U.C.C. § 1-305
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS          >            
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES        
§ 1-305. REMEDIES TO BE LIBERALLY ADMINISTERED
(a)  The remedies provided by [the Uniform Commercial Code] must be liberally administered to the end 
that the aggrieved party may be put in as good a position as if the other party had fully performed but 
neither consequential or special damages nor penal damages may be had except as specifically provided 
in [the Uniform Commercial Code] or by other rule of law.
(b)  Any right or obligation declared by [the Uniform Commercial Code] is enforceable by action unless the 
provision declaring it specifies a different and limited effect.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
   Source: Former Section 1-106.
   Changes from former law: Other than changes in the form of reference to the Uniform Commercial Code, this 
section is identical to former Section 1-106.
   1. Subsection (a) is intended to effect three propositions. The first is to negate the possibility of unduly narrow or 
technical interpretation of remedial provisions by providing that the remedies in the Uniform Commercial Code are 
to be liberally administered to the end stated in this section. The second is to make it clear that compensatory 
damages are limited to compensation. They do not include consequential or special damages, or penal damages; 
and the Uniform Commercial Code elsewhere makes it clear that damages must be minimized. Cf. Sections 1-304, 
2-706(1), and 2-712(2). The third purpose of subsection (a) is to reject any doctrine that damages must be 
calculable with mathematical accuracy. Compensatory damages are often at best approximate: they have to be 
proved with whatever definiteness and accuracy the facts permit, but no more. Cf. Section 2-204(3).
   2. Under subsection (b), any right or obligation described in the Uniform Commercial Code is enforceable by 
action, even though no remedy may be expressly provided, unless a particular provision specifies a different and 
limited effect. Whether specific performance or other equitable relief is available is determined not by this section 
but by specific provisions and by supplementary principles. Cf. Sections 1-103, 2-716.
   3. "Consequential" or "special" damages and "penal" damages are not defined in the Uniform Commercial Code; 
rather, these terms are used in the sense in which they are used outside the Uniform Commercial Code.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document