U.C.C. § 8-505
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS        
§ 8-505. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY WITH RESPECT TO 
PAYMENTS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
(a)  A securities intermediary shall take action to obtain a payment or distribution made by the issuer of a 
financial asset. A securities intermediary satisfies the duty if:
(1)  the securities intermediary acts with respect to the duty as agreed upon by the entitlement holder 
and the securities intermediary; or
(2)  in the absence of agreement, the securities intermediary exercises due care in accordance with 
reasonable commercial standards to attempt to obtain the payment or distribution.
(b)  A securities intermediary is obligated to its entitlement holder for a payment or distribution made by the 
issuer of a financial asset if the payment or distribution is received by the securities intermediary.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. One of the core elements of the securities account relationships for which the Part 5 rules were designed is that 
the securities intermediary passes through to the entitlement holders the economic benefit of ownership of the 
financial asset, such as payments and distributions made by the issuer. Subsection (a) expresses the ordinary 
understanding that a securities intermediary will take appropriate action to see to it that any payments or 
distributions made by the issuer are received. One of the main reasons that investors make use of securities 
intermediaries is to obtain the services of a professional in performing the record-keeping and other functions 
necessary to ensure that payments and other distributions are received.
   2. Subsection (a) incorporates the same "agreement/due care" formula as the other provisions of Part 5 dealing 
with the duties of a securities intermediary. See Comment 4 to Section 8-504. This formulation permits the parties 
to specify by agreement what action, if any, the intermediary is to take with respect to the duty to obtain payments 
and distributions. In the absence of specification by agreement, the intermediary satisfies the duty if the 
intermediary exercises due care in accordance with reasonable commercial standards. The provisions of Section 8-
509 also apply to the Section 8-505 duty, so that compliance with applicable regulatory requirements constitutes 
compliance with the Section 8-505 duty.
   3. Subsection (b) provides that a securities intermediary is obligated to its entitlement holder for those payments 
or distributions made by the issuer that are in fact received by the intermediary. It does not deal with the details of 
the time and manner of payment. Moreover, as with any other monetary obligation, the obligation to pay may be 
subject to other rights of the obligor, by way of setoff counterclaim or the like. Section 8-509(c) makes this point 
explicit.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Agreement"
   Section 1-201(3)

§ 8-505. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY WITH RESPECT TO PAYMENTS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
Page 2 of 2
   "Entitlement holder"
   Section 8-102(a)(7)
   "Financial asset"
   Section 8-102(a)(9)
   "Securities intermediary"
   Section 8-102(a)(14)
   "Security entitlement"
   Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document