U.C.C. § 9-327
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY          >            SUBPART 3. PRIORITY        
§ 9-327. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
The following rules govern priority among conflicting security interests in the same deposit account:
(1)  A security interest held by a secured party having control of the deposit account under Section 9-
104 has priority over a conflicting security interest held by a secured party that does not have control.
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), security interests perfected by control 
under Section 9-314 rank according to priority in time of obtaining control.
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (4), a security interest held by the bank with which the 
deposit account is maintained has priority over a conflicting security interest held by another secured 
party.
(4)  A security interest perfected by control under Section 9-104(a)(3) has priority over a security 
interest held by the bank with which the deposit account is maintained.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New; derived from former Section 9-115(5).
   2. Scope of This Section. This section contains the rules governing the priority of conflicting security interests in 
deposit accounts. It overrides conflicting priority rules. See Sections 9-322(f)(1), 9-324(a), (b), (d), (f). This section 
does not apply to accounts evidenced by an instrument (e.g., certain certificates of deposit), which by definition are 
not "deposit accounts."
   3. Control. Under paragraph (1), security interests perfected by control (Sections 9-314, 9-104) take priority over 
those perfected otherwise, e.g., as identifiable cash proceeds under Section 9-315. Secured parties for whom the 
deposit account is an integral part of the credit decision will, at a minimum, insist upon the right to immediate 
access to the deposit account upon the debtor's default (i.e., control). Those secured parties for whom the deposit 
account is less essential will not take control, thereby running the risk that the debtor will dispose of funds on 
deposit (either outright or for collateral purposes) after default but before the account can be frozen by court order 
or the secured party can obtain control.
   Paragraph (2) governs the case (expected to be very rare) in which a bank enters into a Section 9-104(a)(2) 
control agreement with more than one secured party. It provides that the security interests rank according to time of 
obtaining control. If the bank is solvent and the control agreements are well drafted, the bank will be liable to each 
secured party, and the priority rule will have no practical effect.
   4. Priority of Bank. Under paragraph (3), the security interest of the bank with which the deposit account is 
maintained normally takes priority over all other conflicting security interests in the deposit account, regardless of 
whether the deposit account constitutes the competing secured party's original collateral or its proceeds. A rule of 

§ 9-327. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
Page 2 of 2
this kind enables banks to extend credit to their depositors without the need to examine either the public record or 
their own records to determine whether another party might have a security interest in the deposit account.
   A secured party who takes a security interest in the deposit account as original collateral can protect itself against 
the results of this rule in one of two ways. It can take control of the deposit account by becoming the bank's 
customer. Under paragraph (4), this arrangement operates to subordinate the bank's security interest. Alternatively, 
the secured party can obtain a subordination agreement from the bank. See Section 9-339.
   A secured party who claims the deposit account as proceeds of other collateral can reduce the risk of becoming 
junior by obtaining the debtor's agreement to deposit proceeds into a specific cash-collateral account and obtaining 
the agreement of that bank to subordinate all its claims to those of the secured party. But if the debtor violates its 
agreement and deposits funds into a deposit account other than the cash-collateral account, the secured party risks 
being subordinated.
   5. Priority in Proceeds of, and Funds Transferred from, Deposit Account. The priority afforded by this section 
does not extend to proceeds of a deposit account. Rather, Section 9-322(c) through (e) and the provisions referred 
to in Section 9-322(f) govern priorities in proceeds of a deposit account. Section 9-315(d) addresses continuation of 
perfection in proceeds of deposit accounts. As to funds transferred from a deposit account that serves as collateral, 
see Section 9-332.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document