U.C.C. § 2-611
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 6. 
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE        
§ 2-611. Retraction of Anticipatory Repudiation.
(1)  Until the repudiating party's next performance is due he can retract his repudiation unless the aggrieved 
party has since the repudiation cancelled or materially changed his position or otherwise indicated that he 
considers the repudiation final.
(2)  Retraction may be by any method which clearly indicates to the aggrieved party that the repudiating 
party intends to perform, but must include any assurance justifiably demanded under the provisions of this 
Article ( Section 2-609).
(3)  Retraction reinstates the repudiating party's rights under the contract with due excuse and allowance to 
the aggrieved party for any delay occasioned by the repudiation.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To make it clear that:
1. The repudiating party's right to reinstate the contract is entirely dependent upon the action taken by the 
aggrieved party.  If the latter has cancelled the contract or materially changed his position at any time after the 
repudiation, there can be no retraction under this section.
2. Under subsection (2) an effective retraction must be accompanied by any assurances demanded under the 
section dealing with right to adequate assurance.  A repudiation is of course sufficient to give reasonable ground for 
insecurity and to warrant a request for assurance as an essential condition of the retraction.  However, after a timely 
and unambiguous expression of retraction, a reasonable time for the assurance to be worked out should be allowed 
by the aggrieved party before cancellation.
Cross Reference:
Point 2: Section 2-609.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party".  Section 1-201.
"Cancellation".  Section 2-106.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Party".  Section 1-201.

§ 2-611. Retraction of Anticipatory Repudiation.
Page 2 of 2
"Rights".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document