U.C.C. § 2-604
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 6. 
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE        
§ 2-604. Buyer's Options as to Salvage of Rightfully Rejected Goods.
Subject to the provisions of the immediately preceding section on perishables if the seller gives no instructions 
within a reasonable time after notification of rejection the buyer may store the rejected goods for the seller's account 
or reship them to him or resell them for the seller's account with reimbursement as provided in the preceding 
section.  Such action is not acceptance or conversion.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
The basic purpose of this section is twofold: on the one hand it aims at reducing the stake in dispute and on the 
other at avoiding the pinning of a technical "acceptance" on a buyer who has taken steps towards realization on or 
preservation of the goods in good faith.  This section is essentially a salvage section and the buyer's right to act 
under it is conditioned upon (1) non-conformity of the goods, (2) due notification of rejection to the seller under the 
section on manner of rejection, and (3) the absence of any instructions from the seller which the merchant-buyer 
has a duty to follow under the preceding section.
This section is designed to accord all reasonable leeway to a rightfully rejecting buyer acting in good faith.  The 
listing of what the buyer may do in the absence of instructions from the seller is intended to be not exhaustive but 
merely illustrative.  This is not a "merchant's" section and the options are pure options given to merchant and 
nonmerchant buyers alike.  The merchant-buyer, however, may in some instances be under a duty rather than an 
option to resell under the provisions of the preceding section.
Cross References:
Sections 2-602(1), and 2-603(1) and 2-706.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Notification".  Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time".  Section 1-204.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 2-604. Buyer's Options as to Salvage of Rightfully Rejected Goods.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document