U.C.C. § 2-508
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 5. 
PERFORMANCE        
§ 2-508. Cure by Seller of Improper Tender or Delivery; Replacement.
(1)  Where any tender or delivery by the seller is rejected because non-conforming and the time for 
performance has not yet expired, the seller may seasonably notify the buyer of his intention to cure and 
may then within the contract time make a conforming delivery.
(2)  Where the buyer rejects a non-conforming tender which the seller had reasonable grounds to believe 
would be acceptable with or without money allowance the seller may if he seasonably notifies the buyer 
have a further reasonable time to substitute a conforming tender.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) permits a seller who has made a non-conforming tender in any case to make a conforming 
delivery within the contract time upon seasonable notification to the buyer.  It applies even where the seller has 
taken back the non-conforming goods and refunded the purchase price.  He may still make a good tender within the 
contract period.  The closer, however, it is to the contract date, the greater is the necessity for extreme promptness 
on the seller's part in notifying of his intention to cure, if such notification is to be "seasonable" under this 
subsection.
The rule of this subsection, moreover, is qualified by its underlying reasons.  Thus if, after contracting for June 
delivery, a buyer later makes known to the seller his need for shipment early in the month and the seller ships 
accordingly, the "contract time" has been cut down by the supervening modification and the time for cure of tender 
must be referred to this modified time term.
2. Subsection (2) seeks to avoid injustice to the seller by reason of a surprise rejection by the buyer.  However, the 
seller is not protected unless he had "reasonable grounds to believe" that the tender would be acceptable.  Such 
reasonable grounds can lie in prior course of dealing, course of performance or usage of trade as well as in the 
particular circumstances surrounding the making of the contract.  The seller is charged with commercial knowledge 
of any factors in a particular sales situation which require him to comply strictly with his obligations under the 
contract as, for example, strict conformity of documents in an overseas shipment or the sale of precision parts or 
chemicals for use in manufacture.  Further, if the buyer gives notice either implicitly, as by a prior course of dealing 
involving rigorous inspections, or expressly, as by the deliberate inclusion of a "no replacement" clause in the 
contract, the seller is to be held to rigid compliance.  If the clause appears in a "form" contract evidence that it is out 
of line with trade usage or the prior course of dealing and was not called to the seller's attention may be sufficient to 
show that the seller had reasonable grounds to believe that the tender would be acceptable.

§ 2-508. Cure by Seller of Improper Tender or Delivery; Replacement.
Page 2 of 2
3. The words "a further reasonable time to substitute a conforming tender" are intended as words of limitation to 
protect the buyer.  What is a "reasonable time" depends upon the attending circumstances.  Compare Section 2-
511 on the comparable case of a seller's surprise demand for legal tender.
4. Existing trade usages permitting variations without rejection but with price allowance enter into the agreement 
itself as contractual limitations of remedy and are not covered by this section.
Cross References:
Point 2: Section 2-302.
Point 3: Section 2-511.
Point 4: Sections 1-205 and 2-721.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Conforming".  Section 2-106.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Money".  Section 1-201.
"Notifies".  Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time".  Section 1-204.
"Seasonably".  Section 1-204.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document