U.C.C. § 2-210
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 2. 
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-210. Delegation of Performance; Assignment of Rights.
(1)  A party may perform his duty through a delegate unless otherwise agreed or unless the other party has 
a substantial interest in having his original promisor perform or control the acts required by the contract.  No 
delegation of performance relieves the party delegating of any duty to perform or any liability for breach.
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-406, unless otherwise agreed, all rights of either seller or 
buyer can be assigned except where the assignment would materially change the duty of the other party, or 
increase materially the burden or risk imposed on him by his contract, or impair materially his chance of 
obtaining return performance. A right to damages for breach of the whole contract or a right arising out of 
the assignor's due performance of his entire obligation can be assigned despite agreement otherwise.
(3)  The creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of a security interest in the seller's interest under 
a contract is not a transfer that materially changes the duty of or increases materially the burden or risk 
imposed on the buyer or impairs materially the buyer's chance of obtaining return performance within the 
purview of subsection (2) unless, and then only to the extent that, enforcement actually results in a 
delegation of material performance of the seller. Even in that event, the creation, attachment, perfection, 
and enforcement of the security interest remain effective, but (i) the seller is liable to the buyer for damages 
caused by the delegation to the extent that the damages could not reasonably be prevented by the buyer, 
and (ii) a court having jurisdiction may grant other appropriate relief, including cancellation of the contract 
for sale or an injunction against enforcement of the security interest or consummation of the enforcement.
(4)  An assignment of "the contract" or of "all my rights under the contract" or an assignment in similar 
general terms is an assignment of rights and unless the language or the circumstances (as in an 
assignment for security) indicate the contrary, it is a delegation of performance of the duties of the assignor 
and its acceptance by the assignee constitutes a promise by him to perform those duties.  This promise is 
enforceable by either the assignor or the other party to the original contract.
(5)  The other party may treat any assignment which delegates performance as creating reasonable 
grounds for insecurity and may without prejudice to his rights against the assignor demand assurances 
from the assignee ( Section 2-609).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Generally, this section recognizes both delegation of performance and assignability as normal and permissible 
incidents of a contract for the sale of goods.

§ 2-210. Delegation of Performance; Assignment of Rights.
Page 2 of 3
2. Delegation of performance, either in conjunction with an assignment or otherwise, is provided for by subsection 
(1) where no substantial reason can be shown as to why the delegated performance will not be as satisfactory as 
personal performance.
3. Under subsection (2) rights which are no longer executory such as a right to damages for breach or a right to 
payment of an "account" as defined in the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9) may be assigned although the 
agreement prohibits assignment.  In such cases no question of delegation of any performance is involved.  The 
assignment of a "contract right" as defined in the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9) is not covered by this 
subsection.
4. The nature of the contract or the circumstances of the case, however, may bar assignment of the contract even 
where delegation of performance is not involved.  This Article and this section are intended to clarify this problem, 
particularly in cases dealing with output requirement and exclusive dealing contracts.  In the first place the section 
on requirements and exclusive dealing removes from the construction of the original contract most of the "personal 
discretion" element by substituting the reasonably objective standard of good faith operation of the plant or 
business to be supplied.  Secondly, the section on insecurity and assurances, which is specifically referred to in 
subsection (5) of this section, frees the other party from the doubts and uncertainty which may afflict him under an 
assignment of the character in question by permitting him to demand adequate assurance of due performance 
without which he may suspend his own performance.  Subsection (5) is not in any way intended to limit the effect of 
the section on insecurity and assurances and the word "performance" includes the giving of orders under a 
requirements contract.  Of course, in any case where a material personal discretion is sought to be transferred, 
effective assignment is barred by subsection (2).
5. Subsection (4) lays down a general rule of construction distinguishing between a normal commercial assignment, 
which substitutes the assignee for the assignor both as to rights and duties, and a financing assignment in which 
only the assignor's rights are transferred.
This Article takes no position on the possibility of extending some recognition or power to the original parties to 
work out normal commercial readjustments of the contract in the case of financing assignments even after the 
original obligor has been notified of the assignment.  This question is dealt with in the Article on Secured 
Transactions (Article 9).
6. Subsection (5) recognizes that the non-assigning original party has a stake in the reliability of the person with 
whom he has closed the original contract, and is, therefore, entitled to due assurance that any delegated 
performance will be properly forthcoming.
7. This section is not intended as a complete statement of the law of delegation and assignment but is limited to 
clarifying a few points doubtful under the case law.  Particularly, neither this section nor this Article touches directly 
on such questions as the need or effect of notice of the assignment, the rights of successive assignees, or any 
question of the form of an assignment, either as between the parties or as against any third parties.  Some of these 
questions are dealt with in Article 9.
Cross References:
Point 3: Articles 5 and 9.
Point 4: Sections 2-306 and 2-609.
Point 5: Article 9, Sections 9-317 and 9-318.
Point 7: Article 9.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement".  Section 1-201.

§ 2-210. Delegation of Performance; Assignment of Rights.
Page 3 of 3
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Rights".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Term".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document