U.C.C. § 2-512
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 5. 
PERFORMANCE        
§ 2-512. Payment by Buyer Before Inspection.
(1)  Where the contract requires payment before inspection non-conformity of the goods does not excuse 
the buyer from so making payment unless
(a)  the non-conformity appears without inspection; or
(b)  despite tender of the required documents the circumstances would justify injunction against honor 
under this Act ( Section 5-109(b)).
(2)  Payment pursuant to subsection (1) does not constitute an acceptance of goods or impair the buyer's 
right to inspect or any of his remedies.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None, but see Sections 47 and 49, Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) of the present section recognizes that the essence of a contract providing for payment before 
inspection is the intention of the parties to shift to the buyer the risks which would usually rest upon the seller.  The 
basic nature of the transaction is thus preserved and the buyer is in most cases required to pay first and litigate as 
to any defects later.
2. "Inspection" under this section is an inspection in a manner reasonable for detecting defects in goods whose 
surface appearance is satisfactory.
3. Clause (a) of this subsection states an exception to the general rule based on common sense and normal 
commercial practice.  The apparent non-conformity referred to is one which is evident in the mere process of taking 
delivery.
4. Clause (b) is concerned with contracts for payment against documents and incorporates the general clarification 
and modification of the case law contained in the section on excuse of a financing agency.  Section 5-114.
5. Subsection (2) makes explicit the general policy of the Uniform Sales Act that the payment required before 
inspection in no way impairs the buyer's remedies or rights in the event of a default by the seller.  The remedies 
preserved to the buyer are all of his remedies, which include as a matter of reason the remedy for total non-delivery 
after payment in advance.
The provision on performance or acceptance under reservation of rights does not apply to the situations 
contemplated here in which payment is made in due course under the contract and the buyer need not pay "under 
protest" or the like in order to preserve his rights as to defects discovered upon inspection.

§ 2-512. Payment by Buyer Before Inspection.
Page 2 of 2
6. This section applies to cases in which the contract requires payment before inspection either by the express 
agreement of the parties or by reason of the effect in law of that contract.  The present section must therefore be 
considered in conjunction with the provision on right to inspection of goods which sets forth the instances in which 
the buyer is not entitled to inspection before payment.
Cross References:
Point 4: Article 5.
Point 5: Section 1-207.
Point 6: Section 2-513(3).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Conform".  Section 2-106.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Financing agency".  Section 2-104.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Remedy".  Section 1-201.
"Rights".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document