U.C.C. § 3-116
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 3-116. JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY; CONTRIBUTION
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in the instrument, two or more persons who have the same liability on an 
instrument as makers, drawers, acceptors, indorsers who indorse as joint payees, or anomalous indorsers 
are jointly and severally liable in the capacity in which they sign.
(b)  Except as provided in Section 3-419(f) or by agreement of the affected parties, a party having joint and 
several liability who pays the instrument is entitled to receive from any party having the same joint and 
several liability contribution in accordance with applicable law.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (a) replaces subsection (e) of former Section 3-118. Subsection (b) states contribution rights of 
parties with joint and several liability by referring to applicable law. But subsection (b) is subject to Section 3-419(f). 
If one of the parties with joint and several liability is an accommodation party and the other is the accommodated 
party, Section 3-419(f) applies. Because one of the joint and several obligors may have recourse against the other 
joint and several obligor under subsection (b), each party that is jointly and severally liable under subsection (a) is a 
secondary obligor in part and a principal obligor in part, as those terms are defined in Section 3-103(a). Accordingly, 
Section 3-605 determines the effect of a release, an extension of time, or a modification of the obligation of one of 
the joint and several obligors, as well as the effect of an impairment of collateral provided by one of those obligors.
   2. Indorsers normally do not have joint and several liability. Rather, an earlier indorser has liability to a later 
indorser. But indorsers can have joint and several liability in two cases. If an instrument is payable to two payees 
jointly, both payees must indorse. The indorsement is a joint indorsement and the indorsers have joint and several 
liability and subsection (b) applies. The other case is that of two or more anomalous indorsers. The term is defined 
in Section 3-205(d). An anomalous indorsement normally indicates that the indorser signed as an accommodation 
party. If more than one accommodation party indorses a note as an accommodation to the maker, the indorsers 
have joint and several liability and subsection (b) applies.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document