U.C.C. § 3-409
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES        
§ 3-409. ACCEPTANCE OF DRAFT; CERTIFIED CHECK
(a)  "Acceptance" means the drawee's signed agreement to pay a draft as presented. It must be written on 
the draft and may consist of the drawee's signature alone. Acceptance may be made at any time and 
becomes effective when notification pursuant to instructions is given or the accepted draft is delivered for 
the purpose of giving rights on the acceptance to any person.
(b)  A draft may be accepted although it has not been signed by the drawer, is otherwise incomplete, is 
overdue, or has been dishonored.
(c)  If a draft is payable at a fixed period after sight and the acceptor fails to date the acceptance, the holder 
may complete the acceptance by supplying a date in good faith.
(d)  "Certified check" means a check accepted by the bank on which it is drawn. Acceptance may be made 
as stated in subsection (a) or by a writing on the check which indicates that the check is certified. The 
drawee of a check has no obligation to certify the check, and refusal to certify is not dishonor of the check.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. The first three subsections of Section 3-409 are a restatement of former Section 3-410. Subsection (d) adds a 
definition of certified check which is a type of accepted draft.
   2. Subsection (a) states the generally recognized rule that the mere signature of the drawee on the instrument is a 
sufficient acceptance. Customarily the signature is written vertically across the face of the instrument, but since the 
drawee has no reason to sign for any other purpose a signature in any other place, even on the back of the 
instrument, is sufficient. It need not be accompanied by such words as "Accepted," "Certified," or "Good." It must 
not, however, bear any words indicating an intent to refuse to honor the draft. The last sentence of subsection (a) 
states the generally recognized rule that an acceptance written on the draft takes effect when the drawee notifies 
the holder or gives notice according to instructions.
   3. The purpose of subsection (c) is to provide a definite date of payment if none appears on the instrument. An 
undated acceptance of a draft payable "thirty days after sight" is incomplete. Unless the acceptor writes in a 
different date the holder is authorized to complete the acceptance according to the terms of the draft by supplying a 
date of acceptance. Any date supplied by the holder is effective if made in good faith.
   4. The last sentence of subsection (d) states the generally recognized rule that in the absence of agreement a 
bank is under no obligation to certify a check. A check is a demand instrument calling for payment rather than 
acceptance. The bank may be liable for breach of any agreement with the drawer, the holder, or any other person 
by which it undertakes to certify. Its liability is not on the instrument, since the drawee is not so liable until 
acceptance. Section 3-408. Any liability is for breach of the separate agreement.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 3-409. ACCEPTANCE OF DRAFT; CERTIFIED CHECK
Page 2 of 2
End of Document