U.C.C. § 3-403
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES        
§ 3-403. UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in this Article or Article 4, an unauthorized signature is ineffective except as 
the signature of the unauthorized signer in favor of a person who in good faith pays the instrument or takes 
it for value. An unauthorized signature may be ratified for all purposes of this Article.
(b)  If the signature of more than one person is required to constitute the authorized signature of an 
organization, the signature of the organization is unauthorized if one of the required signatures is lacking.
(c)  The civil or criminal liability of a person who makes an unauthorized signature is not affected by any 
provision of this Article which makes the unauthorized signature effective for the purposes of this Article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. "Unauthorized" signature is defined in Section 1-201(43) as one that includes a forgery as well as a signature 
made by one exceeding actual or apparent authority. Former Section 3-404(1) stated that an unauthorized 
signature was inoperative as the signature of the person whose name was signed unless that person "is precluded 
from denying it." Under former Section 3-406 if negligence by the person whose name was signed contributed to an 
unauthorized signature, that person "is precluded from asserting the *** lack of authority." Both of these sections 
were applied to cases in which a forged signature appeared on an instrument and the person asserting rights on the 
instrument alleged that the negligence of the purported signer contributed to the forgery. Since the standards for 
liability between the two sections differ, the overlap between the sections caused confusion. Section 3-403(a) deals 
with the problem by removing the preclusion language that appeared in former Section 3-404.
   2. The except clause of the first sentence of subsection (a) states the generally accepted rule that the 
unauthorized signature, while it is wholly inoperative as that of the person whose name is signed, is effective to 
impose liability upon the signer or to transfer any rights that the signer may have in the instrument. The signer's 
liability is not in damages for breach of warranty of authority, but is full liability on the instrument in the capacity in 
which the signer signed. It is, however, limited to parties who take or pay the instrument in good faith; and one who 
knows that the signature is unauthorized cannot recover from the signer on the instrument.
   3. The last sentence of subsection (a) allows an unauthorized signature to be ratified. Ratification is a retroactive 
adoption of the unauthorized signature by the person whose name is signed and may be found from conduct as 
well as from express statements. For example, it may be found from the retention of benefits received in the 
transaction with knowledge of the unauthorized signature. Although the forger is not an agent, ratification is 
governed by the rules and principles applicable to ratification of unauthorized acts of an agent.
   Ratification is effective for all purposes of this Article. The unauthorized signature becomes valid so far as its 
effect as a signature is concerned. Although the ratification may relieve the signer of liability on the instrument, it 
does not of itself relieve the signer of liability to the person whose name is signed. It does not in any way affect the 
criminal law. No policy of the criminal law prevents a person whose name is forged to assume liability to others on 
the instrument by ratifying the forgery, but the ratification cannot affect the rights of the state. While the ratification 

§ 3-403. UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE
Page 2 of 2
may be taken into account with other relevant facts in determining punishment, it does not relieve the signer of 
criminal liability.
   4. Subsection (b) clarifies the meaning of "unauthorized" in cases in which an instrument contains less than all of 
the signatures that are required as authority to pay a check. Judicial authority was split on the issue whether the 
one-year notice period under former Section 4-406(4) (now Section 4-406(f)) barred a customer's suit against a 
payor bank that paid a check containing less than all of the signatures required by the customer to authorize 
payment of the check. Some cases took the view that if a customer required that a check contain the signatures of 
both A and B to authorize payment and only A signed, there was no unauthorized signature within the meaning of 
that term in former Section 4-406(4) because A's signature was neither unauthorized nor forged. The other cases 
correctly pointed out that it was the customer's signature at issue and not that of A; hence, the customer's signature 
was unauthorized if all signatures required to authorize payment of the check were not on the check. Subsection (b) 
follows the latter line of cases. The same analysis applies if A forged the signature of B. Because the forgery is not 
effective as a signature of B, the required signature of B is lacking.
   Subsection (b) refers to "the authorized signature of an organization." The definition of "organization" in Section 1-
201(28) is very broad. It covers not only commercial entities but also "two or more persons having a joint or 
common interest." Hence subsection (b) would apply when a husband and wife are both required to sign an 
instrument.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document