U.C.C. § 4-202
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS        
§ 4-202. RESPONSIBILITY FOR COLLECTION OR RETURN; WHEN ACTION 
TIMELY
(a)  A collecting bank must exercise ordinary care in:
(1)  presenting an item or sending it for presentment;
(2)  sending notice of dishonor or nonpayment or returning an item other than a documentary draft to 
the bank's transferor after learning that the item has not been paid or accepted, as the case may be;
(3)  settling for an item when the bank receives final settlement; and
(4)  notifying its transferor of any loss or delay in transit within a reasonable time after discovery thereof.
(b)  A collecting bank exercises ordinary care under subsection (a) by taking proper action before its 
midnight deadline following receipt of an item, notice, or settlement. Taking proper action within a 
reasonably longer time may constitute the exercise of ordinary care, but the bank has the burden of 
establishing timeliness.
(c)  Subject to subsection (a)(1), a bank is not liable for the insolvency, neglect, misconduct, mistake, or 
default of another bank or person or for loss or destruction of an item in the possession of others or in 
transit.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (a) states the basic responsibilities of a collecting bank. Of course, under Section 1-203 a collecting 
bank is subject to the standard requirement of good faith. By subsection (a) it must also use ordinary care in the 
exercise of its basic collection tasks. By Section 4-103(a) neither requirement may be disclaimed.
   2. If the bank makes presentment itself, subsection (a)(1) requires ordinary care with respect both to the time and 
manner of presentment. (Sections 3-501 and 4-212.) If it forwards the item to be presented the subsection requires 
ordinary care with respect to routing (Section 4-204), and also in the selection of intermediary banks or other 
agents.
   3. Subsection (a) describes types of basic action with respect to which a collecting bank must use ordinary care. 
Subsection (b) deals with the time for taking action. It first prescribes the general standard for timely action, namely, 
for items received on Monday, proper action (such as forwarding or presenting) on Monday or Tuesday is timely. 
Although under current "production line" operations banks customarily move items along on regular schedules 
substantially briefer than two days, the subsection states an outside time within which a bank may know it has taken 
timely action. To provide flexibility from this standard norm, the subsection further states that action within a 
reasonably longer time may be timely but the bank has the burden of proof. In the case of time items, action after 
the midnight deadline, but sufficiently in advance of maturity for proper presentation, is a clear example of a 
"reasonably longer time" that is timely. The standard of requiring action not later than Tuesday in the case of 
Monday items is also subject to possibilities of variation under the general provisions of Section 4-103, or under the 

§ 4-202. RESPONSIBILITY FOR COLLECTION OR RETURN; WHEN ACTION TIMELY
Page 2 of 2
special provisions regarding time of receipt of items (Section 4-108), and regarding delays (Section 4-109). This 
subsection (b) deals only with collecting banks. The time limits applicable to payor banks appear in Sections 4-301 
and 4-302.
   4. At common law the so-called New York collection rule subjected the initial collecting bank to liability for the 
actions of subsequent banks in the collection chain; the so-called Massachusetts rule was that each bank, subject 
to the duty of selecting proper intermediaries, was liable only for its own negligence. Subsection (c) adopts the 
Massachusetts rule. But since this is stated to be subject to subsection (a)(1) a collecting bank remains responsible 
for using ordinary care in selecting properly qualified intermediary banks and agents and in giving proper 
instructions to them. Regulation CC Section 229.36(d) states the liability of a bank during the forward collection of 
checks.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document