U.C.C. § 7-204
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS        
§ 7-204. DUTY OF CARE; CONTRACTUAL LIMITATION OF WAREHOUSE'S 
LIABILITY
(a)  A warehouse is liable for damages for loss of or injury to the goods caused by its failure to exercise 
care with regard to the goods that a reasonably careful person would exercise under similar circumstances. 
Unless otherwise agreed, the warehouse is not liable for damages that could not have been avoided by the 
exercise of that care.
(b)  Damages may be limited by a term in the warehouse receipt or storage agreement limiting the amount 
of liability in case of loss or damage beyond which the warehouse is not liable. Such a limitation is not 
effective with respect to the warehouse's liability for conversion to its own use. On request of the bailor in a 
record at the time of signing the storage agreement or within a reasonable time after receipt of the 
warehouse receipt, the warehouse's liability may be increased on part or all of the goods covered by the 
storage agreement or the warehouse receipt. In this event, increased rates may be charged based on an 
increased valuation of the goods.
(c)  Reasonable provisions as to the time and manner of presenting claims and commencing actions based 
on the bailment may be included in the warehouse receipt or storage agreement.
[(d) This section does not modify or repeal [Insert reference to any statute that imposes a higher 
responsibility upon the warehouse or invalidates a contractual limitation that would be permissible under 
this Article].]
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: Insert in subsection (d) a reference to any statute which imposes a higher responsibility upon the 
warehouse or invalidates a contractual limitation that would be permissible under this Article. If no such statutes 
exist, this section should be deleted.
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-204.
   Changes: Updated to reflect modern, standard commercial practices.
Purposes of Changes:
   1. Subsection (a) continues the rule without change from former Section 7-204 on the warehouse's obligation to 
exercise reasonable care.
   2. Former Section 7-204(2) required that the term limiting damages do so by setting forth a specific liability per 
article or item or of a value per unit of weight. This requirement has been deleted as out of step with modern 
industry practice. Under subsection (b) a warehouse may limit its liability for damages for loss of or damage to the 
goods by a term in the warehouse receipt or storage agreement without the term constituting an impermissible 
disclaimer of the obligation of reasonable care. The parties cannot disclaim by contract the warehouse's obligation 

§ 7-204. DUTY OF CARE; CONTRACTUAL LIMITATION OF WAREHOUSE'S LIABILITY
Page 2 of 2
of care. Section 1-302. For example, limitations based upon per unit of weight, per package, per occurrence, or per 
receipt as well as limitations based upon a multiple of the storage rate may be commercially appropriate. As 
subsection (d) makes clear, the states or the federal government may supplement this section with more rigid 
standards of responsibility for some or all bailees.
   3. Former Section 7-204(2) also provided that an increased rate can not be charged if contrary to a tariff. That 
language has been deleted. If a tariff is required under state or federal law, pursuant to Section 7-103(a), the tariff 
would control over the rule of this section allowing an increased rate. The provisions of a non-mandatory tariff may 
be incorporated by reference in the parties' agreement. See Comment 2 to Section 7-103. Subsection (c) deletes 
the reference to tariffs for the same reason that the reference has been omitted in subsection (b).
   4. As under former Section 7-204(2), subsection (b) provides that a limitation of damages is ineffective if the 
warehouse has converted the goods to its own use. A mere failure to redeliver the goods is not conversion to the 
warehouse's own use. See Adams v. Ryan & Christie Storage, Inc., 563 F. Supp. 409 (E.D. Pa. 1983) aff'd 725 
F.2d 666 (3rd Cir. 1983). Cases such as I.C.C. Metals Inc. v. Municipal Warehouse Co., 409 N.E. 2d 849 (N.Y. Ct. 
App. 1980) holding that mere failure to redeliver results in a presumption of conversion to the warehouse's own use 
are disapproved. "Conversion to its own use" is narrower than the idea of conversion generally. Cases such as 
Lipman v. Peterson, 575 P.2d 19 (Kan. 1978) holding to the contrary are disapproved.
   5. Storage agreements commonly establish the contractual relationship between warehouses and depositors who 
have an on-going relationship. The storage agreement may allow for the movement of goods into and out of a 
warehouse without the necessity of issuing or amending a warehouse receipt upon each entry or exit of goods from 
the warehouse.
   Cross References: Sections 1-302, 7-103, 7-309 and 7-403.
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Sign". Section 7-102.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-204.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document