U.C.C. § 7-206
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS        
§ 7-206. TERMINATION OF STORAGE AT WAREHOUSE'S OPTION
(a)  A warehouse, by giving notice to the person on whose account the goods are held and any other 
person known to claim an interest in the goods, may require payment of any charges and removal of the 
goods from the warehouse at the termination of the period of storage fixed by the document of title or, if a 
period is not fixed, within a stated period not less than 30 days after the warehouse gives notice. If the 
goods are not removed before the date specified in the notice, the warehouse may sell them pursuant to 
Section 7-210.
(b)  If a warehouse in good faith believes that goods are about to deteriorate or decline in value to less than 
the amount of its lien within the time provided in subsection (a) and Section 7-210, the warehouse may 
specify in the notice given under subsection (a) any reasonable shorter time for removal of the goods and, if 
the goods are not removed, may sell them at public sale held not less than one week after a single 
advertisement or posting.
(c)  If, as a result of a quality or condition of the goods of which the warehouse did not have notice at the 
time of deposit, the goods are a hazard to other property, the warehouse facilities, or other persons, the 
warehouse may sell the goods at public or private sale without advertisement or posting on reasonable 
notification to all persons known to claim an interest in the goods. If the warehouse, after a reasonable 
effort, is unable to sell the goods, it may dispose of them in any lawful manner and does not incur liability by 
reason of that disposition.
(d)  A warehouse shall deliver the goods to any person entitled to them under this article upon due demand 
made at any time before sale or other disposition under this section.
(e)  A warehouse may satisfy its lien from the proceeds of any sale or disposition under this section but 
shall hold the balance for delivery on the demand of any person to which the warehouse would have been 
bound to deliver the goods.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-206.
   Changes: Changes for style.
Purposes:
   1. This section provides for three situations in which the warehouse may terminate storage for reasons other then 
enforcement of its lien as permitted by Section 7-210. Most warehousing is for an indefinite term, the bailor being 
entitled to delivery on reasonable demand. It is necessary to define the warehouse's power to terminate the 
bailment, since it would be commercially intolerable to allow warehouses to order removal of the goods on short 
notice. The thirty day period provided where the document does not carry its own period of termination corresponds 

§ 7-206. TERMINATION OF STORAGE AT WAREHOUSE'S OPTION
Page 2 of 2
to commercial practice of computing rates on a monthly basis. The right to terminate under subsection (a) includes 
a right to require payment of "any charges", but does not depend on the existence of unpaid charges.
   2. In permitting expeditious disposition of perishable and hazardous goods the pre-Code Uniform Warehouse 
Receipts Act, Section 34, made no distinction between cases where the warehouse knowingly undertook to store 
such goods and cases where the goods were discovered to be of that character subsequent to storage. The former 
situation presents no such emergency as justifies the summary power of removal and sale. Subsections (b) and (c) 
distinguish between the two situations. The reason of this section should apply if the goods become hazardous 
during the course of storage. The process for selling the goods described in Section 7-210 governs the sale of 
goods under this section except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) for the situations described in those 
subsections respectively.
   3. Protection of its lien is the only interest which the warehouse has to justify summary sale of perishable goods 
which are not hazardous. This same interest must be recognized when the stored goods, although not perishable, 
decline in market value to a point which threatens the warehouse's security.
   4. The right to order removal of stored goods is subject to provisions of the public warehousing laws of some 
states forbidding warehouses from discriminating among customers. Nor does the section relieve the warehouse of 
any obligation under the state laws to secure the approval of a public official before disposing of deteriorating 
goods. Such regulatory statutes and the regulations under them remain in force and operative. Section 7-103.
   Cross References: Sections 7-103 and 7-403.
Definitional Cross References:
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-102.
"Good faith". Section 1-201 [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Notice". Section 1-202.
"Notification". Section 1-202.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-205.
"Value". Section 1-204.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document