U.C.C. § 8-305
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 3. TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATED AND UNCERTIFICATED SECURITIES        
§ 8-305. INSTRUCTION
(a)  If an instruction has been originated by an appropriate person but is incomplete in any other respect, 
any person may complete it as authorized and the issuer may rely on it as completed, even though it has 
been completed incorrectly.
(b)  Unless otherwise agreed, a person initiating an instruction assumes only the obligations imposed by 
Section 8-108 and not an obligation that the security will be honored by the issuer.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. The term instruction is defined in Section 8-102(a)(12) as a notification communicated to the issuer of an 
uncertificated security directing that transfer be registered. Section 8-107 specifies who may initiate an effective 
instruction.
   Functionally, presentation of an instruction is quite similar to the presentation of an indorsed certificate for 
reregistration. Note that instruction is defined in terms of "communicate," see Section 8-102(a)(6). Thus, the 
instruction may be in the form of a writing signed by the registered owner or in any other form agreed upon by the 
issuer and the registered owner. Allowing nonwritten forms of instructions will permit the development and 
employment of means of transmitting instructions electronically.
   When a person who originates an instruction leaves a blank and the blank later is completed, subsection (a) gives 
the issuer the same rights it would have had against the originating person had that person completed the blank. 
This is true regardless of whether the person completing the instruction had authority to complete it. Compare 
Section 8-206 and its Comment, dealing with blanks left upon issue.
   2. Subsection (b) makes clear that the originator of an instruction, like the indorser of a security certificate, does 
not warrant that the issuer will honor the underlying obligation, but does make warranties as a transferor under 
Section 8-108.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Appropriate person"
   Section 8-107
   "Instruction"
   Section 8-102(a)(12)
   "Issuer"
   Section 8-201
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 8-305. INSTRUCTION
Page 2 of 2
End of Document