U.C.C. § 8-103
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS        
§ 8-103. RULES FOR DETERMINING WHETHER CERTAIN OBLIGATIONS 
AND INTERESTS ARE SECURITIES OR FINANCIAL ASSETS
(a)  A share or similar equity interest issued by a corporation, business trust, joint stock company, or similar 
entity is a security.
(b)  An "investment company security" is a security. "Investment company security" means a share or 
similar equity interest issued by an entity that is registered as an investment company under the federal 
investment company laws, an interest in a unit investment trust that is so registered, or a face-amount 
certificate issued by a face-amount certificate company that is so registered. Investment company security 
does not include an insurance policy or endowment policy or annuity contract issued by an insurance 
company.
(c)  An interest in a partnership or limited liability company is not a security unless it is dealt in or traded on 
securities exchanges or in securities markets, its terms expressly provide that it is a security governed by 
this Article, or it is an investment company security. However, an interest in a partnership or limited liability 
company is a financial asset if it is held in a securities account.
(d)  A writing that is a security certificate is governed by this Article and not by Article 3, even though it also 
meets the requirements of that Article. However, a negotiable instrument governed by Article 3 is a financial 
asset if it is held in a securities account.
(e)  An option or similar obligation issued by a clearing corporation to its participants is not a security, but is 
a financial asset.
(f)  A commodity contract, as defined in Section 9-102(a)(15), is not a security or a financial asset.
(g)  A document of title is not a financial asset unless Section 8-102(a)(9)(iii)applies.
As amended in 1999 and 2003.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section contains rules that supplement the definitions of "financial asset" and "security" in Section 8-102. 
The Section 8-102 definitions are worded in general terms, because they must be sufficiently comprehensive and 
flexible to cover the wide variety of investment products that now exist or may develop. The rules in this section are 
intended to foreclose interpretive issues concerning the application of the general definitions to several specific 
investment products. No implication is made about the application of the Section 8-102 definitions to investment 
products not covered by this section.
   2. Subsection (a) establishes an unconditional rule that ordinary corporate stock is a security. That is so whether 
or not the particular issue is dealt in or traded on securities exchanges or in securities markets. Thus, shares of 
closely held corporations are Article 8 securities.

§ 8-103. RULES FOR DETERMINING WHETHER CERTAIN OBLIGATIONS AND INTERESTS ARE 
SECURITIES OR FINANCIAL ASSETS
Page 2 of 3
   3. Subsection (b) establishes that the Article 8 term "security" includes the various forms of the investment 
vehicles offered to the public by investment companies registered as such under the federal Investment Company 
Act of 1940, as amended. This clarification is prompted principally by the fact that the typical transaction in shares 
of open-end investment companies is an issuance or redemption, rather than a transfer of shares from one person 
to another as is the case with ordinary corporate stock. For similar reasons, the definitions of indorsement, 
instruction, and entitlement order in Section 8-102 refer to "redemptions" as well as "transfers," to ensure that the 
Article 8 rules on such matters as signature guaranties, Section 8-306, assurances, Sections 8-402 and 8-507, and 
effectiveness, Section 8-107, apply to directions to redeem mutual fund shares. The exclusion of insurance 
products is needed because some insurance company separate accounts are registered under the Investment 
Company Act of 1940, but these are not traded under the usual Article 8 mechanics.
   4. Subsection (c) is designed to foreclose interpretive questions that might otherwise be raised by the application 
of the "of a type" language of Section 8-102(a)(15)(iii) to partnership interests. Subsection (c) establishes the 
general rule that partnership interests or shares of limited liability companies are not Article 8 securities unless they 
are in fact dealt in or traded on securities exchanges or in securities markets. The issuer, however, may explicitly 
"opt-in" by specifying that the interests or shares are securities governed by Article 8. Partnership interests or 
shares of limited liability companies are included in the broader term "financial asset." Thus, if they are held through 
a securities account, the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 apply, and the interest of a person who holds them 
through such an account is a security entitlement.
   5. Subsection (d) deals with the line between Article 3 negotiable instruments and Article 8 investment securities. 
It continues the rule of the prior version of Article 8 that a writing that meets the Article 8 definition is covered by 
Article 8 rather than Article 3, even though it also meets the definition of negotiable instrument. However, 
subsection (d) provides that an Article 3 negotiable instrument is a "financial asset" so that the indirect holding 
system rules apply if the instrument is held through a securities intermediary. This facilitates making items such as 
money market instruments eligible for deposit in clearing corporations.
   6. Subsection (e) is included to clarify the treatment of investment products such as traded stock options, which 
are treated as financial assets but not securities. Thus, the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 apply, but the 
direct holding system rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 do not.
   7. Subsection (f) excludes commodity contracts from all of Article 8. However, the Article 9 rules on security 
interests in investment property do apply to security interests in commodity positions. See Section 9-115 and 
Comment 8 thereto. "Commodity contract" is defined in Section 9-115.
   8. Subsection (g) allows a document of title to be a financial asset and thus subject to the indirect holding system 
rules of Part 5 only to the extent that the intermediary and the person entitled under the document agree to do so.  
This is to prevent the inadvertent application of the Part 5 rules to intermediaries who may hold either electronic or 
tangible documents of title.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Clearing corporation"
   Section 8-102(a)(5)
   "Commodity contract"
   Section 9-115
   "Financial asset"
   Section 8-102(a)(9)
   "Security"
   Section 8-102(a)(15)
   "Security certificate"
   Section 8-102(a)(16)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE

§ 8-103. RULES FOR DETERMINING WHETHER CERTAIN OBLIGATIONS AND INTERESTS ARE 
SECURITIES OR FINANCIAL ASSETS
Page 3 of 3
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document