U.C.C. § 8-603
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 6. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR REVISED ARTICLE 8 AND CONFORMING 
AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLES 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, AND 10        
§ 8-603. SAVINGS CLAUSE
(a)  This [Act] does not affect an action or proceeding commenced before this [Act] takes effect.
(b)  If a security interest in a security is perfected at the date this [Act] takes effect, and the action by which 
the security interest was perfected would suffice to perfect a security interest under this [Act], no further 
action is required to continue perfection. If a security interest in a security is perfected at the date this [Act] 
takes effect but the action by which the security interest was perfected would not suffice to perfect a 
security interest under this [Act], the security interest remains perfected for a period of four months after the 
effective date and continues perfected thereafter if appropriate action to perfect under this [Act] is taken 
within that period. If a security interest is perfected at the date this [Act] takes effect and the security 
interest can be perfected by filing under this [Act], a financing statement signed by the secured party 
instead of the debtor may be filed within that period to continue perfection or thereafter to perfect.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   The revision of Article 8 should present few significant transition problems. Although the revision involves 
significant changes in terminology and analysis, the substantive rules are, in large measure, based upon the current 
practices and are consistent with results that could be reached, albeit at times with some struggle, by proper 
interpretation of the rules of present law. Thus, the new rules can be applied, without significant dislocations, to 
transactions and events that occurred prior to enactment.
   The enacting provisions should not, whether by applicability, transition, or savings clause language, attempt to 
provide that old Article 8 continues to apply to "transactions," "events," "rights," "duties," "liabilities," or the like that 
occurred or accrued before the effective date and that new Article 8 applies to those that occur or accrue after the 
effective date. The reason for revising Article 8 and corresponding provisions of Article 9 is the concern that the 
provisions of old Article 8 could be interpreted or misinterpreted to yield results that impede the safe and efficient 
operation of the national system for the clearance and settlement of securities transactions. Accordingly, it is not the 
case that any effort should be made to preserve the applicability of old Article 8 to transactions and events that 
occurred before the effective date.
   Only two circumstances seem to warrant continued application of rules of old Article 8. First, to avoid disruption in 
the conduct of litigation, it may make sense to provide for continued application of the old Article 8 rules to lawsuits 
pending before the effective date. Second, there are some limited circumstances in which prior law permitted 
perfection of security interests by methods that are not provided for in the revised version. Section 8-313(1)(h) 
(1978) permitted perfection of security interests in securities held through intermediaries by notice to the 
intermediary. Under Revised Articles 8 and 9, security interests can be perfected in such cases by control, which 
requires the agreement of the intermediary, or by filing. It is likely that secured parties who relied strongly on such 
collateral under prior law did not simply send notices but obtained agreements from the intermediaries that would 
suffice for control under the new rules. However, it seems appropriate to include a provision that gives a secured 

§ 8-603. SAVINGS CLAUSE
Page 2 of 2
creditor some opportunity after the effective date to perfect in this or any other case in which there is doubt whether 
the method of perfection used under prior law would be sufficient under the new version.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document