U.C.C. § 8-112
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS        
§ 8-112. CREDITOR'S LEGAL PROCESS
(a)  The interest of a debtor in a certificated security may be reached by a creditor only by actual seizure of 
the security certificate by the officer making the attachment or levy, except as otherwise provided in 
subsection (d). However, a certificated security for which the certificate has been surrendered to the issuer 
may be reached by a creditor by legal process upon the issuer.
(b)  The interest of a debtor in an uncertificated security may be reached by a creditor only by legal process 
upon the issuer at its chief executive office in the United States, except as otherwise provided in subsection 
(d).
(c)  The interest of a debtor in a security entitlement may be reached by a creditor only by legal process 
upon the securities intermediary with whom the debtor's securities account is maintained, except as 
otherwise provided in subsection (d).
(d)  The interest of a debtor in a certificated security for which the certificate is in the possession of a 
secured party, or in an uncertificated security registered in the name of a secured party, or a security 
entitlement maintained in the name of a secured party, may be reached by a creditor by legal process upon 
the secured party.
(e)  A creditor whose debtor is the owner of a certificated security, uncertificated security, or security 
entitlement is entitled to aid from a court of competent jurisdiction, by injunction or otherwise, in reaching 
the certificated security, uncertificated security, or security entitlement or in satisfying the claim by means 
allowed at law or in equity in regard to property that cannot readily be reached by other legal process.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. In dealing with certificated securities the instrument itself is the vital thing, and therefore a valid levy cannot be 
made unless all possibility of the certificate's wrongfully finding its way into a transferee's hands has been removed. 
This can be accomplished only when the certificate is in the possession of a public officer, the issuer, or an 
independent third party. A debtor who has been enjoined can still transfer the security in contempt of court. See 
Overlock v. Jerome-Portland Copper Mining Co., 29 Ariz. 560, 243 P. 400 (1926). Therefore, although injunctive 
relief is provided in subsection (e) so that creditors may use this method to gain control of the certificated security, 
the security certificate itself must be reached to constitute a proper levy whenever the debtor has possession.
   2. Subsection (b) provides that when the security is uncertificated and registered in the debtor's name, the 
debtor's interest can be reached only by legal process upon the issuer. The most logical place to serve the issuer 
would be the place where the transfer records are maintained, but that location might be difficult to identify, 
especially when the separate elements of a computer network might be situated in different places. The chief 
executive office is selected as the appropriate place by analogy to Section 9-103(3)(d). See Comment 5(c) to that 
section. This section indicates only how attachment is to be made, not when it is legally justified. For that reason 
there is no conflict between this section and Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186 (1977).

§ 8-112. CREDITOR'S LEGAL PROCESS
Page 2 of 2
   3. Subsection (c) provides that a security entitlement can be reached only by legal process upon the debtor's 
security intermediary. Process is effective only if directed to the debtor's own security intermediary. If Debtor holds 
securities through Broker, and Broker in turn holds through Clearing Corporation, Debtor's property interest is a 
security entitlement against Broker. Accordingly, Debtor's creditor cannot reach Debtor's interest by legal process 
directed to the Clearing Corporation. See also Section 8-115.
   4. Subsection (d) provides that when a certificated security, an uncertificated security, or a security entitlement is 
controlled by a secured party, the debtor's interest can be reached by legal process upon the secured party. This 
section does not attempt to provide for rights as between the creditor and the secured party, as, for example, 
whether or when the secured party must liquidate the security.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Certificated security"
   Section 8-102(a)(4)
   "Issuer"
   Section 8-201
   "Secured party"
   Section 9-105(1)(m)
   "Securities intermediary"
   Section 8-102(a)(14)
   "Security certificate"
   Section 8-102(a)(16)
   "Security entitlement"
   Section 8-102(a)(17)
   "Uncertificated security"
   Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document