U.C.C. § 8-206
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER        
§ 8-206. COMPLETION OR ALTERATION OF SECURITY CERTIFICATE
(a)  If a security certificate contains the signatures necessary to its issue or transfer but is incomplete in any 
other respect:
(1)  any person may complete it by filling in the blanks as authorized; and
(2)  even if the blanks are incorrectly filled in, the security certificate as completed is enforceable by a 
purchaser who took it for value and without notice of the incorrectness.
(b)  A complete security certificate that has been improperly altered, even if fraudulently, remains 
enforceable, but only according to its original terms.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. The problem of forged or unauthorized signatures necessary for the issue or transfer of a security is not 
involved here, and a person in possession of a blank certificate is not, by this section, given authority to fill in blanks 
with such signatures. Completion of blanks left in a transfer instruction is dealt with elsewhere (Section 8-305(a)).
   2. Blanks left upon issue of a security certificate are the only ones dealt with here, and a purchaser for value 
without notice is protected. A purchaser is not in a good position to determine whether blanks were completed by 
the issuer or by some person not authorized to complete them. On the other hand the issuer can protect itself by 
not placing its signature on the writing until the blanks are completed or, if it does sign before all blanks are 
completed, by carefully selecting the agents and employees to whom it entrusts the writing after authentication. 
With respect to a security certificate that is completed by the issuer but later is altered, the issuer has done 
everything it can to protect the purchaser and thus is not charged with the terms as altered. However, it is charged 
according to the original terms, since it is not thereby prejudiced. If the completion or alteration is obviously 
irregular, the purchaser may not qualify as a purchaser who took without notice under this section.
   3. Only the purchaser who physically takes the certificate is directly protected. However, a transferee may receive 
protection indirectly through Section 8-302(a).
   4. The protection granted a purchaser for value without notice under this section is modified to the extent that an 
overissue may result where an incorrect amount is inserted into a blank (Section 8-210).
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Notice"   Section 1-201(25)
   "Purchaser"
   Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
   "Security certificate"
   Section 8-102(a)(16)
   "Unauthorized signature"
   Section 1-201(43)

§ 8-206. COMPLETION OR ALTERATION OF SECURITY CERTIFICATE
Page 2 of 2
   "Value"
   Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document