U.C.C. § 9-512
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND 
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT        
§ 9-512. AMENDMENT OF FINANCING STATEMENT
[Alternative A]
(a) [Amendment of information in financing statement.]  Subject to Section 9-509, a person may 
add or delete collateral covered by, continue or terminate the effectiveness of, or, subject to subsection 
(e), otherwise amend the information provided in, a financing statement by filing an amendment that:
(1)  identifies, by its file number, the initial financing statement to which the amendment relates; and
(2)  if the amendment relates to an initial financing statement filed [or recorded] in a filing office 
described in Section 9-501(a)(1), provides the information specified in Section 9-502(b).
[Alternative B]
(a) [Amendment of information in financing statement.]  Subject to Section 9-509, a person may 
add or delete collateral covered by, continue or terminate the effectiveness of, or, subject to subsection 
(e), otherwise amend the information provided in, a financing statement by filing an amendment that:
(1)  identifies, by its file number, the initial financing statement to which the amendment relates; and
(2)  if the amendment relates to an initial financing statement filed [or recorded] in a filing office 
described in Section 9-501(a)(1), provides the date [and time] that the initial financing statement 
was filed [or recorded] and the information specified in Section 9-502(b).
[End of Alternatives]
(b) [Period of effectiveness not affected.]  Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-515, the filing 
of an amendment does not extend the period of effectiveness of the financing statement.
(c) [Effectiveness of amendment adding collateral.]  A financing statement that is amended by an 
amendment that adds collateral is effective as to the added collateral only from the date of the filing of 
the amendment.
(d) [Effectiveness of amendment adding debtor.]  A financing statement that is amended by an 
amendment that adds a debtor is effective as to the added debtor only from the date of the filing of the 
amendment.
(e) [Certain amendments ineffective.]  An amendment is ineffective to the extent it:
(1)  purports to delete all debtors and fails to provide the name of a debtor to be covered by the 
financing statement; or
(2)  purports to delete all secured parties of record and fails to provide the name of a new secured 
party of record.
Annotations
Commentary

§ 9-512. AMENDMENT OF FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 2 of 3
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Legislative Note: States whose real-estate filing offices require additional information in amendments and cannot 
search their records by both the name of the debtor and the file number should enact Alternative B to Sections 9-
512(a), 9-518(b), 9-518(d), 9-519(f) and 9-522(a).
   1. Source. Former 9-402(4).
   2. Changes to Financing Statements. This section addresses changes to financing statements, including 
addition and deletion of collateral. Although termination statements, assignments, and continuation statements are 
types of amendment, this Article follows former Article 9 and contains separate sections containing additional 
provisions applicable to particular types of amendments. See Section 9-513 (termination statements); 9-514 
(assignments); 9-515 (continuation statements). One should not infer from this separate treatment that this Article 
requires a separate amendment to accomplish each change. Rather, a single amendment would be legally 
sufficient to, e.g., add collateral and continue the effectiveness of the financing statement.
   3. Amendments. An amendment under this Article may identify only the information contained in a financing 
statement that is to be changed; alternatively, it may take the form of an amended and restated financing statement. 
The latter would state, for example, that the financing statement "is amended and restated to read as follows: . . ." 
References in this Part to an "amended financing statement" are to a financing statement as amended by an 
amendment using either technique.
   This section revises former Section 9-402(4) to permit secured parties of record to make changes in the public 
record without the need to obtain the debtor's signature. However, the filing of an amendment that adds collateral or 
adds a debtor must be authorized by the debtor or it will not be effective. See Sections 9-509(a), 9-510(a).
   4. Amendment Adding Debtor. An amendment that adds a debtor is effective, provided that the added debtor 
authorizes the filing. See Section 9-509(a). However, filing an amendment adding a debtor to a previously filed 
financing statement affords no advantage over filing an initial financing statement against that debtor and may be 
disadvantageous. With respect to the added debtor, for purposes of determining the priority of the security interest, 
the time of filing is the time of the filing of the amendment, not the time of the filing of the initial financing statement. 
See subsection (d). However, the effectiveness of the financing statement lapses with respect to added debtor at 
the time it lapses with respect to the original debtor. See subsection (b).
   5. Amendment Adding Debtor Name. Many states have enacted statutes governing the "conversion" of one 
organization organized under the law of that state, e.g., a corporation, into another such organization, e.g., a limited 
liability company. This Article defers to those statutes to determine whether the resulting organization is the same 
legal person as the initial, converting organization (albeit with a different name) or whether the resulting 
organization is a different legal person. When the governing statute does not clearly resolve the question, a secured 
party whose debtor is the converting organization may wish to proceed as if the statute provides for both results. In 
these circumstances, an amendment adding to the initial financing statement the name of the resulting organization 
may be preferable to an amendment substituting that name for the name of the debtor provided on the initial 
financing statement. In the event the governing statute is construed as providing that the resulting organization is 
the same legal person as the converting organization, but with a different name, the timely filing of such an 
amendment would satisfy the requirement of Section 9-507(c)(2). If, however, the governing statute is construed as 
providing that the resulting organization is a different legal person, the financing statement (which continues to 
provide the name of the original debtor) would be effective as to collateral acquired by the resulting organization 
("new debtor") before, and within four months after, the conversion. See Section 9 508(b)(1). Inasmuch as it is the 
first financing statement filed against the resulting organization by the secured party, the record adding the name of 
the resulting organization as a debtor would constitute "an initial financing statement providing the name of the new 
debtor " under Section 9 508(b)(2). The secured party also may wish to file another financing statement naming the 
resulting organization as debtor. See Comment 4.

§ 9-512. AMENDMENT OF FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 3 of 3
   6. Deletion of All Debtors or Secured Parties of Record. Subsection (e) assures that there will be a debtor and 
secured party of record for every financing statement.
   Example: A filed financing statement names A and B as secured parties of record and covers inventory and 
equipment. An amendment deletes equipment and purports to delete A and B as secured parties of record without 
adding a substitute secured party. The amendment is ineffective to the extent it purports to delete the secured 
parties of record but effective with respect to the deletion of collateral. As a consequence, the financing statement, 
as amended, covers only inventory, but A and B remain as secured parties of record.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document