U.C.C. § 9-609
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 6. DEFAULT          >            SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF 
SECURITY INTEREST        
§ 9-609. SECURED PARTY'S RIGHT TO TAKE POSSESSION AFTER 
DEFAULT
(a) [Possession; rendering equipment unusable; disposition on debtor's premises.]  After default, a 
secured party:
(1)  may take possession of the collateral; and
(2)  without removal, may render equipment unusable and dispose of collateral on a debtor's premises 
under Section 9-610.
(b) [Judicial and nonjudicial process.]  A secured party may proceed under subsection (a):
(1)  pursuant to judicial process; or
(2)  without judicial process, if it proceeds without breach of the peace.
(c) [Assembly of collateral.]  If so agreed, and in any event after default, a secured party may require the 
debtor to assemble the collateral and make it available to the secured party at a place to be designated by 
the secured party which is reasonably convenient to both parties.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-503.
   2. Secured Party's Right to Possession. This section follows former Section 9-503 and earlier uniform 
legislation. It provides that the secured party is entitled to take possession of collateral after default.
   3. Judicial Process; Breach of Peace. Subsection (b) permits a secured party to proceed under this section 
without judicial process if it does so "without breach of the peace." Although former Section 9-503 placed the same 
condition on a secured party's right to take possession of collateral, subsection (b) extends the condition to the right 
provided in subsection (a)(2) as well. Like former Section 9-503, this section does not define or explain the conduct 
that will constitute a breach of the peace, leaving that matter for continuing development by the courts. In 
considering whether a secured party has engaged in a breach of the peace, however, courts should hold the 
secured party responsible for the actions of others taken on the secured party's behalf, including independent 
contractors engaged by the secured party to take possession of collateral.
   This section does not authorize a secured party who repossesses without judicial process to utilize the assistance 
of a law-enforcement officer. A number of cases have held that a repossessing secured party's use of a law-
enforcement officer without benefit of judicial process constituted a failure to comply with former Section 9-503.
   4. Damages for Breach of Peace. Concerning damages that may be recovered based on a secured party's 
breach of the peace in connection with taking possession of collateral, see Section 9-625, Comment 3.

§ 9-609. SECURED PARTY'S RIGHT TO TAKE POSSESSION AFTER DEFAULT
Page 2 of 2
   5. Multiple Secured Parties. More than one secured party may be entitled to take possession of collateral under 
this section. Conflicting rights to possession among secured parties are resolved by the priority rules of this Article. 
Thus, a senior secured party is entitled to possession as against a junior claimant. Non-UCC law governs whether a 
junior secured party in possession of collateral is liable to the senior in conversion. Normally, a junior who refuses to 
relinquish possession of collateral upon the demand of a secured party having a superior possessory right to the 
collateral would be liable in conversion.
   6. Secured Party's Right to Disable and Dispose of Equipment on Debtor's Premises. In the case of some 
collateral, such as heavy equipment, the physical removal from the debtor's plant and the storage of the collateral 
pending disposition may be impractical or unduly expensive. This section follows former Section 9-503 by providing 
that, in lieu of removal, the secured party may render equipment unusable or may dispose of collateral on the 
debtor's premises. Unlike former Section 9-503, however, this section explicitly conditions these rights on the 
debtor's default. Of course, this section does not validate unreasonable action by a secured party. Under Section 9-
610, all aspects of a disposition must be commercially reasonable.
   7. Debtor's Agreement to Assemble Collateral. This section follows former Section 9-503 also by validating a 
debtor's agreement to assemble collateral and make it available to a secured party at a place that the secured party 
designates. Similar to the treatment of agreements to permit collection prior to default under Section 9-607 and 
former 9-502, however, this section validates these agreements whether or not they are conditioned on the debtor's 
default. For example, a debtor might agree to make available to a secured party, from time to time, any instruments 
or negotiable documents that the debtor receives on account of collateral. A court should not infer from this 
section's validation that a debtor's agreement to assemble and make available collateral would not be enforceable 
under other applicable law.
   8. Agreed Standards. Subject to the limitation imposed by Section 9-603(b), this section's provisions concerning 
agreements to assemble and make available collateral and a secured party's right to disable equipment and 
dispose of collateral on a debtor's premises are likely topics for agreement on standards as contemplated by 
Section 9-603.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document