U.C.C. § 9-514
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND 
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT        
§ 9-514. ASSIGNMENT OF POWERS OF SECURED PARTY OF RECORD
(a) [Assignment reflected on initial financing statement.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection 
(c), an initial financing statement may reflect an assignment of all of the secured party's power to authorize 
an amendment to the financing statement by providing the name and mailing address of the assignee as 
the name and address of the secured party.
(b) [Assignment of filed financing statement.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), a 
secured party of record may assign of record all or part of its power to authorize an amendment to a 
financing statement by filing in the filing office an amendment of the financing statement which:
(1)  identifies, by its file number, the initial financing statement to which it relates;
(2)  provides the name of the assignor; and
(3)  provides the name and mailing address of the assignee.
(c) [Assignment of record of mortgage.]  An assignment of record of a security interest in a fixture 
covered by a record of a mortgage which is effective as a financing statement filed as a fixture filing under 
Section 9-502(c) may be made only by an assignment of record of the mortgage in the manner provided by 
law of this State other than [the Uniform Commercial Code].
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-405.
   2. Assignments. This section provides a permissive device whereby a secured party of record may effectuate an 
assignment of its power to affect a financing statement. It may also be useful for a secured party who has assigned 
all or part of its security interest or agricultural lien and wishes to have the fact noted of record, so that inquiries 
concerning the transaction would be addressed to the assignee. See Section 9-502, Comment 2. Upon the filing of 
an assignment, the assignee becomes the "secured party of record" and may authorize the filing of a continuation 
statement, termination statement, or other amendment. Note that under Section 9-310(c) no filing of an assignment 
is required as a condition of continuing the perfected status of the security interest against creditors and transferees 
of the original debtor. However, if an assignment is not filed, the assignor remains the secured party of record, with 
the power (even if not the right) to authorize the filing of effective amendments. See Sections 9-511(c), 9-509(d).
   Where a record of a mortgage is effective as a financing statement filed as a fixture filing (Section 9-502(c)), then 
an assignment of record of the security interest may be made only in the manner in which an assignment of record 
of the mortgage may be made under local real-property law.
   3. Comparison to Prior Law. Most of the changes reflected in this section are for clarification or to embrace 
medium-neutral drafting. As a general matter, this section preserves the opportunity given by former Section 9-405 

§ 9-514. ASSIGNMENT OF POWERS OF SECURED PARTY OF RECORD
Page 2 of 2
to assign a security interest of record in one of two different ways. Under subsection (a), a secured party may 
assign all of its power to affect a financing statement by naming an assignee in the initial financing statement. The 
secured party of record may accomplish the same result under subsection (b) by making a subsequent filing. 
Subsection (b) also may be used for an assignment of only some of the secured party of record's power to affect a 
financing statement, e.g., the power to affect the financing statement as it relates to particular items of collateral or 
as it relates to an undivided interest in a security interest in all the collateral. An initial financing statement may not 
be used to change the secured party of record under these circumstances. However, an amendment adding the 
assignee as a secured party of record may be used.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document