U.C.C. § 9-519
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE        
§ 9-519. NUMBERING, MAINTAINING, AND INDEXING RECORDS; 
COMMUNICATING INFORMATION PROVIDED IN RECORDS
(a) [Filing office duties.]  For each record filed in a filing office, the filing office shall:
(1)  assign a unique number to the filed record;
(2)  create a record that bears the number assigned to the filed record and the date and time of filing;
(3)  maintain the filed record for public inspection; and
(4)  index the filed record in accordance with subsections (c), (d), and (e).
(b) [File number.]  A file number [assigned after January 1, 2002,] must include a digit that:
(1)  is mathematically derived from or related to the other digits of the file number; and
(2)  aids the filing office in determining whether a number communicated as the file number includes a 
single-digit or transpositional error.
(c) [Indexing: general.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (d) and (e), the filing office shall:
(1)  index an initial financing statement according to the name of the debtor and index all filed records 
relating to the initial financing statement in a manner that associates with one another an initial 
financing statement and all filed records relating to the initial financing statement; and
(2)  index a record that provides a name of a debtor which was not previously provided in the financing 
statement to which the record relates also according to the name that was not previously provided.
(d) [Indexing: real-property-related financing statement.]  If a financing statement is filed as a fixture 
filing or covers as-extracted collateral or timber to be cut, [it must be filed for record and] the filing office 
shall index it:
(1)  under the names of the debtor and of each owner of record shown on the financing statement as if 
they were the mortgagors under a mortgage of the real property described; and
(2)  to the extent that the law of this State provides for indexing of records of mortgages under the 
name of the mortgagee, under the name of the secured party as if the secured party were the 
mortgagee thereunder, or, if indexing is by description, as if the financing statement were a record of a 
mortgage of the real property described.
(e) [Indexing: real-property-related assignment.]  If a financing statement is filed as a fixture filing or 
covers as-extracted collateral or timber to be cut, the filing office shall index an assignment filed under 
Section 9-514(a) or an amendment filed under Section 9-514(b):
(1)  under the name of the assignor as grantor; and
(2)  to the extent that the law of this State provides for indexing a record of the assignment of a 
mortgage under the name of the assignee, under the name of the assignee.
[Alternative A]
(f) [Retrieval and association capability.]  The filing office shall maintain a capability:

§ 9-519. NUMBERING, MAINTAINING, AND INDEXING RECORDS; COMMUNICATING INFORMATION 
PROVIDED IN RECORDS
Page 2 of 3
(1)  to retrieve a record by the name of the debtor and by the file number assigned to the initial 
financing statement to which the record relates; and
(2)  to associate and retrieve with one another an initial financing statement and each filed record 
relating to the initial financing statement.
[Alternative B]
(f) [Retrieval and association capability.]  The filing office shall maintain a capability:
(1)  to retrieve a record by the name of the debtor and:
(A)  if the filing office is described in Section 9-501(a)(1), by the file number assigned to the initial 
financing statement to which the record relates and the date [and time] that the record was filed [or 
recorded]; or
(B)  if the filing office is described in Section 9-501(a)(2), by the file number assigned to the initial 
financing statement to which the record relates; and
(2)  to associate and retrieve with one another an initial financing statement and each filed record 
relating to the initial financing statement.
[End of Alternatives]
(g) [Removal of debtor's name.]  The filing office may not remove a debtor's name from the index until 
one year after the effectiveness of a financing statement naming the debtor lapses under Section 9-515 
with respect to all secured parties of record.
(h) [Timeliness of filing office performance.]  The filing office shall perform the acts required by 
subsections (a) through (e) at the time and in the manner prescribed by filing-office rule, but not later than 
two business days after the filing office receives the record in question.
[(i) [Inapplicability to real-property-related filing office.] Subsection[s] [(b)] [and] [(h)] do[es] not apply to 
a filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(1).]
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Legislative Notes:
   1. States whose filing offices currently assign file numbers that include a verification number, commonly known as 
a "check digit," or can implement this requirement before the effective date of this Article should omit the bracketed 
language in subsection (b).
   2. In States in which writings will not appear in the real property records and indices unless actually recorded the 
bracketed language in subsection (d) should be used.
   3. States whose real-estate filing offices require additional information in amendments and cannot search their 
records by both the name of the debtor and the file number should enact Alternative B to Sections 9-512(a), 9-
518(b), 9-518(d), 9-519(f) and 9-522(a).
   4. A State that elects not to require real-estate filing offices to comply with either or both of subsections (b) and (h) 
may adopt an applicable variation of subsection (i) and add "Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i)," to the 
appropriate subsection or subsections.

§ 9-519. NUMBERING, MAINTAINING, AND INDEXING RECORDS; COMMUNICATING INFORMATION 
PROVIDED IN RECORDS
Page 3 of 3
   1. Source. Former Sections 9-403(4), (7), 9-405(2).
   2. Filing Office's Duties. Subsections (a) through (e) set forth the duties of the filing office with respect to filed 
records. Subsection (h), which is new, imposes a minimum standard of performance for those duties. Prompt 
indexing is crucial to the effectiveness of any filing system. An accepted but un-indexed record affords no public 
notice. Subsection (f) requires the filing office to maintain appropriate storage and retrieval facilities, and subsection 
(g) contains minimum requirements for the retention of records.
   3. File Number. Subsection (a)(1) requires the filing office to assign a unique number to each filed record. That 
number is the "file number" only if the record is an initial financing statement. See Section 9-102.
   4. Time of Filing. Subsection (a)(2) and Section 9-523 refer to the "date and time" of filing. The statutory text 
does not contain any instructions to a filing office as to how the time of filing is to be determined. The method of 
determining or assigning a time of filing is an appropriate matter for filing-office rules to address.
   5. Related Records. Subsections (c) and (f) are designed to ensure that an initial financing statement and all filed 
records relating to it are associated with one another, indexed under the name of the debtor, and retrieved together. 
To comply with subsection (f), a filing office (other than a real-property recording office in a State that enacts 
subsection (f), Alternative B) must be capable of retrieving records in each of two ways: by the name of the debtor 
and by the file number of the initial financing statement to which the record relates.
   6. Prohibition on Deleting Names from Index. This Article contemplates that the filing office will not delete the 
name of a debtor from the index until at least one year passes after the effectiveness of the financing statement 
lapses as to all secured parties of record. See subsection (g). This rule applies even if the filing office accepts an 
amendment purporting to delete or modify the name of a debtor or terminate the effectiveness of the financing 
statement. If an amendment provides a modified name for a debtor, the amended name should be added to the 
index, see subsection (c)(2), but the pre-amendment name should remain in the index.
   Compared to former Article 9, the rule in subsection (g) increases the amount of information available to those 
who search the public records. The rule also contemplates that searchers--not the filing office--will determine the 
significance and effectiveness of filed records.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document