U.C.C. Art. 6, Note
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES        
PREFATORY NOTE
Background.  Bulk sale legislation originally was enacted in response to a fraud perceived to be common around 
the turn of the century: a merchant would acquire his stock in trade on credit, then sell his entire inventory ("in bulk") 
and abscond with the proceeds, leaving creditors unpaid.  The creditors had a right to sue the merchant on the 
unpaid debts, but that right often was of little practical value.  Even if the merchant-debtor was found, in personam 
jurisdiction over him might not have been readily available.  Those creditors who succeeded in obtaining a judgment 
often were unable to satisfy it because the defrauding seller had spent or hidden the sale proceeds.  Nor did the 
creditors ordinarily have recourse to the merchandise sold.  The transfer of the inventory to an innocent buyer 
effectively immunized the goods from the reach of the seller's creditors.  The creditors of a bulk seller thus might be 
left without a means to satisfy their claims.
To a limited extent, the law of fraudulent conveyances ameliorated the creditors' plight.  When the buyer in bulk was 
in league with the seller or paid less than full value for the inventory, fraudulent conveyance law enabled the 
defrauded creditors to avoid the sale and apply the transferred inventory toward the satisfaction of their claims 
against the seller.  But fraudulent conveyance law provided no remedy against persons who bought in good faith, 
without reason to know of the seller's intention to pocket the proceeds and disappear, and for adequate value.  In 
those cases, the only remedy for the seller's creditors was to attempt to recover from the absconding seller.
State legislatures responded to this perceived "bulk sale risk" with a variety of legislative enactments.  Common to 
these statutes was the imposition of a duty on the buyer in bulk to notify the seller's creditors of the impending sale.  
The buyer's failure to comply with these and any other statutory duties generally afforded the seller's creditors a 
remedy analogous to the remedy for fraudulent conveyances: the creditors acquired the right to set aside the sale 
and reach the transferred inventory in the hands of the buyer.
Like its predecessors, Article 6 (1987 Official Text) is remarkable in that it obligates buyers in bulk to incur costs to 
protect the interests of the seller's creditors, with whom they usually have no relationship.  Even more striking is that 
Article 6 affords creditors a remedy against a good faith purchaser for full value without notice of any wrongdoing on 
the part of the seller.  The Article thereby impedes normal business transactions, many of which can be expected to 
benefit the seller's creditors.  For this reason, Article 6 has been subjected to serious criticism.  See, e.g., Rapson, 
U.C.C. Article 6: Should It Be Revised or "Deep-Sixed"?  38 Bus. Law. 1753 (1983).
In the legal context in which Article 6 (1987 Official Text) and its nonuniform predecessors were enacted, the 
benefits to creditors appeared to justify the costs of interfering with good faith transactions.  Today, however, 
creditors are better able than ever to make informed decisions about whether to extend credit.  Changes in 
technology have enabled credit reporting services to provide fast, accurate, and more complete credit histories at 
relatively little cost.  A search of the public real estate and personal property records will disclose most 
encumbrances on a debtor's property with little inconvenience.
In addition, changes in the law now afford creditors greater opportunities to collect their debts.  The development of 
"minimum contacts" with the forum state as a basis for in personam jurisdiction and the universal promulgation of 
state long-arm statutes and rules have greatly improved the possibility of obtaining personal jurisdiction over a 
debtor who flees to another state.  Widespread enactment of the Uniform Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act 
has facilitated nation-wide collection of judgments.  And to the extent that a bulk sale is fraudulent and the buyer is 
a party to fraud, aggrieved creditors have a remedy under the Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act.  Moreover, creditors 
of a merchant no longer face the choice of extending unsecured credit or no credit at all.  Retaining an interest in 
inventory to secure its price has become relatively simple and inexpensive under Article 9.

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 2 of 2
Finally, there is no evidence that, in today's economy, fraudulent bulk sales are frequent enough, or engender credit 
losses significant enough, to require regulation of all bulk sales, including the vast majority that are conducted in 
good faith.  Indeed, the experience of the Canadian Province of British Columbia, which repealed its Sale of Goods 
in Bulk Act in 1985, and of the United Kingdom, which never has enacted bulk sales legislation, suggests that 
regulation of bulk sales no longer is necessary.
Recommendation.  The National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and the American Law 
Institute believe that changes in the business and legal contexts in which sales are conducted have made 
regulation of bulk sales unnecessary.  The Conference and the Institute therefore withdraw their support for Article 
6 of the Uniform Commercial Code and encourage those states that have enacted the Article to repeal it.
The Conference and the Institute recognize that bulk sales may present a particular problem in some states and 
that some legislatures may wish to continue to regulate bulk sales.  They believe that existing Article 6 has become 
inadequate for that purpose.  For those states that are disinclined to repeal Article 6, they have promulgated a 
revised version of Article 6.  The revised Article is designed to afford better protection to creditors while minimizing 
the impediments to good-faith transactions.
The Official Comment to Section 6-101 explains the rationale underlying the revisions and highlights the major 
substantive changes reflected in them.  Of particular interest is Section 6-103(1)(a), which limits the application of 
the revised Article to bulk sales by sellers whose principal business is the sale of inventory from stock.  In approving 
this provision, the Conference and the Institute were mindful that some states have expanded the coverage of 
existing Article 6 to include bulk sales conducted by sellers whose principal business is the operation of a restaurant 
or tavern.  Expansion of the scope of revised Article 6 is inconsistent with the recommendation that Article 6 be 
repealed.  Nevertheless, the inclusion of restaurants and taverns within the scope of the revised Article as it is 
enacted in particular jurisdictions would not disturb the internal logic and structure of the revised Article.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document