Restat 2d of Contracts, § 105
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 3- Contracts Under Seal; Writing as a Statutory 
Substitute for the Seal        
§ 105 Acceptance Where Return Promise Is Contemplated
Where a conveyance or a document containing a promise also purports to contain a return promise by 
the grantee or promisee, acceptance by the grantee or promisee is essential to create any contractual 
obligation other than an option contract binding on the grantor or promisor.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Exchange of promises.  Where one promise is to be exchanged for another, it is essential that each 
promisor manifest assent.  Compare §§ 17, 50.  Moreover, it is ordinarily not contemplated that one promise 
shall be made without the other.  But if consideration is given or is not required and an intention is manifested to 
create an option contract, one promise may be made irrevocable, the promisee remaining free to accept or 
reject.  See § 25.  The intention may be manifested either by the terms of the document or by the terms on 
which it is delivered.
Illustrations:
1.  A signs and seals a document containing promises by him and by B and hands it to B for execution.  Until B 
executes it, neither party is bound.
2.  A signs and seals a written promise to pay B $ 30,000 on B's completion of a building and delivers the 
document to C, instructing C that the promise is to be irrevocable for 30 days and is to be effective thereafter 
only if within that time B files with C specified written promises and other documents.  A is bound by an option 
contract.
b.  Promise by grantee.  The same principles apply to a promise by the grantee contained in a conveyance.  
Compare § 55.  The grantee is not bound unless he accepts, and ordinarily the grantor is not bound before the 
grantee accepts.  But if the grantor, either in the conveyance or in the terms on which it is delivered, manifests 
an intention that the conveyance shall be irrevocable pending acceptance, delivery may have that effect.
Illustration:
3.  A makes a deed of conveyance of Blackacre to his son B.  The deed contains this clause: "This conveyance 
is subject to a mortgage of $ 10,000 to D which the said B assumes and agrees to pay." A delivers the deed 
unconditionally to C to hold on behalf of B.  B is subject to no duty to pay the mortgage unless he accepts the 
deed.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 105; the reference to an option contract is new.  See 1 Williston, Contracts 
§§ 213-14 (3d ed. 1957); 1A Corbin, Contracts § 245 (1963).
Comment a.  Illustrations 1 and 2 are new; see Humble Oil & Ref. Co. v. Cox, 207 Va. 197, 148 S.E.2d 756 
(1966), discussed in Reporter's Note to Comment c to § 103.  In Humble Oil the court quoted, in Tentative 
Draft, this Section, Comment a and Illustrations 1 and 2, and explained that the transaction involved there was 
governed by Illustration 1 rather than Illustration 2.
Comment b.  Illustration 3 was Illustration 1 to former § 105.
Cross Reference

§ 105 Acceptance Where Return Promise Is Contemplated
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 43
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document