Restat 2d of Contracts, § 180
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 8- 
Unenforceability on Grounds of Public Policy          >            Topic 1- Unenforceability in General        
§ 180 Effect of Excusable Ignorance
If a promisee is excusably ignorant of facts or of legislation of a minor character, of which the promisor 
is not excusably ignorant and in the absence of which the promise would be enforceable, the promisee 
has a claim for damages for its breach but cannot recover damages for anything that he has done after 
he learns of the facts or legislation.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Excusable ignorance.  At the time a promise is made, the promisee may be excusably ignorant of facts that 
contravene the public policy in question.  Furthermore, although for the purposes of this Chapter, parties are 
generally charged with knowledge of policies affecting enforceability, this Section states a limited exception for 
a party who is excusably ignorant of legislation of a minor character from which the policy is derived.  Such 
ignorance is more likely to be excusable where the legislation is of a local, specialized or technical nature and 
where the other party may be assumed to have knowledge as to such matters.  In determining whether 
ignorance of fact or law is excusable, any misrepresentations made by the other party are relevant.  However, 
good faith is expected on the part of the party who claims ignorance and he cannot blind his eyes because he 
does not wish to see.  Furthermore, the matter of which he is ignorant must not be one as to which he is 
expected to have knowledge because of his expertise or his relation to the transaction.
b.  Promisor must not be excusably ignorant.  The promisee's excusable ignorance is not by itself enough to 
give him the right to enforce the promise under this Section.  The promisor must not be excusably ignorant as 
to the matter in question.  (That an unenforceable promise can be consideration for a return promise, see § 78.) 
If the promisor has specialized knowledge of the field involved, he is likely to be charged with knowledge as to 
legislation of even a minor character.  It is not necessary that the promisor make any misrepresentation, 
although a misrepresentation by him may be significant as bearing on whether the promisee's ignorance is 
excusable.  See Comment a.  Furthermore, on learning the truth, the promisee is expected promptly to 
withdraw from the transaction and render no further performance.
Illustrations:
1.  A and B make an agreement under which B promises to deliver to A goods.  B already has a contract to 
deliver the goods to C, but A neither knows nor has reason to know this.  On learning of B's contract with C, A 
refuses to take the goods or pay the price.  Enforcement of B's promise to deliver the goods to A is not 
precluded on grounds of public policy and A has a claim against B for damages.  But see § 194.
2.  A and B make an agreement under which A promises to pay B $ 10,000 in return for B's promise to cut 
down trees on a specified tract of land.  A knows that the land belongs to C rather than to A, but B neither 
knows nor has reason to know this.  C prohibits entry on the land.  Enforcement of A's promise to pay B $ 
10,000 is not precluded on grounds of public policy and B has a claim against A for damages.  As to the rights 
of A and B if A neither knows nor has reason to know that C is the owner, see § 198(b).
3.  A, an insurance company, makes an agreement with B under which it promises to employ B for a year.  A 
has not obtained a license required for it lawfully to do business, but B neither knows nor has reason to know 
this.  On discovering it after he has begun to work, B promptly refuses further services.  Enforcement of A's 
promise to employ B is not precluded on grounds of public policy and B has a claim against A for damages.
4.  A and B make an agreement under which A, a builder, promises to build a house for B for $ 100,000.  The 
plan and specifications involve violations of local building ordinances of which B neither knows nor has reason 

§ 180 Effect of Excusable Ignorance
to know.  On discovering the violations, B promptly refuses to allow A to proceed with the work.  Enforcement of 
A's promise to build the house is not precluded on grounds of public policy and B has a claim against A for 
damages.
5.  A, the owner of a newspaper, promises B that he will publish a statement about C that A knows is false and 
defamatory if B pays him $ 10,000.  B, who is ignorant of the law of torts and does not know the statement is 
actionable as libel, pays A $ 10,000.  A's promise to publish the statement is unenforceable on grounds of 
public policy.
c.  Other effects of ignorance.  If both the promisor and the promisee are excusably ignorant, the promisee may 
have a claim in restitution under the rule stated in § 198 even though he has no claim for damages under this 
Section.  Furthermore, a court may take account of a party's ignorance, even if it is not excusable, in applying 
the rule stated in § 178.  See Comment e to § 178.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 599.  See 6A Corbin, Contracts §§ 1538-39 (1962); 14 Williston, Contracts 
§§ 1631-31A (3d ed. 1972).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 576.  As to conflicting rights to goods in such 
cases, see Uniform Commercial Code § 2-403(2).  Illustrations 2, 3 and 4 are based on Illustrations 2, 3 and 4 
to former § 599.  Illustration 5 is new.  In Roylex Inc. v. Avco Community Developers, 559 S.W.2d 833 (Tex. 
Civ. App. 1977), a subcontractor was permitted to recover from a general contractor for work it performed on a 
city inspector's home at the general contractor's direction.  The court reasoned that there was no evidence that 
the subcontractor knew of the facts that made the transaction between the inspector and the general contractor 
illegal.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 139
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document