Restat 2d of Contracts, § 199
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 8- 
Unenforceability on Grounds of Public Policy          >            Topic 5- Restitution        
§ 199 Restitution Where Party Withdraws or Situation Is Contrary to Public 
Interest
A party has a claim in restitution for performance that he has rendered under or in return for a promise 
that is unenforceable on grounds of public policy if he did not engage in serious misconduct and
(a)  he withdraws from the transaction before the improper purpose has been achieved, or
(b)  allowance of the claim would put an end to a continuing situation that is contrary to the public 
interest.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Restitution on withdrawal.  The rule stated in paragraph (a) gives a right of restitution to a party, who, after 
having become involved in an improper transaction, withdraws from the transaction before the improper 
purpose has been achieved.  There are two reasons for giving a party such a "time for repentance," or locus 
poenitentiae, as it is sometimes called.  First, the rule may encourage a party to abandon an improper 
transaction before the improper purpose is carried out.  Second, the granting of relief may not be regarded as a 
misuse of official authority if the wrongdoer who asks for relief has withdrawn in time.  To come within the rule, 
a party must actually withdraw by refusing any further participation in or benefits from the transaction.  It is not 
enough that the achievement of the purpose has been prevented by circumstances beyond his control.  The 
time when an improper purpose has been so substantially achieved that withdrawal should no longer give a 
right to restitution depends on the gravity of the social harm threatened under the facts of the particular case.  
The exception is not available in favor of a party whose misconduct is serious when viewed in the light of the 
threatened social harm.  Restitution under this Section is subject to the rules stated in §§ 370-77.
Illustrations:
1.  A, an insurance company, issues a policy of fire insurance to B on a building.  A state statute makes A's 
promise unenforceable as a wager because B has no legally insurable interest in the building.  B pays A the 
premium but, before the coverage becomes effective, B notifies A that he cancels the policy.  Although A's 
promise is unenforceable on grounds of public policy, B withdrew from the transaction before the improper 
purpose had been achieved.  B has a claim in restitution against A for the amount of the premium paid.
2.  A lends money to B for the purpose of enabling B to bet on a horse race in return for B's promise to repay it 
in six months.  A state statute makes betting on a horse race a crime.  Before B has made the bet, A tells B that 
he wants the money back so that it will not be used for this purpose.  Although B's promise to repay the money 
is unenforceable on grounds of public policy (§ 178), A withdrew from the transaction before the improper 
purpose had been achieved.  A is entitled to restitution from B of the amount lent.  The result does not depend 
on whether or not B makes the bet.
3.  A, who is engaged in organizing a prize contest, promises B that if B pays A $ 500, A will see that B wins a $ 
5,000 automobile in the contest.  Although organizing the contest is not itself a crime, a state statute makes 
participation in the fraudulent operation of such a contest a crime.  B pays A $ 500, but when A demands 
another $ 100 from B, before the contest, B refuses, tells A that he does not want the automobile, and demands 
the return of the $ 500.  Although A's promise that B will get an automobile is unenforceable on grounds of 
public policy, B withdrew from the transaction before the improper purpose had been achieved.  B has a claim 
in restitution against A for $ 500.

§ 199 Restitution Where Party Withdraws or Situation Is Contrary to Public Interest
b.  Situation against public interest.  The exception stated in paragraph (b) is applicable when the denial of 
restitution would leave property in the hands of one whose control of it would be contrary to the public interest, 
for example, because its status would be rendered so uncertain as seriously to restrain its alienation.  The 
exception may be invoked to recover money deposited with a stakeholder under an unenforceable wagering 
agreement.  Even after the event that is the subject of the wager has occurred, either party can claim restitution 
from the stakeholder.  The stakeholder is not, however, liable to the loser for anything that he pays over to the 
winner before notice by the loser of his claim.
Illustrations:
4.  A and B make a wagering agreement under which each deposits $ 1,000 with C, who as a stakeholder 
promises to pay the total sum of $ 2,000 to the winner.  Under a state statute it is a crime to make such a 
wager.  A wins the wager, but before C has paid A, B notifies C that he claims restitution.  B has a claim in 
restitution against C for $ 1,000, the amount that he paid C.  The result is the same even if C pays A after 
notice from B.
5.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 4, C refuses to pay A, although not requested by B to do 
so.  Although C's promise to pay the total sum of $ 2,000 to A is unenforceable on grounds of public policy, A 
has a claim in restitution against C for $ 1,000, the amount that he paid C.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former §§ 605 and 524.  See 6A Corbin, Contracts § 1541 (1962); 15 Williston, 
Contracts § 1788 (3d ed. 1972); Wade, Restitution of Benefits Acquired Through Illegal Transactions, 95 U. Pa. 
L. Rev. 261, 282-92 (1947); Wade, Legal Status of Property Transferred Under an Illegal Transaction, 41 Ill. L. 
Rev. 487 (1946).
Comment a.  The rule of paragraph (a) makes no reference to any actual repentance; the party's act of 
withdrawal from the transaction, not his state of mind, is what governs.  On this issue, see the debate between 
Judge Augustus N. Hand and Judge Jerome Frank in Adams-Mitchell Co. v. Cambridge Distrib. Co., 189 F.2d 
913 (2d Cir. 1951), and 2 Palmer, Law of Restitution § 8.7 (1978), discussing Adams-Mitchell, other cases and 
the rule of former § 605.  Illustration 1 is based in part on Illustration 8 to former § 520.  Illustration 2 is based 
on Illustration 2 to former § 605.  Illustration 3 is based on Greenberg v. Evening Post Ass'n, 91 Conn. 371, 99 
A. 1037 (1917).
Comment b.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 524; cf.  Gheres v. Ater, 148 Ohio St. 89, 73 
N.E.2d 513 (1947). Illustration 5 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 524.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Law of forum against wagering transactions as precluding enforcement of claim based on gambling 
transactions valid under applicable foreign law.  71 A.L.R.3d 178.
Recovery of money paid, or property transferred, as a bribe.  60 A.L.R.2d 1273.
Recovery of money or property lost through cheating or fraud in forbidden gambling or game.  39 A.L.R.2d 
1213.
Restitution of property conveyed in consideration of previous reconciliation, as condition of entertaining divorce 
action.  4 A.L.R.2d 1210.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Implied and Constructive Contracts 61
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document