Restat 2d of Contracts, § 270
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 11- 
Impracticability of Performance and Frustration of Purpose        
§ 270 Partial Impracticability
Where only part of an obligor's performance is impracticable, his duty to render the remaining part is 
unaffected if
(a)  it is still practicable for him to render performance that is substantial, taking account of any 
reasonable substitute performance that he is under a duty to render; or
(b)  the obligee, within a reasonable time, agrees to render any remaining performance in full and to 
allow the obligor to retain any performance that has already been rendered.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Relation to other rules.  An obligor's performance may be impracticable only in part.  (If impracticability as to 
part makes his performance of the rest so much more burdensome that it is also impracticable, then the entire 
performance is impracticable and the rules stated in §§ 261 and 266 apply.) If he has done all that is 
practicable, he may have a claim for relief including restitution under the rules stated in §§ 240 and 370-77.  
See § 272(1) and Comment a.  If, however, further performance is practicable, it may be possible to salvage at 
least some of the unexecuted part of the agreement.  This Section states rules for two situations in which it is 
relatively easy to do this because the obligee has already performed in full, or is willing to do so, or can be 
required to do so.  In more complex situations where the obligee's duty to perform must be adjusted to avoid 
injustice, a court may nevertheless salvage some of the agreement by supplying a term under the rule stated in 
§ 272(2).  Analogous problems involving frustration of purpose are also dealt with in § 272(2).
b.  Substantial performance practicable.  If the part of the obligor's performance that is impracticable is so minor 
that it is still practicable for him to render substantial performance, his duty to do so is unaffected.  Whether his 
performance would be substantial depends on the impact on the reasonable expectations of the obligee, who 
either has performed in full or remains liable to perform in full (§ 237).  Two means of reducing this impact are 
significant.  First, if the obligor can render a reasonable substitute performance in place of the impracticable 
part, he must do so under his duty of good faith in performance (§ 205), and that substitute performance will be 
considered in determining whether his performance would be substantial.  Second, if the obligee has a claim in 
restitution against the obligor under the rules stated in § 272(1), on the ground that the obligor will otherwise 
receive a performance from the obligee for which he has not rendered the agreed exchange in full, the 
adequacy of this claim as compensation for the obligee must also be considered in determining whether the 
obligor's performance would be substantial.  In the common case where performances are to be exchanged 
under an exchange of promises, performance would be substantial if the failure of performance would not be 
material.  See Comment d to § 237.  Both parties then remain bound to complete the exchange, subject to 
discharge of the duty to perform the impracticable part and a compensating claim for restitution.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to build a supermarket for B for $ 250,000.  Included in the plans are numerous lighted signs, 
including one next to an adjacent highway.  Before A begins performance, a local ordinance prohibits the 
installation of this sign.  Since A's failure to install it would not be material, his performance would be 
substantial, and A's duty to build the rest of the supermarket is unaffected.  B is still under a duty to pay $ 
250,000, subject to a claim under the rule stated in § 272(1) based on A's failure to build the sign for which he 
has been paid.

§ 270 Partial Impracticability
2.  A contracts with B to deliver all of B's requirements of milk during the following year at B's loading platform 
at 200 Lincoln Street.  Before A begins performance, the loading platform is accidentally destroyed by fire, but 
B has an equally suitable platform across the street at 201 Lincoln Street.  Neither A's nor B's duties are 
affected, except that A is to deliver and B is to accept milk at 201 Lincoln Street.
3.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a quantity of wheat "f.o.b. Kosmos Steamer at Seattle." Before delivery, an 
outbreak of war makes Kosmos line ships unavailable at Seattle, but delivery on that line's loading dock 
remains possible and is a commercially reasonable substitute.  Neither A's nor B's duties are affected, except 
that A is to deliver and B is to accept wheat at the Kosmos line's loading dock.  B may have a claim under the 
rules stated in § 272(1) based on A's failure to load the wheat for which he has been paid.
c.  Agreement.  Even if it is not practicable to render substantial performance, the obligee may salvage the 
agreement under the rule stated in Subsection (b).  If he assures the obligor that the latter will receive in full the 
performance that he originally expected from the obligee, the obligor must render the rest of his performance.  
The obligee can make a legally binding commitment of this kind by agreeing (cf. § 3) to render to the obligor 
any remaining performance and to allow the obligor to retain any performance that has already been rendered.  
See §§ 18, 19, 89.  When performances are to be exchanged under an exchange of promises, and the obligor's 
non-performance will be a material failure, such agreement will prevent the discharge of the obligee's duties (§§ 
237, 238) and the consequent discharge of the obligor's duties, and the agreement will be salvaged.  It will also 
bar any claim for restitution with respect to the obligor's non-performance.  See Comment b.  Under an 
exchange of any type, such agreement will bar a claim by the obligee for restitution with respect to any 
performance that he has already rendered.
Illustration:
4.  A contracts with B to service seven different areas at B's airport for a lump sum.  Before performance is to 
begin, a government regulation forbids the servicing of one of the areas, discharging A's duty as to that area 
under the rules stated in §§ 261 and 264.  Under § 267(1), A's non-performance would operate as a failure of 
performance for the purpose of the rule stated in § 237, and B's remaining duties would be discharged.  If, 
however, B within a reasonable time agrees to pay A the lump sum in full, B's remaining duties are not 
discharged and A's duty to service the other six areas is unaffected.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former §§ 460(2) and 463.  See 18 Williston, Contracts § 1956 (3d ed. 1978).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is new.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 463 and on Whitman v. 
Anglum, 92 Conn. 392, 103 A. 114 (1918). But cf.  Daburlos v. Commercial Ins. Co., 521 F.2d 18 (3d Cir. 1975) 
(applying Pennsylvania law in insurance coverage case).  Illustration 3 is based on Comment 1 to Uniform 
Commercial Code § 2-614 and on Meyer v. Sullivan, 40 Cal. App. 723, 181 P. 847 (1919).
Comment c.  The facts in Illustration 4 are suggested by Van Dusen Aircraft Supplies of New England v. 
Massachusetts Port Auth., 361 Mass. 131, 279 N.E.2d 717 (1972); compare Illustration 2 to § 272.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Construction contract provision excusing delay caused by "severe weather".  85 A.L.R.3d 1085.
Enforceability of voluntary promise of additional compensation because of unforeseen difficulties in 
performance of existing contract.  85 A.L.R.3d 259.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 309
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document