Restat 2d of Contracts, § 345
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 16- Remedies          
>            Topic 1- In General        
§ 345 Judicial Remedies Available
The judicial remedies available for the protection of the interests stated in § 344 include a judgment or 
order
(a) awarding a sum of money due under the contract or as damages,
(b) requiring specific performance of a contract or enjoining its non-performance,
(c) requiring restoration of a specific thing to prevent unjust enrichment,
(d) awarding a sum of money to prevent unjust enrichment,
(e) declaring the rights of the parties, and
(f) enforcing an arbitration award.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Nature of remedies.  This Section enumerates the principal judicial remedies available for the protection of 
the interests defined in the preceding section.  It is not intended to be exhaustive, since other remedies such as 
replevin of a chattel or reformation or cancellation of a writing supplement those listed here.  As to reformation, 
see §§ 155, 166.  Nor are the remedies listed mutually exclusive, since a court may in the same action, for 
example, both require specific performance of a promise and award a sum of money as damages for delay in 
its performance.  The details of the procedure by which such remedies are obtained and enforced vary from 
one jurisdiction to another and are beyond the scope of this Restatement.  In some circumstances a party to a 
contract is empowered to protect himself or to obtain satisfaction by methods not involving recourse to a court, 
such as retaking goods or foreclosing on security.  The exercise of such a power, whether under a term of the 
contract or otherwise, is not a judicial remedy and is not dealt with in this Section.  But see Topic 5 as to 
election and avoidance.
b.  Enforcement.  In most contract cases, what is sought is enforcement of a contract.  Enforcement usually 
takes the form of an award of a sum of money due under the contract or as damages.  Damages may be based 
on either the expectation or reliance interest of the injured party.  See § 344.  They are subject to the rules 
stated in Topic 2.  A court may also enforce a promise by ordering that it be specifically performed or, in the 
alternative, by enjoining its nonperformance.  In doing so, it protects the promisee's expectation interest.  The 
rules governing the granting of such relief are stated in Topic 3.
c.  Restitution.  Sometimes a party, instead of seeking to enforce a contract under the rules stated in Topics 2 
and 3, seeks protection of his restitution interest.  If this can be accomplished by requiring the other party to 
restore a specific thing that is in his hands, a court may order restoration or make restoration a condition of 
granting relief to the other party.  If restoration of the specific thing is not appropriate, the restitution interestmay 
be protected by requiring the other party to pay a sum of money equivalent to the benefit that he has derived 
from that thing.  The rules relating to the prevention of unjust enrichment by restitution, in either kind or money, 
are stated in Topic 4.
d.  Declaratory judgments.  Declaratory judgments play an important and growing role in the resolution of 
disputes arising out of contracts.  Courts may render declaratory judgments under statutes adopted in nearly all 
states, and, in some instances, without the aid of statute.  Such a judgment declares the legal relations 

§ 345 Judicial Remedies Available
between the parties but does not award damages or order other relief and may be rendered even though no 
breach of contract has occurred.  In most states, including those that have adopted the Uniform Declaratory 
Judgment Act, courts may also render declaratory judgments in conjunction with other relief.  In all states, and 
in the federal courts under the Federal Declaratory Judgment Act, the decision whether to render a declaratory 
judgment is discretionary.  Because questions relating to declaratory judgments depend largely on statute and 
are not confined to contract cases, they are not considered in detail in this Restatement.
e.  Enforcement of arbitration awards.  Arbitration also plays an important and growing role in the resolution of 
contract disputes.  Although arbitration is not in itself a judicial remedy, enforcement by a court of an award of 
an arbitral tribunal is.  Statutes relating to the enforcement of such awards, based on either an agreement to 
arbitrate a future dispute or a submission of an existing dispute, have been enacted in many states.  These 
statutes provide for the transformation of an award into a judgment by means of a summary procedure, without 
the necessity of bringing an action on the award as was required at common law.  This transformation permits 
the use of the regular judicial process to enforce the arbitration award.  The passage of these statutes reflects 
the increasing use of arbitration to settle private disputes and a decline in the judicial hostility to arbitration that 
had limited its effectiveness.  Because questions concerning the enforcement of arbitration awards depend 
largely on statute, they are not considered in detail in this Restatement.  But see Comment a Illustration 2 to § 
366.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 326.  See 5 Corbin, Contracts §§ 990-91, 994 (1954); 11 Williston, Contracts 
§ 1314 (3d ed. 1968).
On declaratory judgments, see Borchard, Declaratory Judgments (2d ed. 1941); 6A Moore, Federal Practice ch. 
57 (1974); 3 Weinstein, Korn & Miller, New York Civil Practice § 3001 (1977); 10 Wright & Miller, Federal 
Practice and Procedure §§ 2751-80 (1973); Wright, Law of Federal Courts 497-503 (3d ed. 1976).  See also 
Uniform Declaratory Judgments Act; Federal Declaratory Judgments Act, 28 U.S.C. §§ 2201, 2202 (1976).  On 
the enforcement of arbitration awards see Domke, The Law and Practice of Commercial Arbitration § 37 (1968); 
16 Williston, Contracts § 1923A (3d ed. 1976).  See also Uniform Arbitration Act; United States Arbitration Act, 
9 U.S.C. § 1 et seq., and, for examples of modern state enforcement procedures, see Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 
1285 et seq. and N.Y. Civ. Prac. Law § 7510.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Comment Note. -- Contractual provision as to remedy as excluding other possible remedies.  84 A.L.R.2d 322.
Power and standing of personal representative of deceased promisee to enforce a contract made for benefit of 
a third party.  76 A.L.R.2d 231.
Rightsand remedies of tenant upon landlord's breach of covenant to repair.  28 A.L.R.2d 446.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Arbitration 83.1
Contracts 324
Declaratory Judgments 142
Implied and Constructive Contracts 3
Specific Performance 1
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document