Restat 2d of Contracts, § 43
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 4- Duration of the Offeree’s Power of Acceptance        
§ 43 Indirect Communication of Revocation
An offeree's power of acceptance is terminated when the offeror takes definite action inconsistent with 
an intention to enter into the proposed contract and the offeree acquires reliable information to that 
effect.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Direct and indirect communication.  This Section extends the principle giving effect to a revocation 
communicated directly by the offeror to the offeree, and is subject to the same qualifications.  See § 42.  Thus a 
revocation is ineffective, whether communication is direct or indirect, if the offer is itself a contract, or after the 
power of acceptance has been duly exercised.  On the other hand, no communication at all is necessary for 
revocation if the offer so provides.  Where a revocation is communicated through a person or persons having 
power to act for the offeror or offeree, the case is governed by § 42, supplemented by the law of agency.
b.  Sale of land.  The rule of this Section has been applied most frequently to offers for the sale of an interest in 
land.  If the offeror, after making such an offer, sells or contracts to sell the interest to another person than the 
offeree, his act manifests an intention not to perform in accordance with the offer and creates a probable 
inability to perform.  Compare the rules on vendor's prospective inability in §§ 250-52.  Moreover, the other 
person has title to the land or a right to specific performance prior to any right of the offeree, and interference by 
the offeree with the rights of the other person may be tortious.  See Restatement, Second, Torts §§ 766, 773.  
An agreement in derogation of those rights may be unenforceable as against public policy.  See §§ 192, 194.
Illustration:
1.  A offers a parcel of land to B at a stated price, and gives B a week in which to consider the proposal.  Within 
the week A contracts to sell the parcel to C, and B is informed of that fact by a tenant of the premises.  B 
nevertheless sends a formal acceptance which is received by A within the week.  There is no contract between 
A and B.
c.  Other transactions.  The considerations applicable to offers to sell land are equally applicable to offers to sell 
other specific property, if the offeror enters into a transaction which confers on a third person rights prior to 
those of the offeree.  But the rule stated is not limited to such cases.  Nor is this Section an exhaustive 
statement of the circumstances under which indirect communication may result in termination of the offeree's 
power of acceptance.  Compare, e.g., §§ 20, 153 on the effect of the offeree's acquisition of knowledge of a 
misunderstanding or mistake.
Illustration:
2.  A offers to employ B to replace C, an employee of A who has given A a month's notice of intention to quit.  A 
gives B a week to consider the proposal.  C changes his mind and makes a contract with A for continued 
employment for a year.  B asks C about his duties, and C informs B of the new contract.  B immediately mails a 
letter of acceptance to A, which arrives within the week allowed for acceptance.  There is no contract between 
A and B.
d.  Definite action; reliable information.  This Section does not apply to cases where the offeror takes no action 
or takes equivocal action.  Thus mere negotiations with a third person, or even a definite offer to a second 
offeree, may be consistent with an intention on the part of the offeror to honor an acceptance by the original 
offeree.  Even a binding contract with a third person may be expressly subject to any rights arising under the 
outstanding offer.  Moreover, a mere rumor does not terminate the power of acceptance, if the offeree 

§ 43 Indirect Communication of Revocation
disbelieves it and is reasonable in doing so, even though the rumor is later verified.  The basic standard to 
which the offeree is held is that of a reasonable person acting in good faith.
Illustration:
3.  A offers to sell B a hundred shares of stock at a fixed price, and states that the offer will not be revoked for a 
week.  Within the week C offers A a higher price for the same stock, and B learns of the higher offer.  B's power 
of acceptance is not terminated, since he is entitled to assume that A will honor his commitment regardless of 
its legal effect.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 42.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 57 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 40 
(1963).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 42; see Dickinson v. Dodds, 2 Ch. D. 463 (C.A. 
1876); Berryman v. Kmoch, 221 Kan. 304, 559 P.2d 790 (1977), citing this Section in Tentative Draft; but see 
Butler v. Wehrley, 5 Ariz. App. 228, 425 P.2d 130 (1967).
Comment c.  Illustration 2 is new.  No case not involving land has been found which follows the rule of 
Dickinson v. Dodds, supra. In that case the offeree learned that the offeror had been "offering or agreeing to 
sell" to a third person, and acceptance was held ineffective.
Comment d.  Illustration 3 is new; compare Illustration 2 to former § 42.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 19
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document