Restat 2d of Contracts, § 64
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 5- Acceptance of Offers        
§ 64 Acceptance by Telephone or Teletype
Acceptance given by telephone or other medium of substantially instantaneous two-way 
communication is governed by the principles applicable to acceptances where the parties are in the 
presence of each other.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  Where the parties are in each other's presence, the offeree can accept without being in doubt as 
to whether the offeror has attempted to revoke his offer or whether the offeror has received the acceptance.  
His need of a dependable basis for decision whether to accept is therefore met without the rules stated in § 63.  
The situation prevents the question from arising whether a revocation of the offer or acceptance can be 
effective during the period required for communication of the acceptance, and all that remains is the risk of 
misunderstanding.  Where the parties are not in each other's presence, but are able to communicate with each 
other without any substantial lapse of time, the situation is similar and the governing principles are the same.
b.  Failure of communication.  Where the parties are in each other's presence, ambiguities and 
misunderstandings, if perceived by either party, can be cleared up on the spot.  The governing rules where a 
misunderstanding is not corrected are stated in § 20.  The risk of failure of telephone, teletype or other similar 
communication is similar in that ordinarily one or both parties will know or have reason to know of the failure, 
and the same principles apply.  If one party has reason to know of a failure of communication and hence that 
the other party's understanding may be different from his own, he runs the risk of being held to a manifestation 
of assent unless he takes immediate steps to clear up any misunderstanding.  But if both parties are equally 
innocent or equally at fault, there is no contract.
Illustrations:
1.  A makes an offer to B by telephone.  The telephone connection is then broken, but B speaks an acceptance 
in ignorance of the break.  A's failure to answer gives B reason to know of the break.  There is no contract.
2.  A makes an offer to B by teletype.  B transmits an acceptance, and A knows that a reply has been 
transmitted; but a mechanical failure at A's end, unknown to B, prevents A from learning the contents of the 
reply.  There is a contract.
c.  Place of contracting.  The question where an acceptance takes effect may arise in cases turning on policies 
beyond the scope of the Restatement of this Subject.  Compare Comment d to § 63.  To the extent that the 
issue is referred to the rule governing private contract disputes, the analogy of acceptance by mail or telegram 
is controlling in cases of contracts made by parties in each other's presence and also in cases of contracts 
made by telephone or teletype: the contract is created at the place where the acceptor speaks or otherwise 
completes his manifestation of assent.  See, e.g., Restatement, Second, Conflict of Laws § 332, Comment b.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is rewritten from former § 65.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 82A (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts 
§ 79 (1963).
Comment b.  Illustrations 1 and 2 are based on dicta of Denning, L.J. in Entores Ltd. v. Miles, Far East Corp., 
[1955] 2 Q.B. 327 (C.A.).
Comment c.  In several cases issues of jurisdiction or choice of law have led the court into an extensive 
discussion of the issue, largely theoretical in contracts law, whether acceptance by telegraph, telephone or a 
similar electronic medium is effective upon dispatch or upon receipt.In Linn v. Employers Reins. Corp., 392 Pa. 

§ 64 Acceptance by Telephone or Teletype
58, 139 A.2d 638 (1958), the court, citing numerous cases, said that former § 65, requiring receipt, "represents 
a sound theoretical view," but that the reported cases "are uniform in holding that by analogy to the situations in 
which acceptance is mailed or telegraphed, an acceptance by telephone is effective, and a contract is created 
at the place where the acceptor speaks." In Entores Ltd. v. Miles Far East Corp., supra, Denning, L.J., followed 
the reasoning of former § 65 in arriving at the conclusion that the place of contracting was where a teletyped 
acceptance was received, but indicated that the American law was otherwise.  All the cases found deal with the 
issue of place of contracting.  See, e.g., Lipshutz v. Gordon Jewelry Corp., 373 F. Supp. 375 (S.D. Tex. 1974); 
Pierce v. Foley Bros., 283 Minn. 360, 168 N.W.2d 346 (1969).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Oral acceptance of written offer by party sought to be charged as satisfying statute of frauds.  30 A.L.R.2d 972.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 22(3)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document