Restat 2d of Contracts, § 102
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 3- Contracts Under Seal; Writing as a Statutory 
Substitute for the Seal        
§ 102 Unconditional Delivery
A written promise is delivered unconditionally when the promisor puts it out of his possession and 
manifests an intention that it is to take effect at once according to its terms.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Transfer of possession without delivery.  "Delivery" is often used in the sense of voluntary transfer of 
possession.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(14).  But as it is used in this Section more is required.  
There is no delivery if the promisor manifests an intention to reserve a power of revocation.  Thus manual 
tradition to the promisor's own servant or agent is not delivery; nor is a transfer of possession for the purpose of 
inspection or discussion, for use as a sample or model, or merely for safekeeping.  But mailing to the promisee 
is sufficient if the promisor manifests an intention that the promise take immediate effect.  Compare § 63.
Illustrations:
1.  A hands to B a sealed promise by A in which C is named as promisee, and requests B to give the document 
to C unless B receives contrary instructions from A.  There is no delivery and no contract under seal until the 
document is delivered to C.
2.  A signs and seals a written promise to make a gift to B and deposits the document in themail addressed to 
B.  There has been a delivery, and unless consideration is required the promise is binding even though A dies 
before B receives the document.
b.  Retention of possession by promisor.  In England and in some States a manifestation of intention that a 
document take effect immediately is the equivalent of delivery.  Where there is consideration and a 
manifestation of mutual assent in such circumstances, there may be a contract binding as a bargain.  See § 57.  
Otherwise, however, tradition requires that the promisor put the document out of his possession.  But the 
change of possession need not be permanent; a delivery for the purpose of public recording, for example, may 
suffice even though the document is then redelivered to the promisor.
Illustrations:
3.  A signs and seals a written promise to B and deposits the document in the drawer of his own desk, saying to 
B and to a third person as he does so that he intends the promise to be immediately binding.  There has been 
no delivery.
4.  A delivers to B a sealed promise by A in which B is named as promisee.  On receiving the document B 
returns it to A, saying "Please keep it for me." The return does not impair the effectiveness of the delivery.
c.  Unconditional delivery of conditional promise.  This Section refers to the unconditional delivery of a 
document.  The promise contained in the document may be conditional or unconditional.  If the promise is 
conditional it may create a conditional duty even though it takes immediate effect.  See § 224.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 102.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 211 (3d ed. 1957); 1A Corbin, Contracts §§ 
250-51 (1963).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 102; contrast the different result on arguably 
distinguishable facts in Twining v. National Mortgage Corp., 268 Md. 549, 302 A.2d 604 (1973). Illustration 2 is 
modified from Illustration 1 to former § 102.
Comment b.  Illustrations 3 and 4 were Illustrations 2 and 4 to former § 102.

§ 102 Unconditional Delivery
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 42
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document