Restat 2d of Contracts, § 108
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 3- Contracts Under Seal; Writing as a Statutory 
Substitute for the Seal        
§ 108 Requirement of Naming or Describing Promisor and Promisee
A promise under seal is not binding without consideration unless both the promisor and the promisee 
are named in the document or so described as to be capable of identification when it is delivered.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Historical Note.  In the common-law courts of medieval England the sealed instrument was treated as almost 
complete in itself, and evidence of extrinsic circumstances was not permitted even to show that the instrument 
was voidable for fraud.  A different view was taken in equity, and in modern times extrinsic evidence may be 
relevant to show conditional delivery or for a variety of other purposes.  The rule of this Section is a remnant of 
the former strictness, and it may not be followed where the law of seals has been changed by statute or 
decision.  Compare Restatement, Second, Agency §§ 151, 191, 296, under which a principal is not a party to a 
sealed instrument unless he appears in the instrument as a party.  Where the seal is not essential to the validity 
of the contract, it may be treated as superfluous, and a party not named in the writing may then have rights or 
duties under the rules governing unsealed contracts.
Illustrations:
1.  A promise under seal purporting to be by "the eldest son of A," is duly sealed and delivered by B under this 
description without the use of his own name.  B is at the time the eldest son of A.  The promise is operative as a 
contract under seal by him.  The fact that before the time for performance the eldest living son of A, owing to 
the death of B, is a different person, does not alter this effect or make the instrument binding upon the survivor.
2.  A promise purporting to be made by whoever may be the eldest son of A at the time when performance 
thereof is due, though sealed and delivered by the son who ultimately turns out to be the eldest at the time of 
the promised performance, is not his contract under seal.
3.  A promise under seal to whoever shall be the wife of A at the time when performance of the promise is due, 
is not a contract under seal with the person who ultimately fulfills that description, though she is A's wife at the 
time when the writing is delivered, as well as when performance is due.
4.  A gives an option under seal to B.  B is acting on behalf of C, but C's name does not appear in the 
instrument.  Within the time limited in the option B accepts by an unsealed writing delivered to A.  C is bound by 
an unsealed contract created by the unsealed acceptance by B.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 108, with the reference to consideration made explicit.  See 1 Williston, 
Contracts § 206 (3d ed. 1957); 1A Corbin, Contracts § 243 (1963).
Comment a.  For an action by a promisee not identified when the contract was made, based on treatment of a 
seal as surplusage, see JohnsonFoster Co. v. D'Amore Constr. Co., 314 Mass. 416, 50 N.E.2d 89 (1943). 
Illustrations 1-4 are based on Illustrations 1-4 to former § 108.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:

§ 108 Requirement of Naming or Describing Promisor and Promisee
Contracts 33, 48
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document