Restat 2d of Contracts, § 114
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 5- The Statute of 
Frauds          >            Topic 2- The Suretyship Provision        
§ 114 Independent Duty of Promisor
A contract to perform or otherwise to satisfy all or part of a duty of a third person to the promisee is not 
within the Statute of Frauds as a contract to answer for the duty of another if, by the terms of the 
promise when it is made, performance thereof can involve no more than
(a)  the application of funds or property held by the promisor for the purpose, or
(b)  performance of any other duty owing, irrespective of his promise, by the promisor to the promisee, 
or
(c)  performance of a duty which is either owing, irrespective of his promise, by the promisor to the 
third person, or which the promisee reasonably believes to be so owing.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  Where the promisor, if he keeps his promise, will be doing no more than he is bound to do by 
reason of a duty other than that imposed by the promise, the promise is not within the Statute.  Even though the 
promisor is a surety, he promises to answer for his own obligation as well as that of another and is not within 
the reason of the Statute.  The terms of the promise will commonly refer to the independent duty, but need not 
do so.  The independent duty may exist when the promise is made or may arise subsequently.
b.  Application of funds.  Subsection (a) deals primarily with cases where the promisor is a trustee and the 
promisee a beneficiary of the trust, although the trust relationship is not essential.  In such cases the promise 
usually shows by its terms the independent duty and the limitation of the promise.  To the extent that the 
promise goes beyond the duty, the case is not within Subsection (a).
Illustrations:
1.  D owes C $ 100 and pays that sum to S in trust to pay it to C.  Then or thereafter S orally promises C to pay 
D's debt.  Whether or not C knows of the trust, C acquires an enforceable right against S.
2.  D pays $ 100 to S in trust to apply it to whatever judgment C may recover against D in an action then 
pending.  S orally promises C to pay the judgment in full.  C recovers judgment for $ 125.  C has an enforceable 
right against S for only $ 100.
c.  Other independent duties.  Where the promisor merely promises to perform an independent duty owed to 
the promisee or to the principal obligor, the promise is not within the Statute.  In such cases the terms of the 
promise often do not disclose the independent duty.  Where the promisee in good faith believes, when the 
promise is made, that such a duty is owed by the promisor to his co-obligor, the same rule is applied even 
though the duty does not in fact exist.
Illustrations:
3.  S is a member of a partnership.  After he retires but before the debts of the partnership are paid, S orally 
promises C, a partnership creditor, to pay the amount due him.  The promise is not within the Statute of Frauds.
4.  S, at D's request, orally promises C to guarantee the payment by D to C of the price of any goods sold by C 
to D, to the extent of the indebtedness S may owe D at the time when C notifies S that D has made default.  C 
thereupon sells goods to D.  S's promise is not within the Statute of Frauds.

§ 114 Independent Duty of Promisor
5.  S and D severally promise C to pay for goods to be delivered to D.  The goods are really for S and D is the 
real surety, but S and D lead C to suppose that S is the surety.  S's promise is not within the Statute of Frauds; 
under § 113(c) neither is D's.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 182.  See 3 Williston, Contracts §§ 459, 479 (3d ed. 1960); 2 Corbin, 
Contracts §§ 363, 391 (1950 & Supp. 1971).
Comments b and c.  Illustrations 1-5 are based on Illustrations 1-5 to former § 182.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Applicability of statute of frauds to promise to pay for medical, dental, or hospital services furnished to another.  
64 A.L.R.2d 1071.
Question, as one of law for court or of fact for jury, whether oral promise was an original one or was a collateral 
promise to answer for the debt, default, or miscarriage of another.  20 A.L.R.2d 246.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Frauds, Statute of 23 et seq.
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document