Restat 2d of Contracts, § 168
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 7- 
Misrepresentation, Duress and Undue Influence          >            Topic 1- Misrepresentation        
§ 168 Reliance on Assertions of Opinion
(1)  An assertion is one of opinion if it expresses only a belief, without certainty, as to the existence of a 
fact or expresses only a judgment as to quality, value, authenticity, or similar matters.
(2)  If it is reasonable to do so, the recipient of an assertion of a person's opinion as to facts not 
disclosed and not otherwise known to the recipient may properly interpret it as an assertion
(a)  that the facts known to that person are not incompatible with his opinion, or
(b)  that he knows facts sufficient to justify him in forming it.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Knowledge and opinion.  A statement of opinion is also a statement of fact because it states that a person 
has a particular state of mind concerning the matter to which his opinion relates.  But it also implies that he 
does not have such definite information, that he is not certain enough of what he says, to make an assertion of 
his own knowledge as to that matter.  It implies atmost that he knows of no facts incompatible with the belief or 
that he knows of facts that justify him in holding it.  The difference is that between "This is true," and "I think this 
is true, but I am not sure." The important distinction is between assertions of knowledge and those of opinion, 
rather than assertions of fact and those of opinion.  The person whose opinion is asserted is usually the maker 
of the assertion himself, but the opinion may also be that of a third person.  See Comment b to § 169.
b.  Criteria.  The fact that points of view may be expected to differ on the subject of a statement suggests that 
the statement is one of opinion.  Statements of judgment as to quality, value, authenticity, or similar matters are 
common examples.  For instance, the statement that an automobile is a "good" car relates to a matter on which 
views may be expected to differ.  The maker of such a statement will normally be understood as expressing 
only his own judgment and not as making assertions concerning such matters as horsepower or riding qualities.  
But see Comment d and Illustration 3.  The form of the statement is important but not controlling.  A statement 
that is in form an assertion of the maker's knowledge may be made in circumstances that suggest that it 
expresses only a belief, that he is not free from doubt.  This may be so, for example, when the recipient knows 
that the maker has no information concerning the fact asserted and therefore can be stating only his belief.  The 
problem is one of interpretation of the language used.
c.  Statements of quantity, quality, value and price.  A seller's statement of the quantity of land or goods is 
virtually never a statement of opinion, even though he does not suggest that it is based on a survey, weighing 
or other measurement.  The words "more or less" do not change such a statement into one of opinion, and the 
recipient is justified in believing that the quantity is substantially as stated although the measurement expressed 
may not be exact.  In contrast, a seller's general statement of quality is usually one of opinion.  There are, 
however, instances in which the gradations of quality are so marked that goods are usually sold as of a 
specified grade and an assertion of grade is not one of opinion.  A statement of value is, like one of quality, 
ordinarily a statement of opinion.  However, a statement of the price at which something has been offered for 
sale or sold is not one of opinion.
Illustrations:
1.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to buy goods, tells B that he paid $ 10,000 for them.  A knows that 
he paid only $ 8,000 for the goods.  The statement is not one of opinion.

§ 168 Reliance on Assertions of Opinion
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A tells B only that the goods are worth $ 10,000.  The 
statement is one of opinion.
d.  Implication of a statement of opinion.  In some circumstances the recipient may reasonably understand a 
statement of opinion to be more than an assertion as to the maker's state of mind.  Under the rule stated in 
Subsection (2), if the statement of opinion relates to facts not known to the recipient, he may be justified in 
inferring that there are facts that justify the opinion, or at least that there are no facts that are incompatible with 
it.  In such a case, the statement of opinion becomes, in effect, an assertion as to those facts and may be relied 
on as such.  The rule is, however, applied in the light of the realities of the market place.  The propensity of 
sellers and buyers to exaggerate the advantages to the other party of the bargains they promise is well 
recognized, and to some extent their assertions of opinion must be discounted.  Nevertheless, while some 
allowance must be made for seller's puffing and buyer's depreciation, the other party is entitled to assume that 
a statement of opinion is not so far removed from the truth as to be incompatible with the facts known to the 
maker.  Where circumstances justify it, a statement of opinion may also be reasonably understood as carrying 
with it an assertion that the maker knows facts sufficient to justify him in forming it.  However, the rule stated in 
Subsection (2) applies only when the facts to which the opinion relates are not disclosed and not otherwise 
known to the recipient.  An assertion of opinion that does not fall within Subsection (2) is one of opinion only.  
As to the circumstances in which reliance on such an assertion is justified, see § 169.
Illustrations:
3.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to buy real property, tells B that the sewage system is "good." A 
knows that the sewage system is unworkable.  B interprets A's statement of opinion as an assertion that the 
facts known to A are not incompatible with his opinion and is induced by this assertion to make the contract.  
B's interpretation is reasonable, the assertion is a fraudulent misrepresentation, and the contract is voidable by 
B.
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3, A knows that the sewage system is not very good but is 
workable.  There is no misrepresentation because the facts known to A are not incompatible with his opinion, 
and the contract is not voidable by B.
5.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to become A's partner in A's business, tells B that the business is 
"a money-maker." A knows that the business has been unprofitable since its inception.  B interprets A's 
statement of opinion as an assertion that the facts known to A are not incompatible with his opinion and is 
induced by this assertion to make the contract.  B's interpretation is reasonable, the assertion is a fraudulent 
misrepresentation, and the contract is voidable by B.
6.  A, who is knowledgeable in financial matters, seeking to induce B, who is also knowledgeable in such 
matters, to make a contract to buy A's shares of stock in C Corporation, tells B that within five years the shares 
will pay dividends that will amount to the purchase price of the stock.  Neither A nor B has information about the 
finances of C, which is, in fact, hopelessly insolvent.  B interprets A's statement of opinion as an assertion that 
A knows facts sufficient to justify him in forming that opinion and is induced by this assertion to make the 
contract.  B's interpretation is reasonable, the assertion is a fraudulent misrepresentation, and the contract is 
voidable by B.
7.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to buy land, tells B, "There is water under this land and if you dig 
a well anywhere on the land, you will strike it." A does not know whether there is water under the land, and 
there is none.  B knows that no water survey has been made and that A has no information concerning the 
presence or absence of subterranean water, but interprets A's statement of opinion as an assertion that A 
knows facts sufficient to justify him in forming that opinion and is induced by this assertion to make the contract.  
B's interpretation is not reasonable, and the contract is not voidable by B.  See also § 169.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  Subsection (1) is based on Restatement, Second, Torts § 538A.  Subsection(2) is based 
on Restatement, Second, Torts § 539.  See 12 Williston, Contracts §§ 1491-93 (3d ed. 1970); Keeton, Fraud: 
Misrepresentations of Opinion, 21 Minn. L. Rev. 643 (1937); James & Gray, Misrepresentation -- Part II, 37 Md. 
L. Rev. 488, 489-93 (1978).

§ 168 Reliance on Assertions of Opinion
Comment c.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 4 to former § 474.  Illustration 2 is supported by Byers v. 
Federal Land Co., 3 F.2d 9 (8th Cir. 1924). But see Benedict v. Heirs of Dickens, 119 Conn. 541, 177 A. 715 
(1935); Fox v. Cosgriff, 66 Idaho 371, 159 P.2d 224 (1945).
Comment d.  Illustration 3 is based on Twing v. Schott, 80 Wyo. 100, 338 P.2d 839 (1959); Spiess v. Brandt, 
230 Minn. 246, 41 N.W.2d 561 (1950); cf. Illustration 3 to former § 474.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 3 
to former § 474.  Illustration 5 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 474.  Illustration 6 is adapted from Illustration 
3 to Restatement, Second, Torts § 525.  Illustration 7 is based on Harris v. Delco Prods., 305 Mass. 362, 25 
N.E.2d 740 (1940); see Illustration 1 to former § 474; Illustration 1 to Restatement, Second, Torts § 538A.  
Recent cases finding a statement to be an opinion or puffing and not fraudulent include Miles v. Love, 1 Kan. 
App.2d 630, 573 P.2d 622 (1977) (advice by seller that sand in well water would clear up if water was run 
continually for a couple of weeks; house had been vacant and seller, though an experienced real estate 
developer, had no knowledge that system was defective); Eaton v. Sontag, 387 A.2d 33 (Me. 1978) (assertion 
that campsite was a "gold mine"; dictum that a statement that it was worth the asking price would also be 
puffing); Wilkinson v. Walker, 143 Ga. App. 838, 240 S.E.2d 210 (1977) (Statement that a mechanical cotton 
picker was "in good condition and would satisfactorily pick cotton"); Stern v. Satra Corp., 539 F.2d 1305 (2d Cir. 
1976) (party's estimate of his influence with specific potential customers).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 94(5)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document