Restat 2d of Contracts, § 167
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 7- 
Misrepresentation, Duress and Undue Influence          >            Topic 1- Misrepresentation        
§ 167 When a Misrepresentation Is an Inducing Cause
A misrepresentation induces a party's manifestation of assent if it substantially contributes to his 
decision to manifest his assent.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope.  The rule stated in this Section determines whether a misrepresentation in fact induced a party's 
actual or apparent manifestation of assent, as required under §§ 163, 164 and 166.  A misrepresentation is not 
a cause of a party's making a contract unless he relied on the misrepresentation in manifesting his assent.  His 
reliance will usually consist of his acceptance, an affirmative act, but may also consist of his refraining from 
revoking an outstanding offer.  See Illustrations 8 and 9 to § 161.  It is not necessary that this reliance have 
been the sole or even the predominant factor in influencing his conduct.  It is not even necessary that he would 
not have acted as he did had he not relied on the assertion.  It is enough that the manifestation substantially 
contributed to his decision to make the contract.  It is, therefore, immaterial that he may also have been 
influenced by other considerations.  As to the effect of the recipient's fault, see § 172.  The misrepresentation 
need not be made directly to the recipient but may be made to a third person for the purpose of having him 
transmit it, or its substance, to the recipient in order to induce action.  See Illustration 1 to § 162.
Illustrations:
1.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to buy land, makes a fraudulent misrepresentation.  Although he 
believes A's assertion, B wishes to confirm it and therefore inspects the land and inquires of third persons.  B 
then makes the contract.  The misrepresentation substantially contributes to his decision to make the contract, 
although he is also induced to do so by his investigation and inquiries.  B's manifestation of assent is induced 
by the misrepresentation, and the contract is voidable by B.
2.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to buy land, makes two statements to B about the land, one a true 
assertion and one a fraudulent misrepresentation.  B makes the contract.  The fraudulent misrepresentation 
substantially contributes to his decision to make the contract, although he is also induced to do so by the true 
assertion.  B's manifestation of assent is induced by the misrepresentation, and the contract is voidable by B.
b.  Criteria.  Circumstantial evidence is often important in determining whether a misrepresentation has been an 
inducing cause.  The materiality of the misrepresentation is a particularly significant factor in this determination.  
It is assumed, in the absence of facts showing the contrary, that the recipient attached importance to the truth 
of a misrepresentation if it was material, but not if it was immaterial.  The extent of a party's investigation also 
bears on the question of causation.  If he relies solely on his investigation and not on the misrepresentation, he 
is not entitled to relief.  One who makes an investigation will often be taken to rely on it alone as to all facts 
disclosed to him in the course of it.  On the other hand, if the fact is not one that the investigation disclosed or 
would have been likely to disclose, the recipient may still be relying on the misrepresentation as well as on the 
investigation.  Particularly when the investigation produces results that tend to confirm the misrepresentation 
but are still somewhat inconclusive, it may be found that the recipient relied on both and that he attached 
importance to the truth of the misrepresentation in making the contract.  A party who, having made a 
misrepresentation, intentionally frustrates the other's investigation of its truth, will be precluded from claiming 
that the other relied on the investigation to the exclusion of the misrepresentation.  See Restatement, Second, 
Torts § 547(2).
Illustrations:

§ 167 When a Misrepresentation Is an Inducing Cause
3.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to buy his race horse, tells him that the horse has run a mile in a 
specified time.  A is honestly mistaken, and, unknown to him, the horse has never come close to that time.  B 
makes the contract.  Because A's misrepresentation is material, it will be assumed, in the absence of facts 
showing the contrary, that B attached importance to its truth in deciding to make the contract.  The contract is 
therefore voidable by B.  See Illustration 3 to § 162.
4.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to buy his race horse, tells him that the horse was bred in a 
particular stable.  A knows that it was bred in another stable.  B makes the contract.  If A's misrepresentation is 
not material, it will not be assumed that B attached importance to its truth in deciding to make the contract.  
Unless other evidence shows that B relied on the misrepresentation, the contract is not voidable by B.  See 
Illustration 4 to § 162.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on Restatement, Second, Torts § 546; see also former § 479 and Restatement, Second, 
Torts §§ 547, 548.  See 12 Williston, Contracts §§ 1515, 1515A (3d ed. 1970).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 2 to Restatement, Second, Torts § 546.  Illustration 2 is based 
on Illustration 3 to Restatement, Second, Torts § 546.
Comment b.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 479.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 2 to 
former § 479.  The use of circumstantial evidence, inferences and assumptions to determine actual reliance is 
illustrated by Fidelity Sav. and Loan Ass'n v. Aetna Life and Cas. Corp., 440 F. Supp. 862, 867-68 (N.D. Cal. 
1977).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
What constitutes "affirmation of fact" giving rise to express warranty under UCC § 2-313(1)(a).  94 A.L.R.3d 
729.
Comment Note. -- "Out of pocket" or "benefit of bargain" as proper rule of damages for fraudulent 
representations inducing contract for the transfer of property.  13 A.L.R.3d 875.
Necessity of showing damage to establish fraud as defense to action on contract.  91 A.L.R.2d 346.
False representations as to income, profits, or productivity of property as fraud.  27 A.L.R.2d 14.
Proceeding under executory contract after discovering fraud as waiver of right to recover damages for the 
fraud.  13 A.L.R.2d 807.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 94(5)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document