Restat 2d of Contracts, § 163
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 7- 
Misrepresentation, Duress and Undue Influence          >            Topic 1- Misrepresentation        
§ 163 When a Misrepresentation Prevents Formation of a Contract
If a misrepresentation as to the character or essential terms of a proposed contract induces conduct 
that appears to be a manifestation of assent by one who neither knows nor has reasonable opportunity 
to know of the character or essential terms of the proposed contract, his conduct is not effective as a 
manifestation of assent.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  Under the general principle stated in § 19(2), a party's conduct is not effective as a manifestation 
of his assent unless he knows or has reason to know that the other party may infer from it that he assents.  This 
Section involves an application of that principle where a misrepresentation goes to what is sometimes calledthe 
"factum" or the "execution" rather than merely the "inducement." If, because of a misrepresentation as to the 
character or essential terms of a proposed contract, a party does not know or have reasonable opportunity to 
know of its character or essential terms, then he neither knows nor has reason to know that the other party may 
infer from his conduct that he assents to that contract.  In such a case there is no effective manifestation of 
assent and no contract at all.  Compare § 174.  This result only follows, however, if the misrepresentation 
relates to the very nature of the proposed contract itself and not merely to one of its nonessential terms.  The 
party may believe that he is not assenting to any contract or that he is assenting to a contract entirely different 
from the proposed contract.  The mere fact that a party is deceived as to the identity of the other party, as when 
a buyer of goods obtains credit by impersonating a person of means, does not bring the case within the present 
Section, unless it affects the very nature of the contract.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-403(1)(a).  It is 
immaterial under the rule stated in this Section whether the misrepresentation is made by a party to the 
transaction or by a third person.  See Comment e to § 164.
Illustration:
1.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to sell him goods on credit, tells B that he is C, a well-known 
millionaire.  B is induced by the statement to make the proposed contract with A.  B's apparent manifestation of 
assent is effective.  However, the contract is voidable by B under the rule stated in § 164(1).  Contrast 
Illustrations 2 and 4.
b.  Effect of fault.  If the recipient had a reasonable opportunity to know the character or essential terms of the 
proposed contract, the rule stated in this Section does not apply, and his conduct is effective as a manifestation 
of assent.  Compare § 172.  The case then comes within § 164 on avoidance or § 166 on reformation.  In 
deciding whether the recipient has had such an opportunity, less care will ordinarily be expected of him if he did 
not intend to assume a legal obligation at all than if he intended to assume a legal obligation, although one of a 
different nature.
Illustrations:
2.  A and B reach an understanding that they will execute a written contract containing terms on which they 
have agreed.  It is properly prepared and is read by B, but A substitutes a writing containing essential terms that 
are different from those agreed upon and thereby induces B to sign it in the belief that it is the one he has read.  
B's apparent manifestation of assent is not effective.
3.  A and B reach an understanding that they will execute a written contract containing terms on which they 
have agreed.  A prepares a writing containing essential terms that are different from those agreed upon and 
induces B to sign it by telling him that it contains the terms agreed upon and that it is not necessary for him to 
read it.  B's apparent manifestation of assent is effective if B had a reasonable opportunity to read the writing.  

§ 163 When a Misrepresentation Prevents Formation of a Contract
However, the contract is voidable by B under the rule stated in § 164.  See Illustration 3 to § 164.  In the 
alternative, at the request of B, the court will decree that the writing be reformed to conform to their 
understanding under the rule stated in § 166.  See Illustration 1 to § 166.
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3, B is blind and gets C to read the writing to him, but C, in 
collusion with A, reads it wrongly.  B's apparent manifestation of assent is not effective.
c.  "Void" rather than voidable.  It is sometimes loosely said that, where the rule stated in this Section applies, 
there is a "void contract" as distinguished from a voidable one.  See Comment a to § 7.  This distinction has 
important consequences.  For example, the recipient of a misrepresentation may be held to have ratified the 
contract if it is voidable but not if it is "void." Furthermore, a good faith purchaser may acquire good title to 
property if he takes it from one who obtained voidable title by misrepresentation but not if he takes it from one 
who obtained "void title" by misrepresentation.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 475 and on Uniform Commercial Code § 3-305(2)(c).  See 12 Williston, 
Contracts § 1488 (3d ed. 1970); Annot., 78 A.L.R.2d 1020 (1977).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 6 to former § 475; Uniform Commercial Code § 2-403(1)(a); 
Phelps v. McQuade, 220 N.Y. 232, 115 N.E. 441 (1917); see also 3 Corbin, Contracts § 602 (1960).  But see 
Bancredit, Inc. v. Bethea, 68 N.J. Super. 62, 172 A.2d 10 (1961).
Comment b.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 475.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 2 to 
former § 475; First Nat'l Bank of Odessa v. Fazzari, 10 N.Y.2d 394, 223 N.Y.S.2d 483, 179 N.E.2d 493 (1961). 
Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 475.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 94, 98
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document