Restat 2d of Contracts, § 18
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 2- Manifestation of Assent in General        
§ 18 Manifestation of Mutual Assent
Manifestation of mutual assent to an exchange requires that each party either make a promise or begin 
or render a performance.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Manifestation of assent.  Assent to the formation of an informal contract is operative only to the extent that it 
is manifested.  Compare § 3 and Comment b to § 2.  As to the manifestation of assent by conduct other than 
words, see §§ 4 and 19.  Rules for cases where one party could reasonably draw more than one inference as 
to the intention of another are stated in the following sections, in connection with the scope of contractual 
obligations (see §§ 201, 219), and in connection with mistake (see § 151-58).
b.  Assent by promise or performance.  Where a bargain has been fully performed on one side, there is 
commonly no need to determine the moment of making of the contract or whether the performing party made a 
promise before he performed.  Those issues ordinarily become important only when a dispute arises at an 
earlier stage.  In the typical case such a dispute involves an exchange of promises before any performance 
takes place; there is an offer containing a promise and made binding by an acceptance containing a return 
promise.  Section 50.  The beginning or tender of performance may operate as such a return promise under § 
63.  In less common cases, acceptance may be made by a performance under § 54, and the beginning of 
performance may have an intermediate effect of making the offer irrevocable under § 45.
c.  Sham or jest.  Where all the parties to what would otherwise be a bargain manifest an intention that the 
transaction is not to be taken seriously, there is no such manifestation of assent to the exchange as is required 
by this Section.  In some cases the setting makes it clear that there is no contract, as where a business 
transaction is simulated on a stage during a dramatic performance.  In other cases, there may be doubt as to 
whether there is a joke, or one of the parties may take the joke seriously.  If one party is deceived and has no 
reason to know of the joke the law takes the joker at his word.  Even if the deceived party had reason to know 
of the joke, there may be a claim for fraud or unjust enrichment by virtue of the promise made.  Where the 
parties to a sham transaction intend to deceive third parties, considerations of public policy may sometimes 
preclude a defense of sham.  Cf. Illustration 1 to § 21.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new; compare former § 20.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 22 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 
107 (1963 & Supp. 1980).  The requirement of a voluntary act is dealt with in § 19.  The effect of a 
manifestation of assent when the party does not in fact assent is stated in §§ 19, 20, and subsequent sections.  
Intention to be or not to be legally bound is the subject of § 21.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
What constitutes a contract for sale under uniform commercial code § 2-314.  78 A.L.R.3d 696.
Validity and construction of preincorporation agreement between promoters as to future employment.  66 
A.L.R.3d 1138.

§ 18 Manifestation of Mutual Assent
Variance between offer and acceptance in regard to title as affecting consummation of contract for sale of real 
property.  16 A.L.R.3d 1424.
Person who signs contract but is not named in body thereof as party to contract and liable thereunder.  94 
A.L.R.2d 691.
Validity, construction, and effect of contract between grower of vegetable or fruit crops, and purchasing 
processor, packer, or canner.  87 A.L.R.2d 732.
What constitutes acceptance or ratification of, or acquiescence in, services rendered by attorney so as to raise 
implied promise to pay reasonable value thereof.  78 A.L.R.2d 318.
Conditions printed on confirmation slips as binding on customers of stock or commodity broker.  71 A.L.R.2d 
1089.
Admissibility of oral evidence to show that a writing was a sham agreement not intended to create legal 
relations.  71 A.L.R.2d 382.
Comment Note. -- Mutuality of remedy as essential to granting of specific performance.  22 A.L.R.2d 508.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 14, 15
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document