Restat 2d of Contracts, § 193
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 8- 
Unenforceability on Grounds of Public Policy          >            Topic 4- Interference with Other 
Protected Interests        
§ 193 Promise Inducing Violation of Fiduciary Duty
A promise by a fiduciary to violate his fiduciary duty or a promise that tends to induce such a violation 
is unenforceable on grounds of public policy.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope.  A fiduciary is expected to refrain from acting for his private advantage or otherwise contrary to the 
interests of his beneficiary or principal in matters affecting the fiduciary relation, and he is liable in tort for 
breach of his duty.  Restatement, Second, Torts § 874, cf. Restatement, Second, Agency § 312.  A promise by 
a fiduciary to violate his duty as a fiduciary is unenforceable on grounds of public policy, as is a promise that 
tends to induce such a violation.  In an exceptional case, however, a court may conclude that the interests of 
third parties require enforcement.  See Illustration 18 to § 178. Directors and other officials of a corporation act 
in a fiduciary capacity and are subject to the rule stated in this Section.  The rule applies by analogy to 
shareholders with reference to their voting powers, although it does not preclude agreements where the only 
advantage bargained for is one that will accrue to all shareholders through the ownership of shares.  See 
Illustration 3.  The details of the duties of various types of fiduciaries and the extent to which the beneficiary or 
principal can authorize a fiduciary to bargain for private advantages not directly accruing to him by virtue of his 
fiduciary relation are beyond the scope of this Restatement.  See Restatement, Second, Agency §§ 387, 393; 
Restatement, Second, Trusts §§ 169, 170.  If there has been effective consent by the beneficiary or principal so 
that no violation of a fiduciary duty is involved, the rule stated in this Section does not apply.  In determining 
whether consent is effective, such matters as capacity to contract and undue influence are taken into account.
Illustrations:
1.  A, in consulting with B, his lawyer, informs B of some facts.  Later C promises B $ 1,000 if B will disclose 
those facts.  B discloses them to C.  C's promise is one that tends to induce a violation of B's fiduciary duty to A 
and is unenforceable on grounds of public policy.
2.  A sells all of his shares of stock in a corporation to B, who pays the price and promises to exercise his voting 
power in accordance with A's instructions.  B's promise is one to violate a fiduciary duty and is unenforceable 
on grounds of public policy.
3.  A, B and C, shareholders in a corporation who are dissatisfied with the policy of the directors, promise each 
other to vote for other directors.  Their promises are not ones to violate a fiduciary duty and their enforcement is 
not precluded on grounds of public policy.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 570.  See also former §§ 557, 569.  See 6A Corbin, Contracts §§ 1456-57 
(1962); 15 Williston, Contracts §§ 1736, 1737 (3d ed. 1972).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based in part on Illustration 3 to former § 557.  Illustrations 2 and 3 are based on 
Illustrations 2 and 3 to former § 569.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:

§ 193 Promise Inducing Violation of Fiduciary Duty
Validity of contract for sale of "good will" of law practice.  79 A.L.R.3d 1243.
Validity, construction, and enforcement of business opportunities or "Finder's Fee" contract.  24 A.L.R.3d 1160.
Attorney's recovery in quantum meruit for legal services rendered under a contract which is illegal or void as 
against public policy.  100 A.L.R.2d 1378.
Validity and enforceability of agreement to drop or compromise will contest or withdraw objections to probate, or 
of agreement to induce others to do so.  42 A.L.R.2d 1319.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 113
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document