Restat 2d of Contracts, § 204
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 1- The Meaning of Agreements        
§ 204 Supplying an Omitted Essential Term
When the parties to a bargain sufficiently defined to be a contract have not agreed with respect to a 
term which is essential to a determination of their rights and duties, a term which is reasonable in the 
circumstances is supplied by the court.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope; relation to other rules.  This Section states a principle governing the legal effect of a binding 
agreement.  The supplying of an omitted term is not technically interpretation, but the two are closely related; 
courts often speak of an "implied" term.  In many common situations the principle has been elaborated in more 
detailed rules, applicable unless otherwise agreed.  See the rules on the effect of failure of performance stated 
in §§ 231-49 and the rules on impossibility and frustration stated in Chapter 11, and compare §§ 158 and 272, 
regarding the supplying of terms in cases of mistake and impracticability or frustration.  A similar principle is 
often applicable in determining whether the terms of an agreement are sufficiently certain to constitute a 
contract.  See §§ 33, 34.  In both situations the supplying of an omitted term may resemble or overlap 
interpretation (see § 200) or the effect given to usage (see §§ 219-23).
b.  How omission occurs.  The parties to an agreement may entirely fail to foresee the situation which later 
arises and gives rise to a dispute; they then have no expectations with respect to that situation, and a search 
for their meaning with respect to it is fruitless.  Or they may have expectations but fail to manifest them, either 
because the expectation rests on an assumption which is unconscious or only partly conscious, or because the 
situation seems to be unimportant or unlikely, or because discussion of it might be unpleasant or might produce 
delay or impasse.
c.  Interpretation and omission.  Interpretation may be necessary to determine that the parties have not agreed 
with respect to a particular term, but the supplying of an omitted term is not within the definition of interpretation 
in § 200.  Where there is tacit agreement or a common tacit assumption or where a term can be supplied by 
logical deduction from agreed terms and the circumstances, interpretation may be enough.  But interpretation 
may result in the conclusion that there was in fact no agreement on a particular point, and that conclusion 
should be accepted even though the omitted term could be supplied by giving agreed language a meaning 
different from the meaning or meanings given it by the parties.
d.  Supplying a term.  The process of supplying an omitted term has sometimes been disguised as a literal or a 
purposive reading of contract language directed to a situation other than the situation that arises.  Sometimes it 
is said that the search is for the term the parties would have agreed to if the question had been brought to their 
attention.  Both the meaning of the words used and the probability that a particular term would have been used 
if the question had been raised may be factors in determining what term is reasonable in the circumstances.  
But where there is in fact no agreement, the court should supply a term which comports with community 
standards of fairness and policy rather than analyze a hypothetical model of the bargaining process.  Thus 
where a contract calls for a single performance such as the rendering of a service or the delivery of goods, the 
parties are most unlikely to agree explicitly that performance will be rendered within a "reasonable time;" but if 
no time is specified, a term calling for performance within a reasonable time is supplied.  See Uniform 
Commercial Code §§ 1-204, 2-309(1).  Similarly, where there is a contract for the sale of goods but nothing is 
said as to price the price is a reasonable price at the time for delivery.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-305.
e.  Effect of the parol evidence rule.  The fact that an essential term is omitted may indicate that the agreement 
is not integrated or that there is partial rather than complete integration.  In such cases the omitted term may be 

§ 204 Supplying an Omitted Essential Term
supplied by prior negotiations or a prior agreement.  See § 216.  But omission of a term does not show 
conclusively that integration was not complete and a completely integrated agreement, if binding, discharges 
prior agreements within its scope.  See § 213.  Where there is complete integration and interpretation of the 
writing discloses a failure to agree on an essential term, evidence of prior negotiations or agreements is not 
admissible to supply the omitted term, but such evidence may be admissible, if relevant, on the question of 
what is reasonable in the circumstances.
Illustration:
1.  A and his wife convey their ranch to A's sister and her husband, reserving an option to repurchase.  The 
parties agree orally that the property will be kept in the family, but the deed says nothing as to assignment of 
the option.  If the deed is found to be a partial integration, the oral agreement is effective to show that the option 
is not assignable.  If the deed is found to be a complete integration, the oral agreement is discharged and the 
option is assignable.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  See 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 561-72A (1960 & Supp. 1980); 4 Williston, Contracts §§ 600-
610B, 614-15, 640 (3d ed. 1961); Farnsworth, Disputes Over Omissions in Contracts, 68 Colum. L. Rev. 860 
(1968).
Comment a.  For a discussion of the duty of good faith and fair dealing, see § 205.  For its relation to the court's 
power to supply omitted terms, and application of these concepts to different parts ofa contract with differing 
results, see Snyder v. Howard Johnson's Motor Lodges, Inc., 412 F. Supp. 724 (S.D. Ill. 1976). In Chemetron 
Corp. v. McLouth Steel Corp., 522 F.2d 469 (7th Cir. 1975), the court, from the ungrammatical language of a 
provision, concluded that the draftsman had inadvertently omitted either "and" or "or." Compare § 158.
Comment d.  Examples of courts adding a reasonable time requirement to contracts silent on the point include 
Haines v. City of New York, 41 N.Y.2d 769, 396 N.Y.S.2d 155, 364 N.E.2d 820 (1977) (long-term maintenance 
of a sewer system; cites this Section in Tentative Draft); and Houston County v. Leo L. Landauer & Assoc., 424 
S.W.2d 458 (Tex. Civ. App. 1968), ref. n.r.e. (time for performance under a contract).  In Southern Bell Tel. & 
Tel. Co. v. Florida E. Coast Ry. Co., 399 F.2d 854 (5th Cir. 1968), 47 N.C. L. Rev. 710 (1969), a power to place 
telephone and telegraph lines over and under railroad tracks, duration of which was unspecified, was held 
subject to termination upon reasonable notice.  The power had already been in existence for more than fifty 
years.  As to a court's power to find an omitted term limiting restrictive employment agreements to a reasonable 
time or area, compare Toch v. Eric Schuster Corp., 490 S.W.2d 618 (Tex. Civ. App. 1972), ref. n.r.e., with 
Haines v. City of New York, supra (dictum).  In Snyder v. Howard Johnson's Motor Lodges, Inc., supra, the 
court refused to find an implied covenant not to compete, but found an implied covenant that a restaurant would 
be operated in a manner consistent with others operated by the defendants.  For an example of a court refusing 
to supply an allegedly omitted term, see Hinckley v. Bechtel Corp., 41 Cal. App.3d 206, 116 Cal. Rptr. 33 
(1974).
Comment e.  On the interplay with the parol evidence rule see Snyder v. Howard Johnson's Motor Lodges, Inc., 
supra. Illustration 1 is based on Masterson v. Sine, 68 Cal.2d 222, 65 Cal. Rptr. 545, 436 P.2d 561 (1968).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Admissibility of extrinsic evidence to identify person or persons intended to be designated by the name in which 
a contract is made.  80 A.L.R.2d 1137.
Implied obligation of purchaser or lessee to conduct search for, or to develop or work premises for, minerals 
other than oil and gas.  76 A.L.R.2d 721.
Sale of business or of real estate upon which business is conducted as transferring good will by implication, in 
absence of covenant not to compete.  65 A.L.R.2d 502.
Effect of failure of contract for sale or exchange of real estate to specify time for giving of possession.  56 
A.L.R.2d 1272.

§ 204 Supplying an Omitted Essential Term
Place, in absence of written provision in sales contract, where cash consideration for goods purchased is 
payable.  49 A.L.R.2d 1350.
Implied covenant in lease for business purposes, that lessor will not compete in business activity for conducting 
of which lessee leased the premises.  22 A.L.R.2d 1466.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 152
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document