Restat 2d of Contracts, § 268
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 11- 
Impracticability of Performance and Frustration of Purpose        
§ 268 Effect on Other Party's Duties of a Prospective Failure Justified by 
Impracticability or Frustration
(1)  A party's prospective failure of performance may, except as stated in Subsection (2), discharge the 
other party's duties or allow him to suspend performance under the rules stated in §§ 251(1) and 253(2) 
even though the failure would be justified under the rules stated in this Chapter.
(2)  The rule stated in Subsection (1) does not apply if the other party assumed the risk that he would 
have to perform in spite of such a failure.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Relation to other rules.  This Restatement adopts the principle "that a continuing sense of reliance and 
security that the promised performance will be forthcoming when due, is an important feature of the bargain." 
Comment 1 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609; see Comment a to § 251.  If there is reason to expect that a 
party will not perform as promised, the other party has the protection afforded by the rules stated in §§ 250 and 
253 if the first party has repudiated, and by the rule stated in § 251 if reasonable grounds for insecurity have 
arisen with respect to the first party's future performance.  However, those sections apply only if such 
prospective non-performance would amount to a breach.  This Section applies when the prospective non-
performance would not be a breach because of the rules on impracticability of performance or frustration of 
purpose stated in this Chapter.  Subsection (2) makes it clear that if the other party has assumed the risk that 
he will have to perform although he receives no return performance, his duties are not discharged.
b.  Statement or voluntary act.  If a party properly states that he will not perform because of impracticability of 
his performance or frustration of his purpose, the other party cannot treat that statement as a repudiation under 
the rule stated in § 250(a) because the threatened non-performance would not be a breach.  It therefore gives 
him no claim for breach of contract.  Nevertheless, under the rule stated in this Section it discharges his 
remaining duties to render the agreed exchange.  The same rule applies to a voluntary affirmative act that 
would otherwise be a repudiation under the rule stated in § 250(b).  The rules on nullification of a repudiation (§ 
256) and urging performance (§ 257) also apply to situations that come under this Section.
Illustration:
1.  A, an impresario, contracts with B, a singer, for an engagement for three months beginning on January 1.  
On the preceding November 30, B contracts pneumonia, and states to A that he will be unable to sing before 
February 1.  A employs another singer to fill B's place.  On January 1, B, having recovered, offers to perform 
but A refuses.  Since B's statement would have been a repudiation under the rule stated in § 250 but for the 
operation of the rules on impracticability of performance stated in §§ 261 and 262, A's duty to employ B is 
discharged, and A is not liable to B for breach of contract.  Cf. Illustration 2 to § 242.
c.  Failure to give assurances.  If reasonable grounds arise to believe that a party will not perform because of 
impracticability of his performance or frustration of his purpose, the other party cannot demand assurances and 
treat a failure to give them as a repudiation under the rule stated in § 251, because the prospective non-
performance would not be a breach.  It therefore gives him no claim for breach of contract.  Nevertheless, 
under the rule stated in this Section, he may in a proper case suspend his own performance and treat a failure 
to give assurance as discharging any remaining duties that he has to render the agreed exchange.
Illustrations:

§ 268 Effect on Other Party’s Duties of a Prospective Failure Justified by Impracticability or Frustration
2.  A, an impresario, contracts with B, a singer, for an engagement for three months beginning on January 1.  
On the preceding November 30, B contracts pneumonia, and A is advised by competent medical authority that 
B will not be able to sing before February 1.  A reasonably demands assurances of due performance by B.  B 
ignores the demand, and A employs another singer to fill B's place.  On January 1, B, having recovered, offers 
to perform, but A refuses.  Since B's failure to furnish assurance of due performance would have been a 
repudiation under the rule stated in § 251 but for the operation of the rules on impracticability of performance 
stated in §§ 261 and 262, A's duty to employ B is discharged, and A is not liable to B for breach of contract.
3.  A contracts to sell land to B, title to be conveyed one year from the date of the contract.  B then learns from 
reliable sources that the state plans to condemn the land for a highway before that time and reasonably 
demands assurance of due performance by A.  A ignores the demand, and B acquires other land as a 
substitute for that which A contracted to convey.  The state then abandons its plans to build the highway and A 
tenders the deed one year from the date of the contract.  B refuses to perform.  Since A's failure to furnish 
assurance of due performance would have been a repudiation under the rule stated in § 251 but for the 
operation of the rules on impracticability of performance stated in §§ 261 and 264, B's duty to take and pay for 
the land is discharged, and B is not liable to A for breach of contract.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  It is suggested by Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609 and by § 251 of this Restatement.  It 
replaces former §§ 281, 282 and 286.  See 6 Corbin, Contracts §§ 1259, 1260 (1962 & Supp. 1980); 6 
Williston, Contracts §§ 877, 885 (3d ed. 1962).
Comment b.  The facts in Illustration 1 are suggested by Illustration 2 to § 242 and by Poussard v. Spiers & 
Pond, 1 Q.B. Div. 410 (1896).
Comment c.  The facts in Illustration 2 are suggested by Illustration 2 to § 242 and by Poussard v. Spiers & 
Pond, supra; see Illustration 3 to former § 282; Illustration 7 to former § 275; cf.  Illustration 4 to former § 323.  
The facts in Illustration 3 are suggested by Hess v. Dumouchel Paper Co., 154 Conn. 343, 225 A.2d 797 
(1966).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 309
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document