Restat 2d of Contracts, § 280
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 12- Discharge by 
Assent or Alteration          >            Topic 2- Substituted Performance, Substituted Contract, 
Accord and Account Stated        
§ 280 Novation
A novation is a substituted contract that includes as a party one who was neither the obligor nor the 
obligee of the original duty.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Definition of novation.  The word "novation" is used in this Restatement to refer to a type of substituted 
contract that has the effect of adding a party, either as obligor or obligee, who was not a party to the original 
duty.  See Comment a to § 279.  A novation may involve more than three parties.  The performance to be 
rendered under the new duty may be the same as or different from that to be rendered under the original duty.  
It is also possible to have an accord that adds a new party, but that is less often the case and such an accord is 
not termed a novation.  See Illustration 1.
b.  Effect of novation.  A novation discharges the original duty, just as any other substituted contract does, so 
that breach of the new duty gives no right of action on the old duty.  Most novations simply substitute a new 
obligor for an old obligor or, less commonly, a new obligee for an old obligee.  Sometimes these are termed 
simple novations, to distinguish them from more complex transactions that are termed compound novations.
c.  Consideration.  A novation is subject to the same requirements as any other contract, including that of 
consideration.  However, since consideration need not be given to the promisor and need not be given by the 
promisee (§ 71 (4)), consideration to support the discharge of the original duty can usually be found in the 
promise to undertake a new duty.  It is not necessary for this purpose that all of the parties to the novation 
manifest their assent simultaneously nor that they all be in the same place, but their manifestations of assent 
must have reference to one another (§ 23).  Although all parties usually assent to a novation, a novation is 
possible without the assent of the obligor of the original duty or of the obligee of the new duty if that party is an 
intended beneficiary and does not disclaim (§ 306).  See Illustrations 2 and 5.  Assent of the obligee of the 
original duty and of the obligor of the new duty is always necessary.
d.  Substitution of obligor.  A simple novation involving a substitution of obligors results when an obligee 
promises the obligor that he will discharge the obligor's duty in consideration for a third person's promise to pay 
the obligee.  See Illustration 1.  As to the analogous situation of an obligee who takes in payment from the 
obligor a negotiable instrument on which a third person is liable, see Uniform Commercial Code § 3-802.  A 
substitution of obligors may also result when an obligee promises a third person that he will discharge the 
obligor's duty in consideration for the third person's promise to render either the performance that was due from 
the obligor or some other performance.  Even a promise to render part performance is consideration in that 
situation.  See Comment c to § 278.  If the obligor is an intended beneficiary (§ 302), there is a novation.  The 
assent of the obligor is not required.  However, his rights are governed by the rules stated in Chapter 14, 
Contract Beneficiaries, and if he has not assented he can by disclaimer render the transaction inoperative from 
the beginning (§ 306).  See Illustration 2.  Such a novation also results when a third person promises an obligor 
to assume, immediately and in substitution for the obligor's duty, a duty to the obligee to render the 
performance that was due from the obligor or some other performance, and the obligee agrees with the obligor 
or with the third person to that substitution.  The third person then comes under a new duty to the obligee, who 
is an intended beneficiary of his promise to assume (§ 302), and this is consideration for the obligee's 
agreement to discharge the original obligor.  The obligee, having already assented to the discharge of the duty 
in this way, has no power to disclaim it.  See Illustration 3.  However, a mere promise by a third party to assume 

§ 280 Novation
the obligor's duty, not offered in substitution for that duty, does not result in a novation, and the new duty that 
the third party may owe to the obligee as an intended beneficiary is in addition to and not in substitution for the 
obligor's original duty.  For a novation to take place, the obligee must assent to the discharge of the obligor's 
duty in consideration for the promise of the third party to undertake that duty.  As to the effect of an obligee's 
acceptance of performance from an assignee after a repudiation by the obligor, see § 329(2).
Illustrations:
1.  A owes B $ 1,000.  B promises A that he will discharge the debt immediately if C will promise B to pay B $ 
1,000.  C so promises.  There is a novation under which B's and C's promises are consideration for each other 
and A is discharged.
2.  A owes B $ 1,000.  B promises C that he will discharge the debt immediately if C will promise him to pay him 
$ 1,000.  Intending to benefit A, C so promises.  There is a novation under which B's and C's promises are 
consideration for each other, and A's duty to pay B is discharged.  A is an intended beneficiary of B's promise 
(§ 302) and can by disclaimer render the transaction, including the discharge, inoperative from the beginning (§ 
306).  The result is the same if B's promise is made in return for C's promise to pay $ 500.  See Illustration 4 to 
§ 278.
3.  A owes B a duty to service B's machine for a year.  A sells part of his business to C, who promises A that he 
will assume A's duty to B if B promises to accept it immediately and in substitution for A's duty.  B so promises 
A.  There is a novation under which B's and C's promises are consideration for each other, and A's duty to 
service B's machine is discharged.  B is an intended beneficiary of C's promise (§ 302), but cannot disclaim 
because he has assented.  The result is the same if B's promise is made to C.
e.  Substitution of obligee.  A simple novation involving a substitution of obligees results when an obligee 
promises his obligor to discharge the obligor's duty in consideration for the obligor's promise to a third person to 
render either the performance that was due from the obligor or some other performance.  See Illustration 4.  A 
substitution of obligees may also result when the obligor's promise is one made directly to the obligee but is one 
to render the performance to a third person as beneficiary.  If the third person is an intended beneficiary (§ 
302), there is a novation.  Illustration 5.  The assent of the third person is not required.  However, his rights are 
subject to the rules stated in Chapter 14, Contract Beneficiaries, and if he has not assented he can by 
disclaimer render the transaction, including the discharge, inoperative from the beginning.  Obligees may also 
be substituted by assignment of a right, which differs from novation in that assignment requires neither the 
knowledge nor the assent of the obligor and cannot change the performance to be rendered by him.  For other 
differences, see Chapter 15, Assignment and Delegation.
Illustrations:
4.  A owes B $ 1,000.  B promises A that he will discharge the debt immediately if A will promise C to perform 
stated services to C.  A so promises C.  There is a novation under which A's and B's promises are 
consideration for each other and A's duty to pay B is discharged.  If B's promise were to discharge A when A 
performed the services, there would be an accord rather than a novation.
5.  A owes B $ 1,000.  Intending to benefit C, B promises A that he will discharge the debt immediately if A will 
promise him to perform stated services to C.  A so promises B.  There is a novation under which A's and B's 
promises are consideration for each other and A's duty to pay B is discharged.  C is an intended beneficiary of 
A's promise (§ 302) and can by disclaimer render the transaction, including the discharge, inoperative from the 
beginning.
f.  Compound novations.  The novations already described involve a simple substitution of one obligor or 
obligee for another.  More complex transactions, sometimes called compound novations, are possible.  If, for 
example, there are two duties and the obligee of the first is the obligor of the second, the three parties may 
agree that one party shall drop out altogether.  See Illustration 6.  Furthermore, if each of two parties has a right 
against the other, they may agree with a third party that the third party shall immediately acquire a right against 
and be subject to a duty to one of them in substitution for the original right of and duty due the other.  The new 
right and duty may be for performances that are the same as or different from the original ones.  See Illustration 
7.
Illustrations:

§ 280 Novation
6.  A owes B $ 1,000 and B owes C $ 1,000.  A promises B and C that he will assume B's debt to C if B 
promises to discharge A's debt to B and if C promises to discharge B's debt to C and accept A as his debtor.  B 
and C so promise.  There is a novation under which A's promise and B's and C's promises are consideration for 
each other, and A's debt to B and B's debt to C are discharged.
7.  A and B make a contract under which A promises to deliver a tractor to B and B promises to pay A $ 1,000.  
A promises to deliver a bulldozer to C and to discharge B's duty if B promises to discharge A's duty and C 
promises to pay A $ 2,000.  B and C so promise.  There is a novation and A's duty to deliver a tractor to B and 
B's duty to pay $ 1,000 are discharged.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 424.  Former §§ 425-30 have been dealt with in the commentary.  See 6 
Corbin, Contracts §§ 1297-1302 (1962 & Supp. 1980); 15 Williston, Contracts §§ 1865-73 (3d ed. 1972).
Comment a.  Courts sometimes use "novation" in situations in which this Restatement would use "substituted 
contract" (§ 279) or "modification" (§ 89).  See, e.g., Burnett v. Luquillo Beach Dev. Co., 443 F. Supp. 378 
(D.P.R. 1978) (also discussing the civil law concept of the precontract ("precontrato")).
Comment d.  This Comment is based on former §§ 427, 428.  Illustration 1 is based in part on Illustration 1 to 
former § 427; see Bridger v. Mangum, 35 N.C. App. 569, 241 S.E.2d 726 (1978). Illustration 2 is based on 
Greenwood Leflore Hosp. Comm'n v. Turner, 213 Miss. 200, 56 So.2d 496 (1952). Illustration 3 is based in part 
on Illustration 2 to former § 428.
Comment e.  This Comment is based on former §§ 425, 426.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 
425.  Illustration 5 is based in part on Illustration 1 to former § 426; cf.  Lawrence v. Fox, 20 N.Y. 268 (1859).
Comment f.  This Comment is based on former §§ 429, 430.  Illustration 6 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 
429; see Jay Cee Fish Co. v. Cannarella, 279 F. Supp. 67 (D.S.C. 1968). Illustration 7 is based on Illustration 1 
to former § 430.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Creditor's acceptance of obligation of third person as constituting novation.  61 A.L.R.2d 755.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Novation 1 et seq.
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document