Restat 2d of Contracts, § 285
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 12- Discharge by 
Assent or Alteration          >            Topic 3- Agreement of Rescission, Release and Contract Not to 
Sue        
§ 285 Contract Not to Sue
(1)  A contract not to sue is a contract under which the obligee of a duty promises never to sue the 
obligor or a third person to enforce the duty or not to do so for a limited time.
(2)  Except as stated in Subsection (3), a contract never to sue discharges the duty and a contract not to 
sue for a limited time bars an action to enforce the duty during that time.
(3)  A contract not to sue one co-obligor bars levy of execution on the property of the promisee during 
the agreed time but does not bar an action or the recovery of judgment against any co-obligor.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Nature of contract not to sue.  Sometimes an obligee does not manifest an intention to discharge the obligor 
but merely makes a contract by which he promises not to sue him.  See § 295.  Such a contract is often called 
"a covenant not to sue," a term that is not used in this Restatement in order to avoid any suggestion that it must 
be under seal.  Although a contract never to sue an obligor does not in terms discharge the obligor's duty 
immediately, it is given this effect in order to avoid circuity of action.  A contract not to sue for a limited time bars 
an action to enforce the duty during that time.  As to a contract not to sue one co-obligor, see Comment b.
Illustration:
1.  A owes B $ 1,000 payable immediately.  B assigns his right to C, receiving in return C's promise not to sue A 
for one year.  C cannot maintain an action against A before the end of the year.
b.  Co-obligors.  If an obligee makes a contract not to sue one co-obligor and then joins that co-obligor in an 
action merely for the purpose of obtaining judgment against the other co-obligors, this is not regarded as a 
breach of the contract not to sue the one co-obligor if none of his assets are seized in satisfaction of the 
judgment.  See Comment b to § 295.  Therefore, the effect of the contract is merely to bar levy of execution on 
his property during the agreed time.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 405.  See 5A Corbin, Contracts § 1251 (1964 & Supp. 1980); 15 Williston, 
Contracts § 1823 (3d ed. 1972).
Comment a.  On the differences between a release and a contract not to sue, see Comments b and c to § 284.  
Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 405.
Comment b.  Compare Finney v. Farmers Ins. Co., 21 Wash. App. 601, 586 P.2d 519 (1978).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Restitution as prerequisite of setting aside release or compromise of claim under Federal Employers' Liability 
Act, as affected by provision thereof invalidating contract, rule, or device to exempt carrier from liability.  96 
A.L.R.2d 655.
Specific performance of compromise and settlement agreement.  48 A.L.R.2d 1211.

§ 285 Contract Not to Sue
Digest System Key Numbers:
Release 7, 37
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document