Restat 2d of Contracts, § 295
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 13- Joint and 
Several Promisors and Promisees          >            Topic 1- Joint and Several Promisors        
§ 295 Effect of Contract Not to Sue; Reservation of Rights
(1)  Where the obligee of promises of the same performance contracts not to sue one promisor, the 
other promisors are not discharged except to the extent required by the law of suretyship.
(2)  Words which purport to release or discharge a promisor and also to reserve rights against other 
promisors of the same performance have the effect of a contract not to sue rather than a release or 
discharge.
(3)  Any consideration received by the obligee for a contract not to sue one promisor discharges the 
duty of each other promisor of the same performance to the extent of the amount or value received.  An 
agreement to the contrary is not effective unless it is made with a surety and expressly preserves the 
duty of his principal.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  The distinction between discharge and contract not to sue.  Discharge by release, rescission or accord and 
satisfaction has long been regarded as an executed transaction rather than an executory promise.  It has also 
long been held that release of one joint promisor discharges his co-promisors, and the rule has been extended 
to other types of discharges.  See § 294.  In its origin the rule was regarded as a logical consequence of the 
nature of the right created by a joint promise; it did not depend on the intention of the parties to the release, and 
regularly operated to defeat their manifest intention.  But the rule could be avoided by use of the form of a 
contract not to sue, also known as a covenant not to sue.  Such a contract was treated as an executory 
promise; although a single promisor could plead the contract as a defense to prevent circuity of action, it did not 
discharge the right and hence did not discharge co-promisors.
b.  Joinder of one not to be sued in action against co-promisor.  If a promisee contracts not to sue one promisor 
and then sues one or more co-promisors, joinder of the obligee under the contracts is not required by the rule of 
§ 290.  Where a contrary view was taken and the co-promisor was held entitled to have the one not to be sued 
joined as a defendant, the formal joinder so required was not regarded as a breach of the contract not to sue.  
The promisee could without violating the contract join the one not to be sued and take a joint judgment against 
all the co-promisors, provided he took no steps to enforce the judgment against the assets of the one not to be 
sued.
c.  Reservation of rights.  Until the nineteenth century, words in a release of one joint promisor which purported 
to reserve rights against co-promisors were regarded as repugnant to the nature of the release and void.  But in 
modern times, in order to give effect to the manifested intention, courts have interpreted releases containing 
such words as contracts not to sue.  This rule has been extended to other types of discharge, and has greatly 
reduced the significance of the rule that release of one releases all.
So far as the rules governing joint promisors are concerned, no reservation of rights is necessary in an 
instrument taking the form of a contract not to sue.  But for the purposes of the law of suretyship, which 
developed independently, a contract not to sue is treated like a release: an unqualified contract not to sue the 
principal debtor is treated as impairing the surety's right to assert the creditor's right by way of subrogation and 
hence as discharging the surety.  See Comment d to § 294.  This result can be avoided by a reservation of 
rights, which is regarded as preserving not only the surety's right to reimbursement from the principal but also 
his right to subrogation.  Thus the reservation subjects the one not to be sued to the risk that the protection the 
contract affords may be illusory.  See Restatement of Security § 122; Uniform Commercial Code § 3-606.

§ 295 Effect of Contract Not to Sue; Reservation of Rights
d.  Consideration received.  Subsection (3) applies to consideration received by the obligee for a contract not to 
sue the same rule stated in § 294(3) for consideration for discharge.  See Comments f and g to § 294.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section consolidates former §§ 120(3), 121(2) and 122.  The effect of parol evidence is left to Chapter 9 on 
the scope and meaning of contracts, and Subsection (3) follows new § 121(3) in revision of former § 120(3).
See Williams, Joint Obligations §§ 50-59 (1949); 2 Williston, Contracts §§ 338, 339, 340, 342 (3d ed. 1959); 4 
Corbin, Contracts §§ 931-34 (1951 & Supp. 1980); Havighurst, The Effect of Settlement with One Co-Obligor 
Upon the Obligations of the Others, 45 Cornell L.Q. 1 (1959); Annots., 53 A.L.R. 1420 (1928); 73 A.L.R.2d 403 
(1960).
Comment a.  On the distinctions among various types of discharge by assent, see Chapter 12, Topics 1-3, 
especially §§ 283-85.
Comment c.  For an effectuation of the evident intent of a party to a release to reserve her rights against an 
alleged co-tortfeasor, see Cooper v. Robert Hall Clothes, Inc., 59 Ind. App. 168, 375 N.E.2d 1142 (1978). For a 
case discharging co-tortfeasors when a stipulation of dismissal in an action against another contained no 
reservation of rights, see Melo v. National Fuse and Powder Co., 267 F. Supp. 611 (D. Colo. 1967) (applying 
Model Joint Obligations Act).  See also M. Zerman Realty Co. v. Borough of Westwood, 64 N.J. 590, 319 A.2d 
441 (1974) in which a developer seeking damages against a municipality unsuccessfully sought to avoid 
discharge by a release from the municipality to the developer's surety.  For a holding under Louisiana law 
similar to the rules of this Section, see Cunningham v. Hardware Mut. Cas. Co., 228 So.2d 700 (La. Ct. App. 
1969).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Release 37
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document