Restat 2d of Contracts, § 327
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 15- Assignment 
and Delegation          >            Topic 2- Mode of Assignment or Delegation        
§ 327 Acceptance or Disclaimer by the Assignee
(1) A manifestation of assent by an assignee to the assignment is essential to make it effective unless
(a) a third person gives consideration for the assignment, or
(b) the assignment is irrevocable by virtue of the delivery of a writing to a third person.
(2) An assignee who has not manifested assent to an assignment may, within a reasonable time after 
learning of its existence and terms, render it inoperative from the beginning by disclaimer.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Necessity of acceptance.  Sale of a contractual right, like sale of goods, requires a bargain in which there is 
a manifestation of mutual assent to the exchange.  Ordinarily the person who furnishes the consideration is the 
transferee of the right sold, but where consideration is given by one person for an assignment to another, it is 
not necessary that the assignee know of the bargain or assent to it.  Compare §§ 17, 71(2).  Where there is no 
bargain, an irrevocable gift can be made without the assent of the donee by the delivery of a written assignment 
or a symbolic or evidentiary writing to a third person.  Compare §§ 104, 306; Restatement, Second, Trusts §§ 
35, 36.  The circumstances in which such a delivery makes the assignment irrevocable are stated in § 332.
Illustrations:
1.  A has a contractual right against D.  For consideration received from B, A assigns the right to B's son C.  C 
has no knowledge of the assignment.  The assignment is effective immediately, subject to C's power of 
disclaimer.
2.  A delivers his savings bank book to B, saying "I deliver this book to you as a gift to C." C has no knowledge 
of the gift.  An attempted revocation by A before C learns of the gift is ineffective.
b.  Disclaimer.  As in other cases of rights created without the assent of the obligee, an assignee is entitled to 
reject the right, whether or not there is a related burden.  Compare §§ 38, 104, 306.  No particular formality is 
required for disclaimer, and its usual effect is the same as if no assignment had been made.  But it cannot 
make tortious acts lawful when done, and in some cases it may give rise to a right of restitution.  See Comment 
a to § 306.  The effect of intervening claims of third persons is beyond the scope of this Restatement.
Illustration:
3.  A, the payee of a negotiable or non-negotiable note or certificate of deposit, delivers it to B without 
indorsement as a gift to C, who has no knowledge of the delivery.  Upon learning of the gift C refuses it.  A is 
the owner of the note or certificate.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is derived from former § 159, but is substantially rewritten.  The exceptions in Subsection (1) are 
limited to situations involving third parties because the assignee's assent will be implicit if he gives 
consideration or receives without timely objection delivery of a writing making the assignment irrevocable.
See 3 Williston, Contracts §§ 424, 436-37 (1960); 4 Corbin, Contracts § 871 (1951).
Comments a and b.  Illustrations 1-3 are based on Illustrations 1-3 to former § 159.
Cross Reference

§ 327 Acceptance or Disclaimer by the Assignee
Digest System Key Numbers:
Assignments 56
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document