Restat 2d of Contracts, § 372
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 16- Remedies          
>            Topic 4- Restitution        
§ 372 Specific Restitution
(1) Specific restitution will be granted to a party who is entitled to restitution, except that:
(a) specific restitution based on a breach by the other party under the rule stated in § 373 may be 
refused in the discretion of the court if it would unduly interfere with the certainty of title to land or 
otherwise cause injustice, and
(b) specific restitution in favor of the party in breach under the rule stated in § 374 will not be granted.
(2) A decree of specific restitution may be made conditional on return of or compensation for anything 
that the party claiming restitution has received.
(3) If specific restitution, with or without a sum of money, will be substantially as effective as restitution 
in money in putting the party claiming restitution in the position he was in before rendering any 
performance, the other party can discharge his duty by tendering such restitution before suit is brought 
and keeping his tender good.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Specific restitution on avoidance or in similar circumstances.  A party who has a right to restitution under the 
rule stated in § 376 because he has avoided the contract, generally has a choice of either claiming a sum of 
money in restitution or seeking specific restitution if the benefit is something that can be returned to him.  The 
same is true of a party who has a right to restitution under the rule stated in § 377 on one of the grounds there 
stated, even though this rule does not, strictly speaking, result in avoidance of the contract.  The right to specific 
restitution may, however, be subject to rights of third parties.  Their rights are not dealt with in this Restatement.  
For special rules governing the right of a seller under a contract for the sale of goods, see Uniform Commercial 
Code §§ 2-507, 2-702.
Illustration:
1.  A is induced by B's misrepresentation to sell a tract of land to B for $ 100,000.  On discovery of the 
misrepresentation, A tenders back the $ 100,000 and sues B for specific restitution of the land.  Specific 
restitution will be granted.
b.  Specific restitution on other grounds.  A party whose right to restitution is based on the other party's breach 
also has a right to specific restitution, subject to the limitation stated in Paragraph (a).  In the case of a contract 
for the sale of goods, the Uniform Commercial Code limits much more severely the seller's right to specific 
restitution, although the seller can protect himself by taking a security interest in the goods.  See Uniform 
Commercial Code § 2-703.  The most important problems of specific restitution that remain usually arise in 
connection with contracts to transfer land.  If the buyer of land fails or refuses to pay the price after the transfer 
of the land to him, the seller is limited to his claim for the price, which may be secured by a vendor's lien as a 
matter of law or by a security interest that he has reserved.  The question of his right to specific restitution does 
not arise in that situation (§ 373(2)).  Specific restitution may, however, be appropriate where there is a right to 
restitution because the return promise is to do something other than pay money.  See Illustrations 2 and 3.  In 
that case, however, a court may refuse specific restitution if it would unduly interfere with the certainty of title to 
the land.  In resolving that question, a court will take into account all the circumstances, including the 
inadequacy of other relief.  A court may also refuse specific restitution if it would otherwise cause injustice as 

§ 372 Specific Restitution
where, for example, it would result in a preference over other creditors in bankruptcy.  Specific restitution under 
the rule stated in this Section is available to the injured party even though enforcement of the contract is barred 
by the Statute of Frauds.  See § 375.  Under the exception stated in Paragraph (b), however, it is never 
available to a party who is himself in breach.  See § 374.
Illustrations:
2.  A contracts to transfer a tract of land to B in return for B's promise to transfer a tract of land to A at the same 
time.  After A has transferred his tract to B and received a deed from B, A learns that B does not have title to 
the other tract.  A sues B for specific restitution.  Specific restitution will be granted, together with compensation 
to A for the value to B of the use of the land, because the right to specific restitution will not unduly interfere with 
the certainty of title to land.  If B's promise is to transfer his tract to A ten years after A's transfer of his tract, 
specific restitution will be denied because a right to specific restitution would unduly interfere with the certainty 
of title to land during the ten years.
3.  A contracts to transfer a tract of land to B in return for B's promise to support A for life.  B repudiates the 
contract after he has supported A for a time and A has transferred the land to him, and A sues B for specific 
restitution.  Specific restitution will be granted, conditional on compensation by A for any support that he has 
received less the value to B of the use of the land, because the right to specific restitution will not unduly 
interfere with the certainty of title to land given the inadequacy of A's right to damages because of the difficulty 
of proving damages with sufficient certainty (§ 352).
4.  A contracts to transfer a tract of land to B in return for B's promise to transfer a tract of land to A at a later 
date.  After A has transferred his tract of land to B, B sells both tracts to C, a good faith purchaser for value, 
taking a mortgage to secure the balance of the price on the tract transferred by A.  A sues B and C for specific 
restitution.  Specific restitution will be denied but A can get a decree subrogating him to B's right to the balance 
of the price and to his rights under the purchase money mortgage that secures it.
5.  A contracts to transfer to B half of his 20,000 shares of stock in the X Corporation in return for B's promise to 
pay $ 100,000, to organize a holding company to control X Corporation and to protect A's remaining interest as 
a shareholder.  After A has transferred the stock and B has paid the $ 100,000, B refuses to organize the 
holding company.  A sues B for specific restitution.  Specific restitution may properly be granted conditional on 
repayment by A of the $ 100,000.
c.  Tender off specific restitution.  In some circumstances, a party who is liable for restitution can discharge his 
duty by tendering specific restitution and keeping his tender good.  The tender has this result only if specific 
restitution will be substantially as effective as restitution in money in putting the party claiming restitution in the 
position he was in before rendering any performance.  If tender of a sum of money in addition to specific 
restitution will do this, such a tender discharges the other party's duty.  See Illustration 6.  The tender must, 
however, be made before suit has been brought.
Illustration:
6.  A makes an oral contract with B under which A transfers 1,000 shares of stock to B in return for B's promise 
to convey a tract of land to A.  B repudiates the contract before he has conveyed the land and tenders back the 
stock and the dividends received from it and keeps his tender good.  A rejects the tender and sues B for 
restitution of the value to B of the stock.  A cannot recover the value of the stock.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former §§ 354, 355(2), 468(1) and 489.  It enlarges the right to specific restitution and 
abandons the adequacy test.  See 1 Palmer, The Law of Restitution §§ 4.7, 4.19, 4.20 (1978); see also 5 
Corbin, Contracts § 1120 (1964); 12 Williston, Contracts §§ 1456, 1458 (3d ed. 1968).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on State St. Bank & Trust Co. v. Beale, 353 Mass. 103, 227 N.E.2d 924 
(1967).
Comment b.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 354 and on the discussion of Benassi v. Harris, 
147 Conn. 451, 162 A.2d 521 (1960), in Palmer, supra, at § 4.19.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to 
former § 354; Brimson v. Pearrow, 218 Ark. 27, 234 S.W.2d 214 (1950); Myers v. Diehl, 365 P.2d 717 (Okl. 
1961). Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 4 to former § 354.  Illustration 5 is based on Illustration 5 to former § 
354; Therm-O-Proof Insulation Mfg. Co. v. Hoffman, 329 Ill. App. 645, 69 N.E.2d 725 (1946); Maytag Co. v. 
Alward, 253 Iowa 455, 112 N.W.2d 654 (1962).

§ 372 Specific Restitution
Comment c.  Illustration 6 is based on Illustration 6 to former § 355.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Cancellation of Instruments 3, 23, 24, 58
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document