Restat 2d of Contracts, § 41
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 4- Duration of the Offeree’s Power of Acceptance        
§ 41 Lapse of Time
(1)  An offeree's power of acceptance is terminated at the time specified in the offer, or, if no time is 
specified, at the end of a reasonable time.
(2)  What is a reasonable time is a question of fact, depending on all the circumstances existing when 
the offer and attempted acceptance are made.
(3)  Unless otherwise indicated by the language or the circumstances, and subject to the rule stated in § 
49, an offer sent by mail is seasonably accepted if an acceptance is mailed at any time before midnight 
on the day on which the offer is received.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Specified time.  Just as the offer may prescribe the identity of the offeree (§ 29) or the form of acceptance (§ 
30), so it may prescribe a time limit for acceptance.  Such a limitation must be complied with.  See § 60.  In 
cases of misunderstanding, the principles underlying § 20 are applicable.  See Chapter 9.
b.  Reasonable time.  In the absence of a contrary indication, just as acceptance may be made in any manner 
and by any medium which is reasonable in the circumstances (§ 30), so it may be made at any time which is 
reasonable in the circumstances.  The circumstances to be considered have a wide range: they include the 
nature of the proposed contract, the purposes of the parties, the course of dealing between them, and any 
relevant usages of trade.  In general, the question is what time would be thought satisfactory to the offeror by a 
reasonable man in the position of the offeree; but circumstances not known to the offeree may be relevant to 
show that the time actually taken by the offeree was satisfactory to the offeror.  See Illustration 6 to § 23.
c.  Time for acceptance by act; rewards.  Where the offeree is invited to accept by performing or refraining from 
performing an act, a reasonable time for so doing is ordinarily a reasonable time for accepting.  But the 
purposes of the offeror, if the offeree knows or has reason to know of them, must also be taken into account.  
Thus an offer of reward for the capture of the person guilty of a specific crime cannot ordinarily be accepted 
after the statute of limitations has barred prosecution.
Illustrations:
1.  A publishes an offer of reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the person guilty of a 
specified murder.  B, intending to obtain the reward, gives the requested information a year after the publication 
of the offer.  The acceptance is timely.
2.  After a series of incendiary attempts, a city publishes each day for a week an offer of reward for information 
leading to the arrest and conviction of any person who shall set fire to any building within the city.  The 
responsible city officials serve for one year terms.  A fire set three years after the last publication is not within 
the terms of the offer.
3.  A bank posts in its office an offer of reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person 
who robs any bank which is a member of an association of banks in the same county.  After several years the 
poster is removed.  A robbery three years after the removal may be found to be within the terms of the offer.
d.  Direct negotiations.  Where the parties bargain face to face or over the telephone, the time for acceptance 
does not ordinarily extend beyond the end of the conversation unless a contrary intention is indicated.  A 
contrary intention may be indicated either by express words or by the circumstances.  For example, the delivery 

§ 41 Lapse of Time
of a written offer to the offeree, or an expectation that some action will be taken before acceptance, may 
indicate that a delayed acceptance is invited.
Illustration:
4.  While A and B are engaged in conversation, A makes B an offer to which B then makes no reply, out on 
meeting A again a few hours later B states that he accepts the offer.  There is no contract unless the offer or 
the circumstances indicate that the offer is intended to continue beyond the immediate conversation.
e.  Offers made by mail or telegram.  Where the parties are at a distance from each other, the normal 
understanding is that the time for acceptance is extended at least by the normal time for transmission of the 
offer and for the sending of the offeree's reply.  Compare § 49.  Subsection (3) reflects the normal 
understanding that mail is promptly answered if a reply is mailed at any time on the day of receipt.  Compare 
Uniform Commercial Code §§ 4-301, 4-302, fixing the time for settlement by a bank for demand items.  But in 
the absence of a significant speculative element in the situation, a considerably longer time may be reasonable.  
The fact that an offer is made by telegram or mailgram may or may not indicate that the time for reply is shorter 
than it would be if the mail were used.  Compare § 65.
Illustration:
5.  A makes B an offer by mail to sell goods.  B receives the offer at the close of business hours and accepts it 
by letter promptly the next morning.  The acceptance is timely.
f.  Speculative transactions.  The rule that an offer becomes irrevocable when an acceptance is mailed (§§ 42, 
63) in effect imposes a risk of commitment on the offeror during the period required for communication of the 
acceptance, although during that period the offeror has no assurance that the bargain has been concluded.  
The rule that the power of acceptance is terminated by the lapse of a reasonable time serves to limit this risk.  
The more significant the risk, the greater is the need for limitation, and hence the shorter is the time which is 
reasonable.
These considerations have their principal application in the sale of property which may be subject to rapid 
fluctuation in value, such as commodities, securities or land.  The value of such property, however, may be 
stable for substantial periods of time, particularly in the case of land.  Absence of actual fluctuation during the 
period before acceptance is a factor tending to indicate that acceptance occurred within a reasonable time.  
Similarly, delay in acceptance of an offer to insure may not be unreasonable if there is no change in the risk or 
in the applicable insurance rates.
The reasonable time for acceptance in a speculative transaction is brief not only because the offeror does not 
ordinarily intend to assume an extended risk without compensation but also because he does not intend to give 
the offeree an extended opportunity for speculation at the offeror's expense.  If the offeree makes use for 
speculative purposes of time allowed for communication, there may be a lack of good faith, and an acceptance 
may not be timely even though it arrives within the time contemplated by the offeror.  Compare Uniform 
Commercial Code §§ 1-203, 2-103.
Illustrations:
6.  A sends B an offer by mail to sell a piece of farm land.  B does not reply for three days and then mails an 
acceptance.  It is a question of fact under the circumstances of the particular case whether the delay is 
unreasonable.
7.  A sends B a telegraphic offer to sell oil which at the time is subject to rapid fluctuations in price.  The offer is 
received near the close of business hours, and a telegraphic acceptance is sent the next day, after the offeree 
has learned of a sharp price rise.  The acceptance is too late if a fixed price was offered, but may be timely if 
the price is market price at time of delivery.
8.  A sends B an offer by mail to sell at a fixed price corporate stock not listed on an exchange.  B waits two 
days after receiving the offer and then sends a telegraphic acceptance after learning of a sharp rise in the price 
bid over-the-counter.  The acceptance may be too late even though it arrives before a prompt acceptance by 
mail would have arrived.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 40.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 53-54 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts 
§§ 35-36 (1963).

§ 41 Lapse of Time
Comment a.  For an example of termination of the power of acceptance by lapse of a specified time, see Kurio 
v. United States, 429 F. Supp. 42, 63-66 (S.D. Tex. 1970).
Comment b.  Examples of courts' factual determinations of whether time periods were reasonable include 
Twining v. National Mortgage Corp., 268 Md. 549, 302 A.2d 604 (1973); and Modern Pool Prods. v. Rudel 
Mach. Co., 58 Misc.2d 83, 294 N.Y.S.2d 426 (Civ. Ct. 1968).
Comment c.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 40.  Illustration 2 is based on Loring v. City of 
Boston, 48 Mass. (7 Met.) 409 (1844). Illustration 3 is based on the facts of Carr v. Mahaska County Bankers 
Ass'n, 222 Iowa 411, 269 N.W. 494, 107 A.L.R. 1080 (1936).
Comment d.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 40.
Comment e.  Illustration 5 is based on Illustration 4 to former § 40.  In Coffman Indus., Inc. v. Gorman-Taber 
Co., 521 S.W.2d 763, 771 (Mo. Ct. App. 1975), the attorney for a contractor's bonding company told the 
attorney for a subcontractor that the subcontractor's claim would be paid if the subcontractor settled a collateral 
matter.  The court found this an offer and found that a letter written eleven months later could have been 
reasonably understood to continue the offer.  Because lengthy negotiations over the collateral claim were 
begun by the subcontractor, the amount of the main claim was conceded, and time was not of the essence, the 
court found that two and one-half years from the original offer to the resolution of the collateral claim was not 
per se an unreasonable period of delay and did not cause the offer to lapse.  See also § 45.
Comment f.  See Nussbaum, Comparative Aspects of the Anglo-American Offer-and-Acceptance Doctrine, 36 
Colum. L. Rev. 920 (1936); compare Llewellyn, Our Case-Law of Contract: Offer and Acceptance, II, 48 Yale L. 
J. 779, 795, 805 (1939). Illustrations 6 and 8 are new.  Illustration 7, although based on Illustration 5 to former § 
40, is changed, from the former conclusion that there is no contract, to emphasize that the resolution of the 
issue is heavily dependent upon the factual context.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Timeliness of notice of exercise of option to purchase realty.  87 A.L.R.3d 805.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 20
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document