Restat 2d of Contracts, § 47
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 4- Duration of the Offeree’s Power of Acceptance        
§ 47 Revocation of Divisible Offer
An offer contemplating a series of independent contracts by separate acceptances may be effectively 
revoked so as to terminate the power to create future contracts, though one or more of the proposed 
contracts have already been formed by the offeree's acceptance.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Divisible offers.  An offer may propose several contracts, to arise at different times; typical examples are 
continuing guaranties and standing offers for the sale of goods.  See § 31 and Comment.  Such an offer is 
divisible, and the power to make an effective revocation continues pari passu with the continuing power of the 
offeree to accept.  Compare §§ 33-34.
Illustrations:
1.  A offers to guarantee the payment of all bills of exchange drawn by B and discounted by C.  C discounts one 
such bill.  A is bound to pay it.  A then notifies C that the guaranty is withdrawn.  A is not bound to pay bills 
subsequently discounted.
2.  A offers B to sell him five tons of steel daily, and tenders five tons at once.  B accepts the tender.  The same 
amount is furnished daily for a number of days.  A then states to B that he revokes the offer.  A contract is 
formed each day that steel is furnished, but the revocation prevents the formation of any contracts thereafter.
b.  Acceptance by beginning performance.  Ordinarily an offer invites acceptance in any manner which is 
reasonable under the circumstances, and rendering a requested performance is often a reasonable mode of 
acceptance.  See §§ 30, 32.  Where performance takes time, the beginning of performance may be a 
reasonable mode of acceptance, and the offer may then become irrevocable, whether or not the offeree's 
action constitutes a promise to complete performance.  See §§ 45, 62.  These principles apply to divisible 
offers, but the beginning of performance of one contract of the contemplated series makes irrevocable only the 
offer for that one.  See § 50.
c.  Divisible option contracts.  It is possible to make a divisible offer irrevocable, not just as to the contracts 
already formed by acceptances, but also as to the power to create future contracts.  An irrevocable divisible 
offer is in effect a series of binding option contracts, but all may be made binding by a single consideration or a 
single formal document.
Illustration:
3.  A offers to buy from B at the market price 100 tons of steel per month for the next 12 months, promising that 
in consideration of the delivery of the first installment B is to have an option to sell any or all of the other eleven 
installments.  B delivers the first 100 tons as requested.  There is an irrevocable offer to buy the eleven 
undelivered installments.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section was former § 44.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 58 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 53 (1963 & 
Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  Illustrations 1 and 2 are based respectively on Illustrations 2 and 1 to former § 44; cf.  American 
Oil Co. v. Estate of Wigley, 251 Miss. 275, 169 So. 2d 454 (1964).
Comment c.  Illustration 3 is new.

§ 47 Revocation of Divisible Offer
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 19
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document