Restat 2d of Contracts, § 55
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 5- Acceptance of Offers        
§ 55 Acceptance of Non-Promissory Offers
Acceptance by promise may create a contract in which the offeror's performance is completed when 
the offeree's promise is made.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  "Reverse unilateral contracts."  It is possible to offer a performance without making any promise.  Like other 
offers, a non-promissory offer may require acceptance by performance or acceptance by promise or a 
combination of the two, or it may leave the mode of acceptance to the offeree's choice.  An exchange of 
performances is not within the definition of "contract" in § 1 and is beyond the scope of the Restatement of this 
Subject.  But where a non-promissory offer is accepted by promise, there is a contract if the requirements other 
than manifestation of mutual assent are met.  Since the contract formed by a performance in response to an 
offer of a promise such as an offer of reward is often called a "unilateral contract," the type of contract referred 
to inthis Section is sometimes referred to as a "reverse unilateral contract." Contracts so referred to often 
involve incidental promises by the performing offeror, and in that event the word "unilateral" is not entirely 
appropriate.
b.  Types of non-promissory offers.  Most offers are themselves promises.  But if the offeror's performance is 
complete at the moment of acceptance, the element of futurity required by the definition of "promise" in § 2 is 
lacking.  Performance may be thus complete when the offer takes the form of a tender of money or other 
property; indeed, the acceptance of the offer may then be implied from the fact that the offeree takes the 
offered benefits, without more.  See § 69.  In such cases the offeree's manifestation of assent may effect the 
transfer of property from offeror to offeree which furnishes consideration for the offeree's promise.  This element 
is lacking when services alone are offered, but a contract may nonetheless be formed if the offeree takes the 
benefit of the services.
Illustrations:
1.  A applies to B, an insurance company, for a policy of life insurance, and pays the first premium on an 
understanding that the insurance must be approved at B's home office.  B's notification that the approval has 
been given is an acceptance of A's offer and forms a contract of insurance.
2.  A offers to lend B $ 100 on specified terms and tenders the money to B.  B's acceptance of the tender forms 
a contract on the terms specified.
3.  A, the owner of a horse in B's possession, offers to sell the horse to B for $ 100 payable in thirty days.  On 
B's promise to pay in accordance with the offer, ownership of the horse is transferred to him and there is a 
contract.  Uniform Commercial Code § 2-401(3).
4.  A, a real estate broker, without authority from B, the owner of property, obtains from C an offer to purchase 
the property from B on terms which include the payment of a specified commission by B to A.  A then presents 
C's offer to B.  B's acceptance of C's offer also accepts A's offer of services and forms a contract between A 
and B.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 57.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 71 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 71 
(1963 & Supp. 1980); Goble, The Non-Promissory Offer, 48 Nw. U.L. Rev. 590 (1953).
Comment b.  Illustrations 1, 2 and 4 are new.  Illustration 3 is revised from Illustration 1 to former § 57.

§ 55 Acceptance of Non-Promissory Offers
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 16, 22
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document