Restat 2d of Contracts, § 60
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 5- Acceptance of Offers        
§ 60 Acceptance of Offer Which States Place, Time or Manner of Acceptance
If an offer prescribes the place, time or manner of acceptance its terms in this respect must be 
complied with in order to create a contract.  If an offer merely suggests a permitted place, time or 
manner of acceptance, another method of acceptance is not precluded.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Interpretation of offer.  If the offeror prescribes the only way in which his offer may be accepted, an 
acceptance in any other way is a counter-offer.  But frequently in regard to the details of methods of 
acceptance, the offeror's language, if fairly interpreted, amounts merely to a statement of a satisfactory method 
of acceptance, without positive requirement that this method shall be followed.
Illustrations:
1.  A mails an offer to B in which A says, "I must receive your acceptance by return mail." An acceptance sent 
within a reasonable time by any other means, which reaches A as soon as a letter sent by return mail would 
normally arrive, creates a contract on arrival.  As to what is a reasonable time, see Illustration 8 to § 41.
2.  A makes an offer to B and adds, "Send your office boy around with an answer to this by twelve o'clock." The 
offeree comes himself before twelve o'clock and accepts.  There is a contract.
3.  A offers to sell his land to B on certain terms, also saying: "You must accept this, if at all, in person at my 
office at ten o'clock tomorrow." B's power is strictly limited to one method of acceptance.
4.  A offers to sell his land to B on certain terms, also saying: "You may accept by leaving word at my house." 
This indicates one operative mode of acceptance; but B's power is not limited to that mode alone.  A personal 
statement to A would serve just as well.
5.  A makes an offer to B and adds, "my address is 53 State Street." This is a business address.  B sends an 
acceptance to A's home which A receives promptly.  Unless the circumstances indicate that A has made a 
positive requirement of the place where the acceptance must be sent, there is a contract.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section was former § 61.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 76 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 77 (1963).
Comment a.  See generally Town of Lindsay v. Cooke County Elec. Coop. Ass'n, 502 S.W.2d 117 (Tex. 1973), 
cert. denied, 416 U.S. 970 (1974). Illustrations 1-5 were Illustrations 1-5 to former § 61.  Illustration 1 is 
modified to provide for the speculative transactions discussed in Comment f to § 41.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Timeliness of notice of exercise of option to purchase realty.  87 A.L.R.3d 805.
Necessity of payment or tender of purchase money within option period in order to exercise option, in absence 
of specific time requirement for payment.  71 A.L.R.3d 1201.
Difference between offer and acceptance as regards place of payment or of delivery as variance preventing 
consummation of contract.  3 A.L.R.2d 256.
Digest System Key Numbers:

§ 60 Acceptance of Offer Which States Place, Time or Manner of Acceptance
Contracts 22(1)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document