Restat 2d of Contracts, § 72
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 1- The Requirement of Consideration        
§ 72 Exchange of Promise for Performance
Except as stated in §§ 73 and 74, any performance which is bargained for is consideration.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Enforcement of bargains.  Section 17(1) embodies the principle that bargains are enforceable unless some 
other principle conflicts.  Chapter 3 on Formation of Contracts-Mutual Assent deals with one essential element 
of a bargain, agreement; this Topic on the Requirement of Consideration deals with the other essential element, 
exchange.  See § 3.  The requirement laid down in § 17(1) is that there be a "consideration." Under § 71 
"consideration" requires an element of exchange.  This Section states the general rule that exchange of 
performance for promise is an enforceable bargain; Sections 73 and 74 deny enforcement to certain bargains 
despite the presence of an element of exchange.  Sections 75-78 state corresponding rules for the exchange of 
promise for promise.
b.  Substantive bases for enforcement; the half-completed exchange.  Bargains are widely believed to be 
beneficial to the community in the provision of opportunities for freedom of individual action and exercise of 
judgment and as a means by which productive energy and product are apportioned in the economy.  The 
enforcement of bargains rests in part on the common belief that enforcement enhances that utility.  Where one 
party has performed, there are additional grounds for enforcement.  Where, for example, one party has 
received goods from the other and has broken his promise to pay for them, enforcement of the promise not only 
encourages the making of socially useful bargains; it also reimburses the seller for a loss incurred in reliance on 
the promise and prevents the unjust enrichment of the buyer at the seller's expense.  Each of these three 
grounds of enforcement, bargain, reliance and unjust enrichment, has independent force, but the bargain 
element alone satisfies the requirement of consideration except in the cases covered by §§ 73, 74, 76 and 77.  
Cases of promises binding by virtue of reliance or unjust enrichment are dealt with in §§ 82-94.
c.  Formality.  Consideration furnishes a substantive rather than a formal basis for the enforcement of a 
promise.  Many bargains, particularly when fully performed on one side, involve acts in the course of 
performance which satisfy some or all of the functions of form and thus may be thought of as natural formalities.  
Four principal functions have been identified which legal formalities in general may serve: the evidentiary 
function, to provide evidence of the existence and terms of the contract; the cautionary function, to guard the 
promisor against ill-considered action; the deterrent function, to discourage transactions of doubtful utility; and 
the channeling or signalizing function, to distinguish a particular type of transaction from other types and from 
tentative or exploratory expressions of intention in the way that coinage distinguishes money from other metal.  
But formality is not essential to consideration; nor does formality supply consideration where the element of 
exchange is absent.  Rules under which formality makes binding a promise not supported by consideration are 
stated in §§ 82-94 and in §§ 95-109 on contracts under seal.
d.  Unconscionable and illegal bargains.  The rule stated in this Section does not require that consideration 
have an economic value equivalent to that of the promise.  See § 79.  Nor does the Section require that the 
consideration or the promise be lawful.  The problems raised by unconscionable and illegal bargains are dealt 
with in § 208 on unconscionability, Chapter 6 on mistake, Chapter 7 on misrepresentation, duress and undue 
influence, and Chapter 8 on unenforceability on grounds of public policy.  In addition, particular types of 
bargains which are likely to be unconscionable are the subject of §§ 73 and 74.
REPORTER'S NOTES

§ 72 Exchange of Promise for Performance
This Section restates the basic rule of former § 76.  The exceptions stated in former Subsections 76(a)-(c) have 
been moved.  The subject matter of former § 76(a) is included in § 73; former § 76(b) is covered by § 74.  
Former § 76(c) is omitted for reasons stated in Whittier, The Restatement of Contracts and Consideration, 18 
Calif. L. Rev. 611, 623 (1930). Compare §§ 79, 87.
Comment c.  See Fuller, Consideration and Form, 41 Colum. L. Rev. 799 (1941); Patterson, An Apology for 
Consideration, 58 Colum. L. Rev. 929 (1958); von Mehren, Civil-Law Analogues to Consideration: An Exercise 
in Comparative Analysis, 72 Harv. L. Rev. 1009 (1959); Atiyah, Contracts, Promises and the Law of 
Obligations, 94 L.Q. Rev. 193 (1978).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Construction and application of agreement by medical or social work student to work in particular position or at 
particular location in exchange for financial aid in meeting costs of education.  83 A.L.R.3d 1273.
Sufficiency of consideration for employee's covenant not to compete, entered into after inception of 
employment.  51 A.L.R.3d 825.
Validity and construction of contract under which applicant for admission to home for aged or infirm turns over 
his property to institution in return for lifetime care.  44 A.L.R.3d 1174.
Contractual waiver of after-acquired homestead exemption.  82 A.L.R.2d 982.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 50, 54(1)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document