Restat 2d of Contracts, § 85
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 2- Contracts Without Consideration        
§ 85 Promise to Perform a Voidable Duty
Except as stated in § 93, a promise to perform all or part of an antecedent contract of the promisor, 
previously voidable by him, but not avoided prior to the making of the promise, is binding.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Types of voidable contracts.  The rule of this Section may be thought of as implicit in the definition of 
"voidable contract" in § 7.  Such a contract is distinguished from the "unenforceable contract" defined in § 8 by 
the existence of a power of ratification.  The power of avoidance may rest on lack of capacity under the rules 
stated in §§ 12-16, on mistake, misrepresentation, duress or undue influence under Chapters 6 and 7.  In such 
cases exercise of the power of avoidance discharges the contractual duty and terminates the power of 
ratification; conversely, exercise of the power of ratification terminates the power of avoidance.  See §§ 378-85.
b.  Ratification and new promise.  This Section relates only to action which constitutes a promise under the 
definition in § 2.  Such a promise may be binding under this Section or because of its formal character or 
because it is supported by consideration or reliance.  Even though it is "binding" under this Section, the new 
promise may itself be voidable for the same reason as the original promise, or it may be voidable or 
unenforceable for some other reason.  See § 1, Comment g.  In particular, a few states require the new promise 
of a former infant to be in writing and signed.  A power of avoidance may also be lost in various other ways: by 
delay in giving notice, by failure to restore performance received, by exercise of dominion over things received, 
or by change of circumstances.  See, e.g., as to avoidance for misrepresentation, § 164.
Illustrations:
1.  A is induced by B's fraud to promise $ 100 in return for a worthless chattel.  After discovering the fraud A 
promises B to pay as agreed.  The promise is binding.
2.  A, an infant, promises B to pay him $ 100 in consideration of a bicycle which B transfers to him.  The bicycle 
is worth $ 60.  On coming of age A promises to pay B the sum he originally agreed to pay.  He is bound to do 
so.  If instead of such a promise he promises to pay a smaller sum, as $ 40, he is also bound, but only to that 
extent.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section was former § 89.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 151-56, 204 (3d ed. 1957), 2 id. § 240 (3d ed. 
1959); 1A Corbin, Contracts §§ 227-28 (1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment b.  Illustrations 1 and 2 were Illustrations 1 and 2 to former § 89.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 81
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document