Restat 2d of Contracts, § 106
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 3- Contracts Under Seal; Writing as a Statutory 
Substitute for the Seal        
§ 106 What Amounts to Acceptance of Instrument
Acceptance of a conveyance or of a document containing a promise is a manifestation of assent to the 
terms thereof made, either before or after delivery, in accordance with any requirements imposed by 
the grantor or promisor.  If the acceptance occurs before delivery and is not binding as an option 
contract, it is revocable until the moment of delivery.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Manifestation of assent.  Acceptance of a promise under seal or a conveyance is the acceptance of an offer 
if the acceptance is made after delivery.  Compare § 50.  An acceptance before delivery can be thought of as 
an offer accepted by the delivery.  Compare § 24.  In either case the effect of misunderstanding is governed by 
the principles stated in § 20.
Illustration:
1.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3 to § 105, C hands the deed to B and B takes it without 
objection.  Unless A or C has reason to know that B is ignorant of the clause relating to the mortgage, B is 
bound by a contract to pay the mortgage debt.  The question whether the contract is voidable by reason of such 
ignorance is governed by the rules stated in Chapters 6 and 7 on mistake, misrepresentation, duress and 
undue influence.
b.  Acceptance before delivery.  Like other offers, a manifestation of assent to a promise under seal or 
conveyance to be delivered in the future is ordinarily revocable.  Compare § 42.  But such an acceptance in 
advance may be irrevocable by virtue of a seal or consideration.  See § 25.  In any event delivery of the 
instrument terminates the power of revocation.
Illustration:
2.  A and B agree orally that A shall transfer to B Blackacre, which is subject to a mortgage, that the deed shall 
contain a promise by B to pay the mortgage debt, and that the deed may be delivered to C on B's behalf.  A 
makes and delivers to C a deed in accordance with the oral agreement.  There has been acceptance by B, and 
though he refuses to take the deed from C, he is bound by a contract to pay the mortgage debt.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 106.  See 1 Williston Contracts § 213 (3d ed. 1957); 1A Corbin, Contracts § 
245 (1963).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 106, with the reference to Chapters 6 and 7 
added.
Comment b.  Illustration 2 was Illustration 2 to former § 106.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 43
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute

§ 106 What Amounts to Acceptance of Instrument
End of Document