Restat 2d of Contracts, § 75
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 1- The Requirement of Consideration        
§ 75 Exchange of Promise for Promise
Except as stated in §§ 76 and 77, a promise which is bargained for is consideration if, but only if, the 
promised performance would be consideration.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  The executory exchange.  In modern times the enforcement of bargains is not limited to those partly 
completed, but is extended to the wholly executory exchange in which promise is exchanged for promise.  In 
such a case the element of unjust enrichment is not present; the element of reliance, if present at all, is less 
tangible and direct than in the case of the half-completed exchange.  The promise is enforced by virtue of the 
fact of bargain, without more.  Since the principle that bargains are binding is widely understood and is 
reinforced in many situations by custom and convention, the fact of bargain also tends to satisfy the cautionary 
and channeling functions of form.  Compare Comments b and c to § 72.  Evidentiary safeguards, however, are 
largely left to the Statute of Frauds rather than to the requirement of consideration.  See Chapter 5.
b.  Promise and performance.  The principle of this Section is that, in determining whether there is 
consideration, one's word is as good as one's deed but no better.  More detailed rules are stated in §§ 76-78 for 
cases in which the application of this principle has produced problems.  Certain cases which have sometimes 
been thought to be exceptions to the principle are commented upon below.
c.  Performance of legal duty and settlement of claims.  A promise to perform a legal duty is not consideration 
for a return promise unless performance would be.  Similarly, a promise to surrender a claim or defense or to 
forbear from asserting it is consideration only if performance would be.  Thus a promise of such performance 
may raise the same questions as the performance would: Is the duty owed to the maker of the return promise?  
Is the claim or defense known to be invalid?  See §§ 73, 74.
Illustrations:
1.  A promises to pay a debt to B, or to perform an existing contractual duty to B, or to perform his duty as a 
public official.  The legal duty is neither doubtful nor the subject of honest dispute, but A would not have fulfilled 
the duty but for B's return promise.  A's promise is not consideration for B's return promise.  Compare § 73.
2.  A promises B to surrender or to forbear suit upon a claim either against B or against C.  A knows the claim is 
invalid.  A's promise is not consideration for a return promise by B.  Compare § 74.
d.  "Void" promises.  The value of a promise does not necessarily depend upon the availability of a legal 
remedy for breach, and bargains are often made in consideration of promises which are voidable or 
unenforceable.  Such a promise may be consideration for a return promise.  See § 78.  But it is sometimes 
suggested that a promise is not consideration if it is not binding, or if it is "void." The examples used commonly 
involve total lack of capacity to contract (see §§ 12, 13), indefinite promises (see §§ 33-34), promises lacking 
consideration, or promises unenforceable as against public policy (see Chapter 8).  Such cases are not 
exceptions to the rule stated in this Section.  In some of them there is no promise within the definition in § 2, in 
others the return promise would not be binding whether the consideration consisted of a promise or of 
performance, in some the invalidity of the return promise rests on other policies than those embodied in the 
requirement of consideration.
Illustrations:
3.  While A's property is under guardianship by reason of an adjudication of mental illness, A makes an 
agreement with B in which B makes a promise.  B's promise is not a contract, whether the consideration 
consists of a promise by A or performance by A.  Compare § 13; Restatement of Restitution § 139.

§ 75 Exchange of Promise for Promise
4.  A promises to forbear suit against B in exchange for B's promise to pay a liquidated and undisputed debt to 
A.  A's promise is not binding because B's promise is not consideration under § 73, but A's promise is 
nevertheless consideration for B's.  Moreover, B's promise would be enforceable without consideration under § 
82.  On either basis, B's promise is conditional on A's forbearance and can be enforced only if the condition is 
met.
5.  A, a married man, and B, an unmarried woman, make mutual promises to marry.  B neither knows nor has 
reason to know that A is married.  B's promise is consideration and B may recover damages from A for breach 
of his promise though B would have a defense to a similar action by A.  See § 180.
6.  A promises B $ 100 in return for B's promise to cut timber on land upon which A is a trespasser.  B neither 
knows nor has reason to know that A is not privileged to cut the timber.  B's promise is consideration and B may 
recover damages from A for breach of his promise though B would have a defense to a similar action by A.  
See Illustration 2 to § 180.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section consolidates subjectmatter found in former §§ 77, 78, 80 and 84(e).  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 
103, 106, 123 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts §§ 142-47 (1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment c.  Illustrations 1 and 2 are based on Illustrations 1 and 2 to former § 78.
Comment d.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 80.  Illustration 4, contrary to Illustration 4 to 
former § 80, adopts the result but not the reasoning of Hay v. Fortier, 116 Me. 455, 102 A. 294 (1917), following 
the reasoning of Ward v. Goodrich, 34 Colo. 369, 82 P. 701 (1905). Illustrations 5 and 6 are Illustrations 5 and 6 
to former § 80.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 56
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document