Restat 2d of Contracts, § 200
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 1- The Meaning of Agreements        
§ 200 Interpretation of Promise or Agreement
Interpretation of a promise or agreement or a term thereof is the ascertainment of its meaning.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Formation of contract.  Questions of interpretation arise in determining whether there is a contract as well as 
in determining rights and duties under a contract.  Chapter 3 states rules applicable in determining whether the 
parties have manifested the mutual assent necessary to a contract enforceable as a bargain.  The rules stated 
in the present Topic overlap with those rules, but also apply where the making of a contract is not disputed.
b.  Manifestation of intention.  As is made clear in Chapter 3, particularly §§ 17-20, the intention of a party that 
is relevant to formation of a contract is the intention manifested by him rather than any different undisclosed 
intention.  The definitions of "promise," "agreement," and "term" in §§ 2, 3 and 5 also refer to "manifestation of 
intention." It follows that the meaning of the words or other conduct of a party is not necessarily the meaning he 
expects or understands.  He is not bound by a meaning unless he has reason to know of it, but the expectation 
and understanding of the other party must also be taken into account.  See § 201.
c.  Interpretation and legal operation.  Interpretation is not a determination of the legal effect of words or other 
conduct.  Properly interpreted, an agreement may not be enforceable as a contract, or a term such as a 
promise to pay a penalty may be denied legal effect, or it may have a legal effect different from that agreed 
upon, as in a case of employment at less than a statutory minimum wage.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Former § 226 is rephrased to make it clear that "interpretation" relates to meaning and to avoid confusion with 
the ascertainment of legal operation or effect, sometimes called "construction." See 4 Williston, Contracts §§ 
600-02 (3d ed. 1961); 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 532-35 (1960 & Supp. 1980); compare the definitions of 
"agreement" and "contract" in Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(3) and (11).  This accords with Comment c to 
former § 226.
Comment c.  Supporting the distinctions made between interpretation and construction are Patterson, The 
Interpretation and Construction of Contracts, 64 Colum. L. Rev. 833 (1964); and Wahlenmaier v. American 
Quasar Petroleum Co., 517 S.W.2d 390 (Tex. Civ. App. 1974), ref. n.r.e.; but see Note, 57 Iowa L. Rev. 215, 
215 n.1 (1971).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Modern status as to duration of employment where contract specifies no terms but fixes daily or longer 
compensation.  93 A.L.R.3d 659.
Validity and construction of "No Damage" clause with respect to delay in building or construction contract.  74 
A.L.R.3d 187.
Landlord and tenant: What amounts to "sale" of property for purposes of provision giving tenant right of first 
refusal if landlord desires to sell.  70 A.L.R.3d 203.
Construction and effect of tenure provisions of contract or statute governing employment of college or university 
faculty member.  66 A.L.R.3d 1018.

§ 200 Interpretation of Promise or Agreement
Validity and construction of provision (Escalator Clause) in land contract or mortgage that rate of interest 
payable shall increase if legal rate is raised.  60 A.L.R.3d 473.
Who is "employee" under employee stock-option plan or contract.  57 A.L.R.3d 787.
Construction and operation of "optional agreement-flat payment" land contract under which optionee has right 
to take title when periodic payments (otherwise to be treated as rent) equal agreed price.  55 A.L.R.3d 159.
Meaning of terms "city," "town," or the like as employed in restrictive covenants not to compete.  45 A.L.R.3d 
1339.
Construction and effect of affirmative provision in contract of sale by which purchaser agrees to take article "as 
is," in the condition in which it is, or equivalent term.  24 A.L.R.3d 465.
Conclusiveness of determination of third party whose approval is provided for by contract for sale of goods.  7 
A.L.R.3d 555.
What 12-month period constitutes "year" or "calendar year" as used in public enactment, contract, or other 
written instrument.  5 A.L.R.3d 584.
Construction and effect of provision in contract for sale of realty by which purchaser agrees to take property "as 
is" or in the condition in which it is.  97 A.L.R.2d 849.
Implied obligation of purchaser or lessee to conduct search for, or to develop or work premises for, minerals 
other than oil and gas.  76 A.L.R.2d 721.
"Escalator" price adjustment clauses.  63 A.L.R.2d 1337.
Construction and effect of contract for sale of commodity or goods wherein quantity is described as "about" or 
"more or less" than an amount specified.  58 A.L.R.2d 377.
What constitutes "accounts receivable" under contract selling, assigning, pledging, or reserving such items.  41 
A.L.R.2d 1395.
Meaning of term "radius" employed in contract, statute, or ordinance as descriptive of area, location, or 
distance.  10 A.L.R.2d 605.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 143 et seq.
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 201
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 1- The Meaning of Agreements        
§ 201 Whose Meaning Prevails
(1)  Where the parties have attached the same meaning to a promise or agreement or a term thereof, it 
is interpreted in accordance with that meaning.
(2)  Where the parties have attached different meanings to a promise or agreement or a term thereof, it 
is interpreted in accordance with the meaning attached by one of them if at the time the agreement was 
made
(a)  that party did not know of any different meaning attached by the other, and the other knew the 
meaning attached by the first party; or
(b)  that party had no reason to know of any different meaning attached by the other, and the other had 
reason to know the meaning attached by the first party.
(3)  Except as stated in this Section, neither party is bound by the meaning attached by the other, even 
though the result may be a failure of mutual assent.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  The meaning of words.  Words are used as conventional symbols of mental states, with standardized 
meanings based on habitual or customary practice.  Unless a different intention is shown, language is 
interpreted in accordance with its generally prevailing meaning.  See § 202(3).  Usages of varying degrees of 
generality are recorded in dictionaries, but there are substantial differences between English and American 
usages and between usages in different parts of the United States.  Differences of usage also exist in various 
localities and in different social, economic, religious and ethnic groups.  All these usages change over time, and 
persons engaged in transactions with each other often develop temporary usages peculiar to themselves.  
Moreover, most words are commonly used in more than one sense.
b.  The problem of context.  Uncertainties in the meaning of words are ordinarily greatly reduced by the context 
in which they are used.  The same is true of other conventional symbols, and the meaning of conduct not used 
as a conventional symbol is even more dependent on its setting.  But the context of words and other conduct is 
seldom exactly the same for two different people, since connotations depend on the entire past experience and 
the attitudes and expectations of the person whose understanding is in question.  In general, the context 
relevant to interpretation of a bargain is the context common to both parties.  More precisely, the question of 
meaning in cases of misunderstanding depends on an inquiry into what each party knew or had reason to 
know, as stated in Subsections (2) and (3).  See § 20 and Illustrations.  Ordinarily a party has reason to know of 
meanings in general usage.
c.  Mutual understanding.  Subsection (1) makes it clear that the primary search is for a common meaning of 
the parties, not a meaning imposed on them by the law.  To the extent that a mutual understanding is displaced 
by government regulation, the resulting obligation does not rest on "interpretation" in the sense used here.  The 
objective of interpretation in the general law of contracts is to carry out the understanding of the parties rather 
than to impose obligations on them contrary to their understanding: "the courts do not make a contract for the 
parties." Ordinarily, therefore, the mutual understanding of the parties prevails even where the contractual term 
has been defined differently by statute or administrative regulation.  But parties who used a standardized term 
in an unusual sense obviously run the risk that their agreement will be misinterpreted in litigation.

§ 201 Whose Meaning Prevails
Illustrations:
1.  A and B agree that A will sell goods to B "f.o.b." the place of destination.  Prior correspondence shows that 
the price has been adjusted on the assumption that B's insurance policies will cover the goods during shipment.  
Notwithstanding the normal meaning of the "f.o.b." term declared in Uniform Commercial Code § 2-319, it may 
be found that the parties have "otherwise agreed" under that section and that B bears the risk in transit.
2.  A signs a negotiable promissory note payable to B's order, and C signs his name on the back without more.  
Under Uniform Commercial Code § 3-402, C's signature is an indorsement, and evidence of a contrary 
understanding is not admissible except for the purpose of reformation of the instrument.  This conclusion does 
not rest on interpretation of the writing.
3.  A agrees to sell beer to B at a specified price per barrel.  At the time of the agreement both parties and 
others in their trade use as standard barrels wooden barrels which originally hold 31 gallons and hold less as 
they continue in use.  A statute defines a barrel as 31 1/2 gallons.  The statute does not prevent interpretation 
of the agreement as referring to the barrels in use.
d.  Misunderstanding.  Subsection (2) follows the terminology of § 20, referring to the understanding of each 
party as the meaning "attached" by him to a term of a promise or agreement.  Where the rules stated in 
Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply, neither party is bound by the understanding of the other.  The result may 
be an entire failure of agreement or a failure to agree as to a term.  There may be a binding contract despite 
failure to agree as to a term, if the term is not essential or if it can be supplied.  See § 204.  In some cases a 
party can waive the misunderstanding and enforce the contract in accordance with the understanding of the 
other party.
Illustrations:
4.  A agrees to sell and B to buy a quantity of eviscerated "chicken." A tenders "stewing chicken" or "fowl"; B 
rejects on the ground that the contract calls for "broilers" or "fryers." Each party makes a claim for damages 
against the other.  It is found that each acted in good faith and that neither had reason to know of the difference 
in meaning.  Both claims fail.
5.  A orders goods from B, using A's standard form.  B acknowledges the order, using his own standard form.  
Each form provides that no terms are agreed to except those on the form and that the other party agrees to the 
form.  One form contains an arbitration clause; the other does not.  The goods are delivered and paid for.  Later 
a dispute arises as to their quality.  There is no agreement to arbitrate the dispute.
REPORTER'S NOTES
The Section covers matters treated in former §§ 227, 230-34.  The rules are entirely rewritten to follow the 
terminology in new § 20 on the effect of misunderstanding.  See 4 Williston, Contracts §§ 603-14 (3d ed. 1961); 
3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 535-44 (1960 & Supp. 1980).  Compare former § 233(a) and (b).
Comment a.  See Farnsworth, "Meaning" in the Law of Contracts, 76 Yale L.J. 939 (1967) and authorities cited 
therein; Della Ratta, Inc. v. American Better Comm. Devs., 38 Md. App. 119, 380 A.2d 627 (1977).
Comment b.  Holmes wrote: "A word is not a crystal, transparent and unchanged; it is the skin of a living 
thought and may vary greatly in color and content according to the circumstances and the time in which it is 
used." Towne v. Eisner, 245 U.S. 418, 425 (1918). On a party's knowledge and reason to know the meaning 
attached to a term by the other party, see Perry and Wallis, Inc. v. United States, 192 Ct. Cl. 310, 427 F.2d 722 
(1970); Emor, Inc. v. Cyprus Mines Corp., 467 F.2d 770 (3d Cir. 1972).
Comment c.  This replaces former § 234.  Illustration 1 is new; cf.  Madeirense Do Brasil S/A v. Stulman-Emrick 
Lumber Co., 147 F.2d 399 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 325 U.S. 861 (1945). Illustration 2 follows the official 
Comment to Uniform Commercial Code § 3-402; compare Illustration 3 to former § 234.  Illustration 3 is based 
on Harvard Brewing Co. v. Killian, 222 Mass. 13, 109 N.E. 649 (1915); compare Wahlenmaier v. American 
Quasar Petroleum Co., 517 S.W.2d 390 (Tex. Civ. App. 1974), ref. n.r.e.
Comment d.  Illustration 4 is based on Frigaliment Importing Co. v. B.N.S. Internat'l Sales Corp., 190 F. Supp. 
116 (S.D.N.Y. 1960); see 3 Corbin, Contracts, § 543B (Supp. 1964).  Illustration 5 is based on In re Doughboy 
Indus., Inc. (Pantasote Co.), 17 A.D.2d 216, 233 N.Y.S.2d 488 (1962).
Cross Reference

§ 201 Whose Meaning Prevails
ALR Annotations:
Modern status as to duration of employment where contract specifies no term but fixes daily or longer 
compensation.  93 A.L.R.3d 659.
Doctrine of unconscionability as applied to insurance contracts.  86 A.L.R.3d 862.
Validity and construction of contract between hospital and physician providing for exclusive medical services.  
74 A.L.R.3d 1268.
Validity and construction of "No Damage" clause with respect to delay in building or construction contract.  74 
A.L.R.3d 187.
Construction and effect of tenure provisions of contract or statute governing employment of college or university 
faculty member.  66 A.L.R.3d 1018.
Validity, construction, and effect of clause in franchise contract prohibiting transfer of franchise or contract.  59 
A.L.R.3d 244.
Construction and effect of provision in contract for sale of realty by which purchaser agrees to take property "as 
is" or in the condition in which it is.  97 A.L.R.2d 849.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 147
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 202
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 1- The Meaning of Agreements        
§ 202 Rules in Aid of Interpretation
(1)  Words and other conduct are interpreted in the light of all the circumstances, and if the principal 
purpose of the parties is ascertainable it is given great weight.
(2)  A writing is interpreted as a whole, and all writings that are part of the same transaction are 
interpreted together.
(3)  Unless a different intention is manifested,
(a)  where language has a generally prevailing meaning, it is interpreted in accordance with that 
meaning;
(b)  technical terms and words of art are given their technical meaning when used in a transaction 
within their technical field.
(4)  Where an agreement involves repeated occasions for performance by either party with knowledge 
of the nature of the performance and opportunity for objection to it by the other, any course of 
performance accepted or acquiesced in without objection is given great weight in the interpretation of 
the agreement.
(5)  Wherever reasonable, the manifestations of intention of the parties to a promise or agreement are 
interpreted as consistent with each other and with any relevant course of performance, course of 
dealing, or usage of trade.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope of special rules.  The rules in this Section are applicable to all manifestations of intention and all 
transactions.  The rules are general in character, and serve merely as guides in the process of interpretation.  
They do not depend upon any determination that there is an ambiguity, but are used in determining what 
meanings are reasonably possible as well as in choosing among possible meanings.
b.  Circumstances.  The meaning of words and other symbols commonly depends on their context; the meaning 
of other conduct is even more dependent on the circumstances.  In interpreting the words and conduct of the 
parties to a contract, a court seeks to put itself in the position they occupied at the time the contract was made.  
When the parties have adopted a writing as a final expression of their agreement, interpretation is directed to 
the meaning of that writing in the light of the circumstances.  See §§ 209, 212.  The circumstances for this 
purpose include the entire situation, as it appeared to the parties, and in appropriate cases may include facts 
known to one party of which the other had reason to know.  See § 201.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts with B to do concrete work on a bridge, to be paid for according to "the number of square yards 
of concrete surface included in the bridge deck." An estimate included in the proposal for bids and an estimate 
submitted by A to B after award are shown to have been based on the top surface only, not including the side 
and bottom surfaces.  On a finding that this was the mutual understanding, the contract is to be sointerpreted.
2.  In a written agreement between A and B it is stated that B owns half of the stock of C Company, that "A has 
rendered valuable services to C Company for which B desires to compensate A in the sum of $ 25,000 payable 

§ 202 Rules in Aid of Interpretation
in the manner hereinafter set forth," and that B will pay A "one-half of all money received from C Company, 
such as dividends, or profits until A has been paid the said amount of $ 25,000." It is shown that the written 
agreement was executed after the services were rendered, that there was no prior explicit understanding that A 
would be compensated, and that before signing the written agreement A and B orally agreed that the $ 25,000 
was to be a "bonus out of B's profit," "double or nothing," "a gamble." The written agreement is to be interpreted 
in accordance with the oral agreement.
c.  Principal purpose.  The purposes of the parties to a contract are not always identical; particularly in business 
transactions, the parties often have divergent or even conflicting interests.  But up to a point they commonly join 
in a common purpose of attaining a specific factual or legal result which each regards as necessary to the 
attainment of his ultimate purposes.  Moreover, one party may know or have reason to know the purpose of the 
other and thus that his meaning is one consistent with that purpose.  Determination that the parties have a 
principal purpose in common requires interpretation, but if such a purpose is disclosed further interpretation is 
guided by it.  Even language which is otherwise explicit may be read with a modification needed to make it 
consistent with such a purpose.
Illustrations:
3.  A promises B as follows: "In consideration of your supplying my nephew C with china and earthenware 
during the coming year, I guarantee the payment of any bills you may draw on him on account thereof to the 
amount of $ 200." C is engaged in the business of selling such goods.  B sells C $ 2,000 of china during the 
year and draws bills for their price in varying amounts.  C pays $ 1,000 and then defaults.  A's promise is to be 
interpreted as a continuing undertaking, not limited to the first $ 200 of purchases.
4.  A agrees with his divorced wife B and C, trustee, to pay to C $ 1,200 each year for the benefit of D, the 10-
year-old son of A and B, until D enters college, and to pay $ 2,200 each year for the period of D's higher 
education but not more than four years.  At age 19 D completes high school and is inducted into the army.  
Upon a finding that the main purpose of the agreement is to provide for D's maintenance and education, the 
agreement is to be interpreted as not requiring payments during D's military service.
d.  Interpretation of the whole.  Meaning is inevitably dependent on context.  A word changes meaning when it 
becomes part of a sentence, the sentence when it becomes part of a paragraph.  A longer writing similarly 
affects the paragraph, other related writings affect the particular writing, and the circumstances affect the whole.  
Where the whole can be read to give significance to each part, that reading is preferred; if such a reading would 
be unreasonable, a choice must be made.  See § 203.  To fit the immediate verbal context or the more remote 
total context particular words or punctuation may be disregarded or supplied; clerical or grammatical errors may 
be corrected; singular may be treated as plural or plural as singular.
Illustrations:
5.  A written agreement between A and B for the exchange of real estate provides that A and B will each pay a 
$ 200 commission to C, a broker, "upon the signing of this agreement by both parties hereto." The last 
sentence of the agreement states, "The commission being due and payable upon the transfer of the 
properties." It is shown that A refused to sign the agreement until the last sentence was added.  The agreement 
is to be interpreted to make the commission due only when both the signing and the transfer take place.
6.  A agrees to appoint B exclusive distributor in a specified area for a new product to be manufactured by A, 
and B agrees to use his best efforts to promote sale of the product.  The written agreement includes an initial 
retail price list and a provision that A will sell to B at the lowest price and highest discount it gives to any 
distributor.  Whether the parties intend to be bound before any other distributor is appointed or any price fixed is 
a question of the meaning of the entire agreement in its context.  If they do, the agreement has the effect of an 
agreement to sell at a reasonable price at the time for delivery.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-305.
7.  A contracts in writing to build a house for B according to specifications, and C, a surety company, 
guarantees A's performance.  After completion and acceptance the house and its contents are damaged by hot 
water because of defective work by the plumbing and heating subcontractor.  In determining the responsibility 
of A and C, the contract, specifications and surety bond are to be read together.
e.  General usage.  In the United States the English language is used far more often in a sense which would be 
generally understood throughout the country than in a sense peculiar to some locality or group.  In the absence 
of some contrary indication, therefore, English words are read as having the meaning given them by general 

§ 202 Rules in Aid of Interpretation
usage, if there is one.  This rule is a rule of interpretation in the absence of contrary evidence, not a rule 
excluding contrary evidence.  It may also yield to internal indications such as inconsistency, absurdity, or 
departure from normal grammar, punctuation, or word order.
Illustrations:
8.  A issues to B a fire insurance policy covering lumber stored in "sheds." In the absence of contrary indication, 
lumber in the basement of a two-story warehouse is not covered.
9.  A leases restaurant premises to B.  The lease provides that A will pay for electricity and that B will "pay for 
gas or fuel used in the preparation of food." In the absence of contrary indication, "fuel" should be read not to 
include electricity.
f.  Technical terms.  Parties to an agreement often use the vocabulary of a particular place, vocation or trade, in 
which new words are coined and common words are assigned new meanings.  But technical terms are often 
misused, and it may be shown that a technical word or phrase was used in a non-technical sense.  Moreover, 
the same word may have a variety of technical and other meanings.  "Mules" may mean animals, shoes or 
machines; a "ram" may mean an animal or a hydraulic ram; "zebra" may refer to a mammal, a butterfly, a lizard, 
a fish, a type of plant, tree or wood, or merely to the letter "Z".
Illustrations:
10.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 9, there is a local usage in the restaurant trade that "fuel" 
includes electricity used in cooking.  In the absence of contrary indication, "fuel" may be read in accordance 
with the usage.  But a provision in the lease that if B installs a new electric range he will also install a special 
meter and pay for electricity used by the range would show that the parties did not adopt the local usage.
11.  A contract for the sale of horsemeat scraps calls for "minimum 50% protein." As both parties know, by a 
usage of the business in which they are engaged, 49.5 per cent is treated as the equivalent of 50 per cent.  The 
contract is to be interpreted in accordance with the usage.
g.  Course of performance.  The parties to an agreement know best what they meant, and their action under it 
is often the strongest evidence of their meaning.  But such "practical construction" is not conclusive of meaning.  
Conduct must be weighed in the light of the terms of the agreement and their possible meanings.  Where it is 
unreasonable to interpret the contract in accordance with the course of performance, the conduct of the parties 
may be evidence of an agreed modification or of a waiver by one party.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
208.  Or there may be simply a mistake which should be corrected.  The rule of Subsection (4) does not apply 
to action on a single occasion or to action of one party only; in such cases the conduct of a party may be 
evidence against him that he had knowledge or reason to know of the other party's meaning, but self-serving 
conduct is not entitled to weight.
Illustrations:
12.  A discloses to B a secret formula for an antiseptic liquid and B agrees to pay monthly royalties based on 
amounts sold.  Fifty years later the formula has been published in medical journals.  After continuing to pay for 
25 years more, B contends that the duty to pay royalties ended when the formula ceased to be secret.  B's 
conduct strongly negates the contention.
13.  Several railroads agree in writing to share working expenses and taxes of X, another railroad, on a 
"wheelage basis." For several years they pay shares in proportion to their stock ownership in the other railroad.  
Then all but one agree that they have been mistaken and that future payments will be made on a basis of use 
of X's physical properties.  Stock ownership is so plainly unrelated to any possible meaning of "wheelage" that 
the course of performance does not support an interpretation of "wheelage basis" as requiring payments in 
proportion to stock ownership.
h.  Preference for consistency.  Subsection (5) states a rule fairly implied in Subsections (1) and (2); words and 
conduct are interpreted in the light of the circumstances, and writings are interpreted as a whole.  A meaning 
consistent with all the circumstances is preferred to a meaning which requires that part of the context be 
disregarded.  But the parties may have agreed to displace normal meanings, may have modified a prior 
understanding, or may have agreed to confusing or self-contradictory terms.  They may even have entirely 
failed to agree, though each thought there was an agreement.  See §§ 20, 201.
REPORTER'S NOTES

§ 202 Rules in Aid of Interpretation
Former § 228 is replaced by new § 209.  This Section is former § 235, rearranged to put the most general rules 
first, plus former § 236(a) and (b).  Subsection (4), formerly § 235(e), is revised to use the terminology of 
Uniform Commercial Code § 2-208.  See 4 Williston, Contracts §§ 618-19, 628-30 (3d ed. 1961); 3 Corbin, 
Contracts §§ 542-45, 549, 552, 555, 558 (1960 & Supp. 1980); Patterson, The Interpretation and Construction 
of Contracts, 64 Colum. L. Rev. 833 (1964).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is based on Berke Moore Co. v. Phoenix Bridge Co., 98 N.H. 261, 98 A.2d 150 
(1953). Illustration 2 is based on Hood v. Gordy Homes, Inc., 267 F.2d 882 (4th Cir. 1959).
Comment c.  Cases seeking to ascertain the parties' purpose as an aid to interpretation include Crestview Bowl, 
Inc. v. Womer Constr. Co., 225 Kan. 335, 592 P.2d 74 (1979); Ludwig Honold Mfg. Co. v. Fletcher, 405 F.2d 
1123 (3d Cir. 1969); and Graziano v. Tortora Agency, Inc., 78 Misc.2d 1094, 359 N.Y.S.2d 489 (Civ. Ct. 1974). 
Illustration 3 was substantially Illustration 2 to former § 236.  Illustration 4 is based on Spaulding v. Morse, 322 
Mass. 149, 76 N.E.2d 137 (1947).
Comment d.  For discussions of interpretation of the whole, see Ludwig Honold Mfg. Co. v. Fletcher, 405 F.2d 
1123, 1130 n.31 (3d Cir. 1969); Elliott Leases Cars, Inc. v. Quigley, 118 R.I. 321, 373 A.2d 810 (1977); 
Castellano v. State, 43 N.Y.2d 909, 403 N.Y.S.2d 724, 374 N.E.2d 618 (1978). In the last two cases, both the 
majority and dissenting opinions deserve attention on this point.  Illustration 5 is based on Mealey v. Kanealy, 
226 Iowa 1266, 286 N.W. 500 (1939); see Annot., 131 A.L.R. 955 (1941). Illustration 6 is based on Mantell v. 
International Plastic Harmonica Corp., 141 N.J. Eq. 379, 55 A.2d 250 (Ct. Err. & App. 1947).  Illustration 7 is 
based on Paisner v. Renaud, 102 N.H. 27, 149 A.2d 867 (1959).
Comment e.  Illustration 8 is based on Easton v. Washington County Ins. Co., 391 Pa. 28, 137 A.2d 332 (1957). 
Illustration 9 is based on John F. Davis Co. v. Shepard Co., 71 R.I. 499, 47 A.2d 635 (1946). See also 
Wahlenmaier v. American Quasar Petroleum Co., 517 S.W.2d 390 (Tex. Civ. App. 1974), ref. n.r.e.
Comment f.  Illustration 10 is based on John F. Davis Co. v. Shepard Co., 71 R.I. 499, 47 A.2d 635 (1946). 
Illustration 11 is based on Hurst v. W. J. Lake & Co., 141 Or. 306, 16 P.2d 627 (1932). See also Robin v. Sun 
Oil Co., 548 F.2d 554, 558 (5th Cir. 1977), involving the interpretation of a settlement agreement: "Counsel in 
this case were competent maritime lawyers.  They knew the difference between liability and negligence.  They 
knew how to use other words if they chose to do so."
Comment g.  See Note, Evaluating the Conduct of Successors in the Interpretation of Contract Terms: Practical 
Construction and Judicial Method, 57 Iowa L. Rev. 215 (1971). Illustration 12 is based on Warner-Lambert 
Pharmaceutical Co. v. John J. Reynolds, Inc., 178 F. Supp. 655 (S.D.N.Y. 1959), aff'd, 280 F.2d 197 (2d Cir. 
1960). Illustration 13 is based on In re Chicago & E.I. Ry., 94 F.2d 296 (7th Cir. 1938).
Comment h.  Compare Elliott Leases Cars, Inc. v. Quigley, 118 R.I. 321, 373 A.2d 810 (1977) with Western Oil 
Fields, Inc. v. Pennzoil United, Inc., 421 F.2d 387 (5th Cir. 1970).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Construction and effect of tenure provisions of contract or statute governing employment of college or university 
faculty member.  66 A.L.R.3d 1018.
Validity, construction, and effect of real-estate brokers' multiple-listing agreement.  45 A.L.R.3d 190.
Effect of provision in real-estate option or land sale contract making the contract subject to zoning or rezoning 
of the property.  76 A.L.R.2d 1195.
Time specified in real-estate contract for giving notice of exercise of option to purchase as of essence.  72 
A.L.R.2d 1127.
Validity, construction, and effect of land sale contract providing that title must be satisfactory to purchaser.  47 
A.L.R.2d 455.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 143(4), 143.5, 147, 152, 169, 170
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute

§ 202 Rules in Aid of Interpretation
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 203
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 1- The Meaning of Agreements        
§ 203 Standards of Preference in Interpretation
In the interpretation of a promise or agreement or a term thereof, the following standards of preference 
are generally applicable:
(a)  an interpretation which gives a reasonable, lawful, and effective meaning to all the terms is 
preferred to an interpretation which leaves a part unreasonable, unlawful, or of no effect;
(b)  express terms are given greater weight than course of performance, course of dealing, and usage 
of trade, course of performance is given greater weight than course of dealing or usage of trade, and 
course of dealing is given greater weight than usage of trade;
(c)  specific terms and exact terms are given greater weight than general language;
(d)  separately negotiated or added terms are given greater weight than standardized terms or other 
terms not separately negotiated.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope.  The rules of this Section are applicable to all manifestations of intention and all transactions.  They 
apply only in choosing among reasonable interpretations.  They do not override evidence of the meaning of the 
parties, but aid in determining meaning or prescribe legal effect when meaning is in doubt.
b.  Superfluous terms.  Since an agreement is interpreted as a whole, it is assumed in the first instance that no 
part of it is superfluous.  The parties may of course agree to supersede prior manifestations of intention; indeed, 
this is the normal effect of an integrated agreement.  See § 213.  But, particularly in cases of integrated 
agreements, terms are rarely agreed to without reason.  Where an integrated agreement has been negotiated 
with care and in detail and has been expertly drafted for the particular transaction, an interpretation is very 
strongly negated if it would render some provisions superfluous.  On the other hand, a standard form may 
include provisions appropriate only to some of the transactions in which the form is to be used; or the form may 
be used for an inappropriate transaction.  Even agreements tailored to particular transactions sometimes 
include overlapping or redundant or meaningless provisions.
The preference for an interpretation which gives meaning to every part of an agreement does not mean that 
every part is assumed to have legal consequences.  Parties commonly direct their attention to performance 
rather than breach, and it is enough that each provision has meaning to them as a guide to performance.  
Stipulations against particular legal consequences are not uncommon.  Thus it is not unusual to define the 
intended performance with precision and then to provide for tolerances within which variation is permitted.  See 
Uniform Commercial Code § 2-508(2).
c.  Unreasonable and unlawful terms.  In the absence of contrary indication, it is assumed that each term of an 
agreement has a reasonable rather than an unreasonable meaning, and that the agreement is intended to be 
lawful rather than unconscionable, fraudulent or otherwise illegal.  But parties are free to make agreements 
which seem unreasonable to others, and circumstances may show that even an agreement innocent on its face 
has an illegal purpose.  The search is for the manifested intention of the parties.  If a term or a contract is 
unconscionable or otherwise against public policy, it should be dealt with directly rather than by spurious 
interpretation.  See § 208 and Uniform Commercial Code § 2-302 and Comment.
Illustration:

§ 203 Standards of Preference in Interpretation
1.  A licenses B to manufacture pipes under A's patents, and B agrees to pay "a royalty of 50 cents per 1,000 
feet for an output of 5,000,000 or less feet per year, and for an output of over 5,000,000 feet per year at the rate 
of 30 cents per thousand feet." The 50 cent rate is payable on the first 5,000,000 feet, the 30 cent rate only on 
the excess.  The more literal reading is unreasonable, since it would involve a smaller payment for 6,000,000 
feet than for 4,000,000 feet.
d.  Priority of express terms.  Just as parties to agreements often depart from general usage as to the meaning 
of words or other conduct, so they may depart from a usage of trade.  Similarly, they may change a pattern 
established by their own prior course of dealing.  Their meaning in such cases is ordinarily to be ascertained as 
a fact; no penalty is attached by the law of contracts to their failure to conform to the usages of others or to their 
own prior usage.  Course of performance may establish meaning, or it may show mistake or oversight or 
modification or waiver.  See § 202.  The priorities stated in Subsection (b) are those stated in Uniform 
Commercial Code §§ 1-205 and 2-208, rephrased to fit the different context of the Restatement.
e.  General and specific terms.  People commonly use general language without a clear consciousness of its 
full scope and without awareness that an exception should be made.  Attention and understanding are likely to 
be in better focus when language is specific or exact, and in case of conflict the specific or exact term is more 
likely to express the meaning of the parties with respect to the situation than the general language.  If the 
specific or exact can be read as an exception or qualification of the general, both are given some effect, in 
accordance with the rule stated in Subsection (a).  Compare Uniform Commercial Code § 2-317.  But the rule 
yields to manifestation of a contrary intention.
f.  Superseded standard terms.  The rule stated in Subsection (d) has frequent application in cases of 
standardized documents.  Printed forms are often misused, and there may be a question whether the parties 
manifested assent to a printed term on a writing.  A printed provision that is clearly part of an integrated contract 
is normally to be interpreted as consistent with other terms, but in cases of inconsistency a handwritten or 
typewritten term inserted in connection with the particular transaction ordinarily prevails.  Similarly, a typewritten 
term may be superseded by drawing a line through it, modified by interlineation, or controlled by an inconsistent 
handwritten insertion in another part of the agreement.  It is sometimes said generally that handwritten terms 
control typewritten and printed terms, and typewritten control printed.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 3-
118(b); compare § 2-316(1) (disclaimer of express warranty), § 3-110(3) (instrument payable both to order and 
to bearer).  But the rule yields to manifestation of a contrary intention.
Illustrations:
2.  A, an agent of C, authorized to make contracts for C, writes a letter to B beginning "We offer," and stating a 
proposal in detailed and clear language, signed "C by A, Agent." At the bottom of the office stationery which A 
uses for the offer there is printed "All contracts and orders taken are subject to the approval of the executive 
office." A portion of the letter is typed over a portion of this printing.  A jury's finding that the printed words were 
not part of the letter and that it is therefore an offer will not be set aside.
3.  A charter party contains the printed provision "vessel to have turn in loading." There is written below this, 
"vessel to be loaded promptly." The printed and written provisions are given the consistent meaning that the 
vessel shall take its turn in loading, though this involves considerable delay, but when its turn arrives, the vessel 
shall be loaded promptly.
4.  A's agent B draws checks on the C bank, imprinting the amounts with perforations made by a checkwriting 
machine.  The amounts are also handwritten in figures.  In case of conflict, since the perforated amounts are 
more difficult to alter, they control the handwritten figures.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 3-118(b), (c).
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 236, but former Subsections (a) and (b) are transferred to § 202 and former 
Subsections (d) and (f) to §§ 206 and 207.  The other Subsections are rearranged.  Subsection (b) is new; it 
conforms to Uniform Commercial Code §§ 1-205, 2-208.  See 4 Williston, Contracts §§ 615-26 (3d ed. 1961); 3 
Corbin, Contracts §§ 546-52, 559 (1960 & Supp. 1980); Patterson, The Interpretation and Construction of 
Contracts, 64 Colum. L. Rev. 833 (1964).
Comment b.  See Intertherm, Inc. v. Coronet Imperial Corp., 558 S.W.2d 344, 351-52 (Mo. Ct. App. 1977).
Comment c.  Many courts have said that the construction process should seek a reading that leads to a 
reasonable result.  See, e.g., Crestview Bowl, Inc. v. Womer Constr. Co., 225 Kan. 335, 592 P.2d 74 (1979); 

§ 203 Standards of Preference in Interpretation
Goddard v. South Bay Union High School Dist., 79 Cal. App.3d 98, 144 Cal. Rptr. 701 (1978); Intertherm, Inc. 
v. Coronet Imperial Corp., supra. Nonetheless, the real question is one of the intentions of the parties.  See 
Perry and Wallis, Inc. v. United States, 192 Ct. Cl. 310, 427 F.2d 722 (1970); Ludwig Honold Mfg. Co. v. 
Fletcher, 405 F.2d 1123 (3d Cir. 1969); compare the majority and dissenting opinions in Pokorny v. Pecsok, 50 
Ohio St.2d 260, 364 N.E.2d 241 (1977) (dissent citing this Section in Tentative Draft).  Illustration 1 is based on 
Illustration 1 to former § 236.
Comment d.  For an example of express terms prevailing over custom of the trade, see Citizens Nat'l Bank v. L. 
L. Glascock, Inc., 243 So.2d 67 (Miss. 1971).
Comment e.  On the general standard that specific clauses should prevail over general ones, see Western Oil 
Fields, Inc. v. Pennzoil United, Inc., 421 F.2d 387 (5th Cir. 1970). That this standard must yield when 
inappropriate under the particular circumstances, see Elliott Leases Cars, Inc. v. Quigley, 118 R.I. 321, 373 
A.2d 810 (1977); contrast the reading of the dissenting opinion in that case, which cites § 202 and this Section 
in Tentative Draft.
Comment f.  See Roylex, Inc. v. Avco Commun. Devs., Inc., 559 S.W.2d 833 (Tex. Civ. App. 1977), which finds 
the general rule that handwriting prevails over typewriting inapplicable under the circumstances shown by 
testimony.  Illustrations 2 and 3 were Illustrations 4 and 5 to former § 236.  Illustration 4 is based on United 
States Fidelity & Guar. Co. v. First Nat'l Bank, 244 S.C. 436, 137 S.E.2d 582 (1964).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Validity, construction, and effect of land sale contract providing that title must be satisfactory to purchaser.  47 
A.L.R.2d 455.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 152, 154, 156, 163
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 204
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 1- The Meaning of Agreements        
§ 204 Supplying an Omitted Essential Term
When the parties to a bargain sufficiently defined to be a contract have not agreed with respect to a 
term which is essential to a determination of their rights and duties, a term which is reasonable in the 
circumstances is supplied by the court.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope; relation to other rules.  This Section states a principle governing the legal effect of a binding 
agreement.  The supplying of an omitted term is not technically interpretation, but the two are closely related; 
courts often speak of an "implied" term.  In many common situations the principle has been elaborated in more 
detailed rules, applicable unless otherwise agreed.  See the rules on the effect of failure of performance stated 
in §§ 231-49 and the rules on impossibility and frustration stated in Chapter 11, and compare §§ 158 and 272, 
regarding the supplying of terms in cases of mistake and impracticability or frustration.  A similar principle is 
often applicable in determining whether the terms of an agreement are sufficiently certain to constitute a 
contract.  See §§ 33, 34.  In both situations the supplying of an omitted term may resemble or overlap 
interpretation (see § 200) or the effect given to usage (see §§ 219-23).
b.  How omission occurs.  The parties to an agreement may entirely fail to foresee the situation which later 
arises and gives rise to a dispute; they then have no expectations with respect to that situation, and a search 
for their meaning with respect to it is fruitless.  Or they may have expectations but fail to manifest them, either 
because the expectation rests on an assumption which is unconscious or only partly conscious, or because the 
situation seems to be unimportant or unlikely, or because discussion of it might be unpleasant or might produce 
delay or impasse.
c.  Interpretation and omission.  Interpretation may be necessary to determine that the parties have not agreed 
with respect to a particular term, but the supplying of an omitted term is not within the definition of interpretation 
in § 200.  Where there is tacit agreement or a common tacit assumption or where a term can be supplied by 
logical deduction from agreed terms and the circumstances, interpretation may be enough.  But interpretation 
may result in the conclusion that there was in fact no agreement on a particular point, and that conclusion 
should be accepted even though the omitted term could be supplied by giving agreed language a meaning 
different from the meaning or meanings given it by the parties.
d.  Supplying a term.  The process of supplying an omitted term has sometimes been disguised as a literal or a 
purposive reading of contract language directed to a situation other than the situation that arises.  Sometimes it 
is said that the search is for the term the parties would have agreed to if the question had been brought to their 
attention.  Both the meaning of the words used and the probability that a particular term would have been used 
if the question had been raised may be factors in determining what term is reasonable in the circumstances.  
But where there is in fact no agreement, the court should supply a term which comports with community 
standards of fairness and policy rather than analyze a hypothetical model of the bargaining process.  Thus 
where a contract calls for a single performance such as the rendering of a service or the delivery of goods, the 
parties are most unlikely to agree explicitly that performance will be rendered within a "reasonable time;" but if 
no time is specified, a term calling for performance within a reasonable time is supplied.  See Uniform 
Commercial Code §§ 1-204, 2-309(1).  Similarly, where there is a contract for the sale of goods but nothing is 
said as to price the price is a reasonable price at the time for delivery.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-305.
e.  Effect of the parol evidence rule.  The fact that an essential term is omitted may indicate that the agreement 
is not integrated or that there is partial rather than complete integration.  In such cases the omitted term may be 

§ 204 Supplying an Omitted Essential Term
supplied by prior negotiations or a prior agreement.  See § 216.  But omission of a term does not show 
conclusively that integration was not complete and a completely integrated agreement, if binding, discharges 
prior agreements within its scope.  See § 213.  Where there is complete integration and interpretation of the 
writing discloses a failure to agree on an essential term, evidence of prior negotiations or agreements is not 
admissible to supply the omitted term, but such evidence may be admissible, if relevant, on the question of 
what is reasonable in the circumstances.
Illustration:
1.  A and his wife convey their ranch to A's sister and her husband, reserving an option to repurchase.  The 
parties agree orally that the property will be kept in the family, but the deed says nothing as to assignment of 
the option.  If the deed is found to be a partial integration, the oral agreement is effective to show that the option 
is not assignable.  If the deed is found to be a complete integration, the oral agreement is discharged and the 
option is assignable.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  See 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 561-72A (1960 & Supp. 1980); 4 Williston, Contracts §§ 600-
610B, 614-15, 640 (3d ed. 1961); Farnsworth, Disputes Over Omissions in Contracts, 68 Colum. L. Rev. 860 
(1968).
Comment a.  For a discussion of the duty of good faith and fair dealing, see § 205.  For its relation to the court's 
power to supply omitted terms, and application of these concepts to different parts ofa contract with differing 
results, see Snyder v. Howard Johnson's Motor Lodges, Inc., 412 F. Supp. 724 (S.D. Ill. 1976). In Chemetron 
Corp. v. McLouth Steel Corp., 522 F.2d 469 (7th Cir. 1975), the court, from the ungrammatical language of a 
provision, concluded that the draftsman had inadvertently omitted either "and" or "or." Compare § 158.
Comment d.  Examples of courts adding a reasonable time requirement to contracts silent on the point include 
Haines v. City of New York, 41 N.Y.2d 769, 396 N.Y.S.2d 155, 364 N.E.2d 820 (1977) (long-term maintenance 
of a sewer system; cites this Section in Tentative Draft); and Houston County v. Leo L. Landauer & Assoc., 424 
S.W.2d 458 (Tex. Civ. App. 1968), ref. n.r.e. (time for performance under a contract).  In Southern Bell Tel. & 
Tel. Co. v. Florida E. Coast Ry. Co., 399 F.2d 854 (5th Cir. 1968), 47 N.C. L. Rev. 710 (1969), a power to place 
telephone and telegraph lines over and under railroad tracks, duration of which was unspecified, was held 
subject to termination upon reasonable notice.  The power had already been in existence for more than fifty 
years.  As to a court's power to find an omitted term limiting restrictive employment agreements to a reasonable 
time or area, compare Toch v. Eric Schuster Corp., 490 S.W.2d 618 (Tex. Civ. App. 1972), ref. n.r.e., with 
Haines v. City of New York, supra (dictum).  In Snyder v. Howard Johnson's Motor Lodges, Inc., supra, the 
court refused to find an implied covenant not to compete, but found an implied covenant that a restaurant would 
be operated in a manner consistent with others operated by the defendants.  For an example of a court refusing 
to supply an allegedly omitted term, see Hinckley v. Bechtel Corp., 41 Cal. App.3d 206, 116 Cal. Rptr. 33 
(1974).
Comment e.  On the interplay with the parol evidence rule see Snyder v. Howard Johnson's Motor Lodges, Inc., 
supra. Illustration 1 is based on Masterson v. Sine, 68 Cal.2d 222, 65 Cal. Rptr. 545, 436 P.2d 561 (1968).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Admissibility of extrinsic evidence to identify person or persons intended to be designated by the name in which 
a contract is made.  80 A.L.R.2d 1137.
Implied obligation of purchaser or lessee to conduct search for, or to develop or work premises for, minerals 
other than oil and gas.  76 A.L.R.2d 721.
Sale of business or of real estate upon which business is conducted as transferring good will by implication, in 
absence of covenant not to compete.  65 A.L.R.2d 502.
Effect of failure of contract for sale or exchange of real estate to specify time for giving of possession.  56 
A.L.R.2d 1272.

§ 204 Supplying an Omitted Essential Term
Place, in absence of written provision in sales contract, where cash consideration for goods purchased is 
payable.  49 A.L.R.2d 1350.
Implied covenant in lease for business purposes, that lessor will not compete in business activity for conducting 
of which lessee leased the premises.  22 A.L.R.2d 1466.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 152
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 205
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 2- Considerations of Fairness and the Public Interest        
§ 205 Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing
Every contract imposes upon each party a duty of good faith and fair dealing in its performance and its 
enforcement.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Meanings of "good faith."  Good faith is defined in Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(19) as "honesty in fact 
in the conduct or transaction concerned." "In the case of a merchant" Uniform Commercial Code § 2-103(1)(b) 
provides that good faith means "honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair 
dealing in the trade." The phrase "good faith" is used in a variety of contexts, and its meaning varies somewhat 
with the context.  Good faith performance or enforcement of a contract emphasizes faithfulness to an agreed 
common purpose and consistency with the justified expectations of the other party; it excludes a variety of 
types of conduct characterized as involving "bad faith" because they violate community standards of decency, 
fairness or reasonableness.  The appropriate remedy for a breach of the duty of good faith also varies with the 
circumstances.
b.  Good faith purchase.  In many situations a good faith purchaser of property for value can acquire better 
rights in the property than his transferor had.  See, e.g., § 342.  In this context "good faith" focuses on the 
honesty of the purchaser, as distinguished from his care or negligence.  Particularly in the law of negotiable 
instruments inquiry may be limited to "good faith" under what has been called "the rule of the pure heart and the 
empty head." When diligence or inquiry is a condition of the purchaser's right, it is said that good faith is not 
enough.  This focus on honesty is appropriate to cases of good faith purchase; it is less so in cases of good 
faith performance.
c.  Good faith in negotiation.  This Section, like Uniform Commercial Code § 1-203, does not deal with good 
faith in the formation of a contract.  Bad faith in negotiation, although not within the scope of this Section, may 
be subject to sanctions.  Particular forms of bad faith in bargaining are the subjects of rules as to capacity to 
contract, mutual assent and consideration and of rules as to invalidating causes such as fraud and duress.  
See, for example, §§ 90 and 208.  Moreover, remedies for bad faith in the absence of agreement are found in 
the law of torts or restitution.  For examples of a statutory duty to bargain in good faith, see, e.g., National Labor 
Relations Act § 8(d) and the federal Truth in Lending Act.  In cases of negotiation for modification of an existing 
contractual relationship, the rule stated in this Section may overlap with more specific rules requiring 
negotiation in good faith.  See §§ 73, 89; Uniform Commercial Code § 2-209 and Comment.
d.  Good faith performance.  Subterfuges and evasions violate the obligation of good faith in performance even 
though the actor believes his conduct to be justified.  But the obligation goes further: bad faith may be overt or 
may consist of inaction, and fair dealing may require more than honesty.  A complete catalogue of types of bad 
faith is impossible, butthe following types are among those which have been recognized in judicial decisions: 
evasion of the spirit of the bargain, lack of diligence and slacking off, willful rendering of imperfect performance, 
abuse of a power to specify terms, and interference with or failure to cooperate in the other party's 
performance.
Illustrations:
1.  A, an oil dealer, borrows $ 100,000 from B, a supplier, and agrees to buy all his requirements of certain oil 
products from B on stated terms until the debt is repaid.  Before the debt is repaid, A makes a new arrangement 
with C, a competitor of B.  Under the new arrangement A's business is conducted by a corporation formed and 

§ 205 Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing
owned by A and C and managed by A, and the corporation buys all its oil products from C.  The new 
arrangement may be found to be a subterfuge or evasion and a breach of contract by A.
2.  A, owner of a shopping center, leases part of it to B, giving B the exclusive right to conduct a supermarket, 
the rent to be a percentage of B's gross receipts.  During the term of the lease A acquires adjoining land, 
expands the shopping center, and leases part of the adjoining land to C for a competing supermarket.  Unless 
such action was contemplated or is otherwise justified, there is a breach of contract by A.
3.  A Insurance Company insures B against legal liability for certain bodily injuries to third persons, with a limit 
of liability of $ 10,000 for an accident to any one person.  The policy provides that A will defend any suit 
covered by it but may settle.  C sues B on a claim covered by the policy and offers to settle for $ 9,500.  A 
refuses to settle on the ground that the amount is excessive, and judgment is rendered against B for $ 20,000 
after a trial defended by A.  A then refuses to appeal, and offers to pay $ 10,000 only if B satisfies the judgment, 
impairing B's opportunity to negotiate for settlement.  B prosecutes an appeal, reasonably expending $ 7,500, 
and obtains dismissal of the claim.  A has failed to deal fairly and in good faith with B and is liable for B's appeal 
expense.
4.  A and B contract that A will perform certain demolition work for B and pay B a specified sum for materials 
salvaged, the contract not to "become effective until" certain insurance policies "are in full force and effect." A 
makes a good faith effort to obtain the insurance, but financial difficulty arising from injury to an employee of A 
on another job prevents A from obtaining them.  A's duty to perform is discharged.
5.  B submits and A accepts a bid to supply approximately 4000 tons of trap rock for an airport at a unit price.  
The parties execute a standard form of "Invitation, Bid, and Acceptance (Short Form Contract)" supplied by A, 
including typed terms "to be delivered to project as required," "delivery to start immediately," "cancellation by A 
may be effected at any time." Good faith requires that A order and accept the rock within a reasonable time 
unless A has given B notice of intent to cancel.
6.  A contracts to perform services for B for such compensation "as you, in your sole judgment, may decide is 
reasonable." After A has performed the services, B refuses to make any determination of the value of the 
services.  A is entitled to their value as determined by a court.
7.  A suffers a loss of property covered by an insurance policy issued by B, and submits to B notice and proof of 
loss.  The notice and proof fail to comply with requirements of the policy as to form and detail.  B does not point 
out the defects, but remains silent and evasive, telling A broadly toperfect his claim.  The defects do not bar 
recovery on the policy.
e.  Good faith in enforcement.  The obligation of good faith and fair dealing extends to the assertion, settlement 
and litigation of contract claims and defenses.  See, e.g., §§ 73, 89.  The obligation is violated by dishonest 
conduct such as conjuring up a pretended dispute, asserting an interpretation contrary to one's own 
understanding, or falsification of facts.  It also extends to dealing which is candid but unfair, such as taking 
advantage of the necessitous circumstances of the other party to extort a modification of a contract for the sale 
of goods without legitimate commercial reason.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-209, Comment 2.  Other 
types of violation have been recognized in judicial decisions: harassing demands for assurances of 
performance, rejection of performance for unstated reasons, willful failure to mitigate damages, and abuse of a 
power to determine compliance or to terminate the contract.  For a statutory duty of good faith in termination, 
see the federal Automobile Dealer's Day in Court Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1221-25 (1976).
Illustrations:
8.  A contracts to sell and ship goods to B on credit.  The contract provides that, if B's credit or financial 
responsibility becomes impaired or unsatisfactory to A, A may demand cash or security before making 
shipment and may cancel if the demand is not met.  A may properly demand cash or security only if he honestly 
believes, with reason, that the prospect of payment is impaired.
9.  A contracts to sell and ship goods to B.  On arrival B rejects the goods on the erroneous ground that delivery 
was late.  B is thereafter precluded from asserting other unstated grounds then known to him which A could 
have cured if stated seasonably.
REPORTER'S NOTES

§ 205 Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing
This Section is new.  See Farnsworth, Good Faith Performance and Commercial Reasonableness under the 
Uniform Commercial Code, 30 U. Chi. L. Rev. 666 (1963); Summers, "Good Faith" in General Contract Law and 
the Sales Provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code, 54 Va. L. Rev. 195 (1968); 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 
654A-I (Supp. 1980).  As to the development of "good faith" in German law, see Dawson, The Oracles of the 
Law 461-502 (1968).
For an important discussion of the concept, see Fortune v. National Cash Register Co., 373 Mass. 96, 364 
N.E.2d 1251 (1977), applying it to an employment contract terminable at will.  In VTR, Inc. v. Goodyear Tire & 
Rubber Co., 303 F. Supp. 773 (S.D.N.Y. 1969), it was held that particular conduct that would have been barred 
by the duty of good faith could be expressly consented to in the contract.  Some of the limits of the duty are 
discussed in Sessions, Inc. v. Morton, 491 F.2d 854 (9th Cir. 1974); see also Commercial Contractors, Inc. v. 
United States F. & G. Co., 524 F.2d 944 (5th Cir. 1975) (discussing good faith, custom of trade and a general 
contractor's lack of duty to help a subcontractor keep his work force intact when another subcontractor offers 
higher wages).
Comment b.  See Gilmore, The Commercial Doctrine of Good Faith Purchase, 63 Yale L. J. 1057 (1954).
Comment c.  See Kessler & Fine, Culpa in Contrahendo, Bargaining in Good Faith, and Freedom of Contract: A 
Comparative Study, 77 Harv. L. Rev. 401 (1964); Cox, The Duty to Bargain in Good Faith, 71 Harv. L. Rev. 
1401 (1958); Summers, Collective Agreements and the Law of Contracts, 78 Yale L.J. 525 (1969).
Comment d.  Illustration 1 is based on Western Oil & Fuel Co. v. Kemp, 245 F.2d 633 (8th Cir. 1957); cf.  Fort 
Wayne Corrugated Paper Co.v. Anchor Hocking Glass Corp., 130 F.2d 471 (3d Cir. 1942); Uniform Commercial 
Code § 2-306(1).  Illustration 2 is based on Daitch Crystal Dairies, Inc. v. Neisloss, 8 A.D.2d 965, 190 N.Y.S.2d 
737 (1959), aff'd mem., 8 N.Y.2d 723, 201 N.Y.S.2d 101, 167 N.E.2d 643 (1960); Carter v. Adler, 138 Cal. 
App.2d 63, 291 P.2d 111 (1955); see Annots., 170 A.L.R. 1113 (1947), 38 A.L.R.2d 1113 (1954); cf.  Food Fair 
Stores, Inc. v. Blumberg, 234 Md. 521, 200 A.2d 166 (1964) (good faith of lessee); Uniform Commercial Code § 
2-306(2) (obligation to use best efforts in cases of exclusive dealing in goods); Bloor v. Falstaff Brewing Corp., 
601 F.2d 609 (2d Cir. 1979) (discussion of scope of "best efforts"); Riess v. Murchison, 503 F.2d 999 (9th Cir. 
1974), cert. denied, 420 U.S. 993 (1975) (buyers of land required by implied obligation of good faith to produce, 
save and sell water on which sellers' adjoining lands were dependant); Center Garment Co. v. United Refrig. 
Co., 369 Mass. 633, 341 N.E.2d 669 (1976) (franchisor required to make at least some effort to find supplies for 
franchisee when previous source was cut off).  Compare Sessions, Inc. v. Morton, 491 F.2d 854 (9th Cir. 1974) 
(no implied obligation on lessors to agree to dedicate significant portion of land to public use even though 
dedication might be necessary to permit lessee to develop land).  Illustration 3 is based on Brassil v. Maryland 
Cas. Co., 210 N.Y. 235, 104 N.E. 622 (1914); see Annot., 69 A.L.R.2d 690 (1960); cf. Annot., 40 A.L.R.2d 168 
(1955) (insurer's duty to settle); Keeton, Ancillary Rights of the Insured Against His Liability Insurer, 13 Vand. L. 
Rev. 837 (1960); Spindle v. Travelers Ins. Cos., 66 Cal. App.3d 951, 136 Cal. Rptr. 404 (1977), discussed 
below in connection with Comment e.  Illustration 4 is based on Omaha Pub. Power Dist. v. Employers' Fire Ins. 
Co., 327 F.2d 912 (8th Cir. 1964). Illustration 5 is based on Sylvan Crest Sand & Gravel Co. v. United States, 
150 F.2d 642 (2d Cir. 1945); cf. Uniform Commercial Code § 2-309(3).  Illustration 6 is based on Pillois v. 
Billingsley, 179 F.2d 205 (2d Cir. 1950); see also In re Estate of Hollingsworth, 88 Wash.2d 322, 560 P.2d 348 
(1977); cf.  California Lettuce Growers, Inc. v. Union Sugar Co., 45 Cal.2d 474, 484, 289 P.2d 785, 791 (1955) 
(power to fix price of goods); Uniform Commercial Code § 2-305(2) (same).  Illustration 7 is based on Johnson 
v. Scottish Union Ins. Co., 160 Tenn. 152, 22 S.W.2d 362 (1962); cf. Uniform Commercial Code § 2-311 
(cooperation in sale of goods).
Comment e.  See Kessler & Brenner, Automobile Dealer Franchises: Vertical Integration by Contract, 66 Yale 
L.J. 1135 (1957). Several courts have found that an express power to terminate a contract at will was modified 
by a duty of good faith.  See, e.g., Fortune v. National Cash Register Co., 373 Mass. 96, 364 N.E.2d 1251 
(1977) (salesman's employment contract); Spindle v. Travelers Ins. Cos., 66 Cal. App.3d 951, 136 Cal. Rptr. 
404 (1977), 26 Drake L. Rev. 883 (1976-77) (termination of physician's malpractice insurance allegedly as part 
of scheme to intimidate the profession to accept higher premiums; court analogized from the insurer's duty to 
settle claims in good faith, see Illustration 3, supra); L'Orange v. Medical Protective Co., 394 F.2d 57 (6th Cir. 
1968) (termination of dentist's malpractice insurance as retaliation because he testified against other dentist 
insured by same carrier); Shell Oil Co. v. Marinello, 63 N.J. 402, 307 A.2d 598 (1973), cert. denied, 415 U.S. 
920 (1974) (termination of service station franchise; court reasoned both from dominant position of franchisor 

§ 205 Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing
and from Legislature's enactment of franchising statute not applicable to particular transaction).  Illustration 8 is 
based on James B.  Berry's Sons Co. v. Monark Gasoline & Oil Co., 32 F.2d 74 (8th Cir. 1929); cf. Uniform 
Commercial Code §§ 1-208, 2-609.  Illustration 9 is based on Fielding v. Robertson, 141 Va. 123, 126 S.E. 231 
(1925); cf. § 248; Uniform Commercial Code § 2-605(1)(a).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Modern status as to duration of employment where contract specifies no term but fixes daily or longer 
compensation.  93 A.L.R.3d 659.
Construction and effect of tenure provisions of contract or statute governing employment of college or university 
faculty member.  66 A.L.R.3d 1018.
Who is "employee" under employee stock-option plan or contract.  57 A.L.R.3d 787.
Validity and construction of restrictive covenant not to compete ancillary to franchise agreement.  50 A.L.R.3d 
746.
"Unconscionability" as ground for refusing enforcement of contract for sale of goods or agreement collateral 
thereto.  18 A.L.R.3d 1305.
Necessity and sufficiency of allegation, in a suit for specific performance of a contract for the sale of land, as to 
the adequacy of the consideration or as to the fairness of the contract.  100 A.L.R.2d 551.
Construction and effect of agreement relating to salary of partners.  66 A.L.R.2d 1023.
"Escalator" price adjustment clauses.  63 A.L.R.2d 1337.
Validity and effect of agreement controlling the vote of corporate stock.  45 A.L.R.2d 799.
Validity, construction and effect of contract, option, or provision for repurchase by vendor.  44 A.L.R.2d 342.
Contract by seller of business not to compete as affecting his lease of other property in restricted area to one 
who he knows will compete with purchaser.  14 A.L.R.2d 1333.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 168
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 206
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 2- Considerations of Fairness and the Public Interest        
§ 206 Interpretation Against the Draftsman
In choosing among the reasonable meanings of a promise or agreement or a term thereof, that meaning 
is generally preferred which operates against the party who supplies the words or from whom a writing 
otherwise proceeds.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  Where one party chooses the terms of a contract, he is likely to provide more carefully for the 
protection of his own interests than for those of the other party.  He is also more likely than the other party to 
have reason to know of uncertainties of meaning.  Indeed, he may leave meaning deliberately obscure, 
intending to decide ata later date what meaning to assert.  In cases of doubt, therefore, so long as other factors 
are not decisive, there is substantial reason for preferring the meaning of the other party.  The rule is often 
invoked in cases of standardized contracts and in cases where the drafting party has the stronger bargaining 
position, but it is not limited to such cases.  It is in strictness a rule of legal effect, sometimes called 
construction, as well as interpretation: its operation depends on the positions of the parties as they appear in 
litigation, and sometimes the result is hard to distinguish from a denial of effect to an unconscionable clause.
b.  Compulsory contract or term.  The rule that language is interpreted against the party who chose it has no 
direct application to cases where the language is prescribed by law, as is sometimes true with respect to 
insurance policies, bills of lading and other standardized documents.  In some cases, however, the statute or 
regulation adopts language which was previously used without compulsion and was interpreted against the 
drafting party, and there is normally no intention to change the established meaning.  Moreover, insurers are 
more likely than insureds to participate in drafting prescribed forms and to review them carefully before putting 
them into use.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section carries forward the substance of former § 236(d).  See 3 Corbin, Contracts § 559 (1960 & Supp. 
1980); 4 Williston, Contracts § 621 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment a.  On the general rule, see, e.g., Semmes Motors, Inc. v. Ford Motor Co., 429 F.2d 1197, 1206-07 
(2d Cir. 1970), quoting from this Comment in Tentative Draft; Goddard v. South Bay Union High School Dist., 
79 Cal. App.3d 98, 144 Cal. Rptr. 701 (1978); Pappas v. Bever, 219 N.W.2d 720 (Iowa 1974). That it has less 
force when the other party has taken an active role in the drafting process, or is particularly knowledgeable, see 
Centennial Ent., Inc. v. Mansfield Dev. Co., 568 P.2d 50 (Colo. 1977); Crestview Bowl, Inc. v. Womer Constr. 
Co., 225 Kan. 335, 592 P.2d 74 (1979); Graziano v. Tortora Agency, Inc., 78 Misc.2d 1094, 359 N.Y.S.2d 489 
(Civ. Ct. 1974). As the text of the Section makes clear, the rule does not apply if the non-drafting party's 
interpretation is unreasonable.  See Intertherm, Inc. v. Coronet Imp. Corp., 558 S.W.2d 344 (Mo. Ct. App. 
1977), quoting from this Comment in Tentative Draft; Perry and Wallis, Inc. v. United States, 192 Ct. Cl. 310, 
427 F.2d 722 (1970). Nonetheless, one may doubt that the rule is "the last one to be resorted to, and never to 
be applied except when other rules of interpretation fail," Quad Constr., Inc. v. Wm. A. Smith Contr. Co., 534 
F.2d 1391 (10th Cir. 1976), quoting (in a diversity case) from Patterson v. Gage, 11 Colo. 50, 16 P. 560 (1888).
Comment b.  The substance of this Comment was contained in former § 236(d) as a qualification of the general 
rule concerning terms prescribed by law.
Cross Reference

§ 206 Interpretation Against the Draftsman
ALR Annotations:
Modern status as to duration of employment where contract specifies no term but fixes daily or longer 
compensation.  93 A.L.R.3d 659.
Doctrine of unconscionability as applied to insurance contracts.  86 A.L.R.3d 862.
Validity and construction of "No Damage" clause with respect to delay in building or construction contract.  74 
A.L.R.3d 187.
Landlord and tenant: What amounts to "sale" of property for purposes of provision giving tenant right of first 
refusal if landlord desires to sell.  70 A.L.R.3d 203.
Construction and effect of tenure provisions of contract or statute governing employment of college or university 
faculty member.  66 A.L.R.3d 1018.
Validity, construction, and effect of clause in franchise contract prohibiting transfer of franchise or contract.  59 
A.L.R.3d 244.
Who is "employee" under employee stock-option plan or contract.  57 A.L.R.3d 787.
Validity and construction of restrictive covenant not to compete ancillary to franchise agreement.  50 A.L.R.3d 
746.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 155
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 207
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 2- Considerations of Fairness and the Public Interest        
§ 207 Interpretation Favoring the Public
In choosing among the reasonable meanings of a promise or agreement or a term thereof, a meaning 
that serves the public interest is generally preferred.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope.  The rule preferring an interpretation which favors an interest of the public applies only to 
agreements which affect a public interest.  It is a rule of legal effect as well as interpretation, and rests more on 
considerations of public policy than on the probable intention of the parties.  It has often been relied on to justify 
narrow construction of a grant of a public franchise or an agreement for a tax exemption.  In general, it does not 
prefer the interest of a governmental agency as a party to a contract; government contracts are likely to be 
construed against the government as the drafting party.
Illustration:
1.  A is employed by B as an inventor.  In an agreement settling their disputes on termination of the 
employment, A promises to assign to B all A's rights in a pending patent application and all improvements on 
the invention covered.  Thereafter A makes an invention and applies for a patent, and B claims it as an 
improvement.  The public interest in encouraging invention supports an interpretation of the agreement 
excluding future improvements unless future improvements were specifically included.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section carries forward the substance of former § 236(f).  See 3 Corbin, Contracts § 550 (1962); 4 
Williston, Contracts § 626 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on De Long Corp. v. Lucas, 176 F. Supp. 104 (S.D.N.Y. 1959), aff'd, 278 
F.2d 804 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 364 U.S. 833 (1960); cf.  Loblaw, Inc. v. Warren Plaza, Inc., 163 Ohio St. 581, 
127 N.E.2d 754 (1955) (lessor's covenant against competition with lessee).  See also Houk v. Ross, 34 Ohio 
St.2d 77, 296 N.E.2d 266 (1973) (construction favored that least restricts the free use of land).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Construction and application of agreement by medical or social work student to work in particular position or at 
particular location in exchange for financial aid in meeting costs of education.  83 A.L.R.3d 1273.
Validity and construction of contract between hospital and physician providing for exclusive medical services.  
74 A.L.R.3d 1268.
Validity and construction of "No Damage" clause with respect to delay in building or construction contract.  74 
A.L.R.3d 187.
Landlord and tenant: What amounts to "sale" of property for purposes of provision giving tenant right of first 
refusal if landlord desires to sell.  70 A.L.R.3d 203.
Validity and construction of contract exempting agricultural fair or similar bailee from liability for articles 
delivered for exhibition.  69 A.L.R.3d 1025.

§ 207 Interpretation Favoring the Public
Validity and construction of provision (Escalator Clause) in land contract or mortgage that rate of interest 
payable shall increase if legal rate is raised.  60 A.L.R.3d 473.
Construction and operation of "Equal Opportunities Clause" requiring pledge against racial discrimination in 
hiring under construction contract.  44 A.L.R.3d 1283.
Validity and construction of contract under which applicant for admission to home for aged or infirm turns over 
his property to institution in return for lifetime care.  44 A.L.R.3d 1174.
Validity and construction of putative father's promise to support or provide for illegitimate child.  20 A.L.R.3d 
500.
"Escalator" price adjustment clauses.  63 A.L.R.2d 1337.
Special requirements of consumer as giving rise to implied contract by public utility to furnish particular amount 
of electricity, gas, or water.  13 A.L.R.2d 1233.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 143
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 208
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 2- Considerations of Fairness and the Public Interest        
§ 208 Unconscionable Contract or Term
If a contract or term thereof is unconscionable at the time the contract is made a court may refuse to 
enforce the contract, or may enforce the remainder of the contract without the unconscionable term, or 
may so limit the application of any unconscionable term as to avoid any unconscionable result.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope.  Like the obligation of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205), the policy against unconscionable contracts 
or terms applies to a wide variety of types of conduct.  The determination that a contract or term is or is not 
unconscionable is made in the light of its setting, purpose and effect.  Relevant factors include weaknesses in 
the contracting process like those involved in more specific rules as to contractual capacity, fraud, and other 
invalidating causes; the policy also overlaps with rules which render particular bargains or terms unenforceable 
on grounds of public policy.  Policing against unconscionable contracts or terms has sometimes been 
accomplished "by adverse construction of language, by manipulation of the rules of offer and acceptance or by 
determinations that the clause is contrary to public policy or to the dominant purpose of the contract." Uniform 
Commercial Code § 2-302 Comment 1.  Particularly in the case of standardized agreements, the rule of this 
Section permits the court to pass directly on the unconscionability of the contract or clause rather than to avoid 
unconscionable results by interpretation.  Compare § 211.
b.  Historic standards.  Traditionally, a bargain was said to be unconscionable in an action at law if it was "such 
as no man in his senses and not under delusion would make on the one hand, and as no honest and fair man 
would accept on the other;" damages were then limited to those to which the aggrieved party was "equitably" 
entitled.  Hume v. United States, 132 U.S. 406 (1889), quoting Earl of Chesterfield v. Janssen, 2 Ves. Sen. 125, 
155, 28 Eng. Rep. 82, 100 (Ch. 1750). Even though a contract was fully enforceable in an action for damages, 
equitable remedies such as specific performance were refused where "the sum total of its provisions drives too 
hard a bargain for a court of conscience to assist." Campbell Soup Co. v. Wentz, 172 F.2d 80, 84 (3d Cir. 
1948). Modern procedural reforms have blurred the distinction between remedies at law and in equity.  For 
contracts for the sale of goods, Uniform Commercial Code § 2-302 states the rule of this Section without 
distinction between law and equity.  Comment 1 to that section adds, "The principle is one of the prevention of 
oppression and unfair surprise (Cf. Campbell Soup Co. v. Wentz, . . .) and not of disturbance of allocation of 
risks because of superior bargaining power."
c.  Overall imbalance.  Inadequacy of consideration does not of itself invalidate a bargain, but gross disparity in 
the values exchanged may be an important factor in a determination that a contract is unconscionable and may 
be sufficient ground, without more, for denying specific performance.  See §§ 79, 364.  Such a disparity may 
also corroborate indications of defects in the bargaining process, or may affect the remedy to be granted when 
there is a violation of a more specific rule.  Theoretically it is possible for a contract to be oppressive taken as a 
whole, even though there is no weakness in the bargaining process and no single term which is in itself 
unconscionable.  Ordinarily, however, an unconscionable contract involves other factors as well as overall 
imbalance.
Illustrations:
1.  A, an individual, contracts in June to sell at a fixed price per ton to B, a large soup manufacturer, the carrots 
to be grown on A's farm.  The contract, written on B's standard printed form, is obviously drawn to protect B's 
interests and not A's; it contains numerous provisions to protect B against various contingencies and none 
giving analogous protection to A.  Each of the clauses can be read restrictively so that it is not unconscionable, 

§ 208 Unconscionable Contract or Term
but several can be read literally to give unrestricted discretion to B.  In January, when the market price has 
risen above the contract price, A repudiates the contract, and B seeks specific performance.  In the absence of 
justification by evidence of commercial setting, purpose, or effect, the court may determine that the contract as 
a whole was unconscionable when made, and may then deny specific performance.
2.  A, a homeowner, executes a standard printed form used by B, a merchant, agreeing to pay $ 1,700 for 
specified home improvements.  A also executes a credit application asking for payment in 60 monthly 
installments but specifying no rate.  Four days later A is informed that the credit application has been approved 
and is given a payment schedule calling for finance and insurance charges amounting to $ 800 in addition to 
the $ 1,700.  Before B does any of the work, A repudiates the agreement, and B sues A for $ 800 damages, 
claiming that a commission of $ 800 was paid to B's salesman in reliance on the agreement.  The court may 
determine that the agreement was unconscionable when made, and may then dismiss the claim.
d.  Weakness in the bargaining process.  A bargain is not unconscionable merely because the parties to it are 
unequal in bargaining position, nor even because the inequality results in an allocation of risks to the weaker 
party.  But gross inequality of bargaining power, together with terms unreasonably favorable to the stronger 
party, may confirm indications that the transaction involved elements of deception or compulsion, or may show 
that the weaker party had no meaningful choice, no real alternative, or did not in fact assent or appear to assent 
to the unfair terms.  Factors which may contribute to a finding of unconscionability in the bargaining process 
include the following: belief by the stronger party that there is no reasonable probability that the weaker party 
will fully perform the contract; knowledge of the stronger party that the weaker party will be unable to receive 
substantial benefits from the contract; knowledge of the stronger party that the weaker party is unable 
reasonably to protect his interests by reason of physical or mental infirmities, ignorance, illiteracy or inability to 
understand the language of the agreement, or similar factors.  See Uniform Consumer Credit Code § 6.111.
Illustration:
3.  A, literate only in Spanish, is visited in his home by a salesman of refrigerator-freezers for B.  They negotiate 
in Spanish; A tells the salesman he cannot afford to buy the appliance because his job will end in one week, 
and the salesman tells A that A will be paid numerous $ 25 commissions on sales to his friends.  A signs a 
complex installment contract printed in English.  The contract provides for a cash price of $ 900 plus a finance 
charge of $ 250.  A defaults after paying $ 32, and B sues for the balance plus late charges and a 20% 
attorney's fee authorized by the contract.  The appliance cost B $ 350.  The court may determine that the 
contract was unconscionable when made, and may then limit B's recovery to a reasonable sum.
e.  Unconscionable terms.  Particular terms may be unconscionable whether or not the contract as a whole is 
unconscionable.  Some types of terms are not enforced, regardless of context; examples are provisions for 
unreasonably large liquidated damages, or limitations on a debtor's right to redeem collateral.  See Uniform 
Commercial Code §§ 2-718, 9-501(3).  Other terms may be unconscionable in some contexts but not in others.  
Overall imbalance and weaknesses in the bargaining process are then important.
Illustrations:
4.  A, a packer, sells and ships 300 cases of canned catsup to B, a wholesale grocer.  The contract provides, 
"All claims other than swells must be made within ten days from receipt of goods." Six months later a 
government inspector, upon microscopic examination of samples, finds excessive mold in the cans and obtains 
a court order for destruction of the 270 remaining cases in B's warehouse.  In the absence of justifying 
evidence, the court may determine that the quoted clause is unconscionable as applied to latent defects and 
does not bar a claim for damages for breach of warranty by B against A.
5.  A, a retail furniture store, sells furniture on installment credit to B, retaining a security interest.  As A knows, 
B is a woman of limited education, separated from her husband, maintaining herself and seven children by 
means of $ 218 per month public assistance.  After 13 purchases over a period of five years for a total of $ 
1,200, B owes A $ 164.  B then buys a stereo set for $ 514.  Each contract contains a paragraph of some 800 
words in extremely fine print, in the middle of which are the words "all payments . . . shall be credited pro rata 
on all outstanding . . . accounts." The effect of this language is to keep a balance due on each item until all are 
paid for.  On B's default, A sues for possession of all the items sold.  It may be determined that either the 
quoted clause or the contract as a whole was unconscionable when made.

§ 208 Unconscionable Contract or Term
6.  A, a corporation with its principal office in State X, contracts with B, a resident of State X, to make 
improvements on B's home in State X.  The contract is made on A's standard printed form, which contains a 
clause by which the parties submit to the jurisdiction of a court in State Y, 200 miles away.  No reason for the 
clause appears except to make litigation inconvenient and expensive for B.  The clause is unconscionable.
f.  Law and fact.  A determination that a contract or term is unconscionable is made by the court in the light of 
all the material facts.  Under Uniform Commercial Code § 2-302, the determination is made "as a matter of law," 
but the parties are to be afforded an opportunity to present evidence as to commercial setting, purpose and 
effect to aid the court in its determination.  Incidental findings of fact are made by the court rather than by a jury, 
but are accorded the usual weight given to such findings of fact in appellate review.  An appellate court will also 
consider whether proper standards were applied.
Illustration:
7.  A, a finance company, lends money to B, a manufacturing company, on the security of an assignment by B 
of its accounts receivable.  The agreement provides for loans of 75% of the value of assigned accounts 
acceptable to A, and forbids B to dispose of or hypothecate any assets without A's written consent.  The agreed 
interest rate of 18% would be usurious but for a statute precluding a corporation from raising the defense of 
usury.  Substantial advances are made, and the balance owed is $ 14,000 when B becomes bankrupt, three 
months after the first advance.  A determination that the agreement is unconscionable on its face, without 
regard to context, is error.  The agreement is unconscionable only if it is not a reasonable commercial device in 
the light of all the circumstances when it was made.
g.  Remedies.  Perhaps the simplest application of the policy against unconscionable agreements is the denial 
of specific performance where the contract as a whole was unconscionable when made.  If such a contract is 
entirely executory, denial of money damages may also be appropriate.  But the policy is not penal: unless the 
parties can be restored to their pre-contract positions, the offending party will ordinarily be awarded at least the 
reasonable value of performance rendered by him.  Where a term rather than the entire contract is 
unconscionable, the appropriate remedy is ordinarily todeny effect to the unconscionable term.  In such cases 
as that of an exculpatory term, the effect may be to enlarge the liability of the offending party.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new; it follows Uniform Commercial Code § 2-302.  See Davenport, Unconscionability and the 
Uniform Commercial Code, 22 U. Miami L. Rev. 121 (1967); Ellinghaus, In Defense of Unconscionability, 78 
Yale L.J. 757 (1969); Leff, Unconscionability and the Code -- The Emperor's New Clause, 115 U. Pa. L. Rev. 
485 (1967); Shulkin, Unconscionability -- The Code, the Court and the Consumer, 9 B.C. Ind. & Com. L. Rev. 
367 (1968); Spanogle, Analyzing Unconscionability Problems, 117 U. Pa. L. Rev. 931 (1969); Murray, 
Unconscionability: Unconscionability, 31 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 1 (1969); Braucher, The Unconscionable Contract or 
Term, 31 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 337 (1970); Leff, Unconscionability and the Crowd -- Consumers and the Common 
Law Tradition, 31 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 349 (1970); Spiedel, Unconscionability, Assent and Consumer Protection, 31 
U. Pitt. L. Rev. 359 (1970); Comments, 58 Dick. L. Rev. 161 (1954), 18 U. Chi. L. Rev. 146 (1950); 45 Va. L. 
Rev. 583 (1959); Annot., 18 A.L.R.3d 1305 (1968).
Comment a.  Uniform Commercial Code § 2-302 is literally inapplicable to contracts not involving the sale of 
goods, but it has proven very influential in non-sales cases.  It has many times been used either by analogy or 
because it was felt to embody a generally accepted social attitude of fairness going beyond its statutory 
application to sales of goods.  See Seabrook v. Commuter Housing Co., 72 Misc.2d 6, 338 N.Y.S.2d 67 (Civ. 
Ct. 1972) (apartment lease); Kugler v. Romain, 58 N.J. 522, 279 A.2d 640 (1971) (consumer fraud proceeding 
by Attorney General); C & J Fertilizer, Inc. v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., 227 N.W.2d 169, 179-81 (Iowa 1975) 
(construction of burglary insurance policy); Contract Buyers League v. F & F Investment, 300 F. Supp. 210 
(N.D. Ill. 1969) (class action with regard to sales of residential property -- no unconscionability found); see other 
examples listed in Albert Merrill School v. Godoy, 78 Misc.2d 647, 357 N.Y.S.2d 378 (Civ. Ct. 1974). In many of 
the cases cited contracts of adhesion were involved.  It is to be emphasized that a contract of adhesion is not 
unconscionable per se, and that all unconscionable contracts are not contracts of adhesion.  Nonetheless, the 
more standardized the agreement and the less a party may bargain meaningfully, the more susceptible the 
contract or a term will be to a claim of unconscionability.  See Comment c to § 211; Note, Unconscionability and 
Standardized Contracts, 5 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 65 (1975); 3 Corbin, Contracts § 559B (Supp. 1980).  
On adhesion contracts, see 3 id. §§ 559A-I (Supp. 1980).

§ 208 Unconscionable Contract or Term
Comment c.  Illustration 1 is based on Campbell Soup Co. v. Wentz, 172 F.2d 80 (3d Cir. 1948). Cf.  Shell Oil 
Co. v. Marinello, 63 N.J. 402, 307 A.2d 598 (1973), cert. denied, 415 U.S. 920 (1974) (termination provision in 
service station franchise while facially neutral, in fact was one-sided in favor of oil company, and consequently 
was "void as against the public policy of this statute").  Illustration 2 is based on American Home Improvement, 
Inc. v. MacIver, 105 N.H. 435, 201 A.2d 886 (1964); cf.  Central Budget Corp. v. Sanchez, 53 Misc.2d 620, 279 
N.Y.S.2d 391 (1967).
Comment d.  For examples of factors weighing in favor of a finding of unconscionability, see Albert Merrill 
School v. Godoy, 78 Misc.2d 647, 357 N.Y.S.2d 378 (Civ. Ct. 1974) (disproportionate levels of education, 
language difficulty and deceptive practices); Seabrook v. Commuter Housing Co., 72 Misc.2d 6, 338 N.Y.S.2d 
67 (Civ. Ct. 1972) (long and complex lease printed in small type and containing many highly technical terms; 
landlord but not tenant represented by counsel; housing a scarce commodity); Kugler v. Romain, 58 N.J. 522, 
279 A.2d 640 (1971) (goods were of extremely little use to buyers; price was two and one-half times a 
"reasonable market price"; sellers made many misrepresentations and deceptions; buyers were poor, 
uneducated and inexperienced); Wheeler v. St. Joseph Hosp., 63 Cal. App.3d 345, 133 Cal. Rptr. 775 (1976) 
(stress of hospital admitting room, superior bargaining position of hospital, failure to call patient's attention to 
arbitration clause) (it is not clear whether the court was relying on the unconscionability concept or on one 
limited to contracts of adhesion); Weidman v. Tomaselli, 81 Misc.2d 328, 365 N.Y.S.2d 681 (Cty. Ct.), aff'd, 84 
Misc.2d 782, 386 N.Y.S.2d 276 (App. Term 1975) (overwhelming need for housing, no bargaining as to terms; 
landlord's dominant position; tenant forced to waive valuable statutory and constitutional rights; attorney's fees 
due from tenant whenever landlord commenced proceedings after tenant's default, even if suit was 
unsuccessful).  For examples of cases rejecting unconscionability claims, see Graziano v. Tortora Agency, 78 
Misc.2d 1094, 359 N.Y.S.2d 489 (Civ. Ct. 1974) (tenant was in real estate business and its principal was a 
sophisticated businessman; its counsel advised tenant not to sign lease; tenant had successfully litigated a 
claim based on a lease before); Curtis Elev. Co. v. Hampshire House, Inc., 142 N.J. Super. 537, 362 A.2d 73 
(1976) (bargaining between experienced businessmen familiar with problems of industry -- provision excused 
performance in event of a strike and industry had history of labor troubles); Frame v. Merrill Lynch, Pierce, 
Fenner & Smith, Inc., 20 Cal. App.3d 668, 97 Cal. Rptr. 811 (1971) (while bargaining strength was unequal, no 
unfair imposition would result from arbitration clause's enforcement) (adhesion contract -- "unconscionable" not 
used in opinion); Wille v. Southwestern Bell Tel. Co., 219 Kan. 755, 519 P.2d 903 (1976) (disparity of 
bargaining power alone is not enough); Royal Indem. Co. v. Westinghouse Elec. Corp., 385 F. Supp. 520 
(S.D.N.Y. 1974) (very large industrial contract between large and knowledgeable companies; equal bargaining 
power, long negotiations); Wheeler v. St. Joseph Hosp., supra, (dissenting opinion) (while hospital admitting 
room is not an ideal locale for bargaining, arbitration clause did not contain very complicated language and 
patient, who was entering only for tests, had plenty of time to read and sign the document).  See also Madden 
v. Kaiser Fdtn. Hosps., 17 Cal.3d 699, 131 Cal. Rptr. 882, 552 P.2d 1178 (1976); Ciofalo v. Vic Tanny Gyms, 
Inc., 10 N.Y.2d 294, 220 N.Y.S.2d 962, 177 N.E.2d 925 (1961). Illustration 3 is based on Frostifresh Corp. v. 
Reynoso, 52 Misc.2d 26, 274 N.Y.S.2d 757 (Cty. Ct. 1966), rev'd as to damages, 54 Misc.2d 119, 281 N.Y.S.2d 
964 (App. Term 1967); cf.  State by Lefkowitz v. ITM, Inc., 52 Misc.2d 39, 275 N.Y.S.2d 303 (Sup. Ct. 1966) 
(referral sales, excessive price); Jones v. Star Credit Corp., 52 Misc.2d 189, 298 N.Y.S.2d 264 (Sup. Ct. 1969) 
(poor, uneducated buyers, excessive price); Toker v. Perl, 103 N.J. Super. 500, 247 A.2d 701 (1968) aff'd, 108 
N.J. Super. 129, 260 A.2d 244 (1970) (deceptive practice, excessive price).  But cf.  Hernandez v. S.I.C. Fin. 
Co., 79 N.M. 673, 448 P.2d 474 (1968) (debtor understood English).
Comment e.  Illustration 4 is based on Kansas City Wholesale Grocery Co. v. Weber Packing Corp., 93 Utah 
414, 73 P.2d 1272 (1937); cf.  Hardy v. General Motors Acceptance Corp., 38 Ga. App. 463, 144 S.E. 327 
(1928); Wilson Trading Corp. v. David Ferguson, Ltd., 23 N.Y.2d 398, 297 N.Y.S.2d 108, 244 N.E.2d 685 
(1968); Q. Vandenberg & Sons v. Siter, 204 Pa. Super. Ct. 392, 204 A.2d 494 (1964). But cf.  Whitaker v. 
Cannon Mills Co., 132 Conn. 434, 45 A.2d 120 (1945). Illustration 5 is based on Williams v. Walker-Thomas 
Furniture Co., 350 F.2d 445 (D.C. Cir. 1965); see also Weidman v. Tomaselli, 81 Misc.2d 328, 365 N.Y.S.2d 
681 (Cty. Ct.), aff'd, 84 Misc.2d 782, 386 N.Y.S.2d 276 (App. Term 1975); cf. Uniform Consumer Credit Code § 
2.409.  Illustration 6 is based on Paragon Homes, Inc. v. Carter, 56 Misc.2d 463, 288 N.Y.S.2d 817 (Sup. Ct.), 
aff'd mem., 30 A.D.2d 1052, 295 N.Y.S.2d 606 (1968); cf. Uniform Consumer Credit Code § 1.201(9).  But cf.  
National Equip. Rental, Ltd. v. Szukhent, 375 U.S. 311 (1964); The Monrosa v. Carbon Black Export, Inc., 359 
U.S. 180 (1959) (validity of choice-of-forum clause not decided); Indussa Corp. v. S.S. Ranborg, 377 F.2d 200 

§ 208 Unconscionable Contract or Term
(2d Cir. 1967) (choice-of-forum clause invalid under Carriage of Goods by Sea Act); Clinic Masters, Inc. v. 
District Court, 556 P.2d 473 (Colo. 1976) (signatory was an educated professional; other party's ties were all 
with state of forum chosen).
Comment f.  Illustration 7 is based on In re Elkins-Dell Mfg. Co., 253 F. Supp. 864 (E.D. Pa. 1966); compare 
Royal Indem. Co. v. Westinghouse Elec. Corp., 385 F. Supp. 520 (S.D.N.Y. 1974).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Doctrine of unconscionability as applied to insurance contracts.  86 A.L.R.3d 862.
Construction and application of agreement by medical or social work student to work in particular position or at 
particular location in exchange for financial aid in meeting costs of education.  83 A.L.R.3d 1273.
Validity and construction of "No Damage" clause with respect to delay in building or construction contract.  74 
A.L.R.3d 187.
Construction and effect of tenure provisions of contract or statute governing employment of college or university 
faculty member.  66 A.L.R.3d 1018.
Validity and construction of provision (Escalator Clause) in land contract or mortgage that rate of interest 
payable shall increase if legal rate is raised.  60 A.L.R.3d 473.
Employer's termination of professional athlete's services as constituting breach of employment contract.  57 
A.L.R.3d 257.
Construction of contract for installation of vending machine on another's premises.  53 A.L.R.3d 471.
"Unconscionability" as ground for refusing enforcement of contract for sale of goods or agreement collateral 
thereto.  18 A.L.R.3d 1305.
Construction and effect of agreement relating to salary of partners.  66 A.L.R.2d 1023.
"Escalator" price adjustment clauses.  63 A.L.R.2d 1337.
Validity, construction and effect of contract, option, or provision for repurchase by vendor.  44 A.L.R.2d 342.
Validity and effect of promise not to make a will.  32 A.L.R.2d 370.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 1
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 209
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 3- Effect of Adoption of a Writing        
§ 209 Integrated Agreements
(1)  An integrated agreement is a writing or writings constituting a final expression of one or more 
terms of an agreement.
(2)  Whether there is an integrated agreement is to be determined by the court as a question preliminary 
to determination of a question of interpretation or to application of the parol evidence rule.
(3)  Where the parties reduce an agreement to a writing which in view of its completeness and 
specificity reasonably appears to be a complete agreement, it is taken to be an integrated agreement 
unless it is established by other evidence that the writing did not constitute a final expression.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Significance of integration.  Where the parties to an agreement have reduced a term of the agreement to 
specific words or other symbols, interpretation of that term relates to the meaning of the words and symbols 
used.  See § 212.  An integrated agreement supersedes contrary prior statements, and a completely integrated 
agreement supersedes even consistent additional terms.  See §§ 213-16.  But both integrated and unintegrated 
agreements are to be read in the light of the circumstances and may be explained or supplemented by 
operative usages of trade, by the course of dealing between the parties, and by the course of performance of 
the agreement.
b.  Form of integrated agreement.  No particular form is required for an integrated agreement.  Written 
contracts, signed by both parties, may include an explicit declaration that there are no other agreements 
between the parties, but such a declaration may not be conclusive.  The intention of the parties may also be 
manifested without explicit statement and without signature.  A letter, telegram or other informal document 
written by one party may be orally assented to by the other as a final expression of some or all of the terms of 
their agreement.  Indeed, the parties to an oral agreement may choose their words with such explicit precision 
and completeness that the same legal consequences follow as where there is a completely integrated 
agreement.
Illustrations:
1.  A and B enter into an oral contract, and prepare and sign a writing to incorporate its terms.  Though the 
writing contains substantially all the orally agreed terms, they are not fully satisfied with it, and they agree to 
have it redrafted.  There is no integrated agreement.
2.  A orally agrees to employ B on certain terms.  B immediately writes and A receives a letter beginning, 
"Confirming our oral arrangement this morning," and fully stating the contract as he understands it.  A makes no 
reply but with knowledge of B's understanding accepts services from B under the contract.  The letter is a 
completely integrated agreement.  Even though the letter is not in all respects accurate, it operates as an offer 
of substituted terms, and A's acquiescence manifests assent to those terms.
c.  Proof of integration.  Whether a writing has been adopted as an integrated agreement is a question of fact to 
be determined in accordance with all relevant evidence.  The issue is distinct from the issues whether an 
agreement was made and whether the document is genuine, and also from the issue whether it was intended 
as a complete and exclusive statement of the agreement.  See § 210; compare Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
202.  Ordinarily the issue whether there is an integrated agreement is determined by the trial judge in the first 
instance as a question preliminary to an interpretative ruling or to the application of the parol evidence rule.  

§ 209 Integrated Agreements
See §§ 212, 213.  After the preliminary determination, such questions as whether the agreement was in fact 
made may remain to be decided by the trier of fact.  Subsection (3) states the rule that a written agreement 
complete on its face is taken to be an integrated agreement in the absence of contrary evidence.
Illustration:
3.  A sells and delivers a hotel to B.  Later A takes possession of the hotel furniture, and B sues to recover it.  B 
claims the furniture under an oral agreement; A proves an apparently complete written agreement for the sale 
of the real property, and objects to consideration of the oral agreement.  In the absence of contrary evidence, 
the writing is taken to be an integration; whether it is a complete integration is decided on the basis of all 
relevant evidence.  If the oral agreement contradicts the writing, or if the writing is a complete integration, 
evidence of the oral agreement is excluded; otherwise the trier of fact is to decide whether the oral agreement 
was made.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Former §§ 228 and 229 are rewritten as §§ 209 and 210 to follow the terminology of Uniform Commercial Code 
§ 2-202.  See 4 Williston, Contracts §§ 604-07, 633-38 (3d ed. 1961); 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 539, 581-88 (1960 
& Supp. 1980); 9 Wigmore, Evidence §§ 2425-31 (3d ed. 1940).
Comment b.  That a declaration in the contract that it is integrated is not conclusive, but is only a factor to be 
considered, see Pasquale Food Co. v. L & H Int'l Airmotive, Inc., 51 Ala. App. 127, 283 So.2d 438 (1973), cert. 
denied, 291 Ala. 795, 283 So.2d 448 (1973). Illustrations 1 and 2 are based on Illustrations 1 and 2 to former § 
228.  Compare Diversified Environments, Inc. v. Olivetti Corp., 461 F. Supp. 286 (M.D. Pa. 1978).
Comment c.  That all relevant evidence, including evidence extrinsic to the document in question, is admissible 
on the issue whether the parties intended the document to be integrated, see Burroughs Corp. v. Weston Int'l 
Corp., 577 F.2d 137 (4th Cir. 1978); David Nassif Assoc. v. United States, 214 Ct. Cl. 407, 557 F.2d 249 (1977) 
(note agreement of both majority and dissent on this point); Friestad v. Travelers Indem. Co., 260 Pa. Super. 
Ct. 178, 393 A.2d 1212 (1978); Don L. Cooney, Inc. v. Star Iron & Steel Co., 12 Wash. App. 120, 528 P.2d 487 
(1974); Murray, Contracts § 105 (Rev. ed. 1974).  See also Note, Chief Justice Traynor and the Parol Evidence 
Rule, 22 Stan. L. Rev. 547 (1970); McCormick, The Parol Evidence Rule as a Procedural Device for Control of 
the Jury, 41 Yale L.J. 365 (1932). Illustration 3 is based on Brown v. Oliver, 123 Kan. 711, 256 P. 1008 (1927).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Effect of stipulation, in private building or construction contract, that alterations or extras must be ordered in 
writing.  2 A.L.R.3d 620.
Effect of stipulation, in public building or construction contract, that alterations or extras must be ordered in 
writing.  1 A.L.R.3d 1173.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 164
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 210
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 3- Effect of Adoption of a Writing        
§ 210 Completely and Partially Integrated Agreements
(1)  A completely integrated agreement is an integrated agreement adopted by the parties as a complete 
and exclusive statement of the terms of the agreement.
(2)  A partially integrated agreement is an integrated agreement other than a completely integrated 
agreement.
(3)  Whether an agreement is completely or partially integrated is to be determined by the court as a 
question preliminary to determination of a question of interpretation or to application of the parol 
evidence rule.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Complete integration.  The definition in Subsection (1) is to be read with the definition of integrated 
agreement in § 209, to reject the assumption sometimes made that because a writing has been worked out 
which is final on some matters, it is to be taken as including all the matters agreed upon.  Even though there is 
an integrated agreement, consistent additional terms not reduced to writing may be shown, unless the court 
finds that the writing was assented to by both parties as a complete and exclusive statement of all the terms.  
Upon such a finding, however, evidence of the alleged making of consistent additional terms must be kept from 
the trier of fact.  See § 216; Uniform Commercial Code § 2-202 Comment 3.
b.  Proof of complete integration.  That a writing was or was not adopted as a completely integrated agreement 
may be proved by any relevant evidence.  A document in the form of a written contract, signed by both parties 
and apparently complete on its face, may be decisive of the issue in the absence of credible contrary evidence.  
But a writing cannot of itself prove its own completeness, and wide latitude must be allowed for inquiry into 
circumstances bearing on the intention of the parties.
Illustration:
1.  A, a college, owns premises which have no toilet or plumbing facilities or heating equipment.  In negotiating 
a lease to B for use of the premises as a radio station, A orally agrees to permit the use of facilities in an 
adjacent building and to provide heat.  The parties subsequently execute a written lease agreement which 
makes no mention of facilities or heat.  The question whether the written lease was adopted as a completely 
integrated agreement is to be decided on the basis of all relevant evidence of the prior and contemporaneous 
conduct and language of the parties.
c.  Partial integration.  It is often clear from the face of a writing that it is incomplete and cannot be more than a 
partially integrated agreement.  Incompleteness may also be shown by other writings, which may or may not 
become part of a completely or partially integrated agreement.  Or it may be shown by any relevant evidence, 
oral or written, that an apparently complete writing never became fully effective, or that it was modified after 
initial adoption.
Illustration:
2.  A writes to B a letter offer containing four provisions.  B replies by letter that three of the provisions are 
satisfactory, but makes a counter proposal as to the fourth.  After further discussion of the fourth provision, the 
parties come to oral agreement on a revision of it, but make no further statements as to the other three terms.  
A's letter is a partially integrated agreement with respect to the first three provisions.
REPORTER'S NOTES

§ 210 Completely and Partially Integrated Agreements
See Reporter's Note to § 209.  The revision is intended to simplify former § 229 by eliminating cross-references 
and to make clear the distinction between completely and partially integrated agreements.
Comment b.  On the so-called Corbin and Williston views as to whether extrinsic evidence is admissable to 
prove the parties' intent as to total or partial integration, see, in addition to the Reporter's Notes to §§ 209 and 
214, Doyle v. Northrop Corp., 455 F. Supp. 1318, 1332-34 (D.N.J. 1978); compare the position of the majority 
in Traudt v. Nebraska Public Power Dist., 197 Neb. 765, 251 N.W.2d 148 (1977), citing former § 240, with that 
of the dissenter, citing this Section in Tentative Draft.  See also Martin Bloom Assoc. v. Manzie, 389 F. Supp. 
848 (D. Nev. 1975). Illustration 1 is based on Golden Gate Corp. v. Barrington College, 98 R.I. 35, 199 A.2d 
586 (1964). See also Bleck v. Stepanich, 64 Ill. App.3d 436, 21 Ill. Dec. 254, 381 N.E.2d 363 (1978).
Comment c.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 229.  See also Kirsch v. Pier Orleans, Inc., 362 
So.2d 1182 (La. Ct. App. 1978); Friestad v. Travelers Indem. Co., 260 Pa. Super. Ct. 178, 393 A.2d 1212 
(1978).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Effect of stipulation, in private building or construction contract, that alterations or extras must be ordered in 
writing.  2 A.L.R.3d 620.
Effect of stipulation, in public building or construction contract, that alterations or extras must be ordered in 
writing.  1 A.L.R.3d 1173.
Admissibility of oral agreement as to specific time for performance where written contract is silent.  85 A.L.R.2d 
1269.
Admissibility of parol evidence to connect signed and unsigned documents relied upon as memorandum to 
satisfy statute of frauds.  81 A.L.R.2d 991.
Admissibility of extrinsic evidence to identify person or persons intended to be designated by the name in which 
a contract is made.  80 A.L.R.2d 1137.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 164
Evidence 442
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 211
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 3- Effect of Adoption of a Writing        
§ 211 Standardized Agreements
(1)  Except as stated in Subsection (3), where a party to an agreement signs or otherwise manifests 
assent to a writing and has reason to believe that like writings are regularly used to embody terms of 
agreements of the same type, he adopts the writing as an integrated agreement with respect to the 
terms included in the writing.
(2)  Such a writing is interpreted wherever reasonable as treating alike all those similarly situated, 
without regard to their knowledge or understanding of the standard terms of the writing.
(3)  Where theother party has reason to believe that the party manifesting such assent would not do so 
if he knew that the writing contained a particular term, the term is not part of the agreement.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Utility of standardization.  Standardization of agreements serves many of the same functions as 
standardization of goods and services; both are essential to a system of mass production and distribution.  
Scarce and costly time and skill can be devoted to a class of transactions rather than to details of individual 
transactions.  Legal rules which would apply in the absence of agreement can be shaped to fit the particular 
type of transaction, and extra copies of the form can be used for purposes such as record-keeping, coordination 
and supervision.  Forms can be tailored to office routines, the training of personnel, and the requirements of 
mechanical equipment.  Sales personnel and customers are freed from attention to numberless variations and 
can focus on meaningful choice among a limited number of significant features: transaction-type, style, quantity, 
price, or the like. Operations are simplified and costs reduced, to the advantage of all concerned.
b.  Assent to unknown terms.  A party who makes regular use of a standardized form of agreement does not 
ordinarily expect his customers to understand or even to read the standard terms.  One of the purposes of 
standardization is to eliminate bargaining over details of individual transactions, and that purpose would not be 
served if a substantial number of customers retained counsel and reviewed the standard terms.  Employees 
regularly using a form often have only a limited understanding of its terms and limited authority to vary them.  
Customers do not in fact ordinarily understand or even read the standard terms.  They trust to the good faith of 
the party using the form and to the tacit representation that like terms are being accepted regularly by others 
similarly situated.  But they understand that they are assenting to the terms not read or not understood, subject 
to such limitations as the law may impose.
c.  Review of unfair terms.  Standardized agreements are commonly prepared by one party.  The customer 
assents to a few terms, typically inserted in blanks on the printed form, and gives blanket assent to the type of 
transaction embodied in the standard form.  He is commonly not represented in the drafting, and the draftsman 
may be tempted to overdraw in the interest of his employer.  The obvious danger of overreaching has resulted 
in government regulation of insurance policies, bills of lading, retail installment sales, small loans, and other 
particular types of contracts.  Regulation sometimes includes administrative review of standard terms, or even 
prescription of terms.  Apart from such regulation, standard terms imposed by one party are enforced.  But 
standard terms may be superseded by separately negotiated or added terms (§ 203), they are construed 
against the draftsman (§ 206), and they are subject to the overriding obligation of good faith (§ 205) and to the 
power of the court to refuse to enforce an unconscionable contract or term (§ 208).  Moreover, various 
contracts and terms are against public policy and unenforceable.  See Chapter 8.

§ 211 Standardized Agreements
d.  Non-contractual documents.  The same document may serve both contractual and other purposes, and a 
party may assent to it for other purposes without understanding that it embodies contract terms.  He may 
nevertheless be bound if he has reason to know that it is used to embody contract terms.  Insurance policies, 
steamship tickets, bills of lading, and warehouse receipts are commonly so obviously contractual in form as to 
give the customer reason to know their character.  But baggage checks or automobile parking lot tickets may 
appear to be mere identification tokens, and a party without knowledge or reason to know that the token 
purports to be a contract is then not bound by terms printed on the token.  Documents such as invoices, 
instructions for use, and the like, delivered after a contract is made, may raise similar problems.
Illustrations:
1.  A delivers a fur coat to B for storage and receives a warehouse receipt which purports on its face to set forth 
the terms of the storage contract.  By accepting the receipt, whether or not A reads it or understands it, A 
assents to its terms.
2.  A pays ten cents and checks a parcel in a parcel room in a bus terminal, and receives a parcel check three 
inches long and two and one-half inches wide.  The check bears an identifying number and the word "contract," 
both conspicuous, and contractual terms in fine print, but A does not read it or know of the terms until later.  
The terms are not part of the checking agreement.
3.  A sells plant bulbs to B.  Later A delivers the bulbs with an invoice containing contractual language.  B writes 
on a copy of the invoice "picked up October 27th" and signs his name.  The invoice terms are not part of the 
contract.
e.  Equality of treatment.  One who assents to standard contract terms normally assumes that others are doing 
likewise and that all who do so are on an equal footing.  In the case of a public utility, that assumption is fortified 
by statutory and common law limitations on discrimination among customers; a term prescribed by statute or 
regulation in the case of an insurance policy also carries an assurance of equal treatment.  Apart from 
government regulation, courts in construing and applying a standardized contract seek to effectuate the 
reasonable expectations of the average member of the public who accepts it.  The result may be to give the 
advantage of a restrictive reading to some sophisticated customers who contracted with knowledge of an 
ambiguity or dispute.
Illustration:
4.  A, an insurance company, issues an insurance policy to B covering injuries "by accidental means." A clause 
in the policy excludes "disability or other loss resulting from or contributed to by any disease or ailment." B 
believes himself to be in good health, but has a latent Parkinson's disease.  Later an accidental blow activates 
the disease into a disabling condition.  B is covered by the policy without regard to his knowledge or 
understanding of the quoted language at the time of contracting.
f.  Terms excluded.  Subsection (3) applies to standardized agreements the general principles stated in §§ 20 
and 201.  Although customers typically adhere to standardized agreements and are bound by them without 
even appearing to know the standard terms in detail, they are not bound to unknown terms which are beyond 
the range of reasonable expectation.  A debtor who delivers a check to his creditor with the amount blank does 
not authorize the insertion of an infinite figure.  Similarly, a party who adheres to the other party's standard 
terms does not assent to a term if the other party has reason to believe that the adhering party would not have 
accepted the agreement if he had known that the agreement contained the particular term.  Such a belief or 
assumption may be shown by the prior negotiations or inferred from the circumstances.  Reason to believe may 
be inferred from the fact that the term is bizarre or oppressive, from the fact that it eviscerates the non-standard 
terms explicitly agreed to, or from the fact that it eliminates the dominant purpose of the transaction.  The 
inference is reinforced if the adhering party never had an opportunity to read the term, or if it is illegible or 
otherwise hidden from view.  This rule is closely related to the policy against unconscionable terms and the rule 
of interpretation against the draftsman.  See §§ 206 and 208.
Illustrations:
5.  A applies to B, an insurance company, for burglary insurance.  B issues to A a written binder by which B 
"agrees to insure property as herein described for amounts subscribed" until a policy is issued.  The policy in 
ordinary use by B includes a provision for cancellation by B on written notice and requires suit within one year 
after loss.  Those terms are part of the contract.

§ 211 Standardized Agreements
6.  A ships goods via B, a carrier.  B carries an insurance policy with C, an insurance company, and with C's 
authority issues to A a certificate that A's shipment is insured under the policy.  The policy contains a clause 
excluding coverage of trips on the Great Lakes unless approved by D, an individual, but this clause is not 
referred to in the certificate or known to A.  It is not part of the contract between A and C.
7.  A sends to B an invitation to bid on ship repairs.  Annexed to the invitation are contract terms, including a 
promise by B to save A harmless from certain claims.  B's bid has printed at the top, in print which cannot be 
read without a magnifying glass, a clause negating liability for personal injuries beyond that imposed by law.  A 
accepts the bid.  The clause in the bid is ineffective to negate B's obligation to save A harmless.
8.  A sells an electric generator to B by a written contract incorporating typewritten specifications and printed 
standard terms.  The specifications include "1136 kilowatts," and the standard terms disclaim any warranties 
not set forth in the documents.  The disclaimer does not impair A's warranty that the generator will produce 
1136 kilowatts.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-316(1).
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  Compare former § 70.  See Llewellyn, The Common Law Tradition: Deciding Appeals 
362-71 (1960); Llewellyn, Book Review, 52 Harv. L. Rev. 700 (1939); Macaulay, Private Legislation and the 
Duty to Read, 19 Vand. L. Rev. 1051 (1966); Patterson, The Interpretation and Construction of Contracts, 64 
Colum. L. Rev. 833, 855-62 (1964); Murray, The Parol Evidence Process and Standardized Agreements Under 
the Restatement, (Second) of Contracts, 123 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1342 (1975); Dugan, Standardized Form Contracts 
-- An Introduction, 24 Wayne L. Rev. 1307 (1978); 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 559A-I (Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  On the utility of standardized agreements, see Kessler, Contracts of Adhesion -- Some Thoughts 
About Freedom of Contract, 43 Colum. L. Rev. 629 (1943); Macauley, Non-Contractual Relations in Business: 
A Preliminary Study, 28 Am. Sociological Rev. (1963); Cohen, Book Review, 46 Harv. L. Rev. 553 (1933); 
Llewellyn, Book Review, 52 Harv. L. Rev. 700 (1939).
Comment b.  When an employee of the dominant party explains a term in a standardized agreement to the 
other party, parol evidence may be admitted to show the explanation.  Rempel v. Nationwide Life Ins. Co., 471 
Pa. 404, 370 A.2d 366 (1977) (insurance agent incorrectly described coverage of policy); Walker v. Traughber, 
351 So.2d 917 (Ala. Ct. Civ. App. 1977) (employment agency employee said agency would guarantee that job 
would last at least ninety days; contract said: "NO TRIAL JOBS.  This agency only handles permanent 
positions." -- court found the explanation part of preliminary discussions and alternatively found the term 
ambiguous).
Comment d.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 90-90E (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 33 (1963).  Illustration 1 
is based on D'Aloisio v. Morton's, Inc., 342 Mass. 231, 172 N.E.2d 819 (1961); cf.  George v. Bekins Van & 
Storage Co., 33 Cal.2d 834, 205 P.2d 1037 (1949); United States Fire Ins. Co. v. Paramount Fur Serv. Inc., 168 
Ohio St. 431, 156 N.E.2d 121 (1959); see Annot., 142 A.L.R. 776 (1943); compare Illustrations 1 and 2 to 
former § 70.  Illustration 2 is based on Klar v. H. & M. Parcel Room, Inc., 270 A.D. 538, 61 N.Y.S.2d 285 
(1946), aff'd mem., 296 N.Y. 1044, 73 N.E.2d 912 (1947); cf.  Kergald v. Armstrong Transfer Exp. Co., 330 
Mass. 254, 113 N.E.2d 53 (1953) (baggage check of intrastate common carrier).  Illustration 3 is based on 
Diepeveen v. Larry Vogt, Inc., 27 N.J. Super. 254, 99 A.2d 329 (1953); see 2 Williston, Sales § 13-5 (4th ed. 
1974); cf.  Elgin Mills, Inc. v. Melcher, 181 Neb. 17, 146 N.W.2d 573 (1966) (warehouse receipt did not modify 
prior sale contract).
Comment e.  Illustration 4 is based on Kievit v. Loyal Protective Life Ins. Co., 34 N.J. 475, 170 A.2d 22 (1961); 
see Annot., 84 A.L.R.2d 176 (1962); cf.  Prudential Ins. Co. v. Lamme, 83 Nev. 146, 425 P.2d 346 (1967) 
(insurance binder conditional on insurability); C & J Fertilizer, Inc. v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., 227 N.W.2d 169 (Iowa 
1975) (meaning of "burglary"; court cited this Comment in Tentative Draft); Bowler v. Fidelity & Cas. Co., 53 
N.J. 313, 250 A.2d 580 (1969) ("total and permanent disability"); Annot., 24 A.L.R.3d 8 (1969) (same); Keeton, 
Insurance Law Rights at Variance with Policy Provisions, 83 Harv. L. Rev. 961, 974-77 (1970).
Comment f.  Illustration 5 is based on Sherri v. National Sur. Co., 243 N.Y. 266, 153 N.E. 70 (1926); cf.  Lipman 
v. Niagara Fire Ins. Co., 121 N.Y. 454, 24 N.E. 699 (1890); Brandyce v. Globe & Rutgers Fire Ins. Co., 252 N.Y. 
69, 168 N.E. 832 (1929) (marine policy; clause requiring suit within one year after loss); New York & Oriental 
S.S. Co. v. Automobile Ins. Co., 37 F.2d 461 (2d Cir. 1930) (same); National Equip. Rental, Ltd. v. Szukhent, 
375 U.S. 311 (1964) (agency to receive service of process).  Illustration 6 rejects the decision in F. S. Royster 

§ 211 Standardized Agreements
Guano Co. v. Globe & Rutgers Fire Ins. Co., 252 N.Y. 75, 168 N.E. 834 (1929); cf.  F. S. Royster Guano Co. v. 
W. E. Hedger Co., 48 F.2d 86 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 283 U.S. 858 (1931); Phoenix Ins. Co. v. DeMonchy, 141 
L.T.R. (n.s.) 439 (H.L. 1929); see Thayer, Marine Insurance Certificates, 49 Harv. L. Rev. 239 (1935). Compare 
also Sohns v. Beavis, 200 N.Y. 268, 93 N.E. 935 (1911) (inadequate reference in auction terms to building 
restrictions "not within reason or precedent").  Illustration 7 is based on California Tanker Co. v. Todd Shipyards 
Corp., 206 F. Supp. 872 (S.D.N.Y. 1962); see Vogel & Bernstein, Fine Print, 21 Bus. Law 544 (1966); Note, 64 
Harv. L. Rev. 494 (1950). Illustration 8 is based on Fairbanks, Morse & Co. v. Consolidated Fisheries Co., 190 
F.2d 817 (3d Cir. 1951). On a party's beliefs or assumptions based on prior negotiations, see Reporter's Note to 
Comment b; C & J Fertilizer, Inc. v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., supra, quoting this Comment in Tentative Draft.  In 
Grant v. North River Ins. Co., 453 F. Supp. 1361, 1367 (N.D. Ind. 1978), the court found that an insurer which 
had insured a municipal corporation had used a form of policy developed for private corporations.  Since the 
insurer had chosen the form, the court construed all ambiguities against it.  See also § 206.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Requirements contracts under § 2-306(1) of Uniform Commercial Code.  96 A.L.R.3d 1275.
Modern status as to duration of employment where contract specifies no term but fixes daily or longer 
compensation.  93 A.L.R.3d 659.
Employer's termination of professional athlete's services as constituting breach of employment contract.  57 
A.L.R.3d 257.
Validity and construction of restrictive covenant not to compete ancillary to franchise agreement.  50 A.L.R.3d 
746.
Effect on compensation of architect or building contractor or express provision in private building contract 
limiting the cost of the building.  20 A.L.R.3d 778.
Effect of stipulation, in private building or construction contract, that alterations or extras must be ordered in 
writing.  2 A.L.R.3d 620.
Effect of stipulation, in public building or construction contract, that alterations or extras must be ordered in 
writing.  1 A.L.R.3d 1173.
Conditions printed on confirmation slips as binding on customers of stock or commodity broker.  71 A.L.R.2d 
1089.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 152
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 212
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 3- Effect of Adoption of a Writing        
§ 212 Interpretation of Integrated Agreement
(1)  The interpretation of an integrated agreement is directed to the meaning of the terms of the writing 
or writings in the light of the circumstances, in accordance with the rules stated in this Chapter.
(2)  A question of interpretation of an integrated agreement is to be determined by the trier of fact if it 
depends on the credibility of extrinsic evidence or on a choice among reasonable inferences to be 
drawn from extrinsic evidence.  Otherwise a question of interpretation of an integrated agreement is to 
be determined as a question of law.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  "Objective" and "subjective" meaning.  Interpretation of contracts deals with the meaning given to language 
and other conduct by the parties rather than with meanings established by law.  But the relevant intention of a 
party is that manifested by him rather than any different undisclosed intention.  In cases of misunderstanding, 
there may be a contract in accordance with the meaning of one party if the other knows or has reason to know 
of the misunderstanding and the first party does not.  See §§ 200, 201.  The meaning of one party may prevail 
as to one term and the meaning of the other as to another term; thus the contract as a whole may not be 
entirely in accordance with the understanding of either.  When a party is thus held to a meaning of which he 
had reason to know, it is sometimes said that the "objective" meaning of his language or other conduct prevails 
over his "subjective" meaning.  Even so, the operative meaning is found in the transaction and its context rather 
than in the law or in the usages of people other than the parties.
Illustrations:
1.  In an integrated agreement A promises to sell and B to buy described real estate.  A intends to sell 
Blackacre; B intends to buy Whiteacre.  The writing reasonably describes Greenacre, and neither party has any 
more reason that the other to know of the misdescription.  There is no contract.
2.  In an integrated agreement A agrees to sell and B to buy certain patent rights.  A intends to sell only the 
rights under the British patent on a certain invention; B intends also to buy rights under American and French 
patents.  If A has reason to know that B intends to buy the American rights, B has reason to know that A does 
not intend to sell the French rights, and the language used can be read to cover the British and American but 
not the French rights, that may be determined to be the proper interpretation.
b.  Plain meaning and extrinsic evidence.  It is sometimes said that extrinsic evidence cannot change the plain 
meaning of a writing, but meaning can almost never be plain except in a context.  Accordingly, the rule stated in 
Subsection (1) is not limited to cases where it is determined that the language used is ambiguous.  Any 
determination of meaning or ambiguity should only be made in the light of the relevant evidence of the situation 
and relations of the parties, the subject matter of the transaction, preliminary negotiations and statements made 
therein, usages of trade, and the course of dealing between the parties.  See §§ 202, 219-23.  But after the 
transaction has been shown in all its length and breadth, the words of an integrated agreement remain the most 
important evidence of intention.  Standards of preference among reasonable meanings are stated in §§ 203, 
206, 207.
Illustrations:
3.  A agrees orally with B, a stockbroker, that in transactions between them "abracadabra" shall mean X 
Company.  A sends a signed written order to B to buy 100 shares "abracadabra," and B buys 100 shares of X 
Company.  The parties are bound in accordance with the oral agreement.

§ 212 Interpretation of Integrated Agreement
4.  A and B are engaged in buying and selling shares of stock from each other, and agree orally to conceal the 
nature of their dealings by using the word "sell" to mean "buy" and using the word "buy" to mean "sell." A sends 
a written offer to B to "sell" certain shares, and B accepts.  The parties are bound in accordance with the oral 
agreement.
c.  Statements of intention.  The rule of Subsection (1) permits reference to the negotiations of the parties, 
including statements of intention and even positive promises, so long as they are used to show the meaning of 
the writing.  A contrary rule in the interpretation of wills is sometimes stated broadly enough to apply to the 
interpretation of contracts, but that rule is subject to exceptions and rests in part on the more rigorous formal 
requirements to which wills are subject.  Statements of a contracting party subsequent to the adoption of an 
integration are admissible against him to show his understanding of the meaning asserted by the other party.
Illustrations:
5.  In an integrated agreement A promises B to insert B's "business card" in A's "advertising chart" for a price to 
be paid when the chart is "published." The quoted terms are to be read in the light of the circumstances known 
to the parties, including their oral statements as to their meaning.
6.  In an integrated agreement A contracts to sell "my horse," and B contracts to buy it.  A owns two horses.  It 
may be shown by oral evidence, including statements of the parties, that both A and B meant the same horse.
d.  "Question of law."  Analytically, what meaning is attached to a word or other symbol by one or more people 
is a question of fact.  But general usage as to the meaning of words in the English language is commonly a 
proper subject for judicial notice without the aid of evidence extrinsic to the writing.  Historically, moreover, 
partly perhaps because of the fact that jurors were often illiterate, questions of interpretation of written 
documents have been treated as questions of law in the sense that they are decided by the trial judge rather 
than by the jury.  Likewise, since an appellate court is commonly in as good a position to decide such questions 
as the trial judge, they have been treated as questions of law for purposes of appellate review.  Such treatment 
has the effect of limiting the power of the trier of fact to exercise a dispensing power in the guise of a finding of 
fact, and thus contributes to the stability and predictability of contractual relations.  In cases of standardized 
contracts such as insurance policies, it also provides a method of assuring that like cases will be decided alike.
e.  Evaluation of extrinsic evidence.  Even though an agreement is not integrated, or even though the meaning 
of an integrated agreement depends on extrinsic evidence, a question of interpretation is not left to the trier of 
fact where the evidence is so clear that no reasonable person would determine the issue in any way but one.  
But if the issue depends on evidence outside the writing, and the possible inferences are conflicting, the choice 
is for the trier of fact.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Former §§ 230 and 231 are entirely rewritten to accord with Uniform Commercial Code §§ 1-205, 2-202 and 2-
208.  Subsection (2) is new.  See 4 Williston, Contracts §§ 606-17 (3d ed. 1961); 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 535-
45, 554-60, 579 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 9 Wigmore, Evidence §§ 2458-78 (3d ed. 1940); Patterson, The 
Interpretation and Construction of Contracts, 64 Colum. L. Rev. 833 (1964).
Comment a.  Supporting the proposition that a party's external manifestations must prevail over his private and 
unexpressed meaning are, e.g., Grant v. North River Ins. Co., 453 F. Supp. 1361 (N.D. Ind. 1978); and 
Goddard v. South Bay Union High School Dist., 79 Cal. App.3d 98, 144 Cal. Rptr. 701 (1978). Cases making a 
bald "objective-subjective" distinction often refuse to go further unless an ambiguity is facially apparent, e.g., 
Berman, Fichtner & Mitchell, Inc. v. Kahn, 573 S.W.2d 869 (Tex. Civ. App. 1978); Kreis v. Venture Out in 
America, Inc., 375 F. Supp. 482 (E.D. Tenn. 1973). This approach is deemed simplistic, for the reason stated in 
this Comment and Comment b.  Illustration 1 is new; see 3 Corbin, Contracts § 539 (1960); § 20.  Illustration 2 
is a revision of Illustration 1 to former § 230; compare Preston v. Luck, 27 Ch. Div. 497 (1884).
Comment b.  See generally Stoops v. Smith, 100 Mass. 63 (1868); Saltzman v. Barson, 239 N.Y. 332, 146 N.E. 
618 (1925); Hurst v. W.J. Lake & Co., 141 Or. 306, 16 P.2d 627 (1932); National City Bank of N.Y. v. Goess, 
130 F.2d 376 (2d Cir. 1942). Anderson v. Kammeier, 262 N.W.2d 366 (Minn. 1978) (quoting from this Comment 
in Tentative Draft).  Compare the debate between the majority and dissent in C. & A. Constr. Co. v. Benning 
Constr. Co., 509 S.W.2d 302 (Ark. 1974), over the role of extrinsic evidence in ascertaining "latent ambiguities" 
in written instruments; and the discussion of this issue in Intertherm, Inc. v. Coronet Imperial Corp., 558 S.W.2d 
344, 350-51 (Mo. Ct. App. 1977). The "plain meaning" approach rejected by this Section is exemplified by 

§ 212 Interpretation of Integrated Agreement
Canter v. Lindsey, 575 S.W.2d 331 (Tex. Civ. App. 1978); and Kreis v. Venture Out in America, Inc., 375 F. 
Supp. 482 (E.D. Tenn. 1973). Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 231.  Illustration 4 reverses the 
result of Illustration 2 to former § 231; see 3 Corbin, Contracts § 540 (1960); 9 Wigmore, Evidence §§ 2461-63 
(3d ed. 1940); cf.  Winegar v. Smith Inv. Co., 590 P.2d 348 (Utah 1979).
Comment c.  The rule of exclusion stated in former § 230 is abandoned.  See 3 Corbin, Contracts § 543 (1960 
& Supp. 1980).  Illustration 5 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 230 and Stoops v. Smith, 100 Mass. 63 
(1868). Illustration 6 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 231.
Comments d and e.  See 4 Williston, Contracts § 616 (3d ed. 1961); 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 554, 595 (1960 & 
Supp. 1980); 9 Wigmore, Evidence § 2556 (3d ed. 1940); C & J Fertilizer, Inc. v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., 227 
N.W.2d 169 (Iowa 1975), citing this Section in Tentative Draft; Winegar v. Smith Inv. Co., 590 P.2d 348 (Utah 
1979); Meyers v. Selznick Co., 373 F.2d 218 (2d Cir. 1966).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Excess of payment for one period as applicable to subsequent period under contract or mortgage providing for 
periodic payments.  89 A.L.R.3d 937.
Person who signs contract but is not named in body thereof as party to contract and liable thereunder.  94 
A.L.R.2d 691.
Admissibility of parol evidence as to limitation on cost of structure in builder's action on written cost-plus-fee 
construction contract.  84 A.L.R.2d 1324.
Implied obligation of purchaser or lessee to conduct search for, or to develop or work premises for, minerals 
other than oil and gas.  76 A.L.R.2d 721.
What constitutes "accounts receivable" under contract selling, assigning, pledging, or reserving such items.  41 
A.L.R.2d 1395.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 150, 176(1, 3)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 213
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 3- Effect of Adoption of a Writing        
§ 213 Effect of Integrated Agreement on Prior Agreements (Parol Evidence 
Rule)
(1)  A binding integrated agreement discharges prior agreements to the extent that it is inconsistent 
with them.
(2)  A binding completely integrated agreement discharges prior agreements to the extent that they are 
within its scope.
(3)  An integrated agreement that is not binding or that is voidable and avoided does not discharge a 
prior agreement.  But an integrated agreement, even though not binding, may be effective to render 
inoperative a term which would have been part of the agreement if it had not been integrated.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Parol evidence rule.  This Section states what is commonly known as the parol evidence rule.  It is not a rule 
of evidence but a rule of substantive law.  Nor is it a rule of interpretation; it defines the subject matter of 
interpretation.  It renders inoperative prior written agreements as well as prior oral agreements.  Where writings 
relating to the same subject matter are assented to as parts of one transaction, both form part of the integrated 
agreement.  Where an agreement is partly oral and partly written, the writing is at most a partially integrated 
agreement.  See § 209.
b.  Inconsistent terms.  Whether a binding agreement is completely integrated or partially integrated, it 
supersedes inconsistent terms of prior agreements.  To apply this rule, the court must make preliminary 
determinations that there is an integrated agreement and that it is inconsistent with the term in question.  See § 
209.  Those determinations are made in accordance with all relevant evidence, and require interpretation both 
of the integrated agreement and of the prior agreement.  The existence of the prior agreement may be a 
circumstance which sheds light on the meaning of the integrated agreement, but the integrated agreement must 
be given a meaning to which its language is reasonably susceptible when read in the light of all the 
circumstances.  See §§ 212, 214.
Illustrations:
1.  D Corporation regularly borrows money from C Bank.  S, the principal stockholder in D, offers to guarantee 
payment if C will increase the amounts lent.  There is a bank custom to make such loans only on adequate 
collateral supplied by the borrower, and C promises S to follow the custom.  S then executes a written 
agreement with C guaranteeing payment of future loans to D "with or without security." If the written agreement 
is a binding integrated agreement, C's prior promise is discharged.
2.  A orally agrees to sell a city lot to B.  The city is installing a sidewalk in front of the lot, and A orally agrees to 
pay the cost to be assessed by the city in an amount not exceeding $ 45.  B then retains a lawyer to draw up a 
written agreement, and A and B execute it, A without reading it.  The agreement provides that A will pay all 
costs of the installation of the sidewalk, but does not mention any dollar limit.  If the written agreement is a 
binding integrated agreement, any agreement for a $ 45 limit is discharged.
c.  Scope of a completely integrated agreement.  Where the parties have adopted a writing as a complete and 
exclusive statement of the terms of the agreement, even consistent additional terms are superseded.  See § 
216.  But there may still be a separate agreement between the same parties which is not affected.  To apply the 
rule of Subsection (2) the court in addition to determining that there is an integrated agreement and that it is 

§ 213 Effect of Integrated Agreement on Prior Agreements (Parol Evidence Rule)
completely integrated, must determine that the asserted prior agreement is within the scope of the integrated 
agreement.  Those determinations are made in accordancewith all relevant evidence, and require interpretation 
both of the integrated agreement and of the prior agreement.
Illustrations:
3.  In May A and B exchange properties and agree orally that A will make certain repairs on the property to be 
conveyed by A to B, the repairs to be finished by October 1.  A and B then draw up and sign a memorandum of 
the repair agreement, specifying all the terms except that the memorandum is silent as to time of performance.  
If the memorandum is a binding completely integrated agreement, the agreement to finish by October 1 is 
discharged, and the repairs are to be finished within a reasonable time.  The oral agreement as to October 1 
may be relevant evidence as to what is a reasonable time.
4.  A and B make an oral agreement for the sale of land and a hotel thereon, together with the hotel furniture.  
They employ a lawyer to prepare a written contract.  He does so, and they sign it.  It contains no mention of 
personal property.  The agreement as to furniture is discharged if there is a binding completely integrated 
agreement covering the entire transaction, but not if only the part of the agreement relating to real property is 
integrated.
d.  Effect of non-binding integration.  An integrated agreement does not supersede prior agreements if it is not 
binding, for example, by reason of lack of consideration, or if it is voidable and avoided.  The circumstances 
may, however, show an agreement to discharge a prior agreement without regard to whether the integrated 
agreement is binding, and such an agreement may be effective.  Moreover, an integrated agreement may be 
effective to render inoperative an oral term which would have been part of the agreement if it had not been 
integrated.  The integrated agreement may then be without consideration, even though the inoperative oral term 
would have furnished consideration.
Illustrations:
5.  A and B enter into a contract that B will build a house on A's land for a price.  Later they enter into an oral 
contract by which B promises to add a porch and A promises to pay an extra $ 2,000.  Still later they enter into 
an integrated agreement in which B promises to build according to the original plans and A promises to pay the 
extra $ 2,000.  The integrated agreement is not binding for lack of consideration, and the oral intermediate 
agreement is not discharged.
6.  A and B enter into a contract that B will build a house on A's land for a price.  Later B offers to add a porch if 
A will sign a new contract.  They then enter into an integrated agreement in which B promises to build 
according to the original plans and A promises to pay an extra $ 2,000.  If the integrated agreement is 
inconsistent with the porch offer, or if it is a completely integrated agreement and the matter of the porch is 
within its scope, the integrated agreement is effective to discharge the porch offer but is not binding for lack of 
consideration.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section carries forward part of former § 237, but leaves to §§ 214-16 the effect of an integration on 
contemporaneous oral agreements.
As to the parol evidence rule generally, see 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 573-96 (1960 & Supp. 1980); McCormick, 
Evidence § 233 (2d ed. 1972); Wigmore, Evidence §§ 2429-49 (3d ed. 1940 & Supp. 1979); 4 Williston, 
Contracts §§ 631-47 (3d ed. 1961); Calamari & Perillo, A Plea for a Uniform Parol Evidence Rule and Principles 
of Contract Interpretation, 42 Ind. L.J. 333 (1967); Corbin, The Interpretation of Words and the Parol Evidence 
Rule, 50 Cornell L. Q. 161 (1965); Farnsworth, "Meaning" in the Law of Contracts, 76 Yale L.J. 939 (1967); 
Murray, The Parol Evidence Rule: A Clarification, 4 Duquesne L. Rev. 337 (1966); Sweet, Contract Making and 
Parol Evidence: Diagnosis and Treatment of a Sick Rule, 53 Cornell L. Rev. 1036 (1968).
Comment a.  That the parol evidence rule is a rule of substantive law and not one of evidence or interpretation, 
see Doyle v. Northrop Corp., 455 F. Supp. 1318, 1332-33 (D.N.J. 1978); David Nassif Assoc. v. United States, 
214 Ct. Cl. 407, 557 F.2d 249 (1977) (citing this Section in Tentative Draft).  Both opinions emphasize that 
integration must be found for the rule to apply.
Comment b.  As to the basic rule that an integrated binding agreement discharges a prior inconsistent one, see, 
e.g., Conn Organ Corp. v. Walt Whitman Music Studios, 67 A.D.2d 995, 413 N.Y.S.2d 725 (1979). Illustration 1 
is based on Chase Manhattan Bank v. May, 311 F.2d 117 (3d Cir. 1962), cert. denied, 372 U.S. 930 (1963). 

§ 213 Effect of Integrated Agreement on Prior Agreements (Parol Evidence Rule)
Illustration 2 is based on Hanes v. Mitchell, 78 N.D. 341, 49 N.W.2d 606 (1951); cf.  Joseph v. Mahoney Corp., 
367 S.W.2d 213 (Tex. Civ. App. 1963).
Comment c.  Illustration 3 is based on Hayden v. Hoadley, 94 Vt. 345, 111 A. 343 (1920). Illustration 4 is based 
on Brown v. Oliver, 123 Kan. 711, 256 P. 1008 (1927); cf.  Bretto v. Levine, 50 Minn. 168, 52 N.W. 525 (1892). 
But cf.  Mitchill v. Lath, 247 N.Y. 377, 160 N.E. 646 (1928) (prior oral agreement discharged if parties would 
"ordinarily be expected to embody" it in the writing).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Modern status as to duration of employment where contract specifies no term but fixes daily or longer 
compensation.  93 A.L.R.3d 659.
Parol exception of fixtures from conveyance or lease.  29 A.L.R.3d 1441.
What 12-month period constitutes "year" or "calendar year" as used in public enactment, contract, or other 
written instrument.  5 A.L.R.3d 584.
Person who signs contract but is not named in body thereof as party to contract and liable thereunder.  94 
A.L.R.2d 691.
Admissibility of oral agreement as to specific time for performance where written contract is silent.  85 A.L.R.2d 
1269.
Admissibility of parol evidence as to limitation on cost of structure in builder's action on written cost-plus-fee 
construction contract.  84 A.L.R.2d 1324.
Admissibility of parol evidence to connect signed and unsigned documents relied upon as memorandum to 
satisfy statute of frauds.  81 A.L.R.2d 991.
Admissibility of extrinsic evidence to identify person or persons intended to be designated by the name in which 
a contract is made.  80 A.L.R.2d 1137.
What constitutes "accounts receivable" under contract selling, assigning, pledging, or reserving such items.  41 
A.L.R.2d 1395.
Meaning of term "radius" employed in contract, statute, or ordinance as descriptive of area, location, or 
distance.  10 A.L.R.2d 605.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 245
Evidence 442
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 214
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 3- Effect of Adoption of a Writing        
§ 214 Evidence of Prior or Contemporaneous Agreements and Negotiations
Agreements and negotiations prior to or contemporaneous with the adoption of a writing are 
admissible in evidence to establish
(a)  that the writing is or is not an integrated agreement;
(b)  that the integrated agreement, if any, is completely or partially integrated;
(c)  the meaning of the writing, whether or not integrated;
(d)  illegality, fraud, duress, mistake, lack of consideration, or other invalidating cause;
(e)  ground for granting or denying rescission, reformation, specific performance, or other remedy.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Integrated agreement and completely integrated agreement.  Whether a writing has been adopted as an 
integrated agreement and, if so, whether the agreement is completely or partially integrated are questions 
determined by the court preliminary to determination of a question of interpretation or to application of the parol 
evidence rule.  See §§ 209-13.  Writings do not prove themselves; ordinarily, if there is dispute, there must be 
testimony that there was a signature or other manifestation of assent.  The preliminary determination is made in 
accordance with all relevant evidence, including the circumstances in which the writing was made or adopted.  
It may require preliminary interpretation of the writing; the court must then consider the evidence which is 
relevant to the question of interpretation.
b.  Interpretation.  Words, written or oral, cannot apply themselves to the subject matter.  The expressions and 
general tenor of speech used in negotiations are admissible to show the conditions existing when the writing 
was made, the application of the words, and the meaning or meanings of the parties.  Even though words seem 
on their face to have only a single possible meaning, other meanings often appear when the circumstances are 
disclosed.  In cases of misunderstanding, there must be inquiry into the meaning attached to the words by each 
party and into what each knew or had reason to know.  See § 201.
Illustrations:
1.  A and B in an integrated contract agree that A shall serve as captain of B's ship, and shall have a certain 
rate of pay instead of "privilege and primage." Previous negotiations showing that the meaning to the parties of 
the quoted words when used was the privilege of transporting goods in the captain's cabin establish that as the 
meaning in the contract.
2.  In an integrated contract with A, B promises to buy "your wool." Previous negotiations of the parties related 
to both wool from A's sheep and wool that A had contracted to buy from other persons.  The negotiations are 
admissible to establish both classes as the meaning of the words "your wool" in the contract.
3.  A, in an integrated contract with B, promises B to sell certain goods to be manufactured by A, and B 
promises to pay the "total cost." Previous negotiations may establish the meaning of "total cost."
4.  A and B make an integrated contract by which A promises to sell and B to buy goods "ex Peerless." 
Evidence is admissible to show that there are two ships of that name, which one each party meant, and, in case 
of misunderstanding, whether either had knowledge or reason to know of the other's meaning.

§ 214 Evidence of Prior or Contemporaneous Agreements and Negotiations
c.  Invalidating cause.  What appears to be a complete and binding integrated agreement may be a forgery, a 
joke, a sham, or an agreement without consideration, or it may be voidable for fraud, duress, mistake, or the 
like, or it may be illegal.  Such invalidating causes need not and commonly do not appear on the face of the 
writing.  They are not affected even by a "merger" clause.  See Comment e to § 216.
Illustrations:
5.  A and B make an integrated agreement by which A promises to complete an unfinished building according 
to certain plans and specifications, and B promises to pay A $ 2,000 for so doing.  It may be shown that, by a 
contract made previously with B, A had promised to erect and complete the building for $ 10,000; that he had 
not fully completed it though paid the whole price.  This evidence is admissible to show that there is no 
consideration for B's new promise, since A is promising no more than he is bound by his original contract to 
perform.
6.  A and B make an integrated agreement by which A promises to sell and B promises to buy a large quantity 
of rifles.  It may be shown that A and B had previously agreed that the rifles when bought by B should be used 
in fomenting a rebellion in violation of law.
d.  Remedies.  A contract which is fully enforceable in an action for damages may be subject to equitable 
remedies such as rescission or reformation by reason of fraud, mistake or the like.  Specific performance may 
be denied by reason of oppression or unfairness, or other remedies may be withheld or limited where the 
contract or a term is unconscionable.  See § 208.  Evidence of the circumstances in which the contract was 
made may be relevant to such remedial issues, even though it also shows an agreement or proposal 
superseded by a later integrated contract.
Illustration:
7.  A and B make an integrated agreement by which A promises to sell and B promises to buy a tract of land 
described in the agreement.  Owing to a mutual mistake the description is not an accurate one of the tract in 
regard to which both A and B were bargaining.  Prior oral agreements may be shown to establish the right to 
reformation of the integration so that it shall accurately describe the tract intended.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Paragraphs (a) and (b) are new and are designed to accord with new §§ 209 and 210.  Paragraph (c) is revised 
to accord with new § 201.  Compare former §§ 230, 231 and 242.  The balance of the Section carries forward 
the substance of former § 238.  See 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 543, 573, 583 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 4 Williston, 
Contracts §§ 630, 637 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment a.  That parol evidence is admissible to prove non-integration, see Federal Deposit Ins. Co. v. First 
Mortgage Inv., 76 Wis.2d 151, 250 N.W.2d 362 (1977); Rempel v. Nationwide Life Ins. Co., 471 Pa. 404, 370 
A.2d 366 (1977).
Comment b.  For the proposition that there need not be a finding of ambiguity before parol evidence is admitted 
to interpret an integrated agreement, see Anderson v. Kammeier, 262 N.W.2d 366 (Minn. 1978), citing this 
Section.  The view that ambiguity is a prerequisite is exemplified by League v. Giffin, 347 So.2d 1332 (Ala. 
1977); Kreis v. Venture Out in America, Inc., 375 F. Supp. 482 (E.D. Tenn. 1973); and Quenzer v. Quenzer, 
225 Kan. 83, 587 P.2d 880 (1978). Illustrations 1-3 are based on Illustrations 1-3 to former § 242; see Olds v. 
Jamison, 195 Neb. 388, 238 N.W.2d 459 (1976). Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 238.
Comment c.  That fraud, mistake, voidness or lack of consideration may be shown by extrinsic evidence see 
the discussions in League v. Giffin, 347 So.2d 1332 (Ala. 1977); Iafolla v. Douglas Pocahontas Coal Corp.,     
W. Va.    , 250 S.E.2d 128 (1978); Miller v. Bare, 457 F. Supp. 1359 (W.D. Pa. 1978); and Reimann v. Saturday 
Eve. Post Co., 464 F. Supp. 214 (S.D.N.Y. 1979). Compare the majority and dissenting opinions in Magi 
Comms., Inc., v. Jac-Lu Assoc., 65 A.D.2d 727, 410 N.Y.S.2d 297 (1978). Illustrations 5 and 6 are based on 
Illustrations 2 and 3 to former § 238.
Comment d.  Illustration 7 is based on Illustration 4 to former § 238.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:

§ 214 Evidence of Prior or Contemporaneous Agreements and Negotiations
Modern status as to duration of employment where contract specifies no term but fixes daily or longer 
compensation.  93 A.L.R.3d 659.
Validity and construction of preincorporation agreement between promoters as to future employment.  66 
A.L.R.3d 1138.
Parol exception of fixtures from conveyance or lease.  29 A.L.R.3d 1441.
What 12-month period constitutes "year" or "calendar year" as used in public enactment, contract, or other 
written instrument.  5 A.L.R.3d 584.
Revocation, prior to execution of formal written contract, of vote or decision of public body awarding contract to 
bidder.  3 A.L.R.3d 864.
Admissibility of oral agreement as to specific time for performance where written contract is silent.  85 A.L.R.2d 
1269.
Admissibility of parol evidence as to limitation on cost of structure in builder's action on written cost-plus-fee 
construction contract.  84 A.L.R.2d 1324.
Admissibility of parol evidence to connect signed and unsigned documents relied upon as memorandum to 
satisfy statute of frauds.  81 A.L.R.2d 991.
Admissibility of extrinsic evidence to identify person or persons intended to be designated by the name in which 
a contract is made.  80 A.L.R.2d 1137.
What constitutes "accounts receivable" under contract selling, assigning, pledging, or reserving such items.  41 
A.L.R.2d 1395.
Meaning of term "radius" employed in contract, statute, or ordinance as descriptive of area, location, or 
distance.  10 A.L.R.2d 605.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Evidence 439-444
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 215
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 3- Effect of Adoption of a Writing        
§ 215 Contradiction of Integrated Terms
Except as stated in the preceding Section, where there is a binding agreement, either completely or 
partially integrated, evidence of prior or contemporaneous agreements or negotiations is not 
admissible in evidence to contradict a term of the writing.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Relation to other rules.  Like § 216, this Section states an evidentiary consequence of § 213.  A binding 
integrated agreement discharges inconsistent prior agreements, and evidence of a prior agreement is therefore 
irrelevant to the rights of the parties when offered to contradict a term of the writing.  The same evidence may 
be properly considered on the preliminary issues whether there is an integrated agreement and whether it is 
completely or partially integrated.  See §§ 209, 210.  If there is a finding that there is an integrated agreement 
or a completely integrated agreement, the evidence may nevertheless be relevant to a question of 
interpretation, to a question of invalidating cause, or to a question of remedy.  See § 214.  But the earlier 
agreement, no matter how clear, cannot override a later agreement which supersedes or amends it.
b.  Interpretation and contradiction.  An earlier agreement may help the interpretation of a later one, but it may 
not contradict a binding later integrated agreement.  Whether there is contradiction depends, as is stated in § 
213, on whether the two are consistent or inconsistent.  This is a question which often cannot be determined 
from the face of the writing; the writing must first be applied to its subject matter and placed in context.  The 
question is then decided by the court as part of a question of interpretation.  Where reasonable people could 
differ as to the credibility of the evidence offered and the evidence if believed could lead a reasonable person to 
interpret the writing as claimed by the proponent of the evidence, the question of credibility and the choice 
among reasonable inferences should be treated as questions of fact.  But the asserted meaning must be one to 
which the language of the writing, read in context, is reasonably susceptible.  If no other meaning is reasonable, 
the court should rule as a matter of law that the meaning is established.  See § 212(2).
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section revises former § 239 to apply to both completely and partially integrated agreements, and changes 
"vary" to "contradict" to avoid application to cases where more than one meaning is reasonably possible.  See 3 
Corbin, Contracts §§ 543, 583 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 4 Williston, Contracts § 630 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment a.  See, e.g., League v. Giffin, 347 So.2d 1332 (Ala. 1977); Conn Organ Corp. v. Walt Whitman 
Music Studios, 67 A.D.2d 995, 413 N.Y.S.2d 725 (1979).
Comment b.  On interpretation of integrated documents, see Anderson v. Kammeier, 262 N.W.2d 366 (Minn. 
1978). On the role of the court in factual determinations in such cases, see Magi Comms., Inc. v. Jac-Lu 
Assoc., 65 A.D.2d 727, 410 N.Y.S.2d 297 (1978); Traudt v. Nebraska Public Power Dist., 197 Neb. 765, 251 
N.W.2d 148 (1977); Intertherm, Inc. v. Coronet Imperial Corp., 558 S.W.2d 344 (Mo. Ct. App. 1977).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Parol exception of fixtures from conveyance or lease.  29 A.L.R.3d 1441.

§ 215 Contradiction of Integrated Terms
Person who signs contract but is not named in body thereof as party to contract and liable thereunder.  94 
A.L.R.2d 691.
Admissibility of parol evidence as to limitation on cost of structure in builder's action on written cost-plus-fee 
construction contract.  84 A.L.R.2d 1324.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Evidence 439 et seq.
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 216
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 3- Effect of Adoption of a Writing        
§ 216 Consistent Additional Terms
(1)  Evidence of a consistent additional term is admissible to supplement an integrated agreement 
unless the court finds that the agreement was completely integrated.
(2)  An agreement is not completely integrated if the writing omits a consistent additional agreed term 
which is
(a)  agreed to for separate consideration, or
(b)  such a term as in the circumstances might naturally be omitted from the writing.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Relation to other rules.  Like § 215, this Section states an evidentiary consequence of § 213.  It also limits 
the concept of a completely integrated agreement set forth in § 210.  Compare Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
202(b).  Where the limitation is not applicable, the court must decide whether the agreement is completely 
integrated on the basis of all relevant evidence, including the evidence of consistent additional terms.
b.  Consistency.  Terms of prior agreements are superseded to the extent that they are inconsistent with an 
integrated agreement, and evidence of them is not admissible to contradict a term of the integration.  See §§ 
213, 215.  The determination whether an alleged additional term is consistent or inconsistent with the integrated 
agreement requires interpretation of the writing in the light of all the circumstances, including the evidence of 
the additional term.  For this purpose, the meaning of the writing includes not only the terms explicitly stated but 
also those fairly implied as part of the bargain of the parties in fact.  It does not include a term supplied by a rule 
of law designed to fill gaps where the parties have not agreed otherwise, unless it can be inferred that the 
parties contracted with reference to the rule of law.  There is no clear line between implications of fact and rules 
of law filling gaps; although fairly clear examples of each can be given, other cases will involve almost 
imperceptible shadings.  See § 204.
Illustrations:
1.  A check states no date of payment, but it is orally agreed that the check will be paid only after six months.  
The oral agreement contradicts the check.  Under Uniform Commercial Code § 3-108 the check is payable on 
demand, and most competent adults in the United States have reason to know the rule.
2.  A owes B two debts, and sends a check for an amount less than the amount of either.  In the absence of any 
contrary manifestation of intention by either party, the rule of law would be that the check is applied to the debt 
which first matured.  An agreement that the other debt is to be paid is not inconsistent with the check.
c.  Separate consideration.  Where there is a binding completely integratedagreement, even consistent 
additional terms are superseded if they are within the scope of the agreement.  See § 213.  A separate 
contract, not covered by the integrated agreement, is not superseded.  The rule of Subsection (2)(a) goes 
further; it limits the scope of the integrated agreement by excluding a consistent additional term made for 
separate consideration even though the additional term and its consideration are part of the same contract.  
This rule may be regarded as a particular application of the rule of Subsection (2)(b).
Illustration:

§ 216 Consistent Additional Terms
3.  A and B in an integrated writing promise to sell and buy a specific automobile.  As part of the transaction 
they orally agree that B may keep the automobile in A's garage for one year, paying $ 15 a month.  The oral 
agreement is not within the scope of the integration and is not superseded.
d.  Terms omitted naturally.  If it is claimed that a consistent additional term was omitted from an integrated 
agreement and the omission seems natural in the circumstances, it is not necessary to consider further the 
questions whether the agreement is completely integrated and whether the omitted term is within its scope, 
although factual questions may remain.  This situation is especially likely to arise when the writing is in a 
standardized form which does not lend itself to the insertion of additional terms.  Thus agreements collateral to 
a negotiable instrument if written on the instrument might destroy its negotiability or otherwise make it less 
acceptable to third parties; the instrument may not have space for the additional term.  Leases and 
conveyances are also often in a standard form which leads naturally to the omission of terms which are not 
standard.  These examples are not exclusive.  Moreover, there is no rule or policy penalizing a party merely 
because his mode of agreement does not seem natural to others.  Even though the omission does not seem 
natural, evidence of the consistent additional terms is admissible unless the court finds that the writing was 
intended as a complete and exclusive statement of the terms of the agreement.  See § 210.
Illustrations:
4.  A owes B $ 1,000.  They agree orally that A will sell B Blackacre for $ 3,000 and that the $ 1,000 will be 
credited against the price, and then sign a written agreement, complete on its face, which does not mention the 
$ 1,000 debt or the credit.  The written agreement is not completely integrated, and the oral agreement for a 
credit is admissible in evidence to supplement the written agreement.
5.  A and B sign a written agreement, complete on its face, that A will sell B Blackacre for $ 3,000, conveyance 
and payment to be made within 60 days.  It is claimed that B was about to render services for A and that the 
written agreement was signed on the oral understanding that B would be permitted to pay the price by 
rendering the services at $ 50 an hour.  The oral understanding is admissible in evidence unless it is found that 
the written agreement was completely integrated.
6.  A and B sign a standard form of written agreement for the sale of goods, complete on its face except that a 
blank for time and place of delivery is not filled in.  It is claimed that the writing was signed on the oral 
understanding that delivery would be made within 30 days at the buyer's place of business.  Under Uniform 
Commercial Code §§ 2-308 and 2-309, the goods would be deliverable, unless otherwise agreed, within a 
reasonable time at the seller's place of business.  The written agreement is not completely integrated, and the 
oral understanding is admissible in evidence to supplement its terms.
7.  A and B sign a written agreement complete on its face, for the sale of goods to be shipped by A from 
Chicago to New York.  It is claimed that the written agreement was signed on the oral understanding that the 
shipment would be made by a specified route.  Under Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-311 and 2-504, unless 
otherwise agreed, A could properly ship by any reasonable route.  The written agreement is not completely 
integrated, and the oral understanding is admissible in evidence to supplement its terms.
8.  A and B orally agree that A shall work for B in specified employment for $ 3,000.  B delivers to A an absolute 
written promise to pay $ 3,000 in six months.  The terms of the oral agreement are admissible in evidence to 
supplement the written promise and to qualify B's duty to pay $ 3,000.
9.  A and B sign a written agreement, complete on its face, for the sale of a specific machine by A to B.  The 
writing describes the machine and warrants that it is new, but contains no other terms relevant to warranty.  
Warranties of title, conformity to the description, merchantability, or fitness for a particular purpose, arising 
under Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-312 through 2-315, are not excluded.  Whether an additional oral 
warranty of quality is superseded depends on whether the agreement is completely integrated.
e.  Written term excluding oral terms ("merger" clause).  Written agreements often contain clauses stating that 
there are no representations, promises or agreements between the parties except those found in the writing.  
Such a clause may negate the apparent authority of an agent to vary orally the written terms, and if agreed to is 
likely to conclude the issue whether the agreement is completely integrated.  Consistent additional terms may 
then be excluded even though their omission would have been natural in the absence of such a clause.  But 
such a clause does not control the question whether the writing was assented to as an integrated agreement, 
the scope of the writing if completely integrated, or the interpretation of the written terms.

§ 216 Consistent Additional Terms
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section carries forward the substance of former § 240(1), revised to fit the revised terminology used in this 
Part, and to make clear that oral terms which are not "natural" are excluded only on a finding that the 
agreement is completely integrated.  See 3 Corbin, Contracts § 583 (1960); 4 Williston, Contracts § 631 (3d ed. 
1961).
Comment b.  That evidence of consistent additional terms may be admitted only if the agreement is not 
completely integrated, see Intermar, Inc. v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 364 F. Supp. 82, 98 (E.D. Pa. 1973). 
Illustrations 1 and 2 are based on Comment c to former § 240.
Comment c.  See Service Iron Foundry v. M.A. Bell Co., 2 Kan. App.2d 662, 588 P.2d 463 (1978), in which a 
sales agent was held to have made an independent warranty enforceable against it despite an (apparently) 
integrated agreement between the buyer and seller.  In Hobbs Trailers v. J.T. Arnett Grain Co., 560 S.W.2d 85 
(Tex. 1977), both the majority and the dissenters agreed that a collateral contract is not barred by an integrated 
one.  The majority held, however, that the alleged collateral agreement contradicted the main contract, while 
the dissent argued that the two agreements could coexist separately.  Neither the dissenter in Hobbs nor the 
court in Service Iron Foundry explained where the consideration for the collateral agreement came from.  
Contrast Traudt v. Nebraska Public Power Dist., 197 Neb. 765, 251 N.W.2d 148 (1977). Illustration 3 is based 
on Illustration 1 to former § 240.
Comment d.  For examples of courts' assessments of whether terms might naturally have been omitted from a 
writing, compare Lee v. Joseph E. Seagram & Sons, 552 F.2d 447 (2d Cir. 1977); and Lakeway Co. v. Leon 
Howard, Inc., 578 S.W.2d 163 (Tex. Civ. App. 1979) (both finding that the term might naturally have been 
omitted); with Pasquale Food Co. v. L & H Int'l Airmotive, Inc., 51 Ala. App. 127, 283 So.2d 438, cert. denied, 
291 Ala. 795, 283 So.2d 448 (1973); and Traudt v. Nebraska Public Power Dist., 197 Neb. 765, 251 N.W.2d 
148 (1977) (finding the contrary).  Illustrations 4-9 are based on Illustrations 2-7 to former § 240, revised to fit 
the terminology of the revised text and to refer where appropriate to the Uniform Commercial Code.  As to 
Illustration 6, see Cargill, Inc. v. Fickbohm, 252 N.W.2d 739 (Iowa 1977), citing this Illustration in Tentative 
Draft.
Comment e.  This is new.  See 3 Corbin, Contracts § 578 (1960); Freeman v. Continental Gin Co., 381 F.2d 
459 (5th Cir. 1967); Pasquale Food Co. v. L & H Int'l Airmotive, Inc., supra.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Evidence 417
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 217
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 3- Effect of Adoption of a Writing        
§ 217 Integrated Agreement Subject to Oral Requirement of a Condition
Where the parties to a written agreement agree orally that performance of the agreement is subject to 
the occurrence of a stated condition, the agreement is not integrated with respect to the oral condition.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Relation to other rules.  This Section states a rule for unsealed writings which is similar in operation to the 
rules governing delivery of a sealed promise in escrow or its conditional delivery to the promisee.  See § 103.  If 
an unrestricted power of revocation is reserved by either party, there is no contract until he acts further.  But if 
performance of the written agreement is subject to an oral requirement of a condition not within the control of 
either party, there may be a binding contract creating immediate conditional rights.  In such a case the precise 
legal consequences may turn on inquiry into what the parties in fact agreed to.  The writing, if so intended, may 
be a partially integrated agreement and may automatically become a completely integrated agreement on the 
occurrence of the oral requirement of a condition.  See §§ 209, 210.
Illustrations:
1.  A and B agree that A will sell a patent to B for $ 10,000 if C, an engineer advising B, approves.  A and B sign 
a written agreement covering all of the agreement except C's approval, and agree orally that it will take effect 
only if C approves.  There is an immediate contract, but B's duty is conditional on C's approval.
2.  A and B sign a written agreement for an exchange of real property and leave it with C, an attorney, on the 
oral understanding that it is not to take effect until each has consulted his wife and notified C that he still wishes 
to close the exchange.  There is no contract until each has notified C.
b.  Requirement of a condition inconsistent with a written term.  The rule of this Section may be regarded as a 
particular application of the rule of § 216(2)(b), giving effect to consistent additional terms omitted naturally from 
a writing.  So regarded, it has sometimes been limited to requirements of conditions consistent with the written 
terms.  But an oral requirement of a condition is never completely consistent with a signed written agreement 
which is complete on its face; in such cases evidence of the oral requirement bears directly on the issues 
whether the writing was adopted as an integrated agreement and if so whether the agreement was completely 
integrated or partially integrated.  Inconsistency is merely one factor in the preliminary determination of those 
issues.  If the parties orally agreed that performance of the written agreement was subject to a condition, either 
the writing is not an integrated agreement or the agreement is only partially integrated until the condition 
occurs.  Even a "merger" clause in the writing, explicitly negating oral terms, does not control the question 
whether there is an integrated agreement or the scope of the writing.  See Comment e to § 216.
Illustrations:
3.  A and B sign a written agreement for the sale of goods, and orally agree that the writing shall not take effect 
unless railroad cars are available within ten days.  The oral agreement is effective.
4.  Evidence of the facts stated in Illustration 3 is offered, and the writing contains a provision that "delivery shall 
be made within 30 days." Evidence of the oral agreement is excluded only if the court makes a preliminary 
determination that performance of the written agreement could not in the circumstances reasonably be found to 
have been subject to the oral agreement.
5.  A and B make and sign an elaborate written agreement for the merger of their corporate holdings into a 
single new company.  The writing provides that all obligations under it will terminate unless agreed 
subscriptions to the stock of the new company are accepted within twenty days.  It is also orally agreed that the 

§ 217 Integrated Agreement Subject to Oral Requirement of a Condition
project is not to be operative unless the parties raise $ 600,000 additional capital.  If the additional capital is not 
raised, there is no contract.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is a revision of former § 241, rewritten to follow new § 103.  See 3 Corbin, Contracts § 589 (1960 
& Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  Illustrations 1 and 2 are new.  Illustration 1 is based on Pym v. Campbell, 6 Ellis & Blackburn 370 
(Q.B. 1856).
Comment b.  A major rationale expressed by courts for the rule of this Section is that it has to do with an oral 
condition that must occur before the written contract comes into existence.  Thus, if the oral condition is not met 
there is no subsequent and superseding agreement and no reason to apply the parol evidence rule.  See § 213.  
This approach is supported by the reasoning of Pym v. Campbell, supra, and Hicks v. Bush, 10 N.Y.2d 488, 
225 N.Y.S.2d 34, 180 N.E.2d 425 (1962), but as the Reporter's Note to Comment c to § 224 indicates, this 
approach is of limited use.  It is not the rationale expressed in this Comment, and is often not the rationale 
expressed by courts.  In addition, oral conditions have been admitted merely to modify a later written contract, 
not to prevent it from coming into effect.
The question whether the rule of this Section applies only when oral conditions are said to go to the very 
existence of a written contract is important when analyzing cases dealing with inconsistency between oral 
conditions and written terms.  Thus, the Georgia Court of Appeals, in Craig v. Citizens & Southern Nat'l Bank, 
142 Ga. App. 474, 236 S.E.2d 166 (1977), stated flatly that Georgia does not permit parol evidence to show 
conditions precedent to a contract, and later cases appeared to apply this rule, see Whiteside v. Douglas Cty. 
Bank, 145 Ga. App. 775, 245 S.E.2d 2 (1978); Auerbach v. First Nat'l Bank, 147 Ga. App. 288, 248 S.E.2d 551 
(1978). Nonetheless, in 1979, the same court did allow an oral condition to be received in evidence to negate 
the existence of a contract.  In Haraka v. Datry, 148 Ga. App. 642, 252 S.E.2d 71 (1979), a defaulting buyer of 
real estate was permitted to show that her written agreement was subject to an oral condition that the sale was 
contingent on her receiving an advance on alimony payments.  The Haraka opinion emphasized that the 
condition went to the very existence of the contract, but the same could have been said about Whiteside v. 
Douglas Cty. Bank, supra, and possibly about Auerbach v. First Nat'l Bank, which involved a claim of an oral 
condition of forgiveness of a note in certain circumstances.  The distinction about oral conditions going to the 
existence of a contract was relied on Hirsch v. S. Berger Imp. & Mfg. Corp., 67 A.D.2d 30, 414 N.Y.S.2d 324 
(1979), which refused to permit evidence of an alleged oral condition not going to the contract's existence.  An 
alleged oral condition of forgiveness of a loan upon certain future events was held not admissible, apparently 
on the same reasoning, in Conn Organ Corp. v. Walt Whitman Music Studios, 67 A.D.2d 995, 413 N.Y.S.2d 
725 (1979). In Feder v. River's Edge Rest., 59 Ill. App.3d 1015, 17 Ill. Dec. 547, 376 N.E.2d 693 (1978), the 
court said that an oral condition need not go to the existence of the contract to be admissible, but went on to 
hold that the evidence could not "contradict the terms of the written agreement"; see also Pasquale Food Co. v. 
L & H Int'l Airmotive, Inc., 51 Ala. App. 127, 283 So.2d 438, cert. denied, 291 Ala. 795, 283 So.2d 448 (1973). 
Nonetheless, in Geiger v. Hansen, 214 Kan. 83, 519 P.2d 699 (1974), an express condition in a written contract 
was held subject to an oral condition greatly restricting it.  Although the decision appears correct on the facts as 
stated, the court's reasoning is rather obscure, and it is submitted that the decision would have rested more 
securely on the rationale expressed in this Comment.  Illustrations 3 and 4 are based on Illustration 1 to former 
§ 241.  Illustration 5 is based on Hicks v. Bush, 10 N.Y.2d 488, 225 N.Y.S.2d 34, 180 N.E.2d 425 (1962); see 
also Haraka v. Datry, supra.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Evidence 420, 444
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute

§ 217 Integrated Agreement Subject to Oral Requirement of a Condition
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 218
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 3- Effect of Adoption of a Writing        
§ 218 Untrue Recitals; Evidence of Consideration
(1)  A recital of a fact in an integrated agreement may be shown to be untrue.
(2)  Evidence is admissible to prove whether or not there is consideration for a promise, even though 
the parties have reduced their agreement to a writing which appears to be a completely integrated 
agreement.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Fact and transaction.  The parol evidence rule (§ 213) relates to the effect of an integrated agreement on 
prior agreements.  An integrated agreement may have the effect of discharging a prior promise, conveyance or 
discharge; it does not establish fictitious events.
b.  Effect of recital.  A recital of fact in an integrated agreement is evidence of the fact, and its weight depends 
on the circumstances.  Contrary facts may be proved.  The result may be that the integrated agreement is not 
binding, or that it has a different effect from the effect if the recital had been true.  In the absence of estoppel, 
the true facts have the same operation as if stated in the writing.
c.  Estoppel.  In some circumstances a recital may embody a representation of fact by one party to the other, 
and the party making such a representation may be barred by estoppel from showing the truth contrary to the 
representation after another has relied on the representation.  See Comment a to § 90.
d.  Omission of consideration.  Where a written agreement requires consideration and none is stated in the 
writing, a finding that the writing is a completely integrated agreement would mean that it is not binding for want 
of consideration.  Since only a binding integrated agreement brings the parol evidence rule into operation, 
evidence is admissible to show that there was consideration and what it was.
Illustration:
1.  A gives B a written promise to pay $ 100.  The writing states no consideration.  B promises orally to build a 
fence in consideration of the promise of $ 100.  Both promises are operative.
e.  Incorrect recital of consideration.  Where a writing shows a promise in consideration of a return promise and 
it is determined that the writing is a binding integrated agreement, inconsistent prior agreements are 
discharged.  See § 213.  But an integrated agreement which is not binding does not ordinarily discharge prior 
agreements, and the parol evidence rule does not apply to recitals of facts.  Where consideration is required, 
the requirement is not satisfied by a false recital of consideration, although in some circumstances a recital of 
consideration may make a promise binding without consideration.  See §§ 71, 87, 88.  An incorrect statement of 
a consideration does not prevent proof either that there was no consideration or that there was a consideration 
different from that stated.  In some such cases the recital may imply a promise not explicitly stated.
Illustrations:
2.  A, an insurance company, issues a fire insurance policy to B.  The policy provides that A is not bound until 
the premium is paid, and falsely recites payment.  On accepting the policy, B impliedly promises to pay the 
premium and A is bound by the policy.
3.  A, desiring to make a gift of Blackacre to his daughter B, delivers to B a written promise to transfer 
Blackacre to her in consideration of $ 1,000 paid by B, receipt of which is acknowledged.  No money is in fact 
paid by B, and the circumstances do not justify implication of a promise to pay.  A's promise is not binding for 
want of consideration.

§ 218 Untrue Recitals; Evidence of Consideration
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section combines former §§ 240(2), 243, and 244.  See 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 585-86 (1960 & Supp. 
1980); 4 Williston, Contracts § 634 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment b.  See Bank of North Carolina v. Cranfill, 37 N.C. App. 182, 245 S.E.2d 538 (1978) (signatories 
permitted to deny their intention to adopt as their seals the printed word "SEAL" on signature line of note).
Comment d.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 8 to former § 240; see Wood v. Roberts, 586 P.2d 405 (Utah 
1978); cf.  Carter v. Sherburne Corp., 132 Vt. 88, 315 A.2d 870 (1974).
Comment e.  Illustrations 2 and 3 are based on Illustrations 1 and 3 to former § 243.  See Traudt v. Nebraska 
Public Power Dist., 197 Neb. 765, 251 N.W.2d 148 (1977).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Evidence 419
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 219
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 4- Scope as Affected by Usage        
§ 219 Usage
Usage is habitual or customary practice.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope of usage.  Although rules of law are often founded on usage, usage is not in itself a legal rule but 
merely habit or practice in fact.  A particular usage may be more or less widespread.  It may prevail throughout 
an area, and the area may be small or large -- a city, a state or a larger region.  A usage may prevail among all 
people in the area, or only in a special trade or other group.  Usages change over time, and persons in close 
association often develop temporary usages peculiar to themselves.
b.  Usage of words.  A word usage exists when few or many people use a word or phrase to convey a standard 
meaning or several standard meanings and develop a common understanding of the meaning or meanings.  
Dictionaries record word usages which have achieved some generality, with varying degrees of completeness 
and accuracy.  See § 201.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 245.  See 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 555-57 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 5 Williston, 
Contracts § 649 (3d ed. 1961).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Validity and construction of contract between hospital and physician providing for exclusive medical services.  
74 A.L.R.3d 1268.
Landlord and tenant: What amounts to "sale" of property for purposes of provision giving tenant right of first 
refusal if landlord desires to sell.  70 A.L.R.3d 203.
Construction and effect of tenure provisions of contract or statute governing employment of college or university 
faculty member.  66 A.L.R.3d 1018.
Who is "employee" under employee stock-option plan or contract.  57 A.L.R.3d 787.
Sufficiency of contractual designation of place of performance to fix venue at that place, under statute 
authorizing or requiring such venue.  97 A.L.R.2d 934.
Construction and effect of provision in contract for sale of realty by which purchaser agrees to take property "as 
is" or in the condition in which it is.  97 A.L.R.2d 849.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Customs and Usages 1
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 220
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 4- Scope as Affected by Usage        
§ 220 Usage Relevant to Interpretation
(1)  An agreement is interpreted in accordance with a relevant usage if each party knew or had reason 
to know of the usage and neither party knew or had reason to know that the meaning attached by the 
other was inconsistent with the usage.
(2)  When the meaning attached by one party accorded with a relevant usage and the other knew or had 
reason to know of the usage, the other is treated as having known or had reason to know the meaning 
attached by the first party.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Relation to other rules.  Usage may "give particular meaning to" an agreement, or may "supplement or 
qualify" it.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 1-205.  This Section deals with usage as an element in 
interpretation and states rules consistent with the general rules on agreement and interpretation stated in §§ 20 
and 201.  Usage supplementing or qualifying an agreement is the subject of the following section, and §§ 222 
and 223 apply the general rules of this Section and § 221 to the particular cases of usage of trade and course 
of dealing.  Where there are conflicting usages of words and no different intention is shown, § 202 provides 
guides for the process of interpretation; where there is conflict between usage of trade and express terms, 
course of performance or course of dealing, § 203 states standards of preference.
b.  Interpretation of language.  An agreement may have a legal effect not intended by either party, but 
interpretation is limited to meanings intended by at least one party.  Neither party is bound by a meaning unless 
he knows orhas reason to know of it.  See §§ 200, 201.  Usage is subject to the same rule: a party is not bound 
by a usage unless he knows or has reason to know of it.  Hence a party who asserts a meaning based on 
usage must show either that the other party knew of the usage or that the other party had reason to know of it.  
Analytically, the meaning of language is a question of fact, but in the absence of extrinsic evidence the meaning 
of language in an integrated writing is to be determined as a question of law.  See § 212.  Where a usage of 
words is sufficiently well known, a court will take judicial cognizance of it without proof; otherwise the burden of 
establishing a usage is on the party asserting it.  See § 202.  Ordinarily there is no requirement that a usage 
relevant to the interpretation of language be pleaded, but a party against whom evidence of usage is offered 
may be entitled to a continuance or to notice sufficient to prevent unfair surprise.  See Uniform Commercial 
Code § 1-205(6).
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to sell and B to buy ten bushels of oats.  By very general usage 32 pounds constitutes a bushel 
of oats.  In the absence of contrary evidence, ten bushels in the contract means 320 pounds.
2.  A contracts with B to "sponsor" a bowling team and to pay B "the usual sponsoring fees." In an action 
against A for repudiating the contract in a dispute over the fees, B cannot recover without proving a usage as to 
"usual sponsoring fees."
3.  A employs B as exclusive broker to sell business premises subject to a one-year lease back to A.  B submits 
an agreement for sale to C subject to a one-year lease, with a provision for termination of the lease on six 
months notice.  A rejects the agreement.  In an action for the agreed commission B claims that by local usage 
all business leases contain such a provision.  B has the burden of establishing the usage and A's knowledge or 
reason to know of it.

§ 220 Usage Relevant to Interpretation
c.  Agreed but unstated terms.  An agreement or term thereof need not be stated in words if the parties 
manifest assent to it by other conduct, and such assent is often manifested by conduct in accordance with 
usage.  Where there is an integrated agreement, an agreed but unstated term may be annexed by usage on 
the same principle which controls consistent additional terms generally.  See § 216.  But it is so common to 
contract with reference to usage, leaving the usage unstated, that no inquiry is necessary as to whether it is 
natural in the particular circumstances to omit the term from the writing.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
202(a).  Where it is claimed that the usage contradicts the express terms, the issue is resolved as a question of 
interpretation.  See § 203(b).  Whether a usage is reasonable may bear on the issue whether the parties 
contracted with reference to it, but if they did they are not in general forbidden to make agreements which seem 
unreasonable to others.
Illustrations:
4.  A and B contract for a year's employment of B by A.  As both parties know, there is a usage that such a 
contract may be terminated by a month's notice.  Unless a contrary intention is manifested, the usage is part of 
the contract.
5.  A sends goods to B by C, a private carrier, receiving a bill of lading from C.  B rejects the shipment.  The 
usage of such carriers, known to A and C, is to notify the shipper of such a rejection.  Unless a contrary 
intention is manifested, the requirement of notification is added to the terms of the bill of lading.
6.  A contracts to sell and B to buy 100 barrels of flour at$ 8 a barrel.  By a usage of the trade known to A and B 
payment under such contracts is due ten days after delivery unless otherwise agreed.  The usage is part of the 
contract.
7.  A contracts to sell and B to buy 100 barrels of mackerel.  By a usage of trade known to A and B, sellers of 
mackerel, unless they agree otherwise, warrant that the fish are not below a certain size.  The usage is part of 
the contract.  See Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-314(3), 2-316(3)(c).
d.  Ambiguity and contradiction.  Language and conduct are in general given meaning by usage rather than by 
the law, and ambiguity and contradiction likewise depend upon usage.  Hence usage relevant to interpretation 
is treated as part of the context of an agreement in determining whether there is ambiguity or contradiction as 
well as in resolving ambiguity or contradiction.  There is no requirement that an ambiguity be shown before 
usage can be shown, and no prohibition against showing that language or conduct have a different meaning in 
the light of usage from the meaning they might have apart from the usage.  The normal effect of a usage on a 
written contract is to vary its meaning from the meaning it would otherwise have.
Illustrations:
8.  A leases a rabbit warren to B.  The written lease contains a covenant that at the end of the term A will buy 
and B will sell the rabbits at "60 £ per thousand." The parties contract with reference to a local usage that 1,000 
rabbits means 100 dozen.  The usage is part of the contract.
9.  In an integrated contract, A promises to sell and B to buy a certain quantity of "white arsenic" for a stated 
price.  The parties contract with reference to a usage of trade that "white arsenic" includes arsenic colored with 
lamp black.  The usage is part of the contract.
10.  A, a bank in New York City, issues to B a letter of credit promising a payment on presentation of 
documents including a "full set of bills of lading." By a general banking usage in New York City, banks accept 
less than a full set in such cases if there is a guaranty by a responsible New York bank in lieu of the missing 
part.  Unless otherwise agreed, the usage is part of the contract.  Uniform Commercial Code § 5-109.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section combines former §§ 246(a) and 247.  See 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 648-62 (3d ed. 1961); 3 
Corbin, Contracts §§ 555-57 (1960 & Supp. 1980).
Comment b.  A newcomer to a trade is not bound by trade custom unless he knows of it or it is so widespread 
that he may be presumed to have known of it.  United States ex. rel. Union Bldg. Mater. Corp. v. Haas and 
Haynie Corp., 577 F.2d 568 (9th Cir. 1978), citing this Section in Tentative Draft; on the knowledge of the usage 
needed to bind a party, see also George v. School Dist. No. 8R, 7 Or. App. 183, 490 P.2d 1009 (1971). 
Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 246; see also Venturi, Inc., v. Adkisson, 261 Ark. 855, 552 
S.W.2d 643 (1977). Illustration 2 is based on Leitner v. Braen, 51 N.J. Super. 31, 143 A.2d 256 (1958); North 

§ 220 Usage Relevant to Interpretation
Unit Potato Co. v. Spada Distrib. Co., 260 Or. 468, 490 P.2d 995 (1971) (dictum).  Illustration 3 is based on 
Frankel v. Pitler, 166 Neb. 219, 88 N.W.2d 770 (1958).
Comment c.  Illustrations 4-7 are based on Illustrations 8-11 to former § 246.
Comment d.  See generally Frigaliment Imp. Co. v. BNS Int'l Sales Corp., 190 F. Supp. 116 (S.D.N.Y. 1960). 
Supporting this Comment's position that ambiguity need not be shown before usage is proven are Campbell v. 
Hostetter Farms, Inc., 251 Pa. Super. Ct. 232, 380 A.2d 463 (1977), relying on Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
202; and Venturi, Inc. v. Adkisson, 261 Ark. 855, 552 S.W.2d 643 (1977) (semble).  See also 1901 Wyoming 
Ave. Coop. Ass'n v. Lee, 345 A.2d 456, 461 & n.9 (D.C. Ct. App. 1975). Examples of cases saying that 
ambiguity is a prerequisite to evidence of usage are Cable-Wiedemer, Inc. v. A. Friederich & Sons, 71 Misc.2d 
443, 336 N.Y.S.2d 139 (County Ct. 1972); and North Unit Potato Co. v. Spada Distrib. Co., 260 Or. 468, 490 
P.2d 995 (1971). In addition, North Unit Potato Co. v. Spada Distrib. Co., supra, says flatly that "evidence of 
custom cannot be used to contradict the terms of a written contract," and Venturi, Inc. v. Adkisson, supra, 
contains similar dictum.  Nonetheless, Venturi actually held that it was a jury question whether an excavation 
contract calling for payment at $ 2.50 per cubic yard was subject to a one-third increase because of a "well-
established custom and usage" concerning a "loose yard basis" of payment computation.  Venturi illustrates the 
problem with loose language about ambiguity and contradiction.  The cases supporting the Illustrations below 
make clear that no matter how plain a meaning may be to a layman, it may turn out to have a different and 
perhaps even contradictory meaning when a special usage is proven.  Common experience supports this 
analysis: two-by-four boards are considerably smaller than two inches by four inches in dimension; 
psychiatrists' hours are forty-five minutes long.  To hold that a contract specifying two-by-fours or a 
psychiatrist's hours was so unambiguous as to prevent proof of an industry-wide standard would be foolish, and 
none of the courts would be likely to do so despite their dicta.  It is right that courts be skeptical of attempts to 
vary express terms through alleged usage, but the ambiguity as prerequisite approach is an oversimplified way 
of handling the problem.
Illustration 8 is based on Smith v. Wilson, 3 B. & Ad. 728 (K.B. 1832). Illustration 9 is based on Illustration 5 to 
former § 248.  Illustration 10 is based on Dixon, Irmaos & Cia, Ltda. v. Chase Nat'l Bank, 144 F.2d 759 (2d Cir. 
1944), cert. denied, 324 U.S. 850 (1945).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Landlord and tenant: What amounts to "sale" of property for purposes of provision giving tenant right of first 
refusal if landlord desires to sell.  70 A.L.R.3d 203.
Construction and effect of tenure provisions of contract or statute governing employment of college or university 
faculty member.  66 A.L.R.3d 1018.
Construction and operation of "Equal Opportunities Clause" requiring pledge against racial discrimination in 
hiring under construction contract.  44 A.L.R.3d 1283.
Construction and effect of provision in contract for sale of realty by which purchaser agrees to take property "as 
is" or in the condition in which it is.  97 A.L.R.2d 849.
Time specified in real-estate contract for giving notice of exercise of option to purchase as of essence.  72 
A.L.R.2d 1127.
Meaning of term "radius" employed in contract, statute, or ordinance as descriptive of area, location, or 
distance.  10 A.L.R.2d 605.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Customs and Usages 9-15
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 221
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 4- Scope as Affected by Usage        
§ 221 Usage Supplementing an Agreement
An agreement is supplemented or qualified by a reasonable usage with respect to agreements of the 
same type if each party knows or has reason to know of the usage and neither party knows or has 
reason to know that the other party has an intention inconsistent with the usage.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Agreed terms and omitted terms.  Where the parties have in fact agreed to incorporate a usage into their 
agreement, the case is within § 220.  This Section extends the same principle to cases where the parties did 
not advert to the problem with which the usage deals, or where one or each separately foresaw the problem but 
failed to manifest any intention with respect to it.  In such cases, in the absence of usage, the court would 
supply a reasonable term.  See § 204.  But if there is a reasonable usage which supplies an omitted term and 
the parties know or have reason to know of the usage, it is a surer guide than the court's own judgment of what 
is reasonable.  Thus a usage may make it unnecessary to inquire into or prove what the actual intentions of the 
parties were with respect to an unstated term.  Compare Uniform Commercial Code §§ 1-205(3), 2-202(a).
Illustrations:
1.  A, a canner, and B, a wholesale grocer, contract for the sale by A to B of canned fruit products, using a 
standard form of contract approved by canning and wholesale grocer trade associations.  By uniform usage 
among canners, where the standard form is used title to unshipped goods passes on billing dates specified on 
the form.  In the absence of contrary indication, the usage is part of the contract.
2.  A, an ordained rabbi, is employed by B, an orthodox Jewish congregation, to officiate as cantor at specified 
religious services.  At the time the contract is made, it is the practice of such congregations to seat men and 
women separately at services, and a contrary practice would violate A's religious beliefs.  At a time when it is 
too late for A to obtain substitute employment, B adopts a contrary practice.  A refuses to officiate.  The practice 
is part of the contract, and A is entitled to the agreed compensation.
b.  Reason to know and reasonableness.  The more general and well-established a usage is, the stronger is the 
inference that a party knew or had reason to know of it.  Similarly, the fact that a usage is reasonable may tend 
to show that the parties contracted with reference to it or that a particular party knew or had reason to know of 
it.  Where the parties in fact agree to a usage, there is no general requirement that their usage seem 
reasonable to others; but where there is no agreement only a reasonable usage supplies an omitted term.  
What is reasonable for this purpose depends on the circumstances; it may be reasonable to hold a 
nonmerchant to mercantile standards if he is represented by a mercantile agent.  See Uniform Commercial 
Code § 2-104, defining "merchant." Ordinarily an agent is authorized to comply with relevant usages of 
business if the principal has notice that usages of such a nature may exist.  See Restatement, Second, of 
Agency § 36.
Illustrations:
3.  A, in Washington, sends an order to B, a broker in Baltimore, to be executed on the New York Stock 
Exchange.  Unless both A and B give the order a different and identical interpretation or B has reason to know 
that A has a different intention, the order is interpreted in accordance with the reasonable usages of the New 
York Stock Exchange.
4.  A, a publisher, contracts with B to publish a two-volume work.  The contract provides for binding "10,000 
copies at .538," which by usage of the publishing business refers to the number of volumes rather than the 

§ 221 Usage Supplementing an Agreement
number of sets.  The usage is part of the contract even though the work is B's first and he does not know of the 
usage.
c.  Effect of usage on law.  It is often said that usage cannot change a rule of law, but a distinction must be 
drawn.  If the rule of law is one which overrides contrary agreement, it also overrides usage; but if the law 
merely supplies a term in the absence of contrary agreement, usage can have the same effect as contrary 
agreement.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(3).
Illustrations:
5.  A and B, both members of a Mercantile Exchange, enter into an oral contract within the Statute of Frauds.  
By usage of the Exchange oral agreements between members of the Exchange are enforceable.  The usage 
does not make the contract enforceable if it is otherwise unenforceable.
6.  A makes B a promise without consideration.  By usage such promises are binding without consideration.  
The usage does not make the promise legally binding.
7.  A makes an offer to B by telephone, and B accepts by telephone.  By usage known to both parties such an 
agreement is not binding unless promptly confirmed in writing by the acceptor.  Unless a contrary intention is 
indicated, the usage is part of the agreement, and there is no contract unless B gives prompt written 
confirmation.
d.  Intention inconsistent with usage.  The parties to an agreement are not bound to follow the usages of others 
or their own prior usages.  If either party has reason to know that the other has an intention inconsistent with a 
particular usage, the usage is not applicable.  Such an intention need not be manifested in any particular way; 
whether the parties contracted with reference to a usage is determined on the basis of all the circumstances, 
and a usage may be excluded by the same type of proof which would include it.
Illustrations:
8.  A, a resident of Philadelphia, makes a contract with B, a resident of New York, by which A promises to build 
a brick wall in Philadelphia.  There is a local usage in Philadelphia as to measuring brick which differs from that 
elsewhere.  B is not aware of the Philadelphia usage, as A has reason to know.  The usage is not part of the 
contract.
9.  A, a bank, issues a letter of credit promising to honor drafts accompanied by bills of lading covering 
"Coromandel groundnuts." Dealers in groundnuts understand "Coromandel groundnuts" to mean "machine-
shelled groundnut kernels." A is not bound to honor drafts accompanied by bills of lading covering "machine-
shelled groundnut kernels." See Uniform Commercial Code § 5-109(1)(c).
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section combines former §§ 246(b) and 247.  See 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 652-61 (3d ed. 1966); 3 
Corbin, Contracts §§ 556-57 (1960 & Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  On the use of established usage to fill gaps left by the parties, see Lambourne v. Manchester Cty. 
Props., 135 Vt. 178, 374 A.2d 122 (1977). Illustration 1 is based on Pacific Grape Prods. Co. v. Commissioner, 
219 F.2d 862 (9th Cir. 1955). Illustration 2 is based on Fisher v. Congregation B'Nai Yitzhok, 177 Pa. Super. Ct. 
359, 110 A.2d 881 (1955).
Comment b.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 247; cf.  Lynch v. Maw, 3 Utah 2d 271, 282 P.2d 
841 (1955); Annot., 79 A.L.R. 592 (1932). Illustration 4 is based on Berwick & Smith Co. v. Salem Press, Inc., 
331 Mass. 196, 117 N.E.2d 825 (1954); Lambourne v. Manchester Cty. Props., supra.
Comment c.  The position of this Comment is supported by Chicago Bridge & Iron Co. v. Reliance Ins. Co., 46 
Ill.2d 522, 264 N.E.2d 134 (1970); Clark Adv. Agency v. Avco Broadcasting Co.,     Ind. App.    , 383 N.E.2d 353 
(1978); Hayward Tamkin & Co. v. Carpenteria Inv. Co., 265 Cal. App.2d 617, 71 Cal. Rptr. 462 (1968). This 
replaces former § 249.  Illustrations 5-7 are based on Illustrations 1-3 to former § 249.  As to Illustration 5, see 
Ozier v. Haines, 411 Ill. 160, 103 N.E.2d 485 (1952), discussed in dictum in Chicago Bridge & Iron Co. v. 
Reliance Ins. Co., supra.
Comment d.  Illustration 8 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 247.  Illustration 9 is based on J.H. Rayner & 
Co. v. Hambro's Bank, Ltd., [1943] 1 K.B. 37 (C.A.); see also North Unit Potato Co. v. Spada Distrib. Co., 260 
Or. 468, 490 P.2d 995 (1971).

§ 221 Usage Supplementing an Agreement
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Landlord and tenant: What amounts to "sale" of property for purposes of provision giving tenant right of first 
refusal if landlord desires to sell.  70 A.L.R.3d 203.
Validity and construction of contract exempting agricultural fair or similar bailee from liability for articles 
delivered for exhibition.  69 A.L.R.3d 1025.
Construction and effect of tenure provisions of contract or statute governing employment of college or university 
faculty member.  66 A.L.R.3d 1018.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Customs and Usages 16
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 222
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 4- Scope as Affected by Usage        
§ 222 Usage of Trade
(1)  A usage of trade is a usage having such regularity of observance in a place, vocation, or trade as to 
justify an expectation that it will be observed with respect to a particular agreement.  It may include a 
system of rules regularly observed even though particular rules are changed from time to time.
(2)  The existence and scope of a usage of trade are to be determined as questions of fact.  If a usage is 
embodied in a written trade code or similar writing the interpretation of the writing is to be determined 
by the court as a question of law.
(3)  Unless otherwise agreed, a usage of trade in the vocation or trade in which the parties are engaged 
or a usage of trade of which they know or have reason to know gives meaning to or supplements or 
qualifies their agreement.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Relation to other rules.  This Section follows Uniform Commercial Code § 1-205 and states a particular 
application of the rules stated in §§ 220 and 221.  As to conflicting usages of words, see § 202; as to conflict 
between usage of trade and express terms, course of performance or course of dealing, see § 203.
b.  Regularity of observance.  A usage of trade need not be "ancient or immemorial," "universal," or the like.  
Unless agreed to in fact, it must be reasonable, but commercial acceptance by regular observance makes out a 
prima facie case that a usage of trade is reasonable.  There is no requirement that an agreement be ambiguous 
before evidence of a usage of trade can be shown, nor is it required that the usage of trade be consistent with 
the meaning the agreement would have apart from the usage.  When the usage consists of a system of rules, 
the parties need not be aware of a particular rule if they know or have reason to know the system and the 
particular rule is within the scheme of the system.  A change within the system may have effect promptly, even 
though there has been no time for regular observance of the change.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to sell B 10,000 shingles.  By usage of the lumber trade, in which both are engaged, two packs 
of a certain size constitute 1,000, though not containing that exact number.  Unless otherwise agreed, 1,000 in 
the contract means two packs.
2.  A contracts to sell B 1,000 feet of San Domingo mahogany.  By usage of dealers in mahogany, known to A 
and B, good figured mahogany of a certain density is known as San Domingo mahogany, though it does not 
come from San Domingo.  Unless otherwise agreed, the usage is part of the contract.
3.  A promises to act as B's agent in a certain business, and B promises to pay a certain commission for each 
"order." By a local usage in that business, "order" means only an order on which the purchaser has paid a 
certain price.  Unless otherwise agreed, the usage is part of the contract.
4.  A and B enter into a contract for the sawing of logs during the "winter season." Usage in the logging 
business may show that "winter season" means the period between the closing of a sawmill in the autumn and 
the arrival of logs in the spring.
5.  A and B enter into a contract of charter party in which A promises to discharge the vessel "in 14 days." 
Usage in the shipping business may show this means 14 working days.

§ 222 Usage of Trade
6.  A and B enter into a contract for the purchase and sale of "No. 1 heavy book paper guaranteed free from 
ground wood." Usage in the paper trade may show that this means paper not containing over 3% ground wood.
c.  Local usages of trade.  Where usages vary from place to place, there may be a problem in deciding which 
usage is applicable.  Even though local residents regularly contract with reference to a local usage of trade, 
others are not bound by the usage unless they know or have reason to know of it.  If that condition is satisfied 
and no contrary intention is shown, a usage of trade in a particular place is ordinarily used to interpret the 
agreement as to that part of the performance which is to occur there.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 1-
205(5).
Illustrations:
7.  A contracts to employ B for 20 days.  In the kind of work to which the employment relates, in the place 
where both reside and the work is to be performed, a day's work is eight hours.  Unless otherwise agreed, B's 
employment is for 20 eight-hour days.
8.  A leases to B a portion of a building for "confectionery store purposes." By local usage at the time and place 
where the lease is made and the building is located, "confectionery store purposes" include the giving of light 
lunches.  Unless otherwise agreed, the usage is part of the contract.
9.  A promises B to keep certain premises "fully insured." At the time and place where the contract is made and 
to be performed and where the parties reside, insurance companies will not insure such premises for more than 
three-fourths of their value, and such premises insured for three-fourths of their value are called "fully insured." 
Unless otherwise agreed, the local usage is part of the contract.
10.  A of Chicago negotiates and concludes in South Carolina an integrated contract to sell and deliver to B in 
South Carolina "ground sheep manure." These words mean a finer grinding in South Carolina than they do in 
Chicago, and A has reason to know of the South Carolina usage.  Unless otherwise agreed, the contract is 
taken to refer to the South Carolina usage.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Former § 248 is here revised to follow Uniform Commercial Code § 1-205.  See 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 648-
62 (3d ed. 1961); 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 555-57 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 9 Wigmore, Evidence §§ 2440, 2460-66 
(3d ed. 1940).
Comment a.  On trade usage generally, see Lipschutz v. Gordon Jewelry Corp., 373 F. Supp. 375 (S.D. Tex. 
1974).
Comment b.  That a trade usage need not be "universal" or "notorious," see Threadgill v. Peabody Coal Co., 34 
Colo. App. 203, 526 P.2d 676 (1974), analogizing from Uniform Commercial Code § 1-205(2) and Comment 5.  
That people in a particular trade need not know specific customs if the customs are prominent, see Heggblade-
Marguleas-Tenneco, Inc. v. Sunshine Biscuit, Inc., 59 Cal. App.3d 948, 131 Cal. Rptr. 183 (1976); Lambourne 
v. Manchester Cty. Props., 135 Vt. 178, 374 A.2d 122 (1977). But usage must be that of a given trade, and 
cannot be imposed from other businesses.  Quad Constr., Inc. v. Wm. A. Smith Contr. Co., 534 F.2d 1391 (10th 
Cir. 1976). On the lack of a need to show ambiguity before trade usage may be shown, see Campbell v. 
Hostetter Farms, Inc., 251 Pa. Super. Ct. 232, 380 A.2d 463 (1977); Heggblade-Marguleas-Tenneco, Inc. v. 
Sunshine Biscuit, Inc., supra; Columbia Nitrogen Corp. v. Royster Co., 451 F.2d 3 (4th Cir. 1971); (all relying on 
Uniform Commercial Code § 2-202); compare C & A Constr. Co. v. Benning Constr. Co., 509 S.W.2d 302, 305 
(Ark. 1974) (dissenting opinion); Della Ratta, Inc. v. American Better Comm. Devs., 38 Md. App. 119, 380 A.2d 
627 (1977). Contra: Cable-Wiedemer, Inc. v. A. Friederick & Sons, 71 Misc.2d 443, 336 N.Y.S.2d 139 (County 
Ct. 1972). Illustrations 1-6 are based on Illustrations 2-7 to former § 246.  See Hurst v. W.J. Lake & Co., 141 
Or. 306, 16 P.2d 627 (1932); Emor, Inc. v. Cyprus Mines Corp., 467 F.2d 770 (3d Cir. 1972). See also Annot., 
89 A.L.R. 1228 (1934).
Comment c.  Illustrations 7-9 are based on Illustrations 1, 2 and 4 to former § 248.  Illustration 10 is based on 
Illustration 4 to former § 247; cf.  Markey v. Brunson, 286 F. 893 (4th Cir. 1923).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:

§ 222 Usage of Trade
Requirements contracts under § 2-306(1) of Uniform Commercial Code.  96 A.L.R.3d 1275.
Validity and construction of "No Damage" Clause with respect to delay inbuilding or construction contract.  74 
A.L.R.3d 187.
Validity, construction, and effect of clause in franchise contract prohibiting transfer of franchise or contract.  59 
A.L.R.3d 244.
Validity and construction of restrictive covenant not to compete ancillary to franchise agreement.  50 A.L.R.3d 
746.
Meaning of terms "city," "town," or the like as employed in restrictive covvenants not to compete.  45 A.L.R.3d 
1339.
Construction and effect of affirmative provision in contract of sale by which purchaser agrees to take article "as 
is," in the condition in which it is, or equivalent term.  24 A.L.R.3d 465.
What 12-month period constitutes "year" or "calendar year" as used in public enactment, contract, or other 
written instrument.  5 A.L.R.3d 584.
Effect of stipulation, in private building or construction contract, that alterations or extras must be ordered in 
writing.  2 A.L.R.3d 620.
Effect of stipulation, in public building or construction contract, that alterations or extras must be ordered in 
writing.  1 A.L.R.3d 1173.
Conditions printed on confirmation slips as binding on customers of stock or commodity broker.  71 A.L.R.2d 
1089.
Construction and effect of contract for sale of commodity or goods wherein quantity is described as "about" or 
"more or less" than an amount specified.  58 A.L.R.2d 377.
Effect of failure of contract for sale or exchange of real estate to specify time for giving of possession.  56 
A.L.R.2d 1272.
Place, in absence of written provision in sales contract, where cash consideration for goods purchased is 
payable.  49 A.L.R.2d 1350.
Construction and effect of provision in private building and construction contract that work must be done to 
satisfaction of owner.  44 A.L.R.2d 1114.
Validity, construction, and effect of limited liability or stipulated damages clause in fire or burglar alarm service 
contract.  42 A.L.R.2d 591.
What constitutes "accounts receivable" under contract selling, assigning, pledging, or reserving such items.  41 
A.L.R.2d 1395.
Contract by seller of business not to compete as affecting his lease of other property in restricted area to one 
who he knows will compete with purchaser.  14 A.L.R.2d 1333.
Validity, construction, and application of "no damage" clause with respect to delay in construction contract.  10 
A.L.R.2d 801.
Meaning of term "radius" employed in contract, statute, or ordinance as descriptive of area, location, or 
distance.  10 A.L.R.2d 605.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Customs and Usages 1-8, 12
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 223
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 4- Scope as Affected by Usage        
§ 223 Course of Dealing
(1)  A course of dealing is a sequence of previous conduct between the parties to an agreement which 
is fairly to be regarded as establishing a common basis of understanding for interpreting their 
expressions and other conduct.
(2)  Unless otherwise agreed, a course of dealing between the parties gives meaning to or supplements 
or qualifies their agreement.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Relation to other rules.  This Section follows Uniform Commercial Code § 1-205 and states a particular 
application of the rules stated in §§ 220 and 221.  As to conflict between course of dealing and express terms, 
course of performance or usage of trade, see § 203.
b.  Common basis of understanding.  Course of dealing may become part of an agreement either by explicit 
provision or by tacit recognition, or it may guide the court in supplying an omitted term.  Like usage of trade, it 
may determine the meaning of language or it may annex an agreed but unstated term.  There is no requirement 
that an agreement be ambiguous before evidence of a course of dealing can be shown, nor is it required that 
the course of dealing be consistent with the meaning the agreement would have apart from the course of 
dealing.
Illustrations:
1.  A, a sugar company, enters into a written agreement with B, a grower of sugar beets, by which B agrees to 
raise and deliver and A to purchase specified quantities of beets during the coming season.  No price is fixed.  
The agreement is on a standard form used for B and many other growers in prior years.  A's practice is to pay 
all growers uniformly on a formula based on A's "net return" according to A's established accounting system.  
Unless otherwise agreed, the established pattern of pricing is part of the agreement.
2.  A, a manufacturer, sends a price quotation on goods to B, a dealer, together with printed "conditions of 
sale." B then sends orders to A; and A fills them.  B takes advantage of discount terms of the quotation not 
referred to in B's orders.  Unless otherwise agreed, the "conditions of sale" are part of each contract.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This is a new Section following Uniform Commercial Code § 1-205 (1) and (3).  See 5 Williston, Contracts § 660 
(3d ed. 1961); 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 555-56 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 9 Wigmore, Evidence § 2465 (3d ed. 1940).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is based on California Lettuce Growers, Inc. v. Union Sugar Co., 45 Cal.2d 474, 289 
P.2d 785 (1955); see Amerine Nat'l Corp. v. Denver Feed Co., 493 F.2d 1275 (10th Cir. 1974). Illustration 2 is 
based on D'Orsay Equip. Co. v. United States Rubber Co., 302 F.2d 777 (1st Cir. 1962).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Requirements contracts under § 2-306(1) of Uniform Commercial Code.  96 A.L.R.3d 1275.
Construction and effect of tenure provisions of contract or statute governing employment of college or university 
faculty member.  66 A.L.R.3d 1018.

§ 223 Course of Dealing
Validity, construction, and effect of clause in franchise contract prohibiting transfer of franchise or contract.  59 
A.L.R.3d 244.
Construction and operation of "optional agreement-flat payment" land contract under which optionee has right 
to take title when periodic payments (otherwise to be treated as rent) equal agreed price.  55 A.L.R.3d 159.
Validity, construction, and effect of real-estate brokers' multiple-listing agreement.  45 A.L.R.3d 190.
Construction of provision in real-estate mortgage, land contract, or other security instrument for release of 
separate parcels of land as payments are made.  41 A.L.R.3d 7.
Validity, construction, and enforcement of business opportunities or "Finder's Fee" contract.  24 A.L.R.3d 1160.
Construction and effect of affirmative provision in contract of sale by which purchaser agrees to take article "as 
is," in the condition in which it is, or equivalent term.  24 A.L.R.3d 465.
Effect of stipulation, in private building or construction contract, that alterations or extras must be ordered in 
writing.  2 A.L.R.3d 620.
Effect of stipulation, in public building or construction contract, that alterations or extras must be ordered in 
writing.  1 A.L.R.3d 1173.
Construction and effect of provision in contract for sale of realty by which purchaser agrees to take property "as 
is" or in the condition in which it is.  97 A.L.R.2d 849.
Implied obligation of purchaser or lessee to conduct search for, or to develop or work premises for, minerals 
other than oil and gas.  76 A.L.R.2d 721.
Conditions printed on confirmation slips as binding on customers of stock or commodity broker.  71 A.L.R.2d 
1089.
Construction and effect of contract for sale of commodity or goods wherein quantity is described as "about" or 
"more or less" than an amount specified.  58 A.L.R.2d 377.
Place, in absence of written provision in sales contract, where cash consideration for goods purchased is 
payable.  49 A.L.R.2d 1350.
What constitutes "accounts receivable" under contract selling, assigning, pledging, or reserving such items.  41 
A.L.R.2d 1395.
Validity, construction, and application of "no damage" clause with respect to delay in construction contract.  10 
A.L.R.2d 801.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 170
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 224
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 5- Conditions and Similar Events        
§ 224 Condition Defined
A condition is an event, not certain to occur, which must occur, unless its non-occurrence is excused, 
before performance under a contract becomes due.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  "Condition" limited to event.  "Condition" is used in this Restatement to denote an event which qualifies a 
duty under a contract.  See the Introductory Note to this Topic.  It is recognized that "condition" is used with a 
wide variety of other meanings in legal discourse.  Sometimes it is used to denote an event that limits or 
qualifies a transfer of property.  In the law of trusts, for example, it is used to denote an event such as the death 
of the settlor that qualifies his disposition of property in trust.  See Restatement, Second, Trusts § 360.  See 
also the rules on "conditional" delivery (§ 103) and "conditional" assignment (§§ 103, 331).  Sometimes it is 
used to refer to a term (§ 5) in an agreement that makes an event a condition, or more broadly to refer to any 
term in an agreement (e.g., "standard conditions of sale").  For the sake of precision, "condition" is not used 
here in these other senses.
Illustration:
1.  A contracts to sell and B to buy goods pursuant to a writing which provides, under the heading "Conditions 
of Sale," that "the obligations of the parties are conditional on B obtaining from X Bank by June 30 a letter of 
credit" on stated terms.  The quoted language is a term of the agreement (§ 5), not a condition.  The event 
referred to by the term, obtaining the letter of credit by June 30, is a condition.
b.  Uncertainty of event.  Whether the reason for making an event a condition is to shift to the obligee the risk of 
its non-occurrence, or whether it is to induce the obligee to cause the event to occur (see Introductory Note to 
this Topic), there is inherent in the concept of condition some degree of uncertainty as to the occurrence of the 
event.  Therefore, the mere passage of time, as to which there is no uncertainty, is not a condition and a duty is 
unconditional if nothing but the passage of time is necessary to give rise to a duty of performance.  Moreover, 
an event is not a condition, even though its occurrence is uncertain, if it is referred to merely to measure the 
passage of time after which an obligor is to perform.  See Comment b to § 227.  Performance under a contract 
becomes due when all necessary events, including any conditions and the passage of any required time, have 
occurred so that a failure of performance will be a breach.  See §§ 231-43.
The event need not, in order to be a condition, be one that is to occur after the making of the contract, although 
that is commonly the case.  It may relate to the present or even to the past, as is the case where a marine 
policy insures against a loss that may already have occurred.  Furthermore, a duty may be conditioned upon 
the failure of something to happen rather than upon its happening, and in that case its failure to happen is the 
event that is the condition.
Illustrations:
2.  A tells B, "If you will paint my house, I will pay you $ 1,000 on condition that 30 days have passed after you 
have finished." B paints A's house.  Although A is not under a duty to pay B $ 1,000 until 30 days have passed, 
the passage of that time is not a condition of A's duty to pay B $ 1,000.
3.  A contracts to sell and B to buy goods to be shipped "C.I.F.," payment to be "on arrival of goods." Risk of 
loss of the goods passes from A to B when A, having otherwise complied with the C.I.F. term of the contract, 
puts the goods in the possession of the carrier (Uniform Commercial Code § 2-320(2)).  If the goods are lost in 

§ 224 Condition Defined
transit, B is under a duty to pay the price when the goods should have arrived (Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-
709(1)(a), 2-321(3)).  The arrival of the goods is not a condition of B's duty to pay for the goods.
c.  Necessity of a contract.  In order for an event to be a condition, it must qualify a duty under an existing 
contract.  Events which are part of the process of formation of a contract, such as offer and acceptance, are 
therefore excluded under the definition in this section.  It is not customary to call such events conditions.  But cf. 
§ 36(2) ("condition of acceptance").  For the most part, they are required by law and may not be dispensed with 
by the parties, while conditions are the result of, or at least subject to, agreement.  Where, however, an offer 
has become an option contract, e.g., by the payment of a dollar (§ 87), the acceptance is a condition under the 
definition in this section.
Illustration:
4.  A tells B, "I promise to pay you $ 1,000 if you paint my house." B begins to paint A's house.  Since B's 
beginning of the invited performance gives rise to an option contract, B's completion of performance is a 
condition of A's duty under that contract to pay B $ 1,000.  See § 45.
d.  Relationship of conditions.  A duty may be subject to any number of conditions, which may be related to 
each other in various ways.  They may be cumulative so that performance will not become due unless all of 
them occur.  They may be alternative so that performance may become due if any one of them occurs.  Or 
some may be cumulative and some alternative.  Furthermore, a condition may qualify the duties of both parties.  
Cf. § 217.
Illustrations:
5.  A, as the result of financial reverses, sells B a valuable painting for $ 1,000,000, but reserves a right to 
repurchase it by tendering the same price on or before August 18 if he again finds himself in such a financial 
condition that he can keep it for his personal enjoyment.  A's tender of $ 1,000,000 by August 18 and his being 
in such financial condition that he can keep the painting for his personal enjoyment are cumulative conditions 
and redelivery of the painting does not become due unless both of them occur.
6.  A purchases land from Mrs. B, who is unable to get Mr. B to join her in signing the deed because they are 
engaged in divorce proceedings.  A takes possession under a deed signed by Mrs. B, pays Mrs. B $ 10,000 
and promises to pay an additional $ 5,000 "if, within one year, (1) Mr. and Mrs. B execute a quitclaim deed to A, 
or (2) Mrs. B furnishes A with a certificate of the death of Mr. B with Mrs. B surviving him, or (3) Mrs. B as a 
single person executes a quitclaim deed to A after having been awarded the land following the entry of a final 
decree of divorce from Mr. B." The three enumerated events are alternative conditions and A's payment of $ 
5,000 to Mrs. B becomes due if any of them occurs.
7.  A and B contract to merge their corporate holdings into a single new company.  It is agreed that the project 
is not to be operative unless the parties raise $ 600,000 additional capital.  The raising of the additional capital 
is a condition of the duties of both A and B.  If it is not raised, neither A's nor B's performance becomes due.
e.  Occurrence of event as discharge.  Parties sometimes provide that the occurrence of an event, such as the 
failure of one of them to commence an action within a prescribed time, will extinguish a duty after performance 
has become due, along with any claim for breach.  Such an event has often been called a "condition 
subsequent," while an event of the kind defined in this section has been called a "condition precedent." This 
terminology is not followed here.  Since a "condition subsequent," so-called, is subject to the rules on discharge 
in § 230, and not to the following rules on conditions, it is not called a "condition" in this Restatement.  
Occasionally, although the language of an agreement says that if an event does not occur a duty is 
"extinguished," "discharged," or "terminated," it can be seen from the circumstances that the event must 
ordinarily occur before performance of the duty can be expected.  When a court concludes that, for this reason, 
performance is not to become due unless the event occurs, the event is, in spite of the language, a condition of 
the duty.  See § 227(3).  See also Comment a to § 230.
Illustrations:
8.  A insures B's property against theft.  The policy provides that B's failure to notify A within 30 days after loss 
shall "terminate" A's duty to pay and that suit must be brought within one year after loss.  Since it can be seen 
from the circumstances that notice must ordinarily be given before payment by A can be expected, B's 
notification of A within 30 days after loss is a condition of A's duty.  B's bringing suit against A within a year after 

§ 224 Condition Defined
loss is not a condition of A's duty.  B's failure to bring suit within that time will discharge A's duty after payment 
has become due, along with any claim for breach.
9.  A and B make a contract under which A promises to pay B $ 10,000 in annual installments of $ 1,000 each, 
beginning the following January 1, with a provision that "no installments whether or not overdue and unpaid 
shall be payable in case of A's death within the 10 years." A's being alive is a condition of his duty to pay any 
installment.  A's death within ten years will discharge his duty to pay any installment after payment has become 
due, along with any claim for breach.
f.  Sealed contracts.  The rules governing conditions stated in the Restatement of this Subject are applicable to 
sealed as well as unsealed contracts.  The same rules have traditionally been applied to both types of contract 
with technical exceptions that are no longer of significance.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section revises former § 250 to eliminate the terms "condition precedent" and "condition subsequent." This 
terminology has long been criticized and has caused confusion when used in an attempt to answer questions 
related to the burdens of pleading and proof.  See Holmes, The Common Law 317 (1881); Harnett and 
Thornton, The Insurance Condition Subsequent: A Needle in a Semantic Haystack, 17 Fordham L. Rev. 220 
(1948). "Conditions subsequent" are dealt with in connection with the rules on discharge in § 230.
Conditions precedent are referred to simply as "conditions." The Section also abandons the use of "condition" in 
two senses, to refer to both the event and the term that makes the event a condition, and uses it only in the 
former sense.  Former § 255 is therefore omitted as unnecessary.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 627, 628 (1960 
& Supp. 1980); 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 663-67A (1961).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is new.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts § 627 (1960).
Comment b.  Illustration 2 is new.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts § 626 (1960).  Illustration 3 is based on 
Illustration1 to former § 301.
Comment c.  When an event that is not normally part of the process of formation of contract is made an event 
upon which the performance of the contract is dependent, courts often describe it as a condition that must be 
performed before the contract comes into existence.  See, e.g., City of Houston v. West, 563 S.W.2d 680 (Tex. 
1978), ref. n.r.e.; Reporter's Note to Comment c to § 217.  Similarly, inartistically drafted contracts may contain 
language such as: "this contract shall not come into existence until Event A occurs." As Illustration 7 suggests, 
it is better to view a contract as already in existence, but with the parties' respective performances subject to 
the specified event, which is a condition to their respective performances.  However, there is no great 
substantive disparity between the terminology used in this Comment and descriptions of such events as 
conditions to the existence of the contract.  This Comment excludes from the definition of condition only the 
elements of contracts, such as offer, acceptance and capacity, not specific events triggering performance 
simply because of the agreement of the parties.  These latter, properly called conditions to the parties' 
performance, are what are often called conditions to the existence of the contract.  Both this Comment and the 
case law agree that they are conditions.  Illustration 4 is new.
Comment d.  This is based on former § 263.  Illustration 5 is based on Youssoupoff v. Widener, 246 N.Y. 174, 
158 N.E. 64 (1927). Illustration 6 is based on Wortman v. Jessen, 183 Neb. 274, 159 N.W.2d 564 (1968). 
Illustration 7 is based on Hicks v. Bush, 10 N.Y.2d 488, 225 N.Y.S.2d 34, 180 N.E.2d 425 (1962); see also 
Illustration 5 to § 243.
Comment e.  Illustrations 8 and 9 are based on Illustrations 1 and 4 to former § 259.
Comment f.  This is based on former § 256.  No section is required to make this point.  See Comment b to § 6; 
Introductory Note to Topic 3 of Chapter 4.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Landlord and tenant: Tenant's rights under provision giving him pre-emptive right to purchase on terms offered 
by third person, where third person's offer is withdrawn before tenant exercises pre-emptive right.  46 A.L.R.3d 
1377.

§ 224 Condition Defined
Validity of individual employment contract for specific term which contains provision that employee will perform 
if physically able, if health permits, or the like.  7 A.L.R.3d 898.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 218
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 225
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 5- Conditions and Similar Events        
§ 225 Effects of the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
(1)  Performance of a duty subject to a condition cannot become due unless the condition occurs or its 
non-occurrence is excused.
(2)  Unless it has been excused, the non-occurrence of a condition discharges the duty when the 
condition can no longer occur.
(3)  Non-occurrence of a condition is not a breach by a party unless he is under a duty that the 
condition occur.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Two effects.  The unexcused non-occurrence of a condition has two possible effects on the duty subject to 
that condition.  The first effect always follows and the second often does.  The first, stated in Subsection (1), is 
that of preventing performance of the duty from becoming due.  This follows from the definition of "condition" in 
§ 224.  Performance of the duty may still become due, however, if the condition occurs later within the time for 
its occurrence.  The non-occurrence of the condition within that time has the additional effect, stated in 
Subsection (2), of discharging the duty.  The time within which the condition can occur in order for the 
performance of the duty to become due may be fixed by a term of the agreement or, in the absence of such a 
term, by one supplied by the court (§ 204).  Where discharge would produce harsh results, this second effect 
may be avoided by rules of interpretation (§§ 226, 228) or of excuse of conditions (Comment b and § 229).
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to sell and B to buy A's business.  The contract provides that B is to pay in installments over a 
five-year period following the conveyance, and that A is to convey on condition that B pledge specified collateral 
to secure his payment.  Conveyance by A does not become due until B pledges the collateral.  If the agreement 
does not provide for the time within which the collateral is to be pledged, A's duty is discharged if it is not 
pledged within a reasonable time.
2.  B gives A $ 10,000 to use in perfecting an invention, and A promises to repay it only out of royalties received 
during his lifetime from the sale of the patent rights.  In spite of diligent efforts, A is unable to perfect his 
invention and obtain a patent, and no royalties are received.  A dies after six years.  B has no claim against A's 
estate.  Receipt of royalties is a condition of A's duty to repay the money and A's duty is discharged by the non-
occurrence of that condition during his lifetime.
b.  Excuse.  The non-occurrence of a condition of a duty is said to be "excused" when the condition need no 
longer occur in order for performance of the duty to become due.  The non-occurrence of a condition may be 
excused on a variety of grounds.  It may be excused by a subsequent promise, even without consideration, to 
perform the duty in spite of the non-occurrence of the condition.  See the treatment of "waiver" in § 84, and the 
treatment of discharge in §§ 273-85.  It may be excused by acceptance of performance in spite of the non-
occurrence of the condition, or by rejection following its non-occurrence accompanied by an inadequate 
statement of reasons.  See §§ 246-48.  It may be excused by a repudiation of the conditional duty or by a 
manifestation of an inability to perform it.  See § 255; §§ 250-51.  It may be excused by prevention or hindrance 
of its occurrence through a breach of the duty of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205).  See § 239.  And it may be 
excused by impracticability.  See § 271.  These and other grounds for excuse are dealt with in other chapters of 
this Restatement.  This Chapter deals only with one general ground, excuse toavoid forfeiture.  See § 229.

§ 225 Effects of the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
c.  Effect of excuse.  When the non-occurrence of a condition of a duty is excused, the damages for breach of 
the duty will depend on whether or not the occurrence of the condition was also part of the performances to be 
exchanged under the exchange of promises.  If it was not part of the agreed exchange, the obligor is liable for 
the same damages for which he would have been liable had the duty originally been unconditional.  If it was 
part of the agreed exchange, however, the saving to the obligee resulting from the non-occurrence of the 
condition must be subtracted in determining the obligor's liability for damages.  Rules for determining damages 
are set out in § 347; see generally §§ 346-56.  If the obligee is under a duty that the condition occur, the ground 
for the excuse of the non-occurrence of the condition may not be a ground for discharge of that duty.  He may 
therefore be liable for breach of the duty in spite of the excuse of the non-occurrence of the condition.  Not only 
may a party excuse entirely the non-occurrence of a condition of his duty, but he may merely excuse its non-
occurrence during the period of time in which it would otherwise have to occur.  If he does this, the non-
occurrence of the condition during that period will not discharge the duty under Subsection (2), although its non-
occurrence will ultimately have that effect.  See Illustration 8 to § 84.
Illustrations:
3.  A contracts with B to build a house for $ 50,000, payable on condition that A present a certificate from C, B's 
architect, showing that the work has been properly completed.  A properly completes the work, but C refuses to 
give the certificate because of collusion with B, and the non-occurrence of the condition is therefore excused.  
See § 239.  Since the presentation of the architect's certificate is not part of the performances to be exchanged 
under the exchange of promises, A has a claim against B for $ 50,000.
4.  Under an option contract, A promises to sell B a painting "on condition that B pay $ 100,000" by a stated 
date.  Before that date, the non-occurrence of the condition is excused by A's repudiation of the contract.  See § 
255.  Since the payment of the $ 100,000 is B's part of the performances to be exchanged under the exchange 
of promises, B saved that amount when the non-occurrence of the condition was excused, and it should be 
subtracted in determining damages.  B has a claim against A for the value of the painting to B less $ 100,000.
5.  A leases property to B for a stated monthly rental.  The lease provides that A is under a duty to remove 
described property from the premises, and that its removal is a condition of B's duty to pay the rent.  After A has 
removed most of the property from the premises, B says that he will pay the rent even though not all of it has 
been removed.  The non-occurrence of the condition is excused and B is under a duty to pay the rent even 
though A does not remove the rest of the property.  See § 84.  But A's duty to remove the rest of the property is 
not discharged and his failure to remove the rest is a breach.
d.  Imposition of duty distinguished.  When one party chooses to use the institution of contract to induce the 
other party to cause an event to occur, he may do so by making the event a condition of his own duty 
(Introductory Note to this Topic).  Or he may do so by having the other party undertake a duty that the event 
occur.  Or he may do both.  But, as Subsection (3) makes clear, a term making an event a condition of 
anobligor's duty does not of itself impose a duty on the obligee and the non-occurrence of the event is not of 
itself a breach by the obligee.  Unless the obligee is under such a duty, the non-occurrence of the event gives 
rise to no claim against him.  The same term may, however, be interpreted not only to make an event a 
condition of the obligor's duty, but also to impose a duty on the obligee that it occur.  And even where no term 
of the agreement imposes a duty that a condition occur, the court may supply such a term.  See § 204.
Illustrations:
6.  A, a shipowner, promises to carry B's cargo on his ship to Portsmouth.  B promises to pay A the stipulated 
freight on condition that A's ship sail directly there on its next sailing.  A's ship carries B's cargo to Portsmouth, 
but puts into port on the way.  Since carrying B's cargo directly to Portsmouth is a condition of B's duty, no duty 
to pay arises, and, since the condition can no longer occur, B's duty is discharged.  Since A is under no duty to 
carry B's cargo directly to Portsmouth, however, his failure to do so is not a breach.
7.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 6, A promises to carry B's cargo on his ship directly to 
Portsmouth on its next sailing.  Since carrying B's cargo directly to Portsmouth is a condition of B's duty, no 
duty to pay arises and, since the condition can no longer occur, B's duty is discharged.  Since A is under a duty 
to carry B's cargo directly to Portsmouth, his failure to do so is also a breach.
8.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a house for $ 50,000, with the provision, "This contract is conditional on 
approval by X Bank of B's pending mortgage application." Approval by X Bank is a condition of B's duty.  B is 

§ 225 Effects of the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
under no duty that the X Bank approve his application, but a court will supply a term imposing on him a duty to 
make reasonable efforts to obtain approval.  See §§ 204, 205.
e.  Ignorance immaterial.  The rules stated in this Section apply without regard to whether a party knows or 
does not know of the non-occurrence of a condition of his duty.
Illustration:
9.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 6, B refuses to pay the freight without knowing that A's 
ship has put into port on the way.  B's refusal is not a breach since his duty is discharged.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is new, but is based in part on former § 294.  See § 224.  Subsection (2) is based on former § 
395.  Subsection (3) is based on former § 257.  See 5 Williston, Contracts § 676 (3d ed. 1961); 3A Corbin, 
Contracts § 655 (1960).
Comment a.  For the basic rule of Subsection (1), see Addison Terry Co. v. N.F.L. Films, Inc., 390 F. Supp. 621 
(S.D.N.Y. 1974), citing this Section in Tentative Draft.  Illustration 1 is suggested by Kingston v. Preston, 2 
Doug. 689, 99 Eng. Rep. 437 (K.B. 1773). Illustration 2 is based on Palmer v. Guillow, 224 Mass. 1, 112 N.E. 
493 (1916).
Comment b.  Excuse of condition by waiver is covered in § 84, and former § 297, which dealt with that subject, 
is therefore omitted.  See Rose v. Mitsubishi Int'l Corp., 423 F. Supp. 1162 (E.D. Pa. 1976); Williamson v. 
Wanlass, 545 P.2d 1145 (Utah 1976); Fritts v. Cloud Oak Flooring Co., 478 S.W.2d 8 (Mo. Ct. App. 1972). On 
excuse to avoid forfeiture, see the two last-cited cases.  On prevention or hindrance, see R.G. Pope Constr. 
Co. v. Guard Rail of Roanoke, Inc., 219 Va. 111, 244 S.E.2d 774 (1978); Chemetron Corp. v. McLouth Steel 
Corp., 381 F. Supp. 245 (N.D.Ill 1974), aff'd, 522 F.2d 469 (7th Cir. 1975). On excuse generally, see 3A Corbin, 
Contracts §§ 752-71 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 676-811 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment c.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 294.  Illustration 4 is suggested by Illustration 3 
to former § 294.  Illustration 5 is suggested by Budget Way Cleaners & Laundry v. Simon, 151 Cal. App.2d 476, 
311 P.2d 591 (1957).
Comment d.  Illustrations 6 and 7 are suggested by Bornmann v. Tooke, 1 Camp. 377, 170 Eng. Rep. 991 
(1807). Illustration 8 is based on Lach v. Cahill, 138 Conn. 418, 85 A.2d 481 (1951).
Comment e.  This is based on former § 278.  Illustration 9 is new; cf.  Addison Terry Co. v. N.F.L. Films, Inc., 
390 F. Supp. 621 (S.D.N.Y. 1974). But see Barbara Oil Co. v. Patrick Petroleum Co., 1 Kan. App.2d 437, 566 
P.2d 389 (1977).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Validity and construction of provision (Escalator Clause) in land contract or mortgage that rate of interest 
payable shall increase if legal rate is raised.  60 A.L.R.3d 473.
Construction and operation of "optional agreement-flat payment" land contract under which optionee has right 
to take title when periodic payments (otherwise to be treated as rent) equal agreed price.  55 A.L.R.3d 159.
Landlord and tenant: Tenant's rights under provision giving him pre-emptive right to purchase on terms offered 
by third person, where third person's offer is withdrawn before tenant exercises pre-emptive right.  46 A.L.R.3d 
1377.
Effect of provision in real-estate option or land sale contract making the contract subject to zoning or rezoning 
of the property.  76 A.L.R.2d 1195.
Restitution of property conveyed in consideration of previous reconciliation, as condition of entertaining divorce 
action.  4 A.L.R.2d 1210.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 278(1)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute

§ 225 Effects of the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 226
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 5- Conditions and Similar Events        
§ 226 How an Event May Be Made a Condition
An event may be made a condition either by the agreement of the parties or by a term supplied by the 
court.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  By agreement of the parties.  No particular form of language is necessary to make an event a condition, 
although such words as "on condition that," "provided that" and "if" are often used for this purpose.  An intention 
to make a duty conditional may be manifested by the general nature of an agreement, as well as by specific 
language.  Whether the parties have, by their agreement, made an event a condition is determined by the 
process of interpretation.  That process is subject to the general rules that are contained in previous topics of 
this Chapter.  For example, as in other instances of interpretation, the purpose of the parties is given great 
weight (§ 202(1)), and, in choosing between reasonable meanings, that meaning is generally preferred which 
operates against the draftsman (§ 206).  There are also some special standards of preference that are of 
particular applicability to conditions, and these are set out in § 227.
Illustrations:
1.  A partnership agreement among physicians provides that A may withdraw from the partnership on three 
months' written notice to the partnership's executive committee, "but in the event that the committee requests 
him to revoke his notice of withdrawal prior to its effective date, and he refuses to comply, he shall not upon his 
withdrawal engage in the practice of medicine within a twenty-five mile radius." A gives notice of his withdrawal.  
A request by the committee that A revoke his notice is a condition of A's duty not to practice medicine within a 
twenty-five mile radius.
2.  A, a tenant of B, promises to pay $ 1,000 for "such repairs as an architect appointed by B shall approve." 
The appointment by B of an architect and the architect's approval of repairs are conditions of A's duty to pay for 
repairs.
3.  A sells an automobile to B, for which B promises to pay $ 5,000 "on demand." A sues B for the $ 5,000 
without first making a demand.  A can recover.  The quoted language is to be interpreted in the light of the 
purpose of the parties (§ 202(1)), and the purpose of such language, in connection with a promise that is one to 
pay money and is otherwise unconditional, is to fix the time after which interest at the legal rate is payable.  A's 
suit should therefore not be dismissed merely because he did not demand payment, and a demand by A is not 
a condition of B's duty.  The same interpretation follows by analogy from the rule of Uniform Commercial Code 
§ 3-122(1)(b), under which a claim on a demand instrument arises on its date or date of issue.
4.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a house for $ 50,000.  The contract contains the provision, "This contract is 
conditional on approval by X Bank of B's pending mortgage application." Approval by X Bank is a condition of 
B's duty but not of A's duty.  The quoted language is to be interpreted in the light of the purpose of the parties (§ 
202(1)), and their purpose in including such a provision is to protect B and not A in the event that the 
application is not approved.  If X Bank does not approve B's application, performance by B will not become due 
even if A makes a conditional offer to deliver a deed, but performance by A will become due if, in spite of X 
Bank's failure to approve B's application, B makes a conditional offer to pay the $ 50,000.  Cf. Illustration 8 to § 
225.
b.  Nature of event.  Just as the process of interpretation determines whether the parties have by their 
agreement made an event a condition, it also determines the nature of that event.  Here too the process is 

§ 226 How an Event May Be Made a Condition
subject to the general rules of interpretation stated earlier in the present Chapter, and here too there are some 
special standards of preference.  These standards are set out in §§ 227(1) and 228.
Illustrations:
5.  A, an insurance company, insures B, a storekeeper, against safe burglary, "provided entry be made by 
actual force and violence, of which there are visible marks upon the exterior of all of the doors of the safe if 
entry is made through such doors." A burglar robs B's safe by picking the lock of the outer door, leaving no 
visible marks, and punching out the lock of the inner door.  Ifthe requirement of visible marks on both doors is 
merely evidentiary, the condition occurs when there is as here, adequate evidence of force and violence to 
prevent fraudulent claims, even though there are no visible marks on the outer door.  Since A was the 
draftsman of the policy, the meaning favorable to B is preferred (§ 206).
6.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a house for $ 50,000.  The contract recites that financing is to take the form 
of "$ 30,000 mortgage from X Bank" on stated terms and provides that B's duty is "conditional upon B's ability 
to arrange above described financing." B is unable to get the mortgage from X Bank but A offers to take a $ 
30,000 purchase money mortgage on the stated terms and makes a conditional offer to deliver a deed.  B 
refuses to perform.  Although circumstances may show a contrary intention, the quoted language will ordinarily 
be interpreted so that the condition occurs only if B is able to get the mortgage from X Bank, and not if B is able 
to get a similar mortgage from A.  Under this interpretation, B's refusal is not a breach.
c.  By a term supplied by court.  When the parties have omitted a term that is essential to a determination of 
their rights and duties, the court may supply a term which is reasonable in the circumstances (§ 204).  Where 
that term makes an event a condition, it is often described as a "constructive" (or "implied in law") condition.  
This serves to distinguish it from events which are made conditions by the agreement of the parties, either by 
their words or by other conduct, and which are described as "express" and as "implied in fact" (inferred from 
fact) conditions.  See Comments a and b to § 4.  It is useful to distinguish "constructive" conditions, even 
though the distinction is necessarily somewhat arbitrary.  For one thing, it is helpful in analysis and description 
to have terminology that reflects the two distinctive processes, sometimes called "interpretation" and 
"construction," that give rise to conditions.  See Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-313 to 2-315, in which an 
analogous distinction is made between express and implied warranties.  For another, to the extent that the 
parties have, by a term of their agreement, clearly made an event a condition, they can be confident that a court 
will ordinarily feel constrained strictly to apply that term, while the same court may regard itself as having 
considerable latitude in tailoring a similar term that it has itself supplied.
One example of such a term supplied by the court is the requirement of § 45(2) that the offeree, under an 
option contract, complete or tender the invited performance as a condition of the offeror's duty.  A more 
common example occurs where an obligor's duty cannot be performed without some act by the obligee, and the 
court supplies a term making that act a condition of the obligor's duty.  In most such situations, the obligee's 
own obligation of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205) imposes on him a duty to do the act, so that a material 
failure to perform that duty would, in any case, have the same effect as the non-occurrence of a condition under 
the rules relating to performances to be exchanged under an exchange of promises (§ 239).  The examples 
given in the following illustrations involve situations where no duty to do the act is imposed.
Illustrations:
7.  A promises to make necessary interior repairs on a building that he has leased to B, but reserves no 
privilege of entering the building.  B's giving reasonable notice to A of any necessary interior repairs of which A 
would otherwise be unaware is a condition of A's duty to make those repairs, although B is under no duty to 
give notice.
8.  A, a general contractor, contracts with B, a town, to construct a sewer system, agreeing in addition to defend 
any action against the town arising out of the work and to pay any damages recovered in such an action.  B's 
giving reasonable notice to A of the commencement of any action of which A would otherwise be unaware is a 
condition of A's duties to defend and pay damages, although B is under no duty to give notice.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former §§ 252, 253 and 258.  The distinction between "express" and "constructive" 
conditions, formerly set out in §§ 252 and 253, is now dealt with in Comment c.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 
631, 632 (1960); 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 668-71 (3d ed. 1961).

§ 226 How an Event May Be Made a Condition
Comment a.  That the process of interpretation governs the requirement of conditions, see In re Carter's Claim, 
390 Pa. 365, 134 A.2d 908 (1957). For examples of the interpretation process when the language of the 
agreement is unclear whether a condition was intended, see Feinberg v. Automobile Banking Corp., 353 F. 
Supp. 508 (E.D. Pa. 1973); Chirichella v. Erwin, 270 Md. 178, 310 A.2d 555 (1973); Lewis v. Roper, 579 P.2d 
434 (Wyo. 1978); Northern State Constr. Co. v. Robbins, 76 Wash.2d 357, 457 P.2d 187 (1969). Illustration 1 is 
based on Partlow v. Mathews, 43 Wash.2d 398, 261 P.2d 394 (1953). Illustration 2 is based on former § 262.  
Illustration 3 is based on former § 264, which has been omitted, and on Illustration 1 to that section.  See 3A 
Corbin, Contracts § 643 (1960).  That a demand fixes the time after which interest at the legal rate is payable, 
see Trustees of University of Pennsylvania v. Cadwalder, 277 Pa. 512, 121 A. 314 (1923). That the statute of 
limitations begins to run from the date the promise is made, see Kirby v. Bourg, 165 Colo. 500, 440 P.2d 151 
(1968). As to the rule applicable to a surety who promises to pay "on demand," see First Nat'l Bank v. Story, 
200 N.Y. 346, 93 N.E. 940 (1911). Contra: Arthur Fulmer St. Louis, Inc. v. Auto-Re-Nu-Inc., 177 Neb. 671, 131 
N.W.2d 89 (1964); cf.  Texas Water Supply Corp., v. Reconstruction Fin. Corp., 204 F.2d 190 (5th Cir. 1953). 
Illustration 4 is new.  See De Freitas v. Cote, 342 Mass. 474, 174 N.E.2d 371 (1961).
Comment b.  Illustration 5 is based on Ferguson v. Phoenix Assurance Co., 189 Kan. 459, 370 P.2d 379 
(1962); see also C & J Fertilizer, Inc. v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., 227 N.W.2d 169 (Iowa 1975). As to Illustration 6, 
compare Glassman v. Gerstein, 10 A.D.2d 875, 200 N.Y.S.2d 690 (1960), with Marino v. Nolan, 24 A.D.2d 
1005, 266 N.Y.S.2d 65 (1965), aff'd mem., 18 N.Y.2d 627, 272 N.Y.S.2d 776, 219 N.E.2d 291 (1966). See also 
Simms Co. v. Wolverton, 232 Or. 291, 375 P.2d 87 (1962). But cf.  Kovarik v. Vesely, 3 Wis.2d 573, 89 N.W.2d 
279 (1958).
Comment c.  This is based on former §§ 252, 253 and 262.  Most of the situations contemplated by former § 
262 are now covered in § 205, which imposes a duty of good faith and fair dealing, coupled with the rules of 
Topics 1 and 2 of Chapter 10 on performances to be exchanged under an exchange of promises.  The few 
remaining ones are considered here.  Since the terms "express" and "constructive," defined in former §§ 253 
and 254, are not used in stating the rules in this Restatement, they are dealt with by comment only.  The use of 
the term "constructive" rather than "implied in law" was urged in Corbin, Conditions in the Law of Contract, 28 
Yale L.J. 739, 744(1919). Whether a court is inferring a condition from the parties' unclear expression of 
intention or constructing one as a matter of lawmaking is often unclear, because the processes overlap: the 
values that encourage a court to construct a condition were usually present when the parties were negotiating 
and thus support inferences about their actual intentions.  See, e.g., United Campgrounds, U.S.A. v. 
Stevenson, 175 Mont. 17, 571 P.2d 1161 (1977); Telecommunications Corp. of America v. Franchises Int'l, Inc., 
332 F. Supp. 469 (S.D.N.Y. 1971); cf. 407 E. 61st Garage v. Savoy Fifth Ave. Corp., 23 N.Y.2d 275, 296 
N.Y.S.2d 338, 244 N.E.2d 37 (1968). Illustration 7 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 262; see also Fiorntino 
v. Wilson, 233 Mass. 451, 124 N.E. 283 (1919); Woodbury Co. v. Williams Tackaberry Co., 166 Iowa 642, 148 
N.W. 639 (1914). Illustration 8 is based on Town of Fairfield v. D'Addario, 149 Conn. 358, 179 A.2d 826 (1962).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Restitution of property conveyed in consideration of previous reconciliation, as condition of entertaining divorce 
action.  4 A.L.R.2d 1210.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 218
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 227
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 5- Conditions and Similar Events        
§ 227 Standards of Preference with Regard to Conditions
(1)  In resolving doubts as to whether an event is made a condition of an obligor's duty, and as to the 
nature of such an event, an interpretation is preferred that will reduce the obligee's risk of forfeiture, 
unless the event is within the obligee's control or the circumstances indicate that he has assumed the 
risk.
(2)  Unless the contract is of a type under which only one party generally undertakes duties, when it is 
doubtful whether
(a)  a duty is imposed on an obligee that an event occur, or
(b)  the event is made a condition of the obligor's duty, or
(c)  the event is made a condition of the obligor's duty and a duty is imposed on the obligee that the 
event occur,
the first interpretation is preferred if the event is within the obligee's control.
(3)  In case of doubt, an interpretation under which an event is a condition of an obligor's duty is 
preferred over an interpretation under which the non-occurrence of the event is a ground for discharge 
of that duty after it has become a duty to perform.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope.  The present Section states three standards of preference used in the process of interpretation with 
regard to conditions.  They supplement the standards of preference in § 203, as well as the other rules set out 
in Topics 1 through 4 of this Chapter.
b.  Condition or not.  The non-occurrence of a condition of an obligor's duty may cause the obligee to lose his 
right to the agreed exchange after he has relied substantially on the expectation of that exchange, as by 
preparation or performance.  The word "forfeiture" is used in this Restatement to refer to the denial of 
compensation that results in such a case.  The policy favoring freedom of contract requires that, within broad 
limits (see § 229), the agreement of the parties should be honored even though forfeiture results.  When, 
however, it is doubtful whether or not the agreement makes an event a condition of an obligor's duty, an 
interpretation is preferred that will reduce the risk of forfeiture.  For example, under a provision that a duty is to 
be performed "when" an event occurs, it may be doubtful whether it is to be performed only if that event occurs, 
in which case the event is a condition, or at such time as it would ordinarily occur, in which case the event is 
referred to merely to measure the passage of time.  In the latter case, if the event does not occur some 
alternative means will be found to measure the passage of time, and the non-occurrence of the event will not 
prevent the obligor's duty from becoming one of performance.  If the event is a condition, however, the obligee 
takes the risk that its non-occurrence will discharge the obligor's duty.  See § 225(2).  When the nature of the 
condition is such that the uncertainty as to the event will be resolved before either party has relied on its 
anticipated occurrence, both parties can be entirely relieved of their duties, and the obligee risks only the loss of 
his expectations.  When, however, the nature of the condition is such that the uncertainty is not likely to be 
resolved until after the obligee has relied by preparing to perform or by performing at least in part, he risks 
forfeiture.  If the event is within his control, he will often assume this risk.  If it is not within his control, it is 

§ 227 Standards of Preference with Regard to Conditions
sufficiently unusual for him to assume the risk that, in case of doubt, an interpretation is preferred under which 
the event is not a condition.  The rule is, of course, subject to a showing of a contrary intention, and even 
without clear language, circumstances may show that he assumed the risk of its non-occurrence.
Although the rule is consistent with a policy of avoiding forfeiture and unjust enrichment, it is not directed at the 
avoidance of actual forfeiture and unjust enrichment.  Since the intentions of the parties must be taken as of the 
time the contract was made, the test is whether a particular interpretation would have avoided the risk of 
forfeiture viewed as of that time, not whether it will avoid actual forfeiture in the resolution of a dispute that has 
arisen later.  Excuse of the non-occurrence of a condition because of actual forfeiture is dealt with in § 229, and 
rules for the avoidance of unjust enrichment as such are dealt with in the Restatement of Restitution and in 
Chapter 16 of this Restatement, particularly §§ 370-77.
Illustrations:
1.  A, a general contractor, contracts with B, a sub-contractor, for the plumbing work on a construction project.  
B is to receive $ 100,000, "no part of which shall be due until five days after Owner shall have paid Contractor 
therefor." B does the plumbing work, but the owner becomes insolvent and fails to pay A.  A is under a duty to 
pay B after a reasonable time.
2.  A, a mining company, hires B, an engineer, to help reopen one of its mines for "$ 10,000to be payable as 
soon as the mine is in successful operation." $ 10,000 is a reasonable compensation for B's service.  B 
performs the required services, but the attempt to reopen the mine is unsuccessful and A abandons it.  A is 
under a duty to pay B $ 10,000 after the passage of a reasonable time.
3.  A, a mining company, contracts with B, the owner of an untested experimental patented process, to help 
reopen one of its mines for $ 5,000 paid in advance and an additional "$ 15,000 to be payable as soon as the 
mine is in successful operation." $ 10,000 is a reasonable compensation for B's services.  B performs the 
required services, but because the process proves to be unsuccessful, A abandons the attempt to reopen the 
mine.  A is under no duty to pay B any additional amount.  In all the circumstances the risk of failure of the 
process was, to that extent, assumed by B.
4.  A contracts to sell and B to buy land for $ 100,000.  At the same time, A contracts to pay C, a real estate 
broker, as his commission, $ 5,000 "on the closing of title." B refuses to consummate the sale.  Absent a 
showing of a contrary intention, a court may conclude that C assumed this risk, and that A's duty is conditional 
on the sale being consummated.  A is then under no duty to pay C.
c.  Nature of event.  In determining the nature of the event that is made a condition by the agreement, as in 
determining whether the agreement makes an event a condition in the first place (see Comment b), it will not 
ordinarily be supposed that a party has assumed the risk of forfeiture.  Where the language is doubtful, an 
interpretation is generally preferred that will avoid this risk.  This standard of preference finds an important 
application in the case of promises to pay for work done if some independent third party, such as an architect, 
surveyor or engineer, is satisfied with it, where the risk of forfeiture in the case of a judgment that is dishonest 
or based on a gross mistake as to the facts is substantial.  The standard does not, however, help a party if the 
condition is within his control or if the circumstances otherwise indicate that he assumed that risk.
Illustrations:
5.  A contracts with B to repair B's building for $ 20,000, payment to be made "on the satisfaction of C, B's 
architect, and the issuance of his certificate." A makes the repairs, but C refuses to issue his certificate, and 
explains why he is not satisfied.  Other experts in the field consider A's performance to be satisfactory and 
disagree with C's explanation.  A has no claim against B.  The quoted language is sufficiently clear that 
Subsection (1) does not apply.  If C is honestly not satisfied, B is under no duty to pay A, and it makes no 
difference if his dissatisfaction was not reasonable.
6.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 5, C refuses to issue his certificate although he admits that 
he is satisfied.  A has a claim against B for $ 20,000.  The quoted language will be interpreted so that the 
requirement of the certificate is merely evidentiary and the condition occurs when there is, as here, adequate 
evidence that C is honestly satisfied.
7.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 5, C does not make a proper inspection of the work and 
gives no reasons for his dissatisfaction.  A has a claim against B for $ 20,000.  In using the quoted language, A 
and B assumed that C would exercise an honest judgment and by failing to make a proper inspection, C did not 

§ 227 Standards of Preference with Regard to Conditions
exercise such a judgment.  Since the parties have omitted an essential term to cover this situation, the court will 
supply a term (see § 204) requiring A to pay B if C ought reasonably to have been satisfied.
8.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 5, C makes a gross mistake with reference to the facts on 
which his refusal to give a certificate is based.  A has a claim against B for $ 20,000.  In using the quoted 
language, A and B assumed that C would exercise his judgment without a gross mistake as to the facts.  Since 
the parties have omitted an essential term to cover this situation, the court will supply a term (see § 204) 
requiring A to pay B if C ought reasonably to have been satisfied.
d.  Condition or duty.  When an obligor wants the obligee to do an act, the obligor may make his own duty 
conditional on the obligee doing it and may also have the obligee promise to do it.  Or he may merely make his 
own duty conditional on the obligee doing it.  Or he may merely have the obligee promise to do it.  (See 
Introductory Note to this Topic and Comment d to § 225).  It may not be clear, however, which he has done.  
The rule in Subsection (2) states a preference for an interpretation that merely imposes a duty on the obligee to 
do the act and does not make the doing of the act a condition of the obligor's duty.  The preferred interpretation 
avoids the harsh results that might otherwise result from the non-occurrence of a condition and still gives 
adequate protection to the obligor under the rules of Chapter 10 relating to performances to be exchanged 
under an exchange of promises.  Under those rules, particularly §§ 237-41, the obligee's failure to perform his 
duty has, if it is material, the effect of the non-occurrence of a condition of the obligor's duty.  Unless the 
agreement makes it clear that the event is required as a condition, it is fairer to apply these more flexible rules.  
The obligor will, in any case, have a remedy for breach.  In many instances the rule in Subsection (1) will also 
apply and will reinforce the preference stated in Subsection (2).
This standard of preference applies only where the event is within the obligee's control.  Where it is within the 
obligor's control (e.g., his honest satisfaction with the obligee's performance), within a third party's control (e.g., 
an architect's satisfaction with performance), or within no one's control (e.g., the accidental destruction of the 
subject matter), the preferential rule does not apply since it is not usual for the obligee to undertake a duty that 
such an event will occur.  Although the obligee can, by appropriate language, undertake a duty that an event 
that is not within his control will occur, such an undertaking must be derived from the agreement of the parties 
under the general rules of interpretation stated earlier in the present Chapter without resort to this standard of 
preference.
Furthermore, this standard of preference does not apply when the contract is of a type under which only the 
obligor generally undertakes duties.  It therefore does not apply to the typical insurance contract under which 
only the insurer generally undertakes duties, and a term requiring an act to be done by the insured is not 
subject to this standard of preference.  In view of the general understanding that only the insurer undertakes 
duties, the term will be interpreted as making that event a condition of the insurer's duty rather than as imposing 
a duty on the insured.
Illustrations:
9.  On August 1, A contracts to sell and B to buy goods, "selection to be made by buyer before September 1." B 
merely has a dutyto make his selection by September 1, and his making it by that date is not a condition of A's 
duty.  A failure by B to make a selection by September 1 is a breach, and if material it operates as the non-
occurrence of a condition of A's duty.  See §§ 237, 241.
10.  A, B, and C make a contract under which A agrees to buy the inventory of B's grocery business, C agrees 
to finance A's down payment, and B agrees to subordinate A's obligation to him to pay the balance to A's 
obligation to C to repay the amount of the down payment.  The contract provides that "C shall maintain the 
books of account for A, and shall inventory A's stock of merchandise every two months, rendering statements to 
B." C merely has a duty to do these acts and doing them is not a condition of B's duty.  A failure by C to do 
them is a breach, and if material it operates as the non-occurrence of a condition of B's duty.  See §§ 237, 241.
11.  A insures B's house against fire for $ 50,000 under a policy providing, "other insurance is prohibited." 
Because the insured has undertaken no other duties under the contract, Subsection (2) does not apply.  
Because a policy of fire insurance is a type of contract under which only the insurer generally undertakes 
duties, the absence of other insurance is merely a condition of A's duty, and B is not under a duty not to procure 
other insurance.

§ 227 Standards of Preference with Regard to Conditions
e.  Condition or discharge.  Circumstances may show that the parties intended to make an event a condition of 
an obligor's duty even though their language appears to make the non-occurrence of the event a ground for 
discharge of his duty after performance has become due.  See Comment e to § 224.  An example is the 
traditional form of bond, which states that the obligor is under a duty to perform, but that the duty will be 
discharged if something happens.  The language, in spite of its form, is interpreted so that the failure of that 
thing to happen is a condition of the obligor's duty.  Unless that condition occurs, no performance is due.  
Although this form of expression persists in legal documents, only rarely do the parties intend that one of them 
shall be under a duty to perform which is to cease on the occurrence of something that is still uncertain.  The 
clearest language is therefore necessary to justify such an interpretation, and if the language is doubtful a 
contrary interpretation is preferred.
Illustrations:
12.  In return for a fee paid by X, A signs and delivers to B a bond which reads: "I acknowledge myself to be 
indebted to B in the sum of $ 50,000.  The condition of this obligation is such that if X shall faithfully perform his 
duties as executor of the will of Y, this obligation shall be void, but otherwise of full effect." X's failure faithfully to 
perform his duties is a condition of A's duty under the bond.
13.  A promises to pay B $ 10,000 for a quantity of oil, and promises to pay B an additional $ 5,000 "but if a 
greater quantity of oil arrives in vessels during the first quarter of the year than arrived during the same quarter 
last year, then this obligation to be void." A's payment of the additional $ 5,000 is not due until the end of the 
first quarter, and the failure of a greater quantity of oil to arrive by that time is a condition of A's duty to pay the 
additional $ 5,000.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section brings together the most important general standards of preference relating to conditions.  
Subsection (1) is new, but it includes the general principle on which former § 303(c)-(f) was based.  See 
Comment a to former § 303.  Former § 303 is omitted, and the conclusions there stated have been incorporated 
into illustrations.  Subsection (2) is based on former § 261.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts § 635 (1960 & Supp. 
1980); 5 Williston, Contracts § 806 (3d ed. 1961).  Former § 260 is omitted.  Subsection (3) is based on former 
§ 259.  See generally, 5 Williston, Contracts, §§ 769-811 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment b.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 636, 641 (1960); 5 Williston, Contracts § 799 (3d ed. 1961).  
Illustration 1 is based on Thos. J. Dyer Co. v. Bishop Int'l Engr. Co., 303 F.2d 655 (6th Cir. 1962); see also 
Peacock Constr. Co. v. Modern Air Conditioning, Inc., 353 So.2d 840 (Fla. 1977) (thoughtful opinion containing 
citations to many cases on point); Mignot v. Parkhill, 237 Or. 450, 391 P.2d 755 (1964). But cf.  Mascioni v. I.B. 
Miller, Inc., 261 N.Y. 1, 184 N.E. 473 (1933) (parol evidence showed that subcontractor assumed the risk of the 
owner's insolvency).  For cases involving similar reasoning in quite different fact situations, see Stark v. 
Budwarker, Inc., 25 Mich. App. 305, 181 N.W.2d 298 (1970); Chirichella v. Erwin, 270 Md. 178, 310 A.2d 555 
(1973). Illustration 2 is based on North American Graphite Corp. v. Allan, 184 F.2d 387 (D.C. Cir. 1950). 
Illustration 3 is suggested by Smith v. Boyden, 49 Idaho 638, 290 P. 377 (1930). See also Zorn v. Sweet, 77 
Utah 389, 296 P. 242 (1931); Hood v. Gordy Homes, Inc., 267 F.2d 882 (4th Cir. 1959). Illustration 4 is based 
on Amies v. Wesnofske, 255 N.Y. 156, 174 N.E. 436 (1931), and Ellsworth Dobbs, Inc. v. Johnson, 50 N.J. 528, 
236 A.2d 843 (1967). See also Feder v. River's Edge Rest., Inc., 59 Ill. App.3d 1015, 17 Ill. Dec. 547, 376 
N.E.2d 693 (1978); Toland v. Kaliff, 435 S.W.2d 260 (Tex. Civ. App. 1968).
Comment c.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 649-52 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 794-98 (3d 
ed. 1961).  Illustrations 5-8 are based on former § 303(c)-(f).  On Illustration 8, see also Terminal Constr. Corp. 
v. Bergen County, 18 N.J.2d 294, 113 A.2d 787 (1955), where the court discusses "gross mistake."
Comment d.  Illustration 9 is based on American Sugar Ref. Co. v. Blake, 102 Conn. 194, 128 A. 523 (1925). 
Illustration 10 is based on Charles Ilfeld Co. v. Taylor, 156 Colo. 204, 397 P.2d 748 (1964). Illustration 11 is 
based on Graham v. American Eagle Fire Ins. Co., 182 F.2d 500 (4th Cir. 1950). See also Illustration 1 to 
former § 260.
Comment e.  Illustration 12 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 259.  Illustration 13 is based on Illustration 2 to 
former § 259 and on Gray v. Gardner, 17 Mass. 188 (1821).
Cross Reference

§ 227 Standards of Preference with Regard to Conditions
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 218 et seq.
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 228
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 5- Conditions and Similar Events        
§ 228 Satisfaction of the Obligor as a Condition
When it is a condition of an obligor's duty that he be satisfied with respect to the obligee's performance 
or with respect to something else, and it is practicable to determine whether a reasonable person in the 
position of the obligor would be satisfied, an interpretation is preferred under which the condition 
occurs if such a reasonable person in the position of the obligor would be satisfied.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Conditions of satisfaction.  This Section sets out a special standard of preference for a type of condition that 
has long been of particular interest and importance -- the satisfaction of the obligor himself, rather than a third 
party.  Usually it is the obligee's performance as to which the obligor is to be satisfied, but it may also be 
something else, such as the propitiousness of circumstances for his enterprise.  The agreement will often use 
language such as "satisfaction" or "complete satisfaction," without making it clear that the test is merely one of 
honest satisfaction rather than of reasonable satisfaction.  Under any interpretation, the exercise of judgment 
must be in accordance with the duty of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205), and for this reason, the agreement is 
not illusory (§ 77).  If the agreement leaves no doubt that it is only honest satisfaction that is meant and no 
more, it will be so interpreted, and the condition does not occur if the obligor is honestly, even though 
unreasonably, dissatisfied.  Even so, the dissatisfaction must be with the circumstance and not with the bargain 
and the mere statement of the obligor that he is not satisfied is not conclusive on the question of his honest 
satisfaction.
Illustrations:
1.  A grants to B an exclusive license in a designated territory to bottle and sell a soft drink on specified terms 
for a five-year period.  The contract describes in detail B's duty diligently to represent A in the territory and 
provides that A may terminate the license at any time if in A's "sole, exclusive and final judgment made in good 
faith" B does not perform that duty.  After a year, A terminates, honestly telling B that in A's judgment B has not 
performed his duty under the contract.  B has no claim against A since the agreement clearly provides a test of 
honest satisfaction.
2.  A contracts to sell and B to buy 500 barrels of cherries in syrup "quality to be satisfactory in buyer's honest 
judgment," delivery to be in installments.  After deliveries of and payments for a total of 100 barrels, B states 
that he is not satisfied and refuses to take more.  Since the agreement clearly provides a test of honest 
satisfaction, B's termination is effective if his judgment is in fact made honestly in accordance with his duty of 
good faith and fair dealing (§ 205).  However, A may show that B's rejection was for other reasons by proving, 
for example, that B expressed satisfaction at the time of the first deliveries, that B's demand had dropped 
sharply, and that A's cherries are selected and put up with great care and are of the highest quality.
b.  Preference for objective standard.  When, however, the agreement does not make it clear that it requires 
merely honest satisfaction, it will not usually be supposed that the obligee has assumed the risk of the obligor's 
unreasonable, even if honest, dissatisfaction.  In such a case, to the extent that it is practicable to apply an 
objective test of reasonable satisfaction, such a test will be applied.  The situation differs from that where the 
satisfaction of a third party such as an architect, surveyor or engineer is concerned.  See Comment c to § 227.  
These professionals, even though employed by the obligor, are assumed to be capable of independent 
judgment, free from the selfish interests of the obligor.  But if the obligor would subject the obligee's right to 
compensation to his own idiosyncrasies, he must use clear language.  When, as is often the case, the preferred 
interpretation will reduce the obligee's risk of forfeiture, so that § 227(1) also applies, there is an additional 

§ 228 Satisfaction of the Obligor as a Condition
argument in its favor.  This argument is particularly strong where the obligor will be left with a benefit which he 
cannot return.  If, however, the circumstance with respect to which a party is to be satisfied is such that the 
application of an objective test is impracticable, the rule of this Section is not applicable.  A court will then, for 
practical reasons, apply a subjective test of honest satisfaction, even if the agreement admits of doubt on the 
point and even if the result will be to increase the obligee's risk of forfeiture.
Illustrations:
3.  A contracts with B to install a heating system in B's factory, for a price of $ 20,000 to be paid "on condition of 
satisfactory completion." A installs the heating system, but B states that he is not satisfied with it and refuses to 
pay the $ 20,000.  B gives no reason except that he does not approve of the heating system, and according to 
experts in the field the system as installed is entirely satisfactory.  A has a claim against B for $ 20,000 since it 
is practicable to apply an objective test to the installation of the heating system.  This interpretation is also 
preferred because it reduces A's risk of forfeiture.
4.  A contracts with B to paint a portrait of B's daughter, for which B promises to pay $ 5,000 "if entirely 
satisfied." A paints the portrait, but B honestly states that he is not satisfied with it and refuses to pay the $ 
5,000.  B gives no reason except that the portrait does not please him, and according to experts in the field the 
portrait is an admirable work of art.  A has no claim against B since it is not practicable to apply an objective 
test to the painting.
5.  A contracts to have B furnish a four-piece band to play in A's inn for six months, with a provision, "If band 
proves unsatisfactory to A contract is subject to two weeks' notice." A occasionally objects when B is absent 
and a guitar is substituted for B's string bass.  After two months, A gives notice of termination, stating that he is 
dissatisfied for this reason.  B has no claim against A since it is not practicable to apply an objective test to the 
band's performance.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 265.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 644-49 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 5 Williston, 
Contracts §§ 675A, 675B (3d ed. 1961).
Comment a.  On the basic rule that the obligor's dissatisfaction must be with the circumstance and not with the 
underlying bargain, see Learned Hand's remarks in Thompson-Starrett Co. v. La Belle Iron Works, 17 F.2d 536, 
541 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 274 U.S. 748 (1927). For examples of courts' ascertainment of obligors' honesty or 
good faith, compare Feinberg v. Automobile Banking Corp., 353 F. Supp. 508 (E.D. Pa. 1973) (finding good 
faith), with In re Estate of Hollingsworth, 88 Wash.2d 322, 560 P.2d 348 (1977); and Barbara Oil Co. v. Patrick 
Petroleum Co., 1 Kan. App.2d 437, 566 P.2d 389 (1977) (both finding bad faith).  Illustration 1 is based on Ard 
Dr. Pepper Bottling Co. v. Dr. Pepper Co., 202 F.2d 372 (5th Cir. 1953). Illustration 2 is based on Devoine Co. 
v. International Co., 151 Md. 690, 136 A. 37 (1927). That the obligor's mere statement of dissatisfaction is not 
conclusive, see McCartney v. Badovinac, 62 Colo. 76, 160 P. 190 (1916).
Comment b.  That there is a preference for an objective standard, see In re Estate of Hollingsworth, 88 
Wash.2d 322, 560 P.2d 348 (1977), citing this Comment in Tentative Draft.  In that case, however, the court 
found that the agreement (a stipulation of settlement) provided no objective criteria by which to measure a 
party's alleged dissatisfactions, and appeared unambiguously to intend a subjective standard; however, the 
court, applying a subjective standard, found that the party's alleged dissatisfaction was with the underlying 
bargain and thus was not in good faith, citing § 205 in Tentative Draft.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 4 to 
former § 265 and on Hawkins v. Graham, 149 Mass. 284, 21 N.E. 312 (1889). See also Haymore v. Levinson, 8 
Utah 2d 66, 328 P.2d 307 (1958); Bruner v. Hegyi, 42 Cal. App. 97, 183 P. 369 (1919). Illustration 4 is based on 
Gibson v. Cranage, 39 Mich. 49 (1878) and on Illustration 3 to former § 265.  See also Mattei v. Hopper, 51 
Cal.2d 119, 330 P.2d 625 (1958) (test of honest satisfaction applied where purchaser contracted to buy land for 
shopping center subject to "obtaining leases satisfactory to purchaser").  Illustration 5 is based on Ferris v. 
Polansky, 191 Md. 79, 59 A.2d 749 (1948); cf.  In re Estate of Hollingsworth, supra.
Cross Reference

§ 228 Satisfaction of the Obligor as a Condition
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 282
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 229
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 5- Conditions and Similar Events        
§ 229 Excuse of a Condition to Avoid Forfeiture
To the extent that the non-occurrence of a condition would cause disproportionate forfeiture, a court 
may excuse the non-occurrence of that condition unless its occurrence was a material part of the 
agreed exchange.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Relation to other rules.  As is pointed out in Comment b to § 227, the non-occurrence of a condition of the 
obligor's duty may result in forfeiture by the obligee.  Forfeiture may sometimes be avoided by application of the 
general rules of interpretation stated in the present Chapter, such as the rule on interpretation against the 
draftsman (§ 206).  It may sometimes be avoided by application of the special rules on interpretation stated in 
the present Topic with regard to conditions (§§ 227(1), 228).  But if the term that requires the occurrence of the 
event as a condition is expressed in unmistakable language, the possibility of forfeiture will not affect the 
interpretation of that language.  See Comment b to § 227.  Nevertheless, forfeiture may sometimes still be 
avoided by application of the rules on excuse of conditions.  See Comment b to § 225.  Under the present 
Section a court may, in appropriate circumstances, excuse the non-occurrence of a condition solely on the 
basis of the forfeiture that would otherwise result.  Although both this Section and § 208, on unconscionable 
contract or term, limit freedom of contract, they are designed to reach different types of situations.  While § 208 
speaks of unconscionability "at the time the contract is made," this Section is concerned with forfeiture that 
would actually result if the condition were not excused.  It is intended to deal with a term that does not appear to 
be unconscionable at the time the contract is made but that would, because of ensuing events, cause forfeiture.
b.  Disproportionate forfeiture.  The rule stated in the present Section is, of necessity, a flexible one, and its 
application is within the sound discretion of the court.  Here, as in § 227(1), "forfeiture" is used to refer to the 
denial of compensation that results when the obligee loses his right to the agreed exchange after he has relied 
substantially, as by preparation or performance on the expectation of that exchange.  See Comment b to § 227.  
The extent of the forfeiture in any particular case will depend on the extent of that denial of compensation.  In 
determining whether the forfeiture is "disproportionate," a court must weigh the extent of the forfeiture by the 
obligee against the importance to the obligor of the risk from which he sought to be protected and the degree to 
which that protection will be lost if the non-occurrence of the condition is excused to the extent required to 
prevent forfeiture.  The character of the agreement may, as in the case of insurance agreements, affect the 
rigor with which the requirement is applied.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to build a house for B, using pipe of Reading manufacture.  In return, B agrees to pay $ 75,000 
in progress payments, each payment to be made "on condition that no pipe other than that of Reading 
manufacture has been used." Without A's knowledge, a subcontractor mistakenly uses pipe of Cohoes 
manufacture which is identical in quality and is distinguishable only by the name of the manufacturer which is 
stamped on it.  The mistake is not discovered until the house is completed, when replacement of the pipe will 
require destruction of substantial parts of the house.  B refuses to pay the unpaid balance of $ 10,000.  A court 
may conclude that the use of Reading rather than Cohoes pipe is so relatively unimportant to B that the 
forfeiture that would result from denying A the entire balance would be disproportionate, and may allow 
recovery by A subject to any claim for damages for A's breach of his duty to use Reading pipe.
2.  A, an ocean carrier, carries B's goods under a contract providing that it is a condition of A's liability for 
damage to cargo that "written notice of claim for loss or damage must be given within 10 days after removal of 

§ 229 Excuse of a Condition to Avoid Forfeiture
goods." B's cargo is damaged during carriage and A knows of this.  On removal of the goods, B notes in writing 
on the delivery record that the cargo is damaged, and five days later informs A over the telephone of a claim for 
that damage and invites A to participate in an inspection within the ten day period.A inspects the goods within 
the period, but B does not give written notice of its claim until 25 days after removal of the goods.  Since the 
purpose of requiring the condition of written notice is to alert the carrier and enable it to make a prompt 
investigation, and since this purpose had been served by the written notice of damage and the oral notice of 
claim, the court may excuse the non-occurrence of the condition to the extent required to allow recovery by B.
c.  Limitation on scope.  The rule of this Section applies only where occurrence of the condition was not a 
material part of the agreed exchange.  These are situations where, under § 84, the non-occurrence of the 
condition could have been excused by a promise to perform the duty in spite of its non-occurrence.  It is not 
enough that the actual non-occurrence happened to involve a departure that was not a material part of the 
agreed exchange, if the occurrence of the condition was a material part of that exchange.  A court may, of 
course, ignore trifling departures.
A court need not excuse entirely the non-occurrence of the condition, but may merely excuse its non-
occurrence during the period of time in which it would otherwise have to occur (see Comment c to § 225), if it 
concludes that the time of its occurrence is not a material part of the agreed exchange.  This conclusion is 
sometimes summed up by the phrase that "time is not of the essence."
Illustrations:
3.  A contracts to make repairs on B's house, in return for which B agrees to pay $ 10,000 "on condition that the 
repairs are completed by October 1." The repairs are not completed until October 2.  A court may decide that 
there are two cumulative conditions, repair of the house and completion of the repairs by October 1, and that 
the non-occurrence of the second condition is excused to the extent of one day.
4.  On July 1, A makes an option contract with B, under which B has the right to buy land for $ 200,000, on 
condition that he exercise it no later than June 30 five years later.  B makes an initial payment of $ 10,000 and 
agrees to make additional $ 10,000 payments on or before June 30 of each of the four succeeding years, 
unless he has already exercised the option, his right being "conditional on his paying the $ 10,000 on or before 
the prescribed date." These payments are not to be applied to the purchase price.  After paying for two years 
and building on adjacent land, substantially increasing the value of the land subject to the option, B mails a $ 
10,000 check for the third year on June 30.  A receives it on July 1 and returns it to B, stating that the option 
contract is cancelled.  A court may decide that there are two cumulative conditions, payment of $ 10,000 and 
payment on or before June 30, and that the non-occurrence of the second condition is excused to the extent of 
one day.
5.  The facts being otherwise as in Illustration 4, B makes the payments on June 30 of each of the four 
succeeding years, but does not exercise the option by tendering the $ 200,000 until July 1, following the June 
30 expiration date.  Even if a court decides that there are two cumulative conditions, payment of $ 200,000 and 
payment on or before June 30, it may not decide that the non-occurrence of the second condition is excused to 
the extent of one day because that would give B a more extensive option than that on which the parties agreed.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 302.  See 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 769-811 (3d ed. 1961); 3A Corbin, 
Contracts § 754 (1960 & Supp. 1980); Childres, Conditions in the Law of Contracts, 45 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 33 
(1970).
Comment a.  For an excellent discussion of the principle on which this Section is based, see Burger King Corp. 
v. Family Dining, Inc., 426 F. Supp. 485 (E.D. Pa.), aff'd mem., 566 F.2d 1168 (3d Cir. 1977). For examples of 
courts avoiding forfeiture by construing provisions to create duties rather than to condition the other party's 
duties, see, in addition to the Reporter's Notes to § 227, Schwartz-Jordan, Inc. v. Delisle Constr. Co., 569 
S.W.2d 878 (Tex. 1978); and Carter v. Sherburne Corp., 132 Vt. 88, 315 A.2d 870 (1974). In Mackie v. State 
Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 13 Mich. App. 556, 164 N.W.2d 777 (1968), involving a condition that was 
unenforceable as against public policy, the court tortured a clearly conditional provision into what it termed a 
"condition subsequent" to the vesting of the plaintiff's right (cf. § 230).  It then declared the "condition 
subsequent" void and held that the already vested right was undisturbed by the failure of the subsequent event 

§ 229 Excuse of a Condition to Avoid Forfeiture
to happen.  A better approach would have been either to excuse the condition on grounds of public policy (§ 
185) or to apply the rule of this Section.
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is suggested by Jacob & Youngs, Inc. v. Kent, 230 N.Y. 239, 129 N.E. 889 (1921). 
Compare Della Ratta, Inc. v. American Better Comm. Devs., 38 Md. App. 119, 380 A.2d 627 (1977). Illustration 
2 is based on Delaware Steel Co. v. Calmar Steamship Corp., 378 F.2d 386 (3d Cir. 1967).
Comment c.  When an obligee has acquiesced in an obligor's failure strictly to adhere to a timetable of payment 
or performance, courts often are inhospitable to the obligee's sudden invocation of forfeiture provisions.  The 
courts may find a "waiver" -- an implicit subsequent agreement modifying the requirement of strictly timely 
payment or performance (see §§ 84, 89, 90, 278-80); it may find the obligee's acquiescence evidence that time 
was not of the essence; or it may treat the obligee's acquiescence as a factor, which because it induced 
reliance, triggers the court's power of equity.  See, e.g., Fritts v. Cloud Oak Flooring Co., 478 S.W.2d 8 (Mo. Ct. 
App. 1972) ("waiver" despite contractual provision providing that failure to insist on strict compliance was not to 
be deemed a waiver; court found an implicit modification of the provision); Burger King Corp. v. Family Dining, 
Inc., 426 F. Supp. 485 (E.D. Pa.), aff'd mem., 566 F.2d 1168 (3d Cir. 1977) (court found that timely 
performance was not of the essence and that obligor had induced obligee's reliance); Williamson v. Wanlass, 
545 P.2d 1145 (Utah 1976) (court found that obligor had induced obligee's reliance, and suggested that 
obligee's subsequent conduct showed that strict compliance was not of the essence); Franklin E. Penny Co. v. 
United States, 207 Ct. Cl. 842, 524 F.2d 668 (1975) (time not ordinarily of the essence).  Each of these cases 
also discussed the reluctance of courts to permit forfeitures.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 
302.  See also Hegeberg v. New England Fish Co., 7 Wash.2d 509, 110 P.2d 182 (1941). Illustration 4 is based 
on Holiday Inns of America, Inc. v. Knight, 70 Cal.2d 327, 74 Cal. Rptr. 722, 450 P.2d 42 (1969). See also 
Williamson v. Wanlass, supra; Fritts v. Cloud Oak Flooring Co., supra; Elliott v. Snyder, 246 S.C. 186, 143 
S.E.2d 374 (1965) (check drawn against uncollected funds).  Illustration 5 is suggested by Holiday Inns of 
America, Inc. v. Knight, supra. See also Cummings v. Bullock, 367 F.2d 182 (9th Cir. 1966). But cf.  Sy Jack 
Realty Co. v. Pergament Syosset Corp., 27 N.Y.2d 449, 318 N.Y.S.2d 720, 267 N.E.2d 462 (1971) (notice lost 
in mail).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 278(1), 303
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 230
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations          >            Topic 5- Conditions and Similar Events        
§ 230 Event That Terminates a Duty
(1)  Except as stated in Subsection (2), if under the terms of the contract the occurrence of an event is 
to terminate an obligor's duty of immediate performance or one to pay damages for breach, that duty is 
discharged if the event occurs.
(2)  The obligor's duty is not discharged if occurrence of the event
(a)  is the result of a breach by the obligor of his duty of good faith and fair dealing, or
(b)  could not have been prevented because of impracticability and continuance of the duty does not 
subject the obligor to a materially increased burden.
(3)  The obligor's duty is not discharged if, before the event occurs, the obligor promises to perform the 
duty even if the event occurs and does not revoke his promise before the obligee materially changes 
his position in reliance on it.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope.  Parties sometimes provide that an obligor's matured duty will be extinguished on the occurrence of 
a specified event, which is sometimes referred to as a "condition subsequent." See Comment e to § 224.  They 
may, for example, provide that an obligor's duty to reimburse the obligee for some loss or to compensate him 
for a breach will be extinguished if the obligee does not take some action, such as bringing suit, within a stated 
period of time.  Under such a provision, the duty is generally discharged if the event occurs.  The same result 
follows if its occurrence becomes inevitable.  Subsection (2) states exceptions to this general rule for cases in 
which the occurrence of the event is due to the obligor's breach of his duty of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205) 
or could not have been prevented by the obligee because of impracticability (§ 261).  See Subsection (2).  The 
rule stated in this Section applies only to matured duties and to duties to make compensation.  If performance 
under the contract is not to become due until occurrence of an event, that event is a condition of the duty and is 
governed by the rules stated in §§ 224-29.  The difference is one of substance and not merely of the form in 
which the provision is stated.
Illustrations:
1.  A, an insurance company, insures the property of B under a policy providing that no recovery can be had if 
suit is not brought on the policy within two years after a loss.  A loss occurs and B lets two years pass before 
bringing suit.  A's duty to pay B for the loss is discharged and B cannot maintain the action on the policy.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, B lives in a foreign country and is prevented by the 
outbreak of war from bringing suit against A for two years.  A's duty to pay B for the loss is not discharged and 
B can maintain an action on the policy when the war is ended.
b.  Promise to perform in spite of occurrence.  Under the rule stated in Subsection (3), a promise by the obligor 
to perform the duty regardless of the occurrence of the event is binding if the obligee has materially changed 
his position in reliance on it.  The promise need not be in words and may be inferred from other conduct.  The 
rule, like that stated in § 84, is sometimes thought of in terms of "waiver" or "estoppel." See Comments a and b 
to § 84.  It supplements the general rules on modification of contracts by agreement of the parties.
Illustration:

§ 230 Event That Terminates a Duty
3.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, after the loss occurs, A tells B that it is not necessary to 
bring suit within two years, and B relies on the statement in refraining from suing for two years.  A's duty to pay 
B for the loss is not discharged and B can maintain an action on the policy even after two years have passed.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is based on former § 396.  Subsection (2) is based on former § 307.  Subsection (3) is based on 
former § 308.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 739-51 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 6 id. § 1267 (1962); 5 Williston, 
Contracts §§ 667, 667A, 809 (3d ed. 1961); 6 id. § 887AA (1962).  The term "condition subsequent" has been 
eliminated for the reasons given in Comment e and the Reporter's Note to § 224.
Comment a.  For an example of a court achieving a just result by questionably treating a condition as an event 
terminating a duty ("condition subsequent" to the vesting of a right), when the better approach would have been 
to excuse the condition to prevent disproportionate forfeiture (§ 229), see Mackie v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. 
Co., 13 Mich. App. 556, 164 N.W.2d 777 (1968). Illustrations 1 and 2 are based on Illustration 1 to former § 
307.  As to Illustration 1, see Lardas v. Underwriters Ins. Co., 426 Pa. 47, 231 A.2d 740 (1967).
Comment b.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 308.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Employer's termination of professional athlete's services as constituting breach of employment contract.  57 
A.L.R.2d 257.
Revocation, prior to execution of formal written contract, of vote or decision of public body awarding contract to 
bidder.  3 A.L.R.3d 864.
Comment Note. -- What law governs in determining whether facts and circumstances operate to terminate, 
breach, rescind, or repudiate a contract.  50 A.L.R.2d 254.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 215(1), 226
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 231
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 1- Performances to Be Exchanged Under an Exchange 
of Promises        
§ 231 Criterion for Determining When Performances Are to Be Exchanged 
Under an Exchange of Promises
Performances are to be exchanged under an exchange of promises if each promise is at least part of 
the consideration for the other and the performance of each promise is to be exchanged at least in part 
for the performance of the other.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Expectation of an exchange of performances.  Agreements involving an exchange of promises play a vital 
role in an economically advanced society.  Ordinarily when parties make such an agreement, they not only 
regard the promises themselves as the subject of an exchange (§ 71(2)), but they also intend that the 
performances of those promises shall subsequently be exchanged for each other.  Even without a showing of 
such an actual intention, a court will often, out of a sense of fairness, assume that it was their expectation that 
there would be a subsequent exchange of the performance of each party for that of the other.  Cf. § 204.  This 
Chapter consists, in substantial part, of rules designed to secure that expectation of a subsequent exchange of 
performances.
b.  Performances need not be simultaneous.  It is often expected that performances will be exchanged under an 
exchange of promises even though those performances are not to take place at the same time.  Under a 
contract for the sale of goods, for example, the parties expect an exchange of the delivery of the goods by the 
seller and the payment of the price by the buyer, regardless of whether the price is payable before, at the same 
time as, or after delivery of the goods.  As long as this is their expectation, the delivery of the goods and the 
payment of the price are to be exchanged under the exchange of promises, and it is immaterial when the price 
is payable.
Illustrations:
1.  A, a shipowner, promises to carry B's cargo on his ship.  B promises to pay A the stipulated freight.  They 
exchange these promises in the expectation that there will be a subsequent exchange of those performances.  
A fails to carry B's cargo, and B thereupon refuses to pay the freight.  A's carrying the cargo and B's paying the 
freight are to be exchanged under the exchange of promises.  Therefore, under the rule stated in § 237, A has 
no claim against B.
2.  In return for A's promise to deliver a machine, B promises to pay A $ 10,000 within 30 days.  They exchange 
these promises in the expectation that there will be a subsequent exchange of those performances.  A fails to 
deliver the machine, and B thereupon refuses to pay any part of the $ 10,000.  A's delivery of the machine and 
B's payment of the $ 10,000 are to be exchanged under the exchange of promises.  Therefore, under the rule 
stated in § 237, A has no claim against B.
c.  Consideration need not be exclusively promises.  The parties may expect that their performances will be 
exchanged under their exchange of promises even though that exchange does not consist exclusively of 
promises.  The consideration given by one or both parties may consist in part of some performance.
Illustration:
3.  In return for A's promise to deliver a machine priced at $ 10,000, B pays A $ 5,000 as a down payment and 
promises to pay A the $ 5,000 balance within 30 days after delivery of the machine.  They exchange these 
promises in the expectation that delivery of the machine will be exchanged, at least in part, for the $ 5,000 

§ 231 Criterion for Determining When Performances Are to Be Exchanged Under an Exchange of Promises
balance and that the $ 5,000 balance will be exchanged for the machine.  A fails to deliver the machine, and B 
thereupon refuses to pay the $ 5,000 balance.  A's delivery of the machine and B's payment of the $ 5,000 
balance within 30 days are to be exchanged under the exchange of promises.  Therefore, under the rule stated 
in § 237, A has no claim against B.  B is entitled to restitution of the $ 5,000 he paid (see §§ 370-77) in addition 
to his claim against A for damages for breach (§ 243).
d.  Separate contracts.  The rules that protect parties whose performances are to be exchanged under an 
exchange of promises apply only when the promises are exchanged as part of a single contract.  When each 
party gives more than one promise, or gives some performance in addition to a promise, it may not be clear 
whether there is a single exchange of promises resulting in a single contract or separate exchanges resulting in 
separate contracts.  If every promise by one party is at least part of the consideration for every promise by the 
other party, there is a single exchange in which all of the promises on each side are exchanged for all of those 
on the other side.  This is so, for example, where a buyer and a seller make a single bargain for the sale of 
several related kinds of goods.  But if one or more promises by each party are no part of the consideration for 
one or more promises by the other party, there are instead separate exchanges.  In that case all of the 
promises on each side cannot be regarded as exchanged for all of those on the other side.  This is so, for 
example, where a buyer and a seller make several bargains at the same time for the sale of several unrelated 
kinds of goods.  In deciding whether there is a single contract rather than separate contracts, the court must 
look to the actual bargain of the parties, in accordance with § 71(2), to decide whether each promise on one 
side was sought and given as at least part of the exchange for each promise on the other side.  The form of the 
agreement is not controlling, and the actual bargain of the parties is not to be determined merely by reference 
to such criteria as whether separate performances are made the subject of a single promise or of separate 
promises, whether separate promises are contained in a single writing or in separate writings, or whether the 
understanding of the parties is entirely written or oral or is partly written and partly oral.
Illustrations:
4.  A promises to sell and B to buy a food freezer priced at $ 1,200 to be paid for in monthly installments over 
an eighteen-month period.  A also promises to sell B frozen food at greatly reduced prices, and B promises to 
buy an initial quantity, deliverable at the same time as the freezer, for $ 200, with additional quantities to be 
available in the future at B's option.  Although two separate writings are executed, one entitled "Freezer 
Contract" and, the other, entitled "Food Contract," the promises are made as part of the same bargain, and 
payment for the freezer, for example, is to be exchanged at least in part for the delivery of the food.  A tenders 
the freezer but fails to supply the food although B tenders the $ 200.  B thereupon refuses to take the freezer or 
to pay anything.  The performances promised in the two writings, A's delivery of the freezer and the food and 
B's payment for the freezer and the food, are to be exchanged under a single exchange of promises.  
Therefore, under the rule stated in § 238, A has no claim against B.
5.  A, the owner of a small publishing business, makes a written contract with B, a large publishing company, to 
sell A's business to B in exchange for 10,000 shares of B's stock, having a market price equal to the fair value 
of A's business.  At the same time, A and B execute a separate writing under which A is to work for B for 5 
years, subject to renewal at B's option, at a salary of $ 30,000 a year plus a bonus based on sales.  B 
unjustifiably discharges A after one month, and A thereupon refuses to complete the transfer of his business to 
B.  Whether or not A's refusal to complete the exchange is a breach depends on whether, under the bargain of 
the parties, there are two contracts or only one contract.  If the court determines that the promise of A to work 
for B is no part of the consideration for B's promise to buy A's business, and that the promise of B to employ A 
is no part of the consideration for A's promise to sell his business, there are two separate exchanges of 
promises.  The performance promised in the one writing and the performance promised in the other cannot 
then be performances to be exchanged under a single exchange of promises.  B then has a claim against A for 
damages for breach of the contract to sell A's business to B, and A has a claim against B for damages for 
breach of the contract to employ A (§ 243).  If, however, the court determines that each of the promises is at 
least part of the consideration for the other, there is only one exchange of promises.  Under the rule stated in § 
232 all of the performances of each party taken collectively are treated as performances to be exchanged under 
that exchange of promises.  Under the rule stated in § 238, B then has no claim against A for damages for A's 
refusal to complete the transfer of his business to B, but A has a claim against B for damages because of his 
unjustifiable discharge of A (§ 243).

§ 231 Criterion for Determining When Performances Are to Be Exchanged Under an Exchange of Promises
e.  Leases and other conveyances.  The applicability of the rules stated in this Chapter to covenants in leases 
and other conveyances of land is not dealt with in this Restatement.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is derived from former § 266(1).  See also former § 290.  It abandons the term "promises for an 
agreed exchange" and uses, as being more descriptive, the term "performances exchanged under an exchange 
of promises." See R.G. Pope Constr. Co. v. Guard Rail of Roanoke, 219 Va. 111, 244 S.E.2d 774 (1978), using 
a formulation similar to that used in this Section.  It avoids as misleading, as did the former Restatement, any 
classification of promises as either "dependent" or "independent." See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 637, 653-60, 
696 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 812-15 (3d ed. 1962).
Comment b.  The facts in Illustration 1 are based on Bornmann v. Tooke, 1 Camp. 377, 170 Eng. Rep. 991 
(1807), which is also the source of Illustrations 6 and 7 to § 225.  Illustration 2 is suggested by Comment a to 
former § 266.
Comment d.  See former § 279; 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 840, 887D (3d ed. 1962).  Illustration 4 is based on 
Star Credit Corp. v. Molina, 59 Misc.2d 290, 298 N.Y.S.2d 570 (Civ. Ct. N.Y. 1969); Continental Supermarket 
Food Serv. v. Soboski, 210 Pa. Super. Ct. 304, 232 A.2d 216 (1967); Bethea v. Investors Loan Corp., 197 A.2d 
448 (D.C. Ct. App. 1964). Illustration 5 is based on Rudman v. Cowles Communications, Inc., 30 N.Y.2d 1, 330 
N.Y.S.2d 33, 280 N.E.2d 867 (1972).
Comment e.  This Comment replaces former § 290.  This subject is dealt with in the Restatement, Second, of 
Property (Landlord and Tenant) § 5.1, Comment a; § 7.1, Comments a, c; § 13.1, Comment a.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Comment Note. -- Employee's arbitrary dismissal as breach of employment contract terminable at will.  62 
A.L.R.3d 271.
Water well-drilling contracts.  90 A.L.R.2d 1346.
Mining grubstake contracts.  70 A.L.R.2d 904.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 175(1)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 232
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 1- Performances to Be Exchanged Under an Exchange 
of Promises        
§ 232 When It Is Presumed That Performances Are to Be Exchanged Under 
an Exchange of Promises
Where the consideration given by each party to a contract consists in whole or in part of promises, all 
the performances to be rendered by each party taken collectively are treated as performancesto be 
exchanged under an exchange of promises, unless a contrary intention is clearly manifested.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Reason for presumption.  The rules applicable to performances to be exchanged under an exchange of 
promises are designed to give the parties maximum protection, consistent with freedom of contract, against 
disappointment of their expectation of a subsequent exchange of those performances.  When the parties have 
exchanged promises, there is ordinarily every reason to suppose that they contracted on the basis of such an 
expectation since the exchange of promises would otherwise have little purpose.  Even absent a showing of 
their actual intentions, fairness dictates that such an expectation be assumed.  This Section therefore states a 
presumption in favor of the conclusion that, in such a case, the performances are to be exchanged under the 
exchange of promises.  For one of the parties to show that the expectation was otherwise, the contrary intention 
must be clearly manifested.  The presumption applies regardless of whether the promises are written or oral or 
both, and even where a negotiable instrument is involved.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 3-408.  It also 
applies even though the consideration given by a party consists partly of some performance and only partly of a 
promise (see Comment c to § 231), although it is possible that in such a case the promise may be so minor and 
incidental that its non-performance would not be a material failure of performance.  See Comment b to § 241.
Illustrations:
1.  A, a wholesaler, promises to sell and B, a retailer, promises to buy goods together with related advertising 
material, payment to be made within 30 days of delivery.  A also promises not to sell similar advertising material 
to any other retailer in B's city.  A sells similar advertising material to another retailer in B's city, and B 
thereupon refuses to take or pay for the goods.  A's selling B goods together with advertising material and not 
selling others similar advertising material, taken collectively, and B's payment are to be exchanged under the 
exchange of promises.  Therefore, under the rule stated in § 237, if A's failure of performance is material, A has 
no claim against B.
2.  A promises to sell to B a lot in a subdivision for $ 8,000.  B promises to pay in four annual installments of $ 
2,000 each, beginning one year after execution of the contract.  A promises to begin to make improvements 
and pave the streets within 60 days and to complete work within a reasonable time and promises to deliver a 
deed at the time of the final payment.  A fails to pave the streets, and B thereupon refuses to pay any 
installments.  A's making improvements, paving streets, and delivering a deed, taken collectively, and B's 
paying installments are to be exchanged under the exchange of promises.  Therefore, under the rule stated in § 
237, if A's failure of performance is material, A has no claim against B.
3.  A employs B under a five-year employment contract, which contains a valid covenant under which B 
promises not to engage in the same business in a designated area for two years after the termination of the 
employment.  It expressly provides that "this covenant is independent of any other provision in this agreement." 
After B has begun work, A unjustifiably discharges him, and B thereupon engages in business in violation of the 
covenant.  A's employing B and B's working for A are to be exchanged under the exchange of promises.  The 

§ 232 When It Is Presumed That Performances Are to Be Exchanged Under an Exchange of Promises
quoted words indicate an intention that A's employing B is not to be exchanged for B's refraining from engaging 
in the same business.  If the court concludes that this intention is clearly manifested, A has a claim against B for 
damages for breach of his promise not to compete.
4.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a machine, to be delivered immediately, for $ 10,000.  As part of the same 
bargain, B gives A his negotiable promissory note for $ 10,000 to A's order, payable in 90 days, but the note 
makes no reference to the transaction out of which it arises.  A fails to deliver the machine.  A's delivering the 
machine and B's paying the note are to be exchanged under the exchange of promises.  Therefore, under the 
rule stated in § 237, A has no claim on the note or the contract against B.  See Uniform Commercial Code §§ 3-
306, 3-408, and 3-307(3).
b.  Promises taken collectively.  When the rule stated in this Section applies, all of the performances to be 
rendered by each party taken collectively are to be exchanged under the exchange of promises.  A court need 
not determine whether separate performances on either side are the subject of a single promise or of separate 
promises.  Nor need a court concern itself with the relationship among separate promises viewed as of the time 
of their making.  Instead the court is to focus on the relative importance of the failure of performance in the light 
of the situation of the parties at the time of that failure.  See §§ 237, 238, 241.
c.  Performances need not be treated as equivalent.  When an exchange consists exclusively of promises, the 
values of the performances to be subsequently exchanged are usually regarded by the parties as equivalent.  
This is not always so since a party may make what is often called an "aleatory" promise, under which his duty to 
perform is conditional on the occurrence of a fortuitous event.  Or it may be understood that the value of one 
party's performance will be affected by chance, as where he promises to deliver his output or to pay during 
another's lifetime.  Even when one or both of the parties makes such a promise, however, they contemplate a 
subsequent exchange of performances, subject of course to the occurrence of the required conditions.  Such 
cases are therefore subject to the rules stated in this Chapter (see § 239), along with some special rules 
relating to the election of remedies which are stated in §§ 378-80.
Illustration:
5.  A, an insurance company, issues to B a group health insurance policy covering B's employees for one year 
beginning January 1 in return for B's promise to pay the premium on February 1.  During the month of January 
A unjustifiably rejects proper claims filed by B's employees under the policy.  B refuses to pay the premium on 
February 1.  A's paying proper claims of B's employees and B's paying the premium are to be exchanged under 
the exchange of promises.  Therefore, under the rule stated in § 237, if A's breach is material, A has no claim 
against B.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is derived from former § 266(2).  The exception stated there for aleatory contracts is now dealt 
with in § 239 and in connection with remedies in § 379.  The exception stated there for mutual promises for the 
benefit of a donee beneficiary has been omitted.  See the criticism of this exception in Patterson, Constructive 
Conditions in Contracts 42 Colum. L. Rev. 903, 916-17 (1942). See 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 816-28 (3d ed. 
1962).
Comment a.  The presumption stated in this Section is supported by K & G Constr. Co. v. Harris, 223 Md. 305, 
164 A.2d 451 (1960), and Morgan v. Singley, 560 S.W.2d 746 (Tex. Civ. App. 1977). The facts in Illustration 1 
are suggested by Tichnor Bros. v. Evans, 92 Vt. 278, 102 A. 1031 (1918). Illustration 2 follows Palmer v. Fox, 
274 Mich. 252, 264 N.W. 361 (1936), and rejects the reasoning in Zambetti v. Commodores Land Co., 102 Fla. 
586, 136 So. 644 (1931). Cf.  Gold Bond Stamp Co. v. Gilt-Edge Stamps, Inc., 437 F.2d 27 (5th Cir. 1971). 
Illustration 3 is based on Orkin Exterminating Co. v. Harris, 224 Ga. 759, 164 S.E.2d 727 (1968); Orkin 
Exterminating Co. v. Gill, 222 Ga. 760, 152 S.E.2d 411 (1966). But cf.  Kaye v. Orkin Exterminating Co., 472 
F.2d 1213 (5th Cir. 1973); Associated Spring Corp. v. Roy F. Wilson & Avnet, 410 F. Supp. 967 (D.S.C. 1976). 
Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 279 and on Uniform Commercial Code §§ 3-306, 3-408, and 
3-307(3).
Comment b.  Cf.  Bart Arconti & Sons, Inc. v. Ames-Ennis, Inc., 275 Md. 295, 340 A.2d 225 (1975).
Comment c.  Illustration 5 is new.  See former § 293(2).
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute

§ 232 When It Is Presumed That Performances Are to Be Exchanged Under an Exchange of Promises
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 233
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 1- Performances to Be Exchanged Under an Exchange 
of Promises        
§ 233 Performance at One Time or in Installments
(1)  Where performances are to be exchanged under an exchange of promises, and the whole of one 
party's performance can be rendered at one time, it is due at one time, unless the language or the 
circumstances indicate the contrary.
(2)  Where only a part of one party's performance is due at one time under Subsection (1), if the other 
party's performance can be so apportioned that there is a comparable part that can also be rendered at 
that time, it is due at that time, unless the language or the circumstances indicate the contrary.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Performance at one time.  Subsection (1) states the established rule that a party who can give his whole 
performance at one time is expected to do so.  He is not entitled to perform a part at a time, nor is the other 
party entitled to demand that he do so.  Uniform Commercial Code § 2-307 so provides for contracts for the 
sale of goods.  The rule expresses the usual understanding of parties in such cases.  A party who asserts a 
different understanding may establish a contrary intention by an express agreement such as one for delivery in 
installments, or by usage of trade (§ 221; Uniform Commercial Code § 1-205) or by course of dealing (§ 223; 
Uniform Commercial Code § 1-205).  Or he may establish it by showing special circumstances, as where under 
a contract for brick to be used to build a building it is understood that the buyer's storage space is so limited that 
it would be impossible for him to receive the entire amount at once.  See Comment 3 to Uniform Commercial 
Code § 2-307.  The rule does not apply where performance requires a period of time.  The requirement that 
performance be possible at one time may, however, be met even though the performance, as in the case of 
delivery of a large quantity of bulky goods, cannot be instantaneous.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to sell and B to buy ten identical carloads of coal for $ 100,000.  Delivery by A of all ten carloads 
is due in a single lot.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, it is known by both A and B that only one carload of coal 
will be available at a time.  A may deliver one carload at a time.
b.  Right to other party's performance.  If the language or circumstances indicate that, contrary to the general 
rule stated in Subsection (1), only a part of one party's performance is due at one time, a question then arises 
as to when the other party's performance is due.  Under the rule stated in Subsection (2), if the other party's 
performance can be so apportioned that there is a comparable part that can also be given at that time, part 
performance by both parties is due at that time.  See § 234(1).  In the typical case the other party's performance 
will consist of the price and the question is whether the price can be apportioned.  See Comment d to § 240.  
This is the way in which the rule is stated for the sale of goods in Uniform Commercial Code § 2-307.
Illustration:
3.  The facts being as stated in Illustration 2, payment of $ 10,000 by B is due at the same time that A delivers 
each carload of coal.
REPORTER'S NOTES

§ 233 Performance at One Time or in Installments
This section is new.  It is based on Uniform Commercial Code § 2-307, although it is limited to performances to 
be exchanged under an exchange of promises to conform to the scope of this Topic.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts 
§§ 687, 694, 695 (1951 & Supp. 1980); 6 Williston, Contracts § 862 (3d ed. 1962).
Comment a.  Illustrations 1 and 2 are based on Comment 3 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-307; see also 
Lynn M. Ranger, Inc. v. Gildersleeve, 106 Conn. 372, 138 A. 142 (1927).
Comment b.  Illustration 3 follows the rule in Uniform Commercial Code § 2-307 and Tipton v. Feitner, 20 N.Y. 
423 (1859); see also William Feinstein Bros., Inc. v. L.Z. Hotte Granite Co., 123 Vt. 167, 184 A.2d 540 (1962). It 
rejects the reasoning in Kelly Constr. Co. v. Hackensack Brick Co., 91 N.J.L. 585, 103 A. 417 (1918). On 
apportionment of the price, see Comment 1 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-607.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Excess of payment for one period as applicable to subsequent period under contract or mortgage providing for 
periodic payments.  89 A.L.R.3d 947.
Construction and operation of "optional agreement-flat payment" land contract under which optionee has right 
to take title when periodic payments (otherwise to be treated as rent) equal agreed price.  55 A.L.R.3d 159.
Building or construction contract providing for instalment or "progress" payments as entire or divisible.  22 
A.L.R.2d 1343.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 213
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 234
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 1- Performances to Be Exchanged Under an Exchange 
of Promises        
§ 234 Order of Performances
(1)  Where all or part of the performances to be exchanged under an exchange of promises can be 
rendered simultaneously, they are to that extent due simultaneously, unless the language or the 
circumstances indicate the contrary.
(2)  Except to the extent stated in Subsection (1), where the performance of only one party under such 
an exchange requires a period of time, his performance is due at an earlier time than that of the other 
party, unless the language or the circumstances indicate the contrary.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Advantages of simultaneous performance.  A requirement that the parties perform simultaneously where 
their performances are to be exchanged under an exchange of promises is fair for two reasons.  First, it offers 
both parties maximum security against disappointment of their expectations of a subsequent exchange of 
performances by allowing each party to defer his own performance until he has been assured that the other will 
perform.  This advantage is implemented by the rule stated in § 238, which deals with offers to perform.  
Second, it avoids placing on either party the burden of financing the other before the latter has performed.  
Subsection (1) therefore imposes a requirement of simultaneous performance whenever this is feasible under 
the contract, in the absence of language or circumstances indicating a contrary intention.  A notable example of 
such a requirement is that laid down for contracts for the sale of goods by Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-507 
and 2-511.  The requirement is subject to the agreement of the parties, as by an express provision extending 
credit to the buyer, or one requiring him to pay against documents or to furnish a letter of credit.  Even absent 
an express provision, a contrary intention may be shown by circumstances including usage of trade and course 
of dealing (§§ 221, 223; Uniform Commercial Code § 1-205).
b.  When simultaneous performance possible under agreement.  In the absence of language or circumstances 
showing a contrary intention, the requirement of simultaneous performance stated in Subsection (1) applies 
whenever such performance is possible, consistent with the terms of the contract.  A major instance where 
simultaneous performance is not possible occurs when one party's performance is continuous over some 
substantial period of time, a situation that is dealt with in Subsection (2).  However, as is the case for the 
requirement of the preceding section that the whole performance be possible at one time, the requirement of 
simultaneous performance is not to be applied so literally as to exclude instances in which the objectives of the 
requirement can be fulfilled although performance cannot be instantaneous.  See Comment a to § 233.  A less 
important instance where simultaneous performance is not possible occurs when distance and lack of adequate 
communications make it impossible to assure the parties that performance is taking place at the same time, so 
that although the performance of each party can be instantaneous, the two performances cannot be 
simultaneous within the meaning of Subsection (1).  Cases in which simultaneous performance is possible 
under the terms of the contract can be grouped into five categories: (1) where the same time is fixed for the 
performance of each party; (2) where a time is fixed for the performance of one of the parties and no time is 
fixed for the other; (3) where no time is fixed for the performance of either party; (4) where the same period is 
fixed within which each party is to perform; (5) where different periods are fixed within which each party is to 
perform.  The requirement of simultaneous performance applies to the first four categories.  The requirement 
does not apply to the fifth category, even if simultaneous performance is possible, because in fixing different 

§ 234 Order of Performances
periods for performance the parties must have contemplated the possibility of performance at different times 
under their agreement.  Therefore in cases in the fifth category the circumstances show an intention contrary to 
the rule stated in Subsection (1).
Illustrations:
1.  A promises to sell land to B, delivery of the deed to be on July 1.  B promises to pay A $ 50,000, payment to 
be made on July 1.  Delivery of the deed and payment of the price are due simultaneously.
2.  A promises to sell land to B, the deed to be delivered on July 1.  B promises to pay A $ 50,000, no provision 
being made for the time of payment.  Delivery of the deed and payment of the price are due simultaneously.
3.  A promises to sell land to B and B promises to pay A $ 50,000, no provision being made for the time either 
of delivery of the deed or of payment.  Delivery of the deed and payment of the price are due simultaneously.
4.  A promises to sell land to B, delivery of the deed to be on or before July 1.  B promises to pay A $ 50,000, 
payment to be on or before July 1.  Delivery of the deed and payment of the price are due simultaneously.
5.  A promises to sell land to B, delivery of the deed to be on or before July 1.  B promises to pay A $ 50,000, 
payment to be on or before August 1.  Delivery of the deed and payment of the prices are not due 
simultaneously.
c.  When simultaneous performance possible in part.  The requirement of simultaneous performance stated in 
Subsection (1) also applies where only part rather than all of the performance of one party can be performed 
simultaneously with either part or all of the performance of the other party.  It therefore applies to the situations 
discussed in Comment b to § 233 and exemplified by Illustration 3 to that section.  But it is broader than this 
and also applies, for example, to instances where some part performance of one party can be rendered 
simultaneously with the entire performance of the other party.  See Comment f and Illustration 12.
Illustrations:
6.  A promises to sell land to B, delivery of the deed to be four years from the following July 1.  B promises to 
pay A $ 50,000 in installments of $ 10,000 on each July 1 for five years.  Delivery of the deed and payment of 
the last installment are due simultaneously.
7.  A promises to sell land to B, delivery of the deed to be one year from July 1.  B promises to pay A $ 50,000 
in installments of $ 10,000 on each July 1 for five years.  Delivery of the deed and payment of the second 
installment are due simultaneously.
d.  When simultaneous performance later becomes possible.  Although different times or periods were originally 
fixed for the performance of each party, performance by the party who is to perform first may sometimes be 
delayed until the time for performance by the other party has arrived.  If the latter party is entitled to and does 
assert that his remaining duties of performance are discharged because of the delay, under the rule stated in § 
237, no question of the order of performance remains.  Unless the delay is justified, he will also have a claim for 
damages for total breach based on all of his remaining rights to performance.  (§§ 236(1), 243(1)).  If, however, 
he is not entitled to assert that his remaining duties of performance are discharged, or if he does not assert this 
even though he is entitled to do so, a question of the order of performances remains.  Unless the delay is 
justified he will, of course, have a claim for damages for partial breach because of the delay.  Whether or not 
the delay is justified, he can at least insist on simultaneous performance.  (As to judicial supervision of the 
requirement of simultaneous performance where the injured party has brought an action before the time when 
his own performance is due and that time then arrives before he has obtained and enforced a judgment, see 
Comment c and Illustration 5 to § 238.) There may be circumstances, however, in which it is appropriate for him 
to require the other party to perform first, as where the parties to a sale of goods contemplate that the buyer will 
need the time specified between delivery and payment to resell the goods in order to pay the price.  In such a 
case the right of the party in delay to receive payment may be subject to postponement.
Illustration:
8.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 6, B duly pays the first three installments, but unjustifiably 
does not pay the fourth until the fifth is due.  If B's failure to pay the fourth installment discharges A's remaining 
duties of performance under the rule stated in § 237, A has a claim for damages for total breach (§ 243(1)), and 
no further performance is due from either party.  Otherwise B's failure to pay the fourth installment gives rise to 
only a claim for damages for partial breach because of the delay, and, unless circumstances make it 

§ 234 Order of Performances
appropriate for A to require B to pay the fourth installment first, delivery of the deed and payment of the fourth 
and fifth installments are then due simultaneously.
e.  Where performance requires a period of time.  Where the performance of one party requires a period of time 
and the performance of the other party does not, their performance can not be simultaneous.  Since one of the 
parties must perform first, he must forego the security that a requirement of simultaneous performance affords 
against disappointment of his expectation of an exchange of performances, and he must bear the burden of 
financing the other party before the latter has performed.  See Comment a.  Of course the parties can by 
express provision mitigate the harshness of a rule that requires that one completely perform before the other 
perform at all.  They often do this, for example, in construction contracts by stating a formula under which 
payment is to be made at stated intervals as work progresses.  But it is not feasible for courts to devise such 
formulas for the wide variety of such cases that come before them in which the parties have made no provision.  
Centuries ago, the principle became settled that where work is to be done by one party and payment is to be 
made by the other, the performance of the work must precede payment, in the absence of a showing of a 
contrary intention.  It is sometimes supposed, that this principle grew out of employment contracts, and reflects 
a conviction that employers as a class are more likely to be responsible than are workmen paid in advance.  
Whether or not the explanation is correct, most parties today contract with reference to the principle, and unless 
they have evidenced a contrary intention it is at least as fair as the opposite rule would be.
f.  Applicability of rule.  The rule stated in Subsection (2) usually finds its application to contracts involving 
services, such as construction and employment contracts.  The common practice of making express provision 
for progress payments has diminished its importance with regard to the former, and the widespread enactment 
of state wage statutes giving the employee a right to the frequent periodic payment of wages has lessened its 
significance with regard to the latter.  Nevertheless, it is a helpful rule for residual cases not otherwise provided 
for.  It applies not only to contracts under which the performance of one party is more or less continuous, but 
also to contracts where performance consists of a series of acts with an interval of time between them.  See 
Comment c.  Under a contract of the latter type, simultaneity may be possible in part and, to the extent that it is 
possible, the rule stated in Subsection (2) is subject to that stated in Subsection (1).  See Illustrations 6 and 12.
Illustrations:
9.  A contracts to do the concrete work on a building being constructed by B for $ 10 a cubic yard.  In the 
absence of language or circumstances indicating the contrary, payment by B is not due until A has finished the 
concrete work.
10.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 9, B promises to furnish a bond to secure his payment.  
No provision is made as to the time for furnishing the bond.  No performance by A is due until B has furnished 
the bond.  Although the doing of the concrete work by A requires a period of time and the furnishing of the bond 
by B does not, the circumstance that the bond is required to secure payment by B indicates that B must furnish 
the bond first.
11.  A contracts to make alterations in B's home for $ 5,000.  $ 500 is to be paid on the signing of the contract, 
$ 1,500 on the starting of work, $ 2,000 on the completion of rough carpentry and rough plumbing, and $ 1,000 
on the completion of the job.  Payment by B is due as the work progresses according to the terms of the 
contract.
12.  A promises to sell land to B, in return for which B promises to pay A $ 10,000 a year for five years on July 1 
of each year.  No provision is made as to the time for delivery of a deed.  Delivery of a deed is not due until July 
1 of the fifth year, at which time delivery of the deed and payment of the last installment are due 
simultaneously.  See Illustration 6.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is based on former §§ 267 and 268(1).  See also former § 273.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 
656, 661-64 (1951 & Supp. 1980); 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 835, 836 (3d ed. 1962); Patterson, Constructive 
Conditions in Contracts, 42 Colum. L. Rev. 903, 917-18 (1942).
Subsection (2) is based on former § 270.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts § 676 (1957); 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 
829-30 (3d ed. 1962); Patterson, Constructive Conditions in Contracts, 42 Colum. L. Rev. 903, 918-20 (1942).
Comment a.  This Comment states in general terms the principles behind Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-507, 
and 2-511.  See Morton v. Lamb, 7 T.R. 125, 101 Eng. Rep. 890 (K.B. 1797). As to what language is sufficient 

§ 234 Order of Performances
to show a contrary intention, compare Loud v. Pomona Land & Water Co., 153 U.S. 564 (1893), with 
Zintsmaster v. Werner, 41 F.2d 634 (3d Cir. 1930), and Glenn v. Rossler, 156 N.Y. 161, 50 N.E. 785 (1898).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is adapted from Illustration 1 to former § 267.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 4 
to former § 267.  Illustration 3 is adapted from Illustration 5 to former § 267.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 
6 to former § 267.  Beach v. First Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 140 Ga. App. 882, 232 S.E.2d 158 (1977). Illustration 
5 is adapted from Illustration 7 to former § 267.
Comment c.  See former § 272.  Illustration 6 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 268 and on Kane v. Hood, 30 
Mass. (13 Pick.) 281 (1832). Illustration 7 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 268.
Comment d.  This Comment replaces former § 273.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts § 689 (1951); 6 Williston, 
Contracts § 887C (3d ed. 1962).  Illustration 8 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 273 and on Beecher v. 
Conradt, 13 N.Y. (3 Kern.) 108 (1855); see also Kennelly v. Shapiro, 222 A.D. 488, 226 N.Y.S. 692 (1928).
Comment e.  On the origin of the principle, see 6 Williston, Contracts § 830 (3d ed. 1962); Murray, Contracts § 
162 (2d rev. ed. 1974).  That a substantial failure to make timely progress payments is a material breach when 
the payments are required by a construction contract, see United States ex rel. Micro-King Co. v. Community 
Science Technology, Inc., 574 F.2d 1292, 1295 n.3 (5th Cir. 1978).
Comment f.  Illustration 9 is based on Stewart v. Newbury, 220 N.Y. 379, 115 N.E. 984 (1917). See also 
Illustration 1 to former § 270.  Illustration 10 is based on Clark v. Gulesian, 197 Mass. 492, 84 N.E. 94 (1908). 
The facts in Illustration 11 are taken from New Era Homes v. Forster, 299 N.Y. 303, 86 N.E.2d 757 (1949). 
Illustration 12 is based on Comment a to former § 270 and Illustration 1 to former § 268.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 213
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 235
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 235 Effect of Performance as Discharge and of Non-Performance As 
Breach
(1)  Full performance of a duty under a contract discharges the duty.
(2)  When performance of a duty under a contract is due any non-performance is a breach.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Discharge by performance.  Under the rule stated in Subsection (1), a duty is discharged when it is fully 
performed.  Nothing less than full performance, however, has this effect and any defect in performance, even 
an insubstantial one, prevents discharge on this ground.  The defect need not be wilful or even negligent.  
Although a court may ignore trifling departures, performance that is merely substantial does not result in 
discharge under Subsection (1).  See Comment d to § 237.  A duty may, of course, be discharged on some 
other ground.  See Chapter 12.  For example, a duty that has not been fully performed may be discharged on 
the ground of impracticability of performance.  See Chapter 11.
Illustration:
1.  A contracts to build a house for B for $ 50,000 according to specifications furnished by B.  A builds the 
house according to the specifications.  A's duty to build the house is discharged.
b.  Effect of non-performance.  Non-performance is not a breach unless performance is due.  Performance may 
not be due because a required period of time has not passed, or because a condition has not occurred (§ 225), 
or because the duty has already been discharged (Chapter 12) as, for example, by impracticability of 
performance (Chapter 11).  In such a case non-performance is justified.  When performance is due, however, 
anything short of full performance is a breach, even if the party who does not fully perform was not at fault and 
even if the defect in his performance was not substantial.  Non-performance of a duty when performance is due 
is a breach whether the duty is imposed by a promise stated in the agreement or by a term supplied by the 
court (§ 204), as in the case of the duty of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205).  Non-performance includes 
defective performance as well as an absence of performance.
Illustrations:
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A builds the house according to the specifications 
except for an inadevertent variation in kitchen fixtures which can easily be remedied for $ 100.  A's non-
performance is a breach.
3.  A contracts with B to manufacture and deliver 100,000 plastic containers for a price of $ 100,000.  The 
colors of the containers are to be selected by B from among those specified in the contract.  B delays in making 
his selection for an unreasonable time, holding up their manufacture and causing A loss.  B's delay is a breach.  
His duty of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205) includes a duty to make his selection within a reasonable time.
4.  A contracts with B to repair B's building for $ 20,000, payment to be made "on the satisfaction of C, B's 
architect, and the issuance of his certificate." A makes the repairs but does not ask C for his certificate.  B does 
not pay A.  B's non-performance is not a breach.  It is justified on the ground that performance is not due 
because of the non-occurrence of a condition.  See Illustration 5 to § 227.
c.  Statute of Frauds.  Non-performance can be a breach of a contract even though, at the time of the non-
performance, the contract is unenforceable because of the Statute of Frauds (§§ 8, 138).  Non-performance 
when performance is due still gives rise to a claim for damages for which a court will grant relief if the Statute is 

§ 235 Effect of Performance as Discharge and of Non-Performance As Breach
subsequently satisfied as, for example, by the later signing of a memorandum or by an admission in court.  See 
Comments c and d to § 133 and Comment b to § 136.  If the Statute is subsequently satisfied, the claim is one 
for damages for a breach that occurred previously, at the time of the actual non-performance, and not for one 
that occurred at the time of the later satisfaction of the Statute.
Illustration:
5.  A and B make an oral contract, unenforceable under the Statute of Frauds (§ 125), by which A promises to 
sell and B to buy land for $ 50,000.  Although B tenders the money, A fails to tender a deed and later writes a 
letter to B which satisfies the Statute of Frauds.  A's non-performance is a breach and gives rise to a claim for 
damages, even though the claim is unenforceable until A writes the letter.  See Illustration 4 to § 133.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section collects rules stated in former §§ 386, 312, 314 and 315.
Comment a.  Subsection (1) is based on former § 386.  See 5A Corbin, Contracts § 1230 (1964); 15 Williston, 
Contracts § 1793 (3d ed. 1972).
Comment b.  Subsection (2) is based on former § 314.  See 4 Corbin, Contracts §§ 943, 948 (1951); 11 
Williston, Contracts §§ 1290, 1295, 1296 (3d ed. 1968).  As to Illustration 2, see Plante v. Jacobs, 10 Wis.2d 
567, 103 N.W.2d 296 (1960). Illustration 3 is based on Kehm Corp. v. United States, 93 F. Supp. 620 (Ct. Cl. 
1950). Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 5 to § 227.
Comment c.  This Comment and Illustration 5 reject the reasoning in Comment b to former § 312, under which 
"a memorandum made subsequently is treated as making retroactively the non-performance wrongful, though 
when it took place it was not." The notion of retroactive breach is not supported by the decisions and is contrary 
to the reasoning behind such sections as §§ 8, 133 and 138.  See Bird v. Monroe, 66 Me. 337 (1887); cf.  
Townsend v. Hargraves, 118 Mass. 325 (1875). Illustration 5 is based on Illustration 4 to § 133.  Cf.  
Dangerfield v. Markel, 252 N.W.2d 184 (N.D. 1977).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Recovery for mental anguish or emotional distress, absent independent physical injury, consequent upon 
breach of contract in connection with sale of real property.  61 A.L.R.3d 922.
Employer's termination of professional athlete's services as constituting breach of employment contract.  57 
A.L.R.3d 257.
Lessee's breach of or default under lease agreement as affecting his right in respect of option to purchase 
under the lease.  53 A.L.R.3d 435.
Contractor's liability for alleged breach of contract for construction of swimming pool.  1 A.L.R.3d 870.
Rendering financial or other assistance to another as breach of covenant not to compete.  1 A.L.R.3d 778.
Liability of garageman to one ordering repair of motor vehicle, for defective work.  92 A.L.R.2d 1408.
Water well-drilling contracts.  90 A.L.R.2d 1346.
Liability of dentist to patient.  83 A.L.R.2d 7.
Comment Note. -- What law governs in determining whether facts and circumstances operate to terminate, 
breach, rescind, or repudiate a contract.  50 A.L.R.2d 254.
Mining grubstake contracts.  70 A.L.R.2d 904.
Right to recover, in action for breach of contract, expenditures incurred in preparation for performance.  17 
A.L.R.2d 1300.
Burden of proving value of relief from performing contract in suit based on defendant's breach preventing or 
excusing full performance.  17 A.L.R.2d 968.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 315

§ 235 Effect of Performance as Discharge and of Non-Performance As Breach
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 236
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 236 Claims for Damages for Total and for Partial Breach
(1)  A claim for damages for total breach is one for damages based on all of the injured party's 
remaining rights to performance.
(2)  A claim for damages for partial breach is one for damages based on only part of the injured party's 
remaining rights to performance.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Breach.  A breach may be one by non-performance (§ 235(2)), or by repudiation (§ 253), or by both (§ 243).  
Every breach gives rise to a claim for damages, and may give rise to other remedies.  Even if the injured party 
sustains no pecuniary loss or is unable to show such loss with sufficient certainty, he has at least a claim for 
nominal damages.  See § 346(2).  If a court chooses to ignore a trifling departure (Comment a to § 235), there 
is no breach and no claim arises.
b.  Total and partial breach distinguished.  Although every breach gives rise to a claim for damages, not every 
claim for damages is one for damages based on all of the injured party's remaining rights to performance under 
the contract.  Such a claim is said to be one for damages for total breach.  (The injured party's remaining duties 
under the contract are not necessarily discharged, however.  Even if performances are to be exchanged under 
an exchange of promises, a duty of the injured party to give a performance that is not part of that exchange of 
performances is not discharged (§ 237).  And a duty of the injured party to give a performance that is the 
agreed equivalent of performance that has been given by the other party is not discharged (§ 240).) If the 
injured party elects to or is required to await the balance of the other party's performance under the contract, his 
claim is said instead to be one for damages for partial breach.  For example, an injured party who claims 
damages in addition to specific performance claims damages for partial breach.  Rules for determining whether 
a particular breach gives rise to a claim for damages for partial breach, for total breach, or for either partial or 
total breach at the election of the injured party are stated in §§ 243 and 253.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts with B to build a building on B's land, work to commence on May 1 and to be completed by 
October 1.  On May 10, A has not yet commenced work.  If the court concludes that A's breach, although 
material (§ 241), has not continued for such a length of time that B is discharged (§ 242), B has a claim against 
A for damages caused by the delay, but this is not a claim for damages based on all of B's remaining rights to 
performance.  B's claim is one for damages for partial breach.  See § 243.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, B cancels the contract.  If the court concludes that A's 
breach is not only material but has continued for such a length of time that B is discharged (§ 242), B has a 
claim against A for damages based on all of his remaining rights to performance.  B's claim is one for damages 
for total breach.  See § 243.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former §§ 312 and 313.  See 4 Corbin, Contracts §§ 943-48 (1951 & Supp. 1980); 11 
Williston, Contracts §§ 1290, 1292 (3d ed. 1968).  The rules in Subsections (1) and (2) have been rewritten to 
speak of a claim for partial or for total breach, rather than of a breach that is partial or total.  See § 243.  On the 
distinction between total and partial breach, see Coughlin v. Blair, 41 Cal.2d 587, 262 P.2d 305 (1953); Riess v. 
Murchison, 503 F.2d 999 (9th Cir. 1974), cert. denied, 420 U.S. 993 (1975). Compare Fox v. Dehn, 42 

§ 236 Claims for Damages for Total and for Partial Breach
Cal.App.3d 165, 116 Cal. Rptr. 786 (1974). See also Enterprise, Inc. v. Nampa City, 96 Idaho 734, 536 P.2d 
729 (1975).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Contractor's liability for alleged breach of contract for construction of swimming pool.  1 A.L.R.3d 870.
Rendering financial or other assistance to another as breach of covenant not to compete.  1 A.L.R.3d 778.
Liability of garageman to one ordering repair of motor vehicle, for defective work.  92 A.L.R.2d 1408.
Liability of dentist to patient.  83 A.L.R.2d 7.
Right to recover, in action for breach of contract, expenditures incurred in preparation for performance.  17 
A.L.R.2d 1300.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 319, 321
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 237
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 237 Effect on Other Party's Duties of a Failure to Render Performance
Except as stated in § 240, it is a condition of each party's remaining duties to render performances to 
be exchanged under an exchange of promises that there be no uncured material failure by the other 
party to render any such performance due at an earlier time.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Effect of non-occurrence of condition.  Under the rule stated in this Section, a material failure of 
performance, including defective performance as well as an absence of performance, operates as the non-
occurrence of a condition.  Under § 225, the non-occurrence of a condition has two possible effects on the duty 
subject to that condition.  See Comment a to § 225.  The first is that of preventing performance of the duty from 
becoming due, at least temporarily (§ 225(1)).  The second is that of discharging the duty when the condition 
can no longer occur (§ 225(2)).  A material failure of performance has, under this Section, these effects on the 
other party's remaining duties of performance with respect to the exchange.  It prevents performance of those 
duties from becoming due, at least temporarily, and it discharges those duties if it has not been cured during 
the time in which performance can occur.  The occurrence of conditions of the type dealt with in this Section is 
required out of a sense of fairness rather than as a result of the agreement of the parties.  Such conditions are 
therefore sometimes referred to as "constructive conditions of exchange." Cf. § 204.  What is sometimes 
referred to as "failure of consideration" by courts and statutes (e.g., Uniform Commercial Code § 3-408) is 
referred to in this Restatement as "failure of performance" to avoid confusion with the absence of consideration.  
Circumstances significant in determining whether a failure is material are set out in § 241.  Circumstances 
significant in determining the period of time after which remaining duties are discharged, if a material failure has 
not been cured, are set out in § 242.  The rules stated in this Section and the one following apply without regard 
to whether or not the failure of performance is a breach.  They apply, for example, even though the failure is 
justified on the ground of impracticability of performance (Chapter 11).  Illustrations of the operation of these 
rules in situations in which the failure is justified are given in other chapters under the sections that deal with the 
particular justification, such as impracticability.  See, e.g., §§ 267, 268.  The illustrations in this Chapter 
concern, for the most part, their operation in situations where the failure is a breach.  But see, e.g., Illustration 
3.  The rules of this Section and the one following apply even when the promise of the party in default is 
unenforceable under the Statute of Frauds, while the promise of the other party is enforceable.  See § 140.  
They are, of course, subject to variation by agreement of the parties.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to build a house for B for $ 50,000, progress payments to be made monthly in an amount equal 
to 85% of the price of the work performed during the preceding month, the balance to be paid on the architect's 
certificate of satisfactory completion of the house.  Without justification B fails to make a $ 5,000 progress 
payment.  A thereupon stops work on the house and a week goes by.  A's failure to continue the work is not a 
breach and B has no claim against A.  B's failure to make the progress payment is an uncured material failure 
of performance which operates as the non-occurrence of a condition of A's remaining duties of performance 
under the exchange.  If B offers to make the delayed payment and in all the circumstances it is not too late to 
cure the material breach, A's duties to continue the work are not discharged.  A has a claim against B for 
damages for partial breach because of the delay.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, B fails to make the progress payment or to give any 
explanation or assurances for one month.  If, in all the circumstances, it is now too late for B to cure his material 

§ 237 Effect on Other Party’s Duties of a Failure to Render Performance
failure of performance by making the delayed payment, A's duties to continue the work are discharged.  
Because B's failure to make the progress payment was a breach, A also has a claim against B for total breach 
of contract (§ 243).
3.  A, a theater manager, contracts with B, an actress, for performance by her for a period of six months in a 
play that A is about to present.  B dies during the first week of the performance.  A's remaining duties with 
respect to the exchange of performances are discharged by B's uncured material failure of performance.  
Because B's failure is justified on the ground of impossibility (§ 262), A has no claim against B's estate.
b.  First material failure of performance.  In many disputes over failure of performance, both parties fail to finish 
performance, and the question is whether one of them is justified in so doing by the other party's failure.  
(Compare Comment d.)  This Section states the fundamental rule under which that question is to be answered.  
(The liability of the other party for damages for total breach is governed by the rule stated in § 243.) The rule is 
based on the principle that where performances are to be exchanged under an exchange of promises, each 
party is entitled to the assurance that he will not be called upon to perform his remaining duties of performance 
with respect to the expected exchange if there has already been an uncured material failure of performance by 
the other party.  The central problem is in determining which party is chargeable with the first uncured material 
failure of performance.  In determining the relative times when performance is due, the terms of the agreement 
and the supplementary rules on time for performance should be considered (§§ 233, 234).  In determining 
whether there has been a failure of performance, the terms of the agreement and the supplementary rules such 
as those on omitted essential terms (§ 204) and the duty of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205) should be 
considered.  In determining whether a failure of performance is material, the circumstances listed in § 241 
should be considered.  Even if the failure is material, it may still be possible to cure it by subsequent 
performance without a material failure.  In the event of cure the injured party may still have a claim for any 
remaining non-performance as well as for any delay.  In determining when it is too late to cure a failure of 
performance, the circumstances listed in § 242 should be considered.  In making all of these determinations the 
situation of the parties is to be viewed as of the time for performance and in terms of the actual failure.  If, for 
example, under the terms of the agreement the order of performance depends on an event subsequent to the 
time of the making of the contract, that event is to be taken into account.
Illustrations:
4.  A contracts to sell and B to buy at a stated price four parcels of land which A does not own but which the 
parties expect A to acquire by purchase at a foreclosure sale.  A bids on the four parcels at the foreclosure 
sale, but each time B bids against him and acquires all four for less than the contract price.  A does not convey 
the four parcels to B.  B has no claim against A.  B's bidding at the sale was a material breach of his duty of 
good faith and fair dealing (§ 205), which operated as the non-occurrence of a condition of A's duties and 
discharged them.
5.  A, a contractor, and B, a subcontractor, make a contract under which B promises to install sewer pipe in a 
trench which A is to dig and maintain during installation.  A unjustifiably so fails to maintain the trench that it fills 
with water, severely hindering installation.  B thereupon stops work and refuses to continue unless the breach is 
cured.  A does not cure his breach.  If A's breach is material (§ 241), it operates as the non-occurrence of a 
condition of B's duty to build the sewer, discharging it, and A has no claim against B.  If A's breach is not 
material, B's duties are not discharged, and B's stopping work and refusing to continue is a breach.
6.  A contracts to sell and B to buy on 30 days credit 3,000 tons of iron rails at a stated price.  B purchases iron 
rails heavily from various sources for use in his business, and in consequence A has difficulty in securing 3,000 
tons and the market price is substantially increased.  A fails to deliver the rails.  B has a claim against A for 
breach of contract.  B's purchase of iron rails from other sources for use in his business is not a failure of 
performance because B is under no duty to refrain from purchasing for that purpose.  A's failure to deliver the 
rails is therefore a breach.
7.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 6, B maliciously buys iron rails heavily from various 
sources in order to prevent A from performing his contract with B.  B has no claim against A.  B's malicious 
purchase of iron rails from other sources is a material breach of his duty of good faith and fair dealing (§ 204), 
which operates as the non-occurrence of a condition of A's duty to deliver the rails, discharging it.

§ 237 Effect on Other Party’s Duties of a Failure to Render Performance
c.  Ignorance immaterial.  The non-occurrence of a condition of a party's duty has the effects stated in § 225 
even though that party does not know of its non-occurrence.  See Comment e to § 225.  It follows that one 
party's material failure of performance has the effect of the non-occurrence of a condition of the other party's 
remaining duties, under the rule stated in this Section, even though that other party does not know of the 
failure.  If the other party is discharged as the result of an unjustified material failure of which he is ignorant, he 
has a claim for damages for total breach (§ 245).  But any loss that he has suffered as a result of his own 
actions taken in ignorance of the breach cannot be recovered since his actions were not caused by the other's 
breach.  See Illustrations 8 and 9.
A party's ignorance may, however, cause him to lose rights under rules other than the one stated in this section.  
He may, for example, be precluded from relying on a condition where, through ignorance, he fails to make 
timely objection.  So, under Uniform Commercial Code § 2-608, a buyer of goods who accepts them in 
ignorance of their defects loses his right to insist upon strict performance as a condition of his duty to pay the 
price.  Other rules may preclude a party from relying on a failure of performance as the non-occurrence of a 
condition where, because of unreasonable ignorance, he has accepted the other party's performance or has 
given no reasons or the wrong reasons for its rejection.  See, e.g., §§ 246 and 248; Uniform Commercial Code 
§§ 2-605, 2-607.
Illustrations:
8.  A and B make an employment contract.  After the service has begun, A, the employee, commits a material 
breach of his duty to give efficient service that would justify B in discharging him.  B is not aware of this but 
discharges A for an inadequate reason.  A has no claim against B for discharging him.  B has a claim against A 
for damages for total breach (§ 243) based on B's loss due to A's failure to give efficient service up to the time 
of discharge, but not for damages based on the loss of A's services after that time, because that loss was 
caused by B's discharge of A and not by A's failure to give efficient service.
9.  A contracts to sell and B to buy goods on 30 days credit.  A delivers defective goods, which B rejects in 
ignorance of their defects.  A has no claim against B.  B has a claim against A for total breach (§ 243), but can 
recover nominal damages only since the unavailability of the goods to B was caused by B's rejection and not by 
their defects.
10.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 9, when B rejects the goods he states an insufficient 
reason, which induces a failure by A to cure the defects in the goods.  B is precluded from relying on the 
defects to justify his rejection, not because of his ignorance itself, but because his giving of an insufficient 
reason for rejection excused the non-occurrence of the condition of his duty to take and pay for the goods (§ 
248; Uniform Commercial Code § 2-605).
d.  Substantial performance.  In an important category of disputes over failure of performance, one party 
asserts the right to payment on the ground that he has completed his performance, while the other party 
refuses to pay on the ground that there is an uncured material failure of performance.  (Compare Comment 
b.)  A typical example is that of the building contractor who claims from the owner payment of the unpaid 
balance under a construction contract.  In such cases it is common to state the issue, not in terms of whether 
there has been an uncured material failure by the contractor, but in terms of whether there has been substantial 
performance by him.  This manner of stating the issue does not change its substance, however, and the rule 
stated in this Section also applies to such cases.  If there has been substantial although not full performance, 
the building contractor has a claim for the unpaid balance and the owner has a claim only for damages.  If there 
has not been substantial performance, the building contractor has no claim for the unpaid balance, although he 
may have a claim in restitution (§ 374).  The considerations in determining whether performance is substantial 
are those listed in § 241 for determining whether a failure is material.  See Comment b to § 241.  If, however, 
the parties have made an event a condition of their agreement, there is no mitigating standard of materiality or 
substantiality applicable to the non-occurrence of that event.  If, therefore, the agreement makes full 
performance a condition, substantial performance is not sufficient and if relief is to be had under the contract, it 
must be through excuse of the non-occurrence of the condition to avoid forfeiture.  See § 229 and Illustration 1 
to that section.
Illustration:

§ 237 Effect on Other Party’s Duties of a Failure to Render Performance
11.  A contracts to build a house for B, for which B promises to pay $ 50,000 in monthly progress payments 
equal to 85% of the value of the work with the balance to be paid on completion.  When A completes 
construction, B refuses to pay the $ 7,500 balance claiming that there are defects that amount to an uncured 
material breach.  If the breach is material, A's performance is not substantial and he has no claim under the 
contract against B, although he may have a claim in restitution (§ 374).  If the breach is not material, A's 
performance is said to be substantial, he has a claim under the contract against B for $ 7,500, and B has a 
claim against A for damages because of the defects.
e.  Duties affected.  Under the rule stated in this Section, only duties with respect to the performances to be 
exchanged under the particular exchange of promises are affected by a failure of one of those performances.  A 
duty under a separate contract is not affected (see Comment d to § 231 and Illustration 5 to that section), nor is 
a duty under the same contract affected if it was not one to render a performance to be exchanged under an 
exchange of promises (see Illustrations 3 and 4 to § 232).  Furthermore, only duties to render performance are 
affected.  A claim for damages that has already arisen as a result of a claim for partial breach is not discharged 
under the rule stated in this Section.
Illustration:
12.  A contracts to build a building for B.  B delays making the site available to A, giving A a claim against B for 
damages for partial breach.  A then commits a material breach and B properly cancels the contract.  B has a 
claim against A for damages for total breach, but A still has a claim against B for damages for partial breach.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This section is based on former §§ 269 and 274.  See also former § 268(2).  It rejects, however, the approach 
reflected in former § 271 under which an attempt was made to determine whether particular promises of one 
party were conditional on the performance of particular promises of the other.  It also abandons as misleading 
the term "failure of consideration" (see, e.g., former § 274) in favor of "failure of performance." As Corbin 
suggested, the former may incorrectly suggest an absence of consideration.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts § 658 
(1960); Cowman v. Allen Monuments, Inc., 500 S.W.2d 223, 227-28 (Tex. Civ. App. 1973). For criticism of the 
term "failure of consideration," see Patterson, Constructive Conditions in Contracts, 42 Colum. L. Rev. 903, 
921-22 (1942). For Williston's defense of the term, see 6 Williston, Contracts § 814 (3d ed. 1962).  The term 
"cure" is used in a broader sense than in Uniform Commercial Code § 2-508, to include performance by one 
party before the other party's remaining duties of performance have been discharged, even though the other 
party has a claim for damages for partial breach because of the delay.  See, e.g., Cohen v. Kranz, 12 N.Y.2d 
242, 238 N.Y.S.2d 928, 189 N.E.2d 473 (1963). See generally 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 657-60, 675, 677-78, 
700-02, 762 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 820-28, 839, 841-42 (3d ed. 1962).
Comment a.  With respect to discharge, see former §§ 397 and 399.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 5 to 
former § 276 and on Pelletier v. Masse, 49 R.I. 408, 143 A. 609 (1928); Harton v. Hildebrand, 230 Pa. 335, 79 
A. 571 (1911). See also Turner Concrete Steel Co. v. Chester Constr. & Contracting Co., 271 Pa. 205, 114 A. 
780 (1921). Cf.  Taylor v. Johnston, 15 Cal.3d 130, 123 Cal. Rptr. 641, 539 P.2d 425 (1975). On the claim for 
damages for partial breach during the delay, see Underground Constr. Co. v. Sanitary Dist. of Chicago, 367 Ill. 
360, 11 N.E.2d 361 (1937). Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 5 to former § 276 and on Guerini Stone Co. v. 
P.J. Carlin Constr. Co., 248 U.S. 334 (1919). See also R.G. Pope Constr. Co. v. Guard Rail of Roanoke, 219 
Va. 111, 244 S.E.2d 774 (1978). Compare the questionable decision in Wagstaff v. Remco, Inc., 540 P.2d 931 
(Utah 1975), in which the defendant's failure to make a timely payment was held a material breach justifying the 
plaintiff's permanent discontinuance of the work.  Nonetheless, defendant was permitted to set off its costs of 
completion.  Illustration 3 is suggested by Illustration 1 to former § 275; see also Poussard v. Spiers & Pond, 1 
Q.B. Div. 410 (1876).
Comment b.  As to the case where the order of performance depends on a future event, see former § 271.  
Illustration 4 is based on Patterson v. Meyerhofer, 204 N.Y. 96, 97 N.E. 472 (1912). The facts in Illustration 5 
are suggested by Quintin Vespa Co. v. Construction Serv. Co., 343 Mass. 547, 179 N.E.2d 895 (1962); see 
also Clarke Contracting Co. v. City of New York, 229 N.Y. 413, 128 N.E. 241 (1920). For cases in which a 
contractor's failure tokeep to a schedule constituted a material failure of performance justifying a 
subcontractor's refusal to proceed and giving the latter a claim for total breach, see e.g., R.G. Pope Constr. Co. 
v. Guard Rail of Roanoke, 219 Va. 111, 244 S.E.2d 774 (1978); Gamm Constr. Co. v. Townsend, 32 Ill. App.3d 
848, 336 N.E.2d 592 (1975); Curators of Univ. of Missouri v. Nebraska Prestressed Concrete Co., 526 S.W.2d 

§ 237 Effect on Other Party’s Duties of a Failure to Render Performance
903 (Mo. Ct. App. 1975). Contrast the special situation of government procurement contracts, felicitously 
described and interestingly applied in Westinghouse Elec. Corp. v. Garrett Corp., 437 F. Supp. 1301, 1331-40 
(D. Md. 1977). For a question of who first materially failed to perform in a sales rather than construction context, 
see Cargill, Inc. v. Atkins Farms, Inc., 422 F. Supp. 239 (W.D. Ark. 1976). Illustration 6 is based on and 
Illustration 7 is suggested by Iron Trade Prod. Co. v. Wilkoff Co., 272 Pa. 172, 116 A. 150 (1922). See also 
Illustration 3 to former § 315.
Comment c.  This Comment is based on former § 278.  See also 3A Corbin, Contracts § 762 (1960); 6 
Williston, Contracts § 839 (3d ed. 1962); Western Auto Supply v. Sullivan, 210 F.2d 36 (8th Cir. 1954). 
Illustration 8 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 278, Illustration 2 to former § 304, Illustration 2 to former § 
315, and Green v. Edgar, 28 N.Y. Sup. Ct. 414 (1880); see also Wechsler v. Capitol Trailer Sales, 220 Cal. 
App.2d 252, 33 Cal. Rptr. 680 (1963). Illustration 9 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 278.  Illustration 10 is 
suggested by Uniform Commercial Code § 2-605(1)(a).
Comment d.  This Comment is based on former § 268(2).  On substantial performance generally, see Della 
Ratta, Inc. v. American Better Community Devs., 38 Md. App. 119, 380 A.2d 627 (Ct. Spec. App. 1977). 
Compare Franklin E. Penny Co. v. United States, 207 Ct. Cl. 842, 524 F.2d 668 (1975). This Section (in 
Tentative Draft) was quoted and applied in Roland A. Wilson & Assocs. v. Forty-O-Four Grand Corp., 246 
N.W.2d 922 (Iowa 1976). The approach of the Section is used in Della Ratta, Inc. v. American Better 
Community Devs., supra. In Bridgkort Racquet Club v. University Bank, 85 Wis.2d 706, 271 N.W.2d 165 (Ct. 
App. 1978), the court used the term "substantial performance" in a dispute over a loan commitment rather than 
actual construction.  The opinion illustrates the substantive equivalence of substantial performance and the 
absence of an uncured material failure of performance.  Illustration 11 is suggested by Illustration 6 to former § 
275; see also Jacob & Youngs v. Kent, 230 N.Y. 239, 129 N.E. 889 (1921).
Comment e.  Illustration 12 is supported by Sitlington v. Fulton, 281 F.2d 552 (10th Cir. 1960); Sitlington v. 
Fulton, 297 F.2d 458 (10th Cir. 1961).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Employer's termination of professional athlete's services as constituting breach of employment contract.  57 
A.L.R.3d 257.
Tenant's rights under unexercised option to purchase as affected by landlord's breach of lease or lease 
agreement.  12 A.L.R.3d 1128.
Construction contractor's liability to contractee for defects or insufficiency of work attributable to the latter's 
plans and specifications.  6 A.L.R.3d 1394.
Water well-drilling contracts.  90 A.L.R.2d 1346.
Mining grubstake contracts.  70 A.L.R.2d 904.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 318
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 238
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 238 Effect on Other Party's Duties of a Failure to Offer Performance
Where all or part of the performances to be exchanged under an exchange of promises are due 
simultaneously, it is a condition of each party's duties to render such performance that the other party 
either render or, with manifested present ability to do so, offer performance of his part of the 
simultaneous exchange.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Effect of offer to perform.  Where the performances are to be exchanged simultaneously under an exchange 
of promises, each party is entitled to refuse to proceed with that simultaneous exchange until he is reasonably 
assured that the other party will perform at the same time.  If a party actually performs, his performance both 
discharges his own duty (§ 235(1)) and amounts to the occurrence of a condition of the other party's duty (§ 
237).  But it is not necessary that he actually perform in order to produce this latter effect.  It is enough that he 
make an appropriate offer to perform, since it is a condition of each party's duties of performance with respect 
to the exchange that there be no uncured material failure by the other party at least to offer performance.  
Circumstances significant in determining whether a failure is material are set out in § 241.  Such an offer of 
performance by a party amounts to the occurrence of a condition of the other party's duty to render 
performance, although it does not amount to performance by the former.  Until a party has at least made such 
an offer, however, the other party is under no duty to perform, and if both parties fail to make such an offer, 
neither party's failure is a breach.  (If one of the parties is already in breach, as where he has repudiated or has 
failed to go to the place appointed for the simultaneous exchange, the other party's duty to render performance 
may already have been discharged under §§ 253(2) or 237, giving him a claim for damages for total breach 
under §§ 253(1) or 243(1).) When it is too late for either to make such an offer, both parties are discharged by 
the non-occurrence of a condition.  A failure to offer performance can be cured, if an appropriate offer is made 
in time (§ 242).  Cf. Comment b to § 237.  The fact that a party is ignorant of a defect in the other party's offer is 
immaterial.  See Comment c to § 237.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a machine for $ 10,000, delivery of the machine and payment of the price to 
be made at a stated place on July 1.  On July 1 both parties are present at that place, but A neither delivers nor 
offers to deliver the machine and B neither pays nor offers to pay the price.  A has no claim against B, and B 
has no claim against A.  See Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-507(1) and 2-511(1).  If, however, B had 
committed a material breach by failing to go to the stated place, A would have had a claim against B for 
damages for total breach.  See §§ 237, 243.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, on July 2, B, with manifested present ability to do so, 
offers to pay the price if A simultaneously delivers the machine, but A refuses to deliver the machine.  If the 
delay of one day does not exceed the time after which A is discharged (§ 242), A's refusal is a breach.  If it 
exceeds that time, B has no claim against A.
b.  What amounts to an offer to perform.  An offer of performance meets the requirement stated in this Section 
even though it is conditional on simultaneous performance by the other party.  The offer must be accompanied 
with manifested present ability to make it good, but the offeror need not go so far as actually to hold out that 
which he is to deliver.  (On the meaning of the term "manifested," see Comment b to § 2.) Thus the Uniform 
Commercial Code § 2-503(1) requires only "that the seller put and hold conforming goods at the buyer's 
disposition and give the buyer any notice reasonably necessary to enable him to take delivery." In this respect 

§ 238 Effect on Other Party’s Duties of a Failure to Offer Performance
the requirement of this Section is less exacting than that of tender under, for example, § 45 or § 62.  Any 
conduct, including tender, that goes beyond an offer of performance will, of course, also satisfy the 
requirement.  The requirement of an offer of performance is to be applied in the light of what is reasonably to be 
expected by the parties in view of the practical difficulties of absolute simultaneity (see Comment b to § 234) 
and is subject to the agreement of the parties, as supplemented or qualified by usage (§§ 221, 222) and course 
of dealing (§ 223).
Illustration:
3.  A contracts to sell and B to buy land for $ 50,000.  The land is to be conveyed free of liens and 
encumbrances, but B knows that it is subject to a $ 30,000 mortgage held by C which A expects to satisfy out of 
the $ 50,000 purchase price.  A, in the presence of B and C, makes a conditional offer of a deed of the property 
subject to the mortgage, and both A and C present documents that are legally sufficient to satisfy the mortgage 
debt to be delivered immediately on payment of the price by B.  B thereupon refuses to pay the price.  In view 
of the circumstances at the time the contract was made, A's offer is sufficient, and A has a claim against B for 
damages for total breach of contract.
c.  Judicial supervision.  In an action for specific performance or for the price, a court may ensure that the party 
seeking relief makes an offer of performance that meets the requirements of this Section by granting relief 
conditional on such an offer.  Uniform Commercial Code § 2-709(2), for example, provides that "where the 
seller sues for the price, he must hold for the buyer any goods which have been identified to the contract and 
are still in his control. . . ." See Illustration 4.  See also Comment a to § 358 with respect to specific 
performance.  If performances, although not originally due simultaneously, have become due simultaneously 
after the commencement of the action because the earlier performance has been delayed, the granting of such 
relief is equally appropriate.  Even though the performances do not become due simultaneously until after 
judgment, the court may exercise its power on either the defendant's request or on its own motion.  See 
Illustration 5.
Illustrations:
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, on July 1, A puts the machine at B's disposition and 
requests that he pay for it.  B refuses to pay and A, after attempting unsuccessfully to resell the machine, brings 
an action for the price under Uniform Commercial Code § 2-709.  A court will award judgment for the full price 
only if A holds the machine for the buyer during the action.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-709(2).
5.  A promises to sell real estate to B, delivery of the deed to be four years from July 1.  B promises to pay $ 
50,000 in installments of $ 10,000 on each July 1 for five years.  B duly pays the first three installments but 
does not pay the fourth, and A brings an action to recover it.  A has judgment but the judgment is not collected 
until after the July 1 when the payment of the fifth installment and the delivery are due.  The court will restrain 
collection of the judgment until A makes an offer to transfer the real estate conditional on being paid the amount 
of the judgment and also the fifth installment of the price.  See Illustration 8 to § 234 and Illustration 2 to § 358.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 251.  It avoids as unnecessary the use of the term "concurrent condition," 
which is characterized in Comment a to that section as "an elliptical expression." See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 
629, 663, 666 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 5 Williston, Contracts § 666A (3d ed. 1961); 6 id. §§ 833, 834 (3d ed. 
1962).
Comment a.  Illustrations 1 and 2 are based on Illustration 1 to former § 251, on Illustration 1 to former § 267, 
on Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-507 and 2-511, and on Vidal v. Transcontinental & W. Air, Inc., 120 F.2d 67 
(3d Cir. 1941). See also Robinson v. Harbour, 42 Miss. 795 (1869).
Comment b.  For an opinion similar in approach to this Comment although using the phrase "tender of 
performance," see Pelletier v. Dwyer, 334 A.2d 867 (Me. 1975). On what is a sufficient conditional offer, see 
Southern Nat'l Bank of Houston v. Crateo, 458 F.2d 688 (5th Cir. 1972); Perry v. Little, 419 S.W.2d 198 (Tex. 
1967); Brooks v. Scoville, 81 Utah 163, 17 P.2d 218 (1932); Lawrence v. Miller, 86 N.Y. 131 (1881). Illustration 
3 is based on Kadow v. Cronin, 97 N.J.L. 301, 116 A. 427 (1922), on Robeson-Marion Dev. Co. v. Powers Co., 
256 S.C. 583, 183 S.E.2d 454 (1971), and on Thomas J. Baird Inv. Co. v. Harris, 209 F. 291 (10th Cir. 1913). 
But cf.  Johnson v. Malone, 252 Ala. 609, 42 So.2d 505 (1949).

§ 238 Effect on Other Party’s Duties of a Failure to Offer Performance
Comment c.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 273 and on Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
709(1).  Illustration 5 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 273.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 318
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 239
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 239 Effect on Other Party's Duties of a Failure Justified by Non-Occurrence 
Of a Condition
(1)  A party's failure to render or to offer performance may, except as stated in Subsection (2), affect the 
other party's duties under the rules stated in §§ 237 and 238 even though failure is justified by the non-
occurrence of a condition.
(2)  The rule stated in Subsection (1) does not apply if the other party assumed the risk that he would 
have to perform in spite of such a failure.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  General rule.  The rules stated in §§ 237 and 238 apply to any uncured material failure, whether or not it is a 
breach.  They therefore apply even when a party's failure is justified on the ground that performance has not 
become due because of the non-occurrence of a condition of his duty (§ 224).  Subsection (1) makes it clear 
that this is so, as a general rule.  The general rule is based on the premise that the other party did not assume 
the risk that he would have to perform even if the expected exchange was not forthcoming because of the non-
occurrence of the condition.  His expectation is that even if the condition does not occur, he will not be called 
upon to perform unless that exchange is forthcoming.  He is therefore entitled to refuse to perform if there is a 
failure of the return performance, even if that failure is not a breach because of the non-occurrence of the 
condition.  In that case, he has, of course, no claim for damages, although he may have one in restitution.  See 
§§ 370-77.
Illustration:
1.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a house for $ 50,000.  The contract contains the provision, "This contract is 
conditional on approval by X Bank of B's pending mortgage application." Approval by X Bank is a condition of 
B's duty, and therefore if X Bank does not approve B's application, performance by B will not become due, even 
if A makes an offer of a deed.  But it is not a condition of A's duty and therefore performance by A will become 
due if, although X Bank does not approve B's application, B makes an offer to pay $ 50,000.  See Illustration 4 
to § 226.  Under the rule stated in this Section, performance by A will not become due if B does not pay or offer 
to pay $ 50,000 because A did not assume the risk that he would nonetheless have to perform.
b.  Assumption of risk.  Subsection (2) states an exception to the general rule to cover the case in which a party 
assumes the risk that he will have to perform even if the agreed exchange is not forthcoming because of the 
non-occurrence of a condition.  Since a condition is by definition not certain to occur (§ 224), every obligee of a 
conditional duty assumes a risk.  It is the premise of the general rule that he assumes only the risk that if the 
condition does not occur, the expected exchange will not be carried out on either side.  See Illustration 1.  But 
sometimes he assumes the greater risk that, if the condition does not occur, he will have to carry out his side of 
the exchange even though it is not carried out on the other side.  If he has assumed this greater risk, then 
conduct on the other side which would otherwise operate as a failure to perform under § 237 or to offer to 
perform under § 238 does not so operate.  The nature of the risk taken by a party who enters into such an 
exchange of promises is sometimes indicated by describing the promise that he receives as "aleatory." See 
Comment c to § 232.
Illustrations:
2.  A, a general contractor, contracts with B, a subcontractor, for the plumbing work on a construction project.  B 
is to receive $ 100,000, payable monthly as the work progresses "on condition that Owner shall have paid 

§ 239 Effect on Other Party’s Duties of a Failure Justified by Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
Contractor therefor." B works for three months and makes monthly requests for payment of a total of $ 60,000 
from A.  When A does not pay B because the owner has not paid A for the plumbing work, B stops work and a 
month later notifies A that he cancels the contract.  If the court determines, in the light of the quoted language 
and other circumstances, that B assumed the risk that he would have to perform even if A did not pay him on 
the ground that the owner did not pay A, A's justifiable non-payment on that ground does not operate as a 
failure to perform under § 237 and therefore B's cancellation is a breach.  Compare Illustration 1 to § 227 and 
Illustration 2 to § 237.
3.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 2, A unjustifiably refuses to pay B, although the owner has 
paid A for the plumbing work.  Although B assumed the risk that he would have to perform even if A did not pay 
on the ground that the owner did not pay A, A's non-payment is not justified on that ground and therefore 
operates as a failure to perform under § 237.  If a court concludes that the failure is material and that B's 
cancellation came when it was too late for A to cure it, B's cancellation is not a breach.  Compare Illustration 1 
to § 227 and Illustration 2 to § 237.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  It is necessary because of the omission from this Chapter of the provisions on aleatory 
promises in former §§ 266(2)(a) and 291-93.
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is adapted from Illustration 4 to § 252.
Comment b.  Illustrations 2 and 3 are adapted from Illustration 1 to § 227 and Illustration 2 to § 237.  See also 
Mascioni v. I.B. Miller, Inc., 261 N.Y. 1, 184 N.E. 473 (1933); Chirichella v. Erwin, 270 Md. 178, 310 A.2d 555 
(1973). In using the term "assumption of risk" in a contracts context it is important to recognize that many of its 
tort connotations may not be appropriate.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 318
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 240
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 240 Part Performances as Agreed Equivalents
If the performances to be exchanged under an exchange of promises can be apportioned into 
corresponding pairs of part performances so that the parts of each pair are properly regarded as 
agreed equivalents, a party's performance of his part of such a pair has the same effect on the other's 
duties to render performance of the agreed equivalent as it would have if only that pair of performances 
had been promised.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Mitigating effect of the rule.  Under the rule stated in § 237, a party's failure to perform may cause him to 
lose his right to the agreed exchange after he has relied substantially on the expectation of that exchange, as 
by either preparation or performance.  The risk of forfeiture is similar to that which arises on the non-occurrence 
of a condition stated in the agreement.  See Comment a to § 227.  But because the failure must be material in 
order to have this effect under § 237, courts can temper the application of those sections in appropriate cases 
to avoid forfeiture in a way that is not possible where the agreement itself states the condition.  Compare §§ 
241 and 242 with § 229.  In addition, forfeiture may sometimes be reduced or avoided by allowing a party 
whose failure has been material to have restitution in accordance with the policy favoring avoidance of unjust 
enrichment.  See §§ 370-77.  This Section embodies another mitigating doctrine which reduces the risk of 
forfeiture in that important class of cases in which it is proper to regard corresponding parts of the performances 
of each party as agreed equivalents.  Its effect is to give a party who has performed one of these parts the right 
to its agreed equivalent just as if the parties had made a separate contract with regard to that pair of 
corresponding parts.  A failure as to some other part does not affect this right.  See Comment d to § 231.  Of 
course, if the failure amounts to a breach, the injured party has a claim for damages.  Substantial performance 
of such a part has the same effect with regard to such a pair of agreed equivalents as substantial performance 
of the whole has under § 237 with respect to the entire contract.  See Comment d to § 237.
b.  Separate contracts distinguished.  When it is proper to regard parts of pairs of corresponding performances 
under a contract as agreed equivalents, the contract is sometimes loosely said to be "divisible" or "severable." 
But under the rule stated in this Section, the pairs of corresponding parts are not treated as if they were 
separate contracts.  If there are two separate contracts, one party's performance under the first and the other 
party's performance under the second are not to be exchanged under a single exchange of promises, and even 
a total failure of performance by one party as to the first has no necessary effect on the other party's duty to 
perform the second.  Comment d to § 231.  (On the situation if the failure gives reasonable grounds to believe 
that the other party will commit a breach of the second, see §§ 251 and 252.) This is not so, however, if there is 
a single contract under which the parties are to exchange performances, even though it is proper to regard 
pairs of corresponding parts of those performances as agreed equivalents.  If there is an uncured material 
failure by either party, he can claim compensation for any parts that he has already performed, but he cannot 
enforce the contract with respect to any other pair of corresponding parts, including the part or parts that he has 
failed to perform.  See Illustration 3.  With respect to those parts the rule of § 237 still applies, for the parties are 
bound by a single contract and not by a series of separate contracts for each pair of corresponding parts.  
Although the pairs of performances may be regarded as agreed equivalents, the parties exchanged promises 
for an exchange of their whole performances.
Illustrations:

§ 240 Part Performances as Agreed Equivalents
1.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a quantity of dressed hogs and a quantity of live hogs at stated prices for 
each quantity.  A is to deliver the dressed hogs first and the live hogs 15 days later, and B is to pay for each 
delivery within 30 days after it is made.  A delivers the dressed hogs, but unjustifiably refuses to deliver the live 
ones.  If a court finds that delivery of the dressed hogs and payment of the price stated for them are agreed 
equivalents, A can recover the stated price for the dressed hogs under the contract.  B then has a claim against 
A for damages for his failure to deliver the live hogs.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A has no right to payment for either the dressed or the 
live hogs until 30 days after delivery of the live ones, but A unjustifiably refuses to deliver the live hogs until B 
pays for the dressed ones.  If a court finds that delivery of the dressed hogs and the price stated for them are 
agreed equivalents, A can recover the stated price for the dressed hogs under the contract.  See § 227(1).  B 
then has a claim against A for damages for his failure to deliver the live hogs.
3.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, before A delivers the dressed hogs, he repudiates the 
contract by stating that he will not deliver the live ones.  B then refuses to accept the dressed hogs.  Even if a 
court finds that delivery of the dressed hogs and payment of the price stated for them are agreed equivalents, A 
has no claim against B.  B has a claim against A for damages for total breach of contract (§ 253).
c.  Order of performance distinguished.  The terms "divisible" and "severable" are sometimes used, not only in 
determining whether the rule stated in this Section is applicable, but also in determining whether a party's 
performance is due at one time or in installments (§ 233).  Many of the contracts covered by the rule stated in 
this Section happen also to be contracts in which performance of each party is to be given in installments, 
corresponding to the times of the other party's performance.  Indeed, the fact that the order of performance 
involves such pairs of corresponding parts may suggest that it is proper to regard those pairs as agreed 
equivalents.  But it does not necessarily follow that it is proper, and in many contracts under which performance 
is to be in pairs of corresponding parts, it is not proper to regard the parts of those pairs as agreed equivalents.  
See Illustrations 7 and 9.  Conversely, in many contracts under which performance of one or both parties is to 
be at one time, it is proper to regard those performances as composed of pairs of agreed equivalents.  See 
Illustrations 2, 8 and 10.  Two distinct determinations are involved and it is undesirable to obscure this by 
employing the same terminology for both.
d.  Apportionment.  The rule stated in this Section cannot be applied unless the parties' performances can be 
apportioned into corresponding pairs of part performances.  The process of apportionment is essentially one of 
calculation and the rule can only be applied where calculation is feasible.  It is enough, however, if the price of 
separate items is separately stated in the agreement itself or in a price list on which the agreement was based, 
or can be reliably ascertained from statedprices for components or from a total price for similar items.
Illustrations:
4.  A contracts with B to work for one year as a real estate salesman and to devote his full time to this work.  A 
is to receive half of the real estate commission on all sales that he effects.  A devotes full time to this work for 
ten months, but unjustifiably devotes only part time for the last two months.  A court may apportion the unpaid 
commissions earned by A into those earned during the first ten months and those earned under the last two 
months according to the formula stated in the contract and, if it finds that working full time for ten months and 
the commissions on the sales over those months are agreed equivalents, A can recover the unpaid 
commissions for those months under the contract.  B then has a claim against A for damages for his failure to 
devote full time during the last two months.
5.  A contracts with B to furnish the rights to 23 motion pictures to be selected by B from a much larger list over 
a period of five years.  The contract states a total price of $ 23,000, but does not break it down into $ 1,000 for 
each picture.  A furnishes B with the rights to only 14 pictures, which B shows, and then A unjustifiably refuses 
to furnish the rights to 9 others.  A court may apportion the price as $ 1,000 for each picture and, if it finds that 
the furnishing of rights to 14 pictures and the payment of $ 14,000 are agreed equivalents, A can recover that 
amount under the contract.  B has a claim for damages against A for his failure to furnish the rights to the 9 
other pictures.
e.  Agreed equivalents.  The corresponding pairs of performances so apportioned only come within the rule 
stated in this Section if it is proper to regard the parts of each pair as agreed equivalents.  The parties may, by 
express provision, determine either that it is or is not proper so to regard them.  But they do not often do this, 
and, because separate pairs of corresponding parts are not the subjects of separate bargains (see Comment 

§ 240 Part Performances as Agreed Equivalents
b), the parties usually cannot even be said to have had any actual intention on the point.  Whether it is proper to 
regard the parts of each pair as agreed equivalents will usually depend on considerations of fairness, similar to 
those that guide a court in deciding whether to supply a term under § 204.  Decisions holding that a contract is 
or is not "divisible" or "severable" for some other purpose, for example in connection with the rules in Chapter 8, 
Unenforceability on Grounds of Public Policy, are not determinative under this Section.  See also Comments b 
and c.  The standard under this Section, like that of materiality under § 237, is necessarily a somewhat 
imprecise and flexible one.  It requires that the parts of a pair be of roughly equivalent value to the injured party 
in terms of his expectation with respect to the total agreed exchange.  This is because fairness requires that a 
party, having received only a fraction of the performance that he expected under a contract, not be asked to 
pay an identical fraction of the price that he originally promised on the expectation of full performance, unless it 
appears that the performance that he actually received is worth to him roughly that same fraction of what full 
performance would have been worth to him.  Therefore the mere fact that the subject of the contract is sold by 
weight or measure and the total price determined by a unit price (e.g., per pound or cubic yard or acre) does 
not result in agreed equivalents.  The injured party will not berequired to pay for a part of the performance that 
he has received if he cannot make full use of that part without the remainder of the performance, as, for 
example, where a buyer has received a machine but not an attachment necessary for its operation.  In deciding 
whether the injured party can make full use of only part, a court must, of course, take account of the possibility 
that the remainder of the performance can be easily obtained from some other source, as, for example, where 
the attachment is available on the market.
Illustrations:
6.  A contracts with B to do specified work on B's subdivision.  A is to do the excavation and grading of lots and 
streets for a lump sum price of $ 75,000, payable on completion of that part of the work.  A is then to make 
street improvements, including the installation of curbs and gutters, for stated unit prices, payable on 
completion of that part of the work.  A is to provide separate performance bonds for each part.  A does the 
excavation and grading of lots and streets but then unjustifiably refuses to make street improvements.  B 
refuses to pay A for excavation and grading, although he can easily have the street improvements made by 
another contractor.  The excavation and grading of lots and streets and the payment of $ 75,000 are agreed 
equivalents.  A has a claim against B for $ 75,000 under the contract for the excavation and grading.  B has a 
claim for damages against A for his unjustified failure to make street improvements.
7.  A contracts to build a house for B for $ 50,000, progress payments to be made monthly in an amount equal 
to 85% of the price of the work performed during the preceding month, the balance to be paid on the architect's 
certificate of satisfactory completion of the house.  A unjustifiably stops work at the end of a month before the 
work is substantially completed and sues for the progress payment for that month.  The performance during 
that month and the corresponding progress payment are not agreed equivalents.  A can recover nothing under 
the contract for that performance.  B has a claim against A for damages for breach.  Whether A has a claim 
against B in restitution is determined under the rules stated in §§ 370-77.
8.  A contracts with B to drive 10,000 logs from various points down a river to B's boom at one cent per log mile.  
Because of a flood, A drives only 5,763 logs an average distance of 100 miles each to B's boom, and leaves 
the other 4,237 logs on the banks part of the way to B's boom.  B expects to resell the logs and can resell the 
5,763 at the same unit price as the entire 10,000.  The driving of the logs to B's boom and the corresponding 
price at the contract rate are agreed equivalents, but the driving of logs part way and the corresponding price at 
the contract rate are not.  A can recover $ 5,763 under the contract for the 5,763 logs that he has driven to B's 
boom, but can recover nothing for the remaining 4,237 logs that he has driven only part of the way.  If A's failure 
to drive the remaining logs to B's boom is unjustified, it is a breach, and B has a claim against A for damages.  
Whether A's failure is justified on the ground of impracticability of performance is determined under the rules 
stated in §§ 261 and 263.
9.  The United States contracts with A under an "Industrial Preparedness Contract" for the production in volume 
of an electronic device.  The work is to be done in three steps.  Step I requires A to draw up plans and make a 
pilot run.  Step II requires A to acquire equipment for production.  Step III, to be taken only in case of national 
emergency and after receipt of an order from the United States, requires volume production and delivery in 
accordance with a stated schedule.  A is required to maintain a state of readiness for this step over a six-year 
period.  Specified payments are to be made on the completion of Steps I and II and against deliveries during 

§ 240 Part Performances as Agreed Equivalents
Step III.  A completes Steps I and II and, after having been paid $ 150,000, repudiates the contract when $ 
50,000 is still unpaid on Step II.  A sues for that unpaid balance of $ 50,000.  The completion of Steps I and II 
and the payment of the amounts specified in the contract for those steps are not agreed equivalents.  A has no 
claim against the United States for that performance.  The United States has a claim against A for damages for 
breach.
10.  A contracts with B to construct and maintain ten signs advertising B's motel for $ 1,600 a year, $ 100 each 
for eight smaller signs and $ 400 each for two larger signs.  The signs are of a special design not easily 
obtainable elsewhere.  A constructs and maintains only seven of the smaller and one of the larger signs, 
unjustifiably failing to construct the other two.  A's failure to construct the remaining two signs will not 
appreciably diminish the effect of the other eight.  The construction and maintenance of the eight signs and the 
corresponding price at the contract rate are agreed equivalents.  A can recover $ 1,100 a year under the 
contract for the signs that he constructs and maintains.  B has a claim against A for damages for breach.
11.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 10, the signs are part of a series beginning "10 more 
miles to B's place," so that the failure to construct the remaining two will appreciably diminish the effect of the 
other eight.  The construction and maintenance of each sign and the corresponding price at the contract rate 
are not agreed equivalents.  A can recover nothing under the contract for the signs that he constructs and 
maintains.  B has a claim against A for damages for breach.  Whether A has a claim against B in restitution is 
determined under the rules stated in §§ 370-77.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 266(3), which has been expanded to express the notions of "apportionment" 
and "agreed equivalents." See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 687-99 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 
859-64, 887D (3d ed. 1962).
Comment a.  Much of the earlier appeal of the doctrine came in connection with contracts of employment for 
wages, where it enabled the employee to recover for unpaid wages in spite of his breach of the contract.  See, 
e.g., Matthews v. Jenkins, 80 Va. 463 (1885) ("two hundred dollars . . . per month for one year").  Two 
developments have reduced its importance under such contracts.  First, the widespread enactment of state 
statutes requiring frequent periodic payment of wages had reduced the incidence of substantial claims for 
unpaid wages.  See McGowan, The Divisibility of Employment Contracts, 21 Iowa L. Rev. 50, 69-78 (1935). 
Second, the tendency to interpret ambiguous language as fixing the rate of compensation only, leaving the term 
at will, rather than as prescribing the term, has diminished the number of cases in which the employee is in 
breach.  See Illustration 6 to § 33.  An example of such a case is Peacock v. Virginia-Carolina Chem. Co., 221 
Ala. 680, 130 So. 411 (1930).
Comment b.  For a case involving what were held, in effect, to be separate contracts, see Mariani v. 
Hennington, 229 Miss. 212, 90 So.2d 356 (1956), suggestion of error overruled, 229 Miss. 212, 92 So.2d 202 
(1957). Illustration 1 is based on Tipton v. Feitner, 20 N.Y. 423 (1859). The facts in Illustrations 2 and 3 are 
taken from the same case.  See also Illustration 1 to former § 272.  Compare National Farmers Organization v. 
Bartlett and Co., 560 F.2d 1350 (8th Cir. 1977).
Comment c.  That provision for payment against delivery in installments does not necessarily make it 
appropriate to regard part performance as agreed equivalents, see Norrington v. Wright, 115 U.S. 188 (1885).
Comment d.  Illustration 4 is based on Allen D. Shadron, Inc., v. Cole, 101 Ariz. 341, 419 P.2d 520 (1966) (held 
to be agreed equivalents).  See also Montgomery Ward & Co. v. Reich, 131 Colo. 407, 282 P.2d 1091 (1955). 
But cf.  Coletti v. Knox Hat Co., 252 N.Y. 468, 169 N.E. 648 (1930) (held not to be agreed equivalents).  
Illustration 5 is based on British Films Do Brasil, Ltda. v. London Film Prods., 8 Misc.2d 848, 166 N.Y.S.2d 703, 
appeal dismissed, 4 A.D.2d 858, 170 N.Y.S.2d 486 (1957) (held to be agreed equivalents).  See also Carrig v. 
Gilbert Varker Corp., 314 Mass. 351, 50 N.E.2d 59 (1943) (price of houses could be calculated from schedule 
in contract); Berlin Machine Works v. Miller, 59 Wash. 572, 110 P. 422 (1910) (price of machines could be 
calculated from price lists).  Cf.  Keene v. Harling, 61 Cal.2d 318, 38 Cal. Rptr. 513, 392 P.2d 273 (1964) 
(illegality case; price of machines could be determined from established market price).
Comment e.  On express provision in the contract, compare Aultman & Taylor Co. v. Lawson, 100 Iowa 569, 69 
N.W. 865 (1897) (held agreed equivalents by agreement), with Goodman v. Newzona Inv. Co., 101 Ariz. 470, 
421 P.2d 318 (1966) (held not agreed equivalents by agreement).  As to the principle involved in the example of 

§ 240 Part Performances as Agreed Equivalents
the machine and attachment, see Rexite Casting Co. v. Midwest Mower Corp., 267 S.W.2d 327 (Mo. Ct. App. 
1954) (castings and the molds for their production); In re Kellett Aircraft Corp., 191 F.2d 231 (3d Cir. 1951) 
(cabinets and the tools for their fabrication); see also Wheeling Downs Racing Ass'n v. West Va. Sportservice, 
157 W. Va. 93, 216 S.E.2d 234 (1975); Illustration 6 is based on Lowy v. United Pac. Ins. Co., 67 Cal.2d 87, 60 
Cal. Rptr. 225, 429 P.2d 577 (1967). Illustration 7 is based on Illustration 4 to former § 266.  See also Condon 
v. H.C. Hazen Contracting Co., 122 Ohio St. 100, 170 N.E. 870 (1930). Cf.  Rich v. Arancio, 277 Mass. 310, 
178 N.E. 743 (1931) (statute of limitations begins to run on completion of contract).  Illustration 8 is based on 
Gill v. Johnstown Lumber Co., 151 Pa. 534, 25 A. 120 (1892). But cf.  Boutin v. Lindsley, 84 Wis. 644, 54 N.W. 
1017 (1893). Illustration 9 is based on Pennsylvania Exch. Bank v. United States, 145 Ct. Cl. 216, 170 F. Supp. 
629 (1959), judgment vacated on other grounds, 161 Ct. Cl. 874 (1963). Illustrations 10 and 11 are based on 
John v. United Advertising, Inc., 165 Colo. 193, 439 P.2d 53 (1968); cf.  Kaplan v. Keith, 60 Ill. App.3d 804, 18 
Ill. Dec. 126, 377 N.E.2d 279 (1978); Cf.  Dour v. Village of Port Jefferson, 89 Misc.2d 146, 390 N.Y.S.2d 965 
(1976).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Contractor's liability for alleged breach of contract for construction of swimming pool.  1 A.L.R.3d 870.
Water well-drilling contracts.  90 A.L.R.2d 1346.
Mining grubstake contracts.  70 A.L.R.2d 904.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 319
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 241
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 241 Circumstances Significant in Determining Whether a Failure Is Material
In determining whether a failure to render or to offer performance is material, the following 
circumstances are significant:
(a)  the extent to which the injured party will be deprived of the benefit which he reasonably expected;
(b)  the extent to which the injured party can be adequately compensated for the part of that benefit of 
which he will be deprived;
(c)  the extent to which the party failing to perform or to offer to perform will suffer forfeiture;
(d)  the likelihood that the party failing to perform or to offer to perform will cure his failure, taking 
account of all the circumstances including any reasonable assurances;
(e)  the extent to which the behavior of the party failing to perform or to offer to perform comports with 
standards of good faith and fair dealing.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Nature of significant circumstances.  The application of the rules stated in §§ 237 and 238 turns on a 
standard of materiality that is necessarily imprecise and flexible.  (Contrast the situation where the parties have, 
by their agreement, made an event a condition.  See § 226 and Comments a and c thereto and § 229.) The 
standard of materiality applies to contracts of all types and without regard to whether the whole performance of 
either party is to be rendered at one time or part performances are to be rendered at different times.  See 
Uniform Commercial Code § 2-612.  It also applies to pairs of agreed equivalents under § 240.  See Illustration 
2.  It is to be applied in the light of the facts of each case in such a way as to further the purpose of securing for 
each party his expectation of an exchange of performances.  This Section therefore states circumstances, not 
rules, which are to be considered in determining whether a particular failure is material.  A determination that a 
failure is not material means only that it does not have the effect of the non-occurrence of a condition under §§ 
237 and 238.  Even if not material, the failure may be a breach and give rise to a claim for damages for partial 
breach (§§ 236, 243).
Illustrations:
1.  A, a subcontractor, contracts to do excavation and earth moving on a housing subdivision project for B, the 
owner and general contractor, and to do all work "in a workmanlike manner." B is to make monthly progress 
payments for the work performed during the preceding month less a retainer of ten percent.  A negligently 
damages a building with his bulldozer causing serious damage and denies any liability for B's loss.  When B 
refuses to make further progress payments until A repairs the damage or admits liability, A notifies B that he 
cancels the contract.  If the court determines that A's breach is material, A has no claim against B.  B has a 
claim against A for damages for breach of contract.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 6 to § 240, A completes the part concerned with the 
excavation and grading of lots and streets but fails in a minor respect to comply with the specifications.  If a 
court determines that the failure is not material, A has a claim against B for $ 75,000 under the contract for the 
excavation and grading.  B has a claim for damages against A for his failure fully to perform as to excavation 
and grading and also for his unjustified refusal to make street improvements.

§ 241 Circumstances Significant in Determining Whether a Failure Is Material
b.  Loss of benefit to injured party.  Since the purpose of the rules stated in §§ 237 and 238 is to secure the 
parties' expectation of an exchange of performances, an important circumstance in determining whether a 
failure is material is the extent to which the injured party will be deprived of the benefit which he reasonably 
expected from the exchange (Subsection (a)).  If the consideration given by either party consists partly of some 
performance and only partly of a promise (see Comment a to § 232), regard must be had to the entire 
exchange, including that performance, in applying this criterion.  Although the relationship between the 
monetary loss to the injured party as a result of the failure and the contract price may be significant, no simple 
rule based on the ratio of the one to the other can be laid down, and here, as elsewhere under this Section, all 
relevant circumstances must be considered.  In construction contracts, for example, defects affecting structural 
soundness are ordinarily regarded as particularly significant.  In the sale of goods a particularly exacting 
standard has evolved.  There it has long been established that, in the absence of a showing of a contrary 
intention, a buyer is entitled to expect strict performance of the contract, and Uniform Commercial Code § 2-601 
carries forward this expectation by allowing the buyer to reject "if the goods or the tender of delivery fail in any 
respect to conform to the contract." The Code, however, compensates to some extent for the severity of this 
standard by extending the seller's right to cure beyond the point when the time for performance has expired in 
some instances (§ 2-508(2)), by allowing revocation of acceptance only if a nonconformity "substantially 
impairs" the value of the goods to the buyer (§ 2-608(1)), and by allowing the injured party to treat a 
nonconformity or default as to one installment under an installment contract as a breach of the whole only if it 
"substantially impairs" the value of the whole (§ 2-612(3)).
c.  Adequacy of compensation for loss.  The second circumstance, the extent to which the injured party can be 
adequately compensated for his loss of benefit (Subsection (b)), is a corollary of the first.  Difficulty that he may 
have in proving with sufficient certainty the amount of that loss will affect the adequacy of compensation.  If the 
failure is a breach, the injured party always has a claim for damages, and the question becomes one of the 
adequacy of that claim to compensate him for the lost benefit.  Where the failure is not a breach, the question 
becomes one of the adequacy of any claim, such as one in restitution, to which the injured party may be 
entitled.  This is a particularly important circumstance when the party in breach seeks specific performance.  
Such relief may be granted if damages can adequately compensate the injured party for the defect in 
performance.  See Comment c to § 242.
d.  Forfeiture by party who fails.  Because a material failure acts as the non-occurrence of a condition, the same 
risk of forfeiture obtains as in the case of conditions generally if the party who fails to perform or tender has 
relied substantially on the expectation of the exchange, as through preparation or performance.  Therefore a 
third circumstance is the extent to which the party failing to perform or to make an offer to perform will suffer 
forfeiture if the failure is treated as material.  For this reason a failure is less likely to be regarded as material if it 
occurs late, after substantial preparation or performance, and more likely to be regarded as material if it occurs 
early, before such reliance.  For the same reason the failure is more likely to be regarded as material if such 
preparation or performance as has taken place can be returned to and salvaged by the party failing to perform 
or tender, and less likely to be regarded as material if it cannot.  These factors argue against a finding of 
material failure and in favor of one of substantial performance where a builder has completed performance 
under a construction contract and, because the building is on the owner's land, can salvage nothing if he is 
denied recovery of the balance of the price.  Even in such a case, however, the potential forfeiture may be 
mitigated if the builder has a claim in restitution (§§ 370-77, especially § 374) or if he has already received 
progress payments under a provision of the contract.  The same factors argue for a finding of material failure 
where a seller tenders goods and can salvage them by resale to others if they are rejected and he is denied 
recovery of the price.  This helps to explain the severity of the rule as applied to the sale of goods.  See 
Comment b.  Even in such a case, however, the potential forfeiture may be aggravated if the seller has 
manufactured the goods specially for the buyer or has spent substantial sums in shipment.
Illustrations:
3.  A contracts to sell and B to buy 300 crates of Australian onions, shipment to be from Australia in March.  A 
has 300 crates ready for shipment in March, but government requisitions prevent him from loading more than 
240 crates on the only ship available in March.  B refuses to accept or pay for the onions when they are 
tendered.  Under the circumstances stated in Subsections (a) and (c), A's failure is material and A has no claim 
against B.  If A's failure is unjustified, B has a claim against A for damages for partial breach because of the 

§ 241 Circumstances Significant in Determining Whether a Failure Is Material
delay even if A cures his failure, and has a claim against A for damages for total breach if A does not cure his 
failure (§ 243).
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 2 to § 232, B can have the part of the street in front of his 
own lot paved for $ 500, but this will not give him the expected access to his lot because the rest of the street is 
not paved.  Under the circumstances stated in Subsections (a), (b), and (c), the failure of performance is 
material and A has no claim against B.  If A's failure is unjustified, B has a claim against A for damages for 
partial breach because of the delay even if A cures his failure, and has a claim against A for damages for total 
breach if A does not cure his failure (§ 243).
e.  Uncertainty.  A material failure by one party gives the other party the right to withhold further performance as 
a means of securing his expectation of an exchange of performances.  To the extent that that expectation is 
already reasonably secure, in spite of the failure, there is less reason to conclude that the failure is material.  
The likelihood that the failure will be cured is therefore a significant circumstance in determining whether it is 
material (Subsection (d)).  The fact that the injured party already has some security for the other party's 
performance argues against a determination that the failure is material.  So do reasonable assurances of 
performance given by the other party after his failure.  So does a shift in the market that makes performance of 
the contract more favorable to the other party.  On the other hand, defaults by the other party under other 
contracts or as to other installments under the same contract argue for a determination of materiality.  So does 
such financial weakness of the other party as suggests an inability to cure.  This circumstance differs from the 
notion of reasonable grounds for insecurity (§ 251), in that the former can become relevant only after there has 
been an actual failure to perform or to tender.  On discharge by repudiation, see § 253(2).
Illustration:
5.  A contracts to sell and B to buy land for $ 25,000.  B is to make a $ 5,000 down payment and pay the 
balance in four annual installments of $ 5,000 each.  A is to proceed immediately to have abstracts of title 
prepared showing a marketable title and to deliver them prior to the time for payment of the first annual 
installment.  Without explanation, A fails to have abstracts prepared for delivery prior to the time for payment of 
the first annual installment.  B refuses to pay that installment.  Under the circumstances stated in Subsections 
(a)-(d), the failure of performance is material and A has no claim against B.  B has a claim against A for 
damages for partial breach based on the delay if A cures his failure and a claim for damages for total breach if 
he does not (§ 243).
f.  Absence of good faith or fair dealing.  A party's adherence to standards of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205) 
will not prevent his failure to perform a duty from amounting to a breach (§ 236(2)).  Nor will his adherence to 
such standards necessarily prevent his failure from having the effect of the non-occurrence of a condition (§ 
237; cf. § 238).  The extent to which the behavior of the party failing to perform or to offer to perform comports 
with standards of good faith and fair dealing is, however, a significant circumstance in determining whether the 
failure is material (Subsection (e)).  In giving weight to this factor courts have often used such less precise 
terms as "wilful." Adherence to the standards stated in Subsection (e) is not conclusive, since other 
circumstances may cause a failure to be material in spite of such adherence.  Nor is non-adherence conclusive, 
and other circumstances may cause a failure not to be material in spite of such non-adherence.
Illustrations:
6.  A contracts to build a house for B, using pipe of Reading manufacture.  In return, B agrees to pay $ 75,000, 
with provision for progress payments.  Without B's knowledge, a subcontractor mistakenly uses pipe of Cohoes 
manufacture which is identical in quality and is distinguishable only by the name of the manufacturer which is 
stamped on it.  The substitution is not discovered until the house is completed, when replacement of the pipe 
will require destruction of substantial parts of the house.  B refuses to pay the unpaid balance of $ 10,000.  
Under the circumstances stated in Subsections (a), (c), and (e), the failure of performance is not material and A 
has a claim against B for the unpaid balance of $ 10,000, subject to a claim by B against A for damages for A's 
breach of his duty to use Reading pipe.  See Illustration 1 to § 229.
7.  A contracts to build a supermarket for B.  In return B agrees to pay $ 250,000, with provision for progress 
payments.  A completes performance except that, angered by a dispute over an unrelated transaction, he 
refuses to build a cover over a compressor.  B can have the cover built by another builder for $ 300.  B refuses 
to pay the unpaid balance of $ 40,000.  In spite of the circumstances stated in Subsection (e), under the 
circumstances stated in Subsections (a), (b), and (c), the failure of performance is not material and A has a 

§ 241 Circumstances Significant in Determining Whether a Failure Is Material
claim against B for the unpaid balance of $ 40,000, subject to a claim by B against A for damages for A's 
breach of his duty to build a cover over the compressor.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 275.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts § 700-12 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 6 Williston, 
Contracts §§ 842-44 (3d ed. 1962).
Comment a.  Courts frequently use "material breach" in a conclusory fashion without indicating how or why they 
reached the conclusion.  See, e.g., R.G. Pope Constr. Co. v. Guard Rail of Roanoke, Inc., 219 Va. 111, 244 
S.E.2d 774 (1978); Taylor v. Johnston, 15 Cal.3d 130, 123 Cal. Rptr. 641, 539 P.2d 425 (1975); Enterprise, Inc. 
v. Nampa City, 96 Idaho 734, 536 P.2d 729 (1975); Martin Bloom Assoc. v. Manzie, 389 F. Supp. 848 (D. Nev. 
1975). Illustration 1 is based on K & G Constr. Co. v. Harris, 223 Md. 305, 164 A.2d 451 (1960). Illustration 2 is 
based on Lowy v. United Pac. Ins. Co., 67 Cal.2d 87, 60 Cal. Rptr. 225, 429 P.2d 577 (1967).
Comment b.  As to the situation where the consideration given by one party consists in part of some 
performance, see former § 289.  With regard to the Code rule on installment contracts, Supplement No. 1 to the 
Uniform Commercial Code, p. 1 (1955), states: "The fact of a continuing relationship normally justifies a less 
rigid standard for installment contracts than for contracts for a single delivery." This Section conforms to the 
policy of the Code in "putting the rule as to buyer's defaults on the same footing as that in regard to seller's 
defaults" (Comment 6 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-612), although the materiality of the buyer's failure to 
pay the price must be judged in the light of any security or other assurances.  See Subsection (e) and 
Comment f.  Examples of analysis based on the extent of deprivation of benefits to the injured party include 
Northern Helex Co. v. United States, 197 Ct. Cl. 118, 455 F.2d 546 (1972) (extended delay in payment) and 
Tolstoy Constr. Co. v. Minter, 78 Cal. App.3d 665, 143 Cal. Rptr. 570 (1978) (many relatively small defects in 
construction of a home).  The latter case implicitly raises the question whether defects should be found material 
more readily when a home is involved since the impact, both physical and emotional, on the injured party is so 
immediate.  Contrast the questionable decision in Brewer v. Custom Builders Corp., 42 Ill. App.3d 668, 1 Ill. 
Dec. 377, 356 N.E.2d 565 (1976), in which the homeowner's acceptance and use of a defective building, 
though under protest, was found to be recognition that the builder's performance had been substantial.  Courts 
have sometimes refused to find a material breach when the injured party fails to act in a way that gives the 
breaching party an opportunity to remedy the defect.  See Bridgkort Racquet Club v. University Bank, 85 
Wis.2d 706, 271 N.W.2d 165 (1978); United States ex rel. A. V. DeBlasio Constr. Co. v. Mountain States 
Constr. Co., 588 F.2d 259 (9th Cir. 1978).
Comment d.  On forfeiture as a factor, see Utah Int'l, Inc. v. Colorado-Ute Elec. Ass'n, 425 F. Supp. 1093 (D. 
Colo. 1976) (applying Colorado law).  Illustration 3 is based on Prescott & Co. v. Powles & Co., 113 Wash. 177, 
193 P. 680 (1920). See also Uniform Commercial Code § 2-106 and Comment 2.  Illustration 4 is suggested by 
Palmer v. Fox, 274 Mich. 252, 264 N.W. 361 (1936).
Comment e.  Subsection (d) accords with the policy of the Code in recognizing the importance of reasonable 
assurances in determining whether a failure is material (see Comment 6 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-612), 
but it does not give a right to assurances whenever reasonable grounds for insecurity arise, as does Uniform 
Commercial Code § 2-609.  As to the right to assurances, see § 251.  Illustration 5 is based on Lake Dorr Land 
Co. v. Parker, 104 Fla. 378, 140 So. 635 (1932).
Comment f.  Subsection (e) substitutes standards of "good faith and fair dealing" for those of "wilful, negligent 
or innocent behavior" under former § 275(e).  Cf. 5A Corbin, Contracts § 1123 (1964 & Supp. 1980); Crawford-
Strauss Properties, Inc. v. Doolittle, 540 S.W.2d 334 (Tex. Civ. App. 1976), ref. n.r.e. Compare Rouselle v. B & 
H Constr. Co., 358 So.2d 614 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1978). Illustration 6 is based on Jacob & Youngs v. Kent, 230 
N.Y. 239, 129 N.E. 889 (1921); cf. Illustration 6 to former § 275.  Illustration 7 is suggested by Mathis v. 
Thunderbird Village, Inc., 236 Or. 425, 389 P.2d 343 (1964); cf. Illustration 3 to former § 275; Hadden v. 
Consolidated Edison Co., 34 N.Y.2d 88, 356 N.Y.S.2d 249, 312 N.E.2d 445 (1974).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:

§ 241 Circumstances Significant in Determining Whether a Failure Is Material
Lessee's breach of or default under lease agreement as affecting his right in respect of option to purchase 
under the lease.  53 A.L.R.3d 435.
Construction contractor's liability to contractee for defects or insufficiency of work attributable to the latter's 
plans and specifications.  6 A.L.R.3d 1394.
Contractor's liability for alleged breach of contract for construction of swimming pool.  1 A.L.R.3d 870.
Liability of garageman to one ordering repair of motor vehicle, for defective work.  92 A.L.R.2d 1408.
Liability of dentist to patient.  83 A.L.R.2d 7.
Construction and effect of provision in private building and construction contract that work must be done to 
satisfaction of owner.  44 A.L.R.2d 1114.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 321
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 242
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 242 Circumstances Significant in Determining When Remaining Duties Are 
Discharged
In determining the time after which a party's uncured material failure to render or to offer performance 
discharges the other party's remaining duties to render performance under the rules stated in §§ 237 
and 238, the following circumstances are significant:
(a)  those stated in § 241;
(b)  the extent to which it reasonably appears to the injured party that delay may prevent or hinder him 
in making reasonable substitute arrangements;
(c)  the extent to which the agreement provides for performance without delay, but a material failure to 
perform or to offer to perform on a stated day does not of itself discharge the other party's remaining 
duties unless the circumstances, including the language of the agreement, indicate that performance or 
an offer to perform by that day is important.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Cure.  Under §§ 237 and 238, a party's uncured material failure to perform or to offer to perform not only has 
the effect of suspending the other party's duties (§ 225(1)) but, when it is too late for the performance or the 
offer to perform to occur, the failure also has the effect of discharging those duties (§ 225(2)).  Ordinarily there 
is some period of time between suspension and discharge, and during this period a party may cure his failure.  
Even then, since any breach gives rise to a claim, a party who has cured a material breach has still committed 
a breach, by his delay, for which he is liable in damages.  Furthermore, in some instances timely performance 
is so essential that any delay immediately results in discharge and there is no period of time during which the 
injured party's duties are merely suspended and the other party can cure his failure.
b.  Significant circumstances.  This Section states circumstances which are to be considered in determining 
whether there is still time to cure a particular failure, or whether the period of time for discharge has expired.  
They are similar to the circumstances stated in the preceding section.  The importance of delay to the injured 
party will depend on the extent to which it will deprive him of the benefit which he reasonably expected (§ 
241(a)) and on the extent to which he can be adequately compensated (§ 241(b)).  The extent of the forfeiture 
by the party failing to perform or to offer to perform (§ 241(c)) is also significant in determining the importance of 
delay.  The likelihood that the injured party's withholding of performance will induce the other party to cure his 
failure is particularly important (§ 241(d)), because the very reason for suspending rather than immediately 
discharging the injured party's duties is that this will induce cure.  The reasonableness of the injured party's 
conduct in communicating his grievances and in seeking satisfaction is a factor to be considered in this 
connection.  Where performance is to extend over a period of time, as where delivery of goods is to be in 
installments, so that a continuing relationship between the parties is contemplated, the injured party may be 
expected to give more opportunity for cure than in the case of an isolated exchange.  On discharge by 
repudiation, see § 253(2).  Finally, the nature of the behavior of the party failing to perform or to offer to perform 
may be considered here as under the preceding section (§ 241(e)).
Illustration:

§ 242 Circumstances Significant in Determining When Remaining Duties Are Discharged
1.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1 to § 237, B tenders the progress payment after a two-
day delay along with damages for the delay.  A refuses to accept the payment and resume work and notifies B 
that he cancels the contract.  B's tender cured his breach before A's remaining duties to render performance 
were discharged, and B has a claim against A for total breach of contract, subject to a claim by A against B for 
damages for partial breach because of the delay.
c.  Substitute arrangements.  It is often said that in commercial transactions, notably those for the sale of 
goods, prompt performance by a party is essential if he is to be allowed to require the other to perform or, as it 
is sometimes put, "time is of the essence." The importance of prompt delivery by a seller of goods generally 
derives from the circumstance that goods, as contrasted for example with land, are particularly likely to be 
subject to rapid fluctuations in market price.  Therefore, even a relatively short delay in a rising market may 
adversely affect the buyer by causing a sharp increase in the cost of "cover." See Uniform Commercial Code §§ 
2-712, 2-713.  A less rigid standard applies to contracts for the sale of goods to be delivered in installments or 
to be specially manufactured for the buyer.  On the other hand, considerable delay does not preclude 
enforcement of a contract for the sale of land if damages are adequate to compensate for the delay and there 
are no special circumstances indicating that prompt performance was essential and no express provision 
requiring such performance.  But these are all merely particular applications of a more general principle.  
Subsection (b) states that principle.  Under any contract, the extent to which it reasonably appears to the 
injured party that delay may prevent or hinder him from making reasonable substitute arrangements is a 
consideration in determining the effect of delay.  Cf. § 241(a), (b).  As in the case of § 241 (see Comment c), a 
party in breach who seeks specific performance may be granted relief with compensation for the delay, in 
circumstances where he would have no claim for damages.
Illustrations:
2.  A, a theater manager, contracts with B, an actress, for her performance for six months in a play that A is 
about to present.  B becomes ill during the second month of the performance, and A immediately engages 
another actress to fill B's place during the remainder of the six months.  B recovers at the end of ten days and 
offers to perform the remainder of the contract, but A refuses.  Whether B's failure to render performance due to 
illness immediately discharges A's remaining duties of performance, instead of merely suspending them, 
depends on the circumstances stated in Subsection (b) and in § 241(b) and (d), and in particular on the 
possibility as it reasonably appears to A when B becomes ill of the illness being only temporary and of A's 
obtaining an adequate temporary substitute.
3.  A contracts to sell and B to buy 1,000 shares of stock traded on a national securities exchange, delivery and 
payment to be on February 1.  B offers to pay the price on February 1, but A unjustifiably and without 
explanation fails to offer to deliver the stock until February 2.  B then refuses to accept the stock or pay the 
price.  Under the circumstances stated in Subsection (b) and in § 241(a) and (c), the period of time has passed 
after which B's remaining duties to render performance are discharged because of A's material breach and A 
therefore has no claim against B.  B has a claim against A for breach.
4.  A contracts to sell and B to buy land, the transfer to be on February 1.  B tenders the price on February 1, 
but A does not tender a deed until February 2.  B then refuses to accept the deed or pay the price.  Under the 
circumstances stated in Subsections (b) and (c) and in § 241(a), in the absence of special circumstances, the 
period of time has not passed after which B's remaining duties to render performance are discharged.  Although 
A's breach is material, it has been cured.  A has a claim against B for damages for total breach of contract, 
subject to a claim by B against A for damages for partial breach because of the delay.
5.  A agrees to sell and B to buy land, the transfer to be on February 1.  A tenders a sufficient deed on February 
1, but B explains that although he wants to carry out the contract he would like to have a few weeks more to 
raise the amount of the price.  A replies that unless B tenders the price immediately he will not deliver the deed.  
On February 15, B sues for specific performance, offering in his pleading to pay the agreed price with interest to 
compensate A for the delay.  In the circumstances stated in Subsection (b) and in § 241(a), (b), and (d), the 
period of time has not passed after which A's remaining duties to render performance are discharged.  Although 
B's breach is material, the court may decree specific performance subject to B's tender of the price and 
payment by B of damages for partial breach to compensate A for the delay.

§ 242 Circumstances Significant in Determining When Remaining Duties Are Discharged
6.  A contracts to sell and B to buy 5,000 tons of iron at a stated price, delivery to be in five monthly installments 
of 1,000 tons each on the first of each month and payment for each installment to be made on the tenth of that 
month.  A makes the first three deliveries on the first of the month but, although the market price for iron is 
falling, he delays twelve days in making the fourth delivery, explaining to B that temporary labor troubles have 
caused the delay.  B notifies A that he refuses to take or pay for the fourth delivery and that he cancels the 
contract.  Whether the period of time has passed after which B's remaining duties to render performance are 
discharged, so that B's notification is not a repudiation, depends on the circumstances stated in Subsection (b) 
and in § 241(a), (b), (d), and (e).  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-612.
7.  A contracts to sell and B to buy 5,000 tons of iron at a stated price, delivery to be in five monthly installments 
of 1,000 tons each on the first of each month and payment for each installment to be made on the tenth of that 
month.  A makes the first four deliveries on the first of the month, and B makes the first three payments by the 
tenth but does not make the fourth payment.  The market price for iron is falling and B gives no assurances or 
explanation for the delay.  On the twentieth of the month A notifies B that he will make no further deliveries and 
that he cancels the contract.  Whether the period of time has passed after which A's remaining duties to render 
performance are discharged, so that A's notification is not a repudiation, depends on the circumstances stated 
in Subsection (b) and in § 241(a), (b), (d), and (e).  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-612.
d.  Effect of agreement.  The agreement of the parties often contains a provision for the time of performance or 
tender.  It may simply provide for performance on a stated date.  In that event, a material breach on that date 
entitles the injured party to withhold his performance and gives him a claim for damages for delay, but it does 
not of itself discharge the other party's remaining duties.  Only if the circumstances, viewed as of the time of the 
breach, indicate that performance or tender on that day is of genuine importance are the injured party's 
remaining duties discharged immediately, with no period of time during which they are merely suspended.  It is, 
of course, open to the parties to make performance or tender by a stated date a condition by their agreement, 
in which event, absent excuse (see Comment b to § 225 and Comment c to § 229), delay beyond that date 
results in discharge (§ 225(2)).  Such stock phrases as "time is of the essence" do not necessarily have this 
effect, although under Subsection (c) they are to be considered along with other circumstances in determining 
the effect of delay.
Illustrations:
8.  A contracts to charter a vessel belonging to B and to pay stipulated freight "on condition that the vessel 
arrive in New York ready for loading by March 1." B promises that the vessel will arrive by that date and carry 
A's cargo.  B unjustifiably fails to have the vessel in New York to be loaded until March 2.  A refuses to load the 
vessel.  Whether or not the period of time has passed after which B's uncured material failure would discharge 
A's remaining duties to render performance, A's duties are discharged under § 225(2) by the non-occurrence of 
an event that is made a condition by the agreement of the parties.  B has no claim against A.  A has a claim 
against B for damages for total breach.
9.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 4, the parties use a printed form contract that provides that 
"time is of the essence." Absent other circumstances indicating that performance by February 1 is of genuine 
importance, A has a claim against B for damages for total breach of contract.
10.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 4, the contract provides that A's rights are "conditional on 
his tendering a deed on or before February 1." A has no claim against B.  But cf. Illustration 4 to § 229.
e.  Excuse and reinstatement.  Just as a party may under § 84 promise to perform in spite of the complete non-
occurrence of a condition, he may under that section promise to perform in spite of a delay in its occurrence.  If 
he places no limit on the delay, his power to impose a time limit by later notification of the other party is subject 
to the rules on reinstatement stated in § 84(2).
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 276.  It has been rephrased so that the stated circumstances determine 
whether a material failure discharges remaining duties, rather than whether the breach is material.  See 3A 
Corbin, Contracts §§ 713-23 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 845-57 (3d ed. 1962).
Comment b.  Compare Internatio-Rotterdam, Inc. v. River Brand Rice Mills, Inc., 259 F.2d 137 (2d Cir. 1958), 
cert. denied, 358 U.S. 946 (1959), with Continental Grain Co. v. Simpson Feed Co., 102 F. Supp. 354 (E.D. 
Ark. 1951), aff'd, 199 F.2d 284 (8th Cir. 1952). As to the significance of forfeiture, see Carsek Corp v. Stephen 

§ 242 Circumstances Significant in Determining When Remaining Duties Are Discharged
Schifter, Inc., 431 Pa. 550, 246 A.2d 365 (1968). Illustration 1 is supported by Turner Concrete Steel Co. v. 
Chester Constr. & Contracting Co., 271 Pa. 205, 114 A. 780 (1921). For a concise appraisal of circumstances 
making a delay a material breach of a construction contract, see Lake Steel Erection, Inc. v. Egan, 61 A.D.2d 
1125, 403 N.Y.S.2d 387 (4th Dep't), motion for leave to appeal dismissed, 44 N.Y.2d 848, 406 N.Y.S.2d 761, 
378 N.E.2d 124(1978).
Comment c.  As to installment contracts, see the Reporter's Note to Comment b of § 243.  As to specially 
manufactured goods, see Beck & Pauli Lithographing Co. v. Colorado Milling & Elevator Co., 52 F. 700 (10th 
Cir. 1892); Fairchild Stratos Corp. v. Lear Siegler, Inc., 337 F.2d 785 (4th Cir. 1964); see also Midwest Color 
Offset Co. v. Thermal Elec. Corp., 116 Ohio St. 482, 156 N.E. 595 (1927). Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 1 
to former § 275 and on Poussard v. Spiers & Pond, 1 Q.B. Div. 410 (1896). See also Citizens Home Ins. Co. v. 
Glisson, 191 Va. 582, 61 S.E.2d 859 (1950). Cf. Illustration 7 to former § 275.  Illustration 3, 4 and 5 are based 
on Illustrations 2, 1 and 7 to former § 276.  As to Illustration 4, see also King v. Connors, 222 Mass. 261, 110 
N.E. 289 (1915); Davis v. Lacy, 121 F. Supp. 246 (E.D. Ky. 1954). As to Illustration 5, see Thomas, Specific 
Performance of Land Purchases, 12 Creighton L. Rev. 295 (1978), criticizing Tedco Corp. v. Overland Hills, 
200 Neb. 748, 266 N.W.2d 56 (1978). Illustrations 6 and 7 are supported by Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
612.  As to Illustration 6, see Norrington v. Wright, 115 U.S. 188 (1885); Cargill, Inc. v. Atkins Farms, Inc., 422 
F. Supp. 239 (W.D. Ark. 1976). As to Illustration 7, see Plotnick v. Pennsylvania Smelting & Ref. Co., 194 F.2d 
859 (3d Cir. 1952); Canadian Steel Foundries, Ltd. v. Thomas Furnace Co., 186 Wis. 557, 203 N.W. 355 
(1925); Helgar Corp. v. Warner's Features, 222 N.Y. 449, 119 N.E. 113 (1918).
Comment d.  Illustration 8 is based on Illustration 6 to former § 276; see also Doctorman v. Schroeder, 92 N.J. 
Eq. 676, 114 A. 810 (1921). Illustration 9 is adapted from Barkis v. Scott, 34 Cal.2d 116, 208 P.2d 367 (1949). 
See also Rogers v. Cardinal Realty, Inc., 115 N.H. 285, 339 A.2d 23 (1975), citing Tentative Draft of this 
Comment.  Illustration 10 is supported by Colbath v. H.B. Stebbins Lumber Co., 127 Me. 406, 144 A. 1 (1929); 
compare Burgess Constr. Co. v. M. Morrin & Son Co., 526 F.2d 108 (10th Cir. 1975), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 
866 (1976).
Comment e.  On the power subsequently to set a time limit, see Taylor v. Goelet, 208 N.Y. 253, 101 N.E. 867 
(1913).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 318
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 243
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 243 Effect of a Breach by Non-Performance As Giving Rise to a Claim for 
Damages for Total Breach
(1)  With respect to performances to be exchanged under an exchange of promises, a breach by non-
performance gives rise to a claim for damages for total breach only if it discharges the injured party's 
remaining duties to render such performance, other than a duty to render an agreed equivalent under § 
240.
(2)  Except as stated in Subsection (3), a breach by non-performance accompanied or followed by a 
repudiation gives rise to a claim for damages for total breach.
(3)  Where at the time of the breach the only remaining duties of performance are those of the party in 
breach and are for the payment of money in installments not related to one another, his breach by non-
performance as to less than the whole, whether or not accompanied or followed by a repudiation, does 
not give rise to a claim for damages for total breach.
(4)  In any case other than those stated in the preceding subsections, a breach by non-performance 
gives rise to a claim for total breach only if it so substantially impairs the value of the contract to the 
injured party at the time of the breach that it is just in the circumstances to allow him to recover 
damages based on all his remaining rights to performance.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Promises exchanged in an expectation of an exchange of performances.  Under § 236, a claim for damages 
for total breach is one for damages based on all of the injured party's remaining rights to performance while a 
claim for damages for partial breach is one that is based on only part of those rights.  No precise general rule 
can be stated for determining in all cases when a breach gives rise to a claim for damages for total breach and 
when it gives rise to a claim merely for damages for partial breach.  Subsection (1), however, states a rule for 
the most significant type of case -- the case in which performances are to be exchanged under an exchange of 
promises, and the breach occurs before the injured party has fully performed his duties with respect to the 
expected exchange.  The breach, if it is material (§ 241), will operate as the non-occurrence of a condition of 
those remaining duties (§ 237).  This will at least justify the injured party in suspending his performance (§ 
225(1)), and will, if the breach is not cured in time (§ 242), discharge his remaining duties of performance (§ 
225(2)).  Under the rule stated in Subsection (1), the injured party has a claim for damages for total breach if, 
but only if, those remaining duties are discharged.  See Comment b to § 236 and Illustration 2 to § 237.  (The 
injured party also has a claim for damages for total breach as the result of a material breach in, for example, 
Illustrations 4, 5, and 6 to § 237 and Illustrations 2 and 6 to § 240).  There is, of course, an exception where the 
injured party has already, at the time of the breach, come under a duty to render performance of an agreed 
equivalent under the rule stated in § 240.  Such a duty is not discharged, even if there is a material breach, and 
its survival does not prevent the injured party from claiming damages for total breach under Subsection (1).  In 
contrast to the situation where there is a repudiation (see Comment b), the injured party has a choice in the 
situation contemplated in Subsection (1).  If, in spite of the breach, he wishes to await performance by the party 
in breach and to have merely a claim for damages for partial breach rather than for total breach, he can excuse 
the non-occurrence of the condition of his remaining duties (§ 237) by promising to perform them in spite of its 
non-occurrence (§ 84).  His remaining duties are then not discharged, and the rule stated in Subsection (1) 

§ 243 Effect of a Breach by Non-Performance As Giving Rise to a Claim for Damages for Total Breach
does not apply.  The injured party need not do this expressly (see Comment e to § 84), but may do so by his 
actions in the course of performance.  See §§ 246, 247.
Illustrations:
1.  A promises to sell to B a lot in a subdivision for $ 8,000.  B promises to pay in four installments of $ 2,000 
each, beginning one year after execution of the contract.  A promises to begin to make improvements and pave 
the streets within 60 days and to complete work within a reasonable time and promises to deliver a deed at the 
time of the final payment.  A commits a material breach by unjustifiably failing to pave the streets, and B 
thereupon refuses to pay any installments.  After a reasonable time for A to cure his material breach has 
passed (§ 242), B's duty to pay the price is discharged, and he has a claim against A for damages for total 
breach.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, B pays the first installment although he knows of A's 
material breach.  B's payment operates as a promise to pay the remaining installments in spite of the non-
occurrence of a condition of his duty to do so.  See § 237; Illustration 5 to § 84.  B's duty to pay the price is not 
discharged, and he has a claim against A merely for damages for partial breach because of the delay.
b.  Effect of repudiation.  Under the rule stated in Subsection (2), if a repudiation (§ 250) accompanies or 
follows a breach by non-performance, the injured party generally has a claim for damages for total breach.  A 
repudiation does not, however, have this effect in those circumstances in which, under the rule stated in 
Subsection (3), nothing less than a breach as to the whole gives rise to such a claim (see Comment c and 
Illustrations 4 and 5).  A repudiation together with a breach by non-performance, therefore, has this effect in all 
cases in which a repudiation alone would give rise to a claim for total breach (§ 253) and in some additional 
cases (see Illustrations 3 and 8).  An injured party who has a claim for damages for total breach as a result of a 
repudiation, and who asserts a claim merely for damages for partial breach, runs the risk that if he prevails he 
will be barred under the doctrine of merger from further recovery, even in the event of a subsequent breach, 
because he has "split a cause of action." See Restatement, Second, Judgments §§ 24-26.  His position differs 
from that of the injured party under the rule stated in Subsection (1), who can, by promising to perform in spite 
of a breach (§ 84), prevent the breach from discharging his remaining duties of performance, avoid its giving 
rise to a claim for damages for total breach at all, and thereby treat it as giving rise to a claim merely for 
damages for partial breach (see Comment a).  Where a repudiation accompanies or follows a breach that 
would, if the injured party so chose, give rise to a claim for damages for total breach under Subsection (1), both 
Subsections (1) and (2) apply.  In that case, the injured party cannot avoid the consequence described above of 
having a claim for damages for total breach under the rule stated in Subsection (2).  Even under the rule stated 
in Subsection (2), however, the injured party can assert a claim for damages for a partial breach without 
prejudice to a claim for damages arising out of a subsequent breach if he and the repudiator agree that the 
latter's performance under the contract is to be continued.  Furthermore, he is not barred from claiming specific 
relief under the contract merely because he has a claim for damages for total breach (see Comment a to § 
359).  If the repudiator nullifies his repudiation (§ 256(1)), the injured party still has a claim for damages for the 
breach by nonperformance but it may then be a claim merely for damages for partial breach (see Comment a to 
§ 256).
Illustration:
3.  A contracts to sell and B to buy for $ 8,000 a subdivision lot on which B plans to build a house for himself.  
Delivery of the deed and payment of the price are to be made within 30 days, and A promises to make 
improvements and pave the streets within one year.  A delivers the deed and B pays the price within 30 days.  
A paves the streets and makes most but not all of the improvements within one year, but then repudiates by 
unjustifiably telling B that he refuses to make the rest of the improvements.  B has a claim against A for 
damages for total breach, even though absent a repudiation B's claim might be merely one for damages for 
partial breach.  See Illustration 8.  If A and B then agree that A will make the rest of the improvements, B has a 
claim against A merely for damages for partial breach because of the delay.
c.  Duties on one side.  The rule stated in Subsection (3) applies only where all the remaining duties at the time 
of the breach are those of the party in breach.  It therefore applies where the parties have exchanged promise 
for performance (§ 72), and where the parties have exchanged promise for promise (§ 74) and the injured party 
has fully performed.  It is well established that if those duties of the party in breach at the time of the breach are 
simply to pay money in installments, not related to one another in some way, as by the requirement of the 

§ 243 Effect of a Breach by Non-Performance As Giving Rise to a Claim for Damages for Total Breach
occurrence of a condition with respect to more than one of them, then a breach as to any number less than the 
whole of such installments gives rise to a claim merely for damages for partial breach.  Whether there is a 
relationship between installments or other acts depends on the extent to which, in the circumstances, a breach 
as to less than the whole of such installments or acts can substantially affect the injured party's expectation 
under the contract.
d.  Avoiding harsh results of limitations.  Dissatisfaction with the rule stated in Subsection (3) often manifests 
itself by the inclusion in the agreement of an acceleration clause under which the remaining installments 
become due, either automatically or at the option of the injured party, on a breach as to one installment, so that 
such non-performance gives rise to a claim for damages for total breach.  Even when the injured party has no 
claim for damages for total breach, he may be entitled to equitable relief, a declaratory judgment, an installment 
judgment, or restitution (see Comment b to § 359), to the extent that these remedies are permitted.  The degree 
to which the limitation might yield on a showing of manifest injustice, as where the refusal to pay is not in good 
faith or where fraud on creditors is involved, is unclear.  Problems of assuring performance of such obligations 
to pay in installments on the debtor's death, dissolution, or bankruptcy arise even where no breach by non-
performance has occurred, and are not dealt with in this Restatement.  See Comment c to § 250.
Illustrations:
4.  A borrows $ 10,000 from B and promises to repay with interest in ten monthly installments.  A unjustifiably 
fails to pay the first four installments.  B has a claim against A merely for damages for partial breach for non-
payment of the four unpaid installments.  The result is the sameeven if A repudiates by telling B that he will not 
make the payments.
5.  A, an insurer, issues a policy of disability insurance to B under which monthly payments are to be made to B 
and the payment of additional premiums waived if B is totally and permanently disabled.  B suffers total and 
permanent disability.  A makes monthly payments for a year and then unjustifiably fails to make further 
payments.  After A has been in default for a year, B sues A.  B has a claim against A merely for damages for 
partial breach for non-payment during the second year.  The result is the same even if A repudiates by telling B 
that he will not make the payments.
e.  General criterion.  The rules stated in Subsections (1), (2) and (3) cover most of the significant cases.  
Subsection (4) states a general rule for residual cases.  Under that rule the criterion is whether the breach so 
substantially impairs the value of the contract to the injured party at the time of the breach that it is just to allow 
him to recover damages based on all his remaining rights to performance.  This determination is to be made in 
the light of all the circumstances, taking account of the difficulty of calculating damages for total breach and of 
any uncertainties that could be avoided if the injured party were given a claim merely for damages for partial 
breach.  The criterion is essentially that of Uniform Commercial Code § 2-610 and, here as there, "The most 
useful test of substantial value is to determine whether material inconvenience or injustice will result if the 
aggrieved party is forced to wait . . ." (Comment 3).  Although the considerations listed in §§ 241 and 242 are 
intended for use in determining whether the injured party is discharged, not in determining whether he has a 
claim for damages for total breach, some of them are relevant to this latter determination.  Among these are the 
extent to which the injured party will be deprived of the benefit that he reasonably expected (§ 241(a)), the 
likelihood that the party in breach will cure his breach (§ 241(d)), the extent to which the behavior of the party in 
breach comports with standards of good faith and fair dealing (§ 241(e)), and the extent to which further delay 
will prevent or hinder the injured party in making reasonable substitute arrangements (§ 242(b)).
Illustrations:
6.  For a fee of $ 25,000, paid in advance, A contracts with B, an impresario, to sing in five concerts offered to 
the public as a series.  A unjustifiably fails to sing in the first two concerts.  A's breach so substantially impairs 
the value of the contract to B that B has a claim against A for damages for total breach.
7.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3, A does not repudiate but, in spite of repeated requests 
from B, does not make improvements or pave streets for two years.  A's breach so substantially impairs the 
value of the contract to B that B has a claim against A for damages for total breach.
8.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3, A does not repudiate and gives B reasonable 
assurances that the remaining improvements will be completed with a delay of no more than one month.  B has 
a claim against A merely for damages for partial breach because of the delay.

§ 243 Effect of a Breach by Non-Performance As Giving Rise to a Claim for Damages for Total Breach
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former §§ 316 and 317.  As to the requirement that the breach substantially impair the 
value of the contract to the injured party, compare Uniform Commercial Code § 2-610.  See 4 Corbin, Contracts 
§§ 946, 948-58 (1951 & Supp. 1980); 11 Williston, Contracts §§ 1292, 1293, 1294, 1315 (3d ed. 1968).
Comment a.  The facts in Illustrations 1 and 2 are suggested by those in Palmer v. Fox, 274 Mich. 252, 264 
N.W. 361 (1936), and in Illustration 2 to § 232 and Illustration 4 to § 242.  As to Illustration 1, see Illustration 1 
to former § 317.  As to Illustration 2, see Illustrations 7 and 8 to former § 317.  See Cities Serv. Helex, Inc. v. 
United States, 211 Ct. Cl. 222, 543 F.2d 1306 (1976).
Comment b.  As to the risk of "splitting a cause of action," see Pakas v. Hollingshead, 184 N.Y. 211, 77 N.E. 40 
(1906). The facts in Illustration 3 are suggested by those in Coughlin v. Blair, 41 Cal.2d 587, 262 P.2d 305 
(1953). See also Illustration 5 to former § 317; Taylor v. Johnston, 15 Cal.3d 130, 123 Cal. Rptr. 641, 539 P.2d 
425 (1975).
Comment d.  As to the alternative of equitable relief, see John Hancock Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Cohen, 254 F.2d 
417 (9th Cir. 1958); see also Greguhn v. Mutual of Omaha Ins. Co., 23 Utah 2d 214, 461 P.2d 285 (1969). As 
to a declaratory judgment, see Stephenson v. Equitable Life Assur. Soc'y, 92 F.2d 406 (4th Cir. 1937). As to 
installment judgments, see Equitable Life Assur. Soc'y v. Goble, 254 Ky. 614, 72 S.W.2d 35 (1934); Equitable 
Life Assur. Soc'y v. Branham, 250 Ky. 472, 63 S.W.2d 498 (1933); Melancon v. Provident Life & Accident Ins. 
Co., 176 La. 1055, 147 So. 346 (1932); cf.  Fanning v. Guardian Life Ins. Co., 59 Wash.2d 101, 366 P.2d 207 
(1961). As to the further possibility that an insurer may be liable for punitive damages for a vexatious delay or 
refusal to pay, see Note, 48 Iowa L. Rev. 731 (1963), discussing the statutes enacted in many states, and see, 
e.g., Wetherbee v. United Ins. Co., 265 Cal. App.2d 921, 71 Cal. Rptr. 764 (1968), imposing such liability at 
common law.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 316; see also John Hancock Mut. Life Ins. Co. 
v. Cohen, supra; Quick v. American Steel and Pump Corp., 397 F.2d 561 (2d Cir. 1968); L.C. Fulenwider, Inc. 
v. Ginsburg, 36 Colo. App. 246, 539 P.2d 1320 (1975). Illustration 5 is based on New York Life Ins. Co. v. 
Viglas, 297 U.S. 672 (1936); Beaman v. Pacific Mut. Life Ins. Co., 369 F.2d 653 (4th Cir. 1966); Carroll v. 
Mutual of Omaha Ins. Co., 354 F. Supp. 1260 (W.D. Va. 1973); Mabery v. Western Cas. & Sur. Co., 173 Kan. 
586, 250 P.2d 824 (1952).
Comment e.  See Taylor v. Johnston, 15 Cal.3d 130, 123 Cal. Rptr. 641, 539 P.2d 425 (1975), citing this 
Section in Tentative Draft.  Illustration 6 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 316.  Illustration 7 is based on and 
the facts in Illustration 8 are suggested by Coughlin v. Blair, supra. See also Illustration 2 to § 232 and 
Illustration 4 to § 242; Gold Mining & Water Co. v. Swinerton, 23 Cal.2d 19, 142 P.2d 22 (1943); Riess v. 
Murchison, 329 F.2d 635 (9th Cir. 1964), cert. denied, 383 U.S. 946 (1966).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 321
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 244
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 244 Effect of Subsequent Events on Duty to Pay Damages
A party's duty to pay damages for total breach by non-performance is discharged if it appears after the 
breach that there would have been a total failure by the injured party to perform his return promise.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  If the parties are to exchange performances under an exchange of promises, each party's duties 
to render performance are generally regarded as conditional on the other party's performance, or at least on his 
readiness to perform (§§ 237, 238, 251, 253).  This principle applies even though one party is already in breach 
by non-performance.  His duty to pay damages is discharged if it subsequently appears that there would have 
been a total failure of performance by the injured party.  A failure is total in this context if it would have been 
sufficient to have discharged any remaining duties of the party in breach to render his performance.  See § 242.  
The result follows even if it appears that the failure would have been justified and not a breach.  Cf. § 254 (1).
Illustration:
1.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a particular machine.  B is to pay the price on June 15 and A is to deliver the 
machine on July 1, at which time risk of loss is to pass to B.  B does not pay on June 15, and on June 20 the 
machine is accidentally destroyed.  B's duty to pay damages to A for his non-payment is discharged.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former §§ 277 and 399(2).  See 6 Corbin, Contracts § 1256 (1962); 6 Williston, 
Contracts § 884 (3d ed. 1962).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 277 and Illustration 2 to former § 399.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 321
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 245
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 245 Effect of a Breach by Non-Performance As Excusing the Non-
Occurrence Of a Condition
Where a party's breach by non-performance contributes materially to the non-occurrence of a condition 
of one of his duties, the non-occurrence is excused.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Excuse of non-occurrence of condition.  Where a duty of one party is subject to the occurrence of a 
condition, the additional duty of good faith and fair dealing imposed on him under § 205 may require some 
cooperation on his part, either by refraining from conduct that will prevent or hinder the occurrence of that 
condition or by taking affirmative steps to cause its occurrence.  Under § 235(2), non-performance of that duty 
when performance is due is a breach.  See Illustration 3 to § 235.  Under this Section it has the further effect of 
excusing the non-occurrence of the condition itself, so that performance of the duty that was originally subject 
to its occurrence can become due in spite of its non-occurrence.  See Comments b and c to § 225.  The rule 
stated in this Section only applies, however, where the lack of cooperation constitutes a breach, either of a duty 
imposed by the terms of the agreement itself or of a duty imposed by a term supplied by the court.  There is no 
breach if the risk of such a lack of cooperation was assumed by the other party or if the lack of cooperation is 
justifiable.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts with B to repair B's building for $ 20,000, payment to be made "on the satisfaction of C, B's 
architect, and the issuance of his certificate." A fully performs his duty to make the repairs, but B induces C to 
refuse to issue his certificate.  A has a claim against B for $ 20,000.  B's breach of his duty of good faith and fair 
dealing contributed materially to the non-occurrence of the condition, the issuance of the certificate, excusing it.  
Cf. Illustrations 5, 6, 7, and 8 to § 227.
2.  A contracts to sell and B to buy land for $ 100,000.  At the same time A contracts to pay C, a real estate 
broker, as his commission, $ 5,000 "on the closing of title." A unjustifiably refuses to consummate the sale.  C 
has a claim against A for $ 5,000, less any expenses that C saved because the sale was not consummated.  
A's breach of his duty of good faith and fair dealing contributed materially to the non-occurrence of the 
condition, the closing of title, excusing it.  See Illustration 4 to § 227.
3.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a house for $ 50,000, with the provision, "This contract is conditional on 
approval by X Bank of B's pending mortgage application." B fails to make reasonable efforts to obtain approval 
and, when the X Bank disapproves the application, refuses to perform when A tenders a deed.  A has a claim 
against B for total breach of contract.  B's breach of his duty of good faith and fair dealing contributed materially 
to the non-occurrence of the condition, approval of the application, excusing it.  Cf. Illustration 8 to § 225.
4.  A contracts to sell and B to buy A's rights as one of three lessees under a mining lease in Indian lands.  The 
contract states that it is "subject only to approval by the Secretary of the Interior," which is required by statute.  
B files a request for approval but A fails to support B's request by giving necessary cooperation.  Approval is 
denied and A cannot convey his rights.  B has a claim against A for total breach of contract.  A's breach of his 
duty of good faith and fair dealing contributed materially to the non-occurrence of the condition, approval by the 
Secretary of the Interior, excusing it.
b.  Contribute materially.  Although it is implicit in the rule that the condition has not occurred, it is not necessary 
to show that it would have occurred but for the lack of cooperation.  It is only required that the breach have 

§ 245 Effect of a Breach by Non-Performance As Excusing the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
contributed materially to the non-occurrence.  Nevertheless, if it can be shown that the condition would not have 
occurred regardless of the lack of cooperation, the failure of performance did not contribute materially to its 
non-occurrence and the rule does not apply.  The burden of showing this is properly thrown on the party in 
breach.
Illustrations:
5.  A and B, about to become man and wife, make an antenuptial contract under which A is to pay B $ 100,000 
if B survives A.  Four years after their marriage, A shoots both B and himself.  B dies instantly and A dies the 
following day.  B's estate has a claim against A's estate for $ 100,000.  A's breach of his duty of good faith and 
fair dealing contributed materially to the non-occurrence of the condition, B's surviving A, excusing it.  The fact 
that B's estate cannot show that B would otherwise have survived A does not prevent it from recovering the $ 
100,000.  Compare the rule on certainty in § 352.
6.  A, the owner of a manufacturing plant, contracts to transfer the plant to B.  B is to pay A $ 500,000 plus a 
bonus of $ 100,000 if the profits from the plant exceed a stated amount during the first year of its operation.  Six 
months after the transfer B sells the plant to C, who dismantles it.  B refuses to pay the bonus.  Whether A has 
a claim against B depends on whether B's failure to operate the plant for a year is a breach of his duty of good 
faith and fair dealing which contributed materially to the non-occurrence of the condition, the profits exceeding 
the stated amount during the first year, excusing it.  The fact that A cannot show that the profits would 
otherwise have exceeded the stated amount does not prevent him from recovering.  If, however, B shows that 
they would not have exceeded that amount, A cannot recover.  Compare the rule on certainty in § 352.
7.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 4, A shows that even if he had given his cooperation, the 
Secretary of the Interior would have withheld approval on other grounds.  B has no claim against A for breach 
of contract.  A's breach of his duty of good faith and fair dealing did not contribute materially to the non-
occurrence of the condition, and its non-occurrence is not excused.
c.  Exceptions.  Under §§ 237 and 238, it may be required as a condition of one party's duty that the other party 
perform or offer to perform his duty.  A breach by the first party of his duty of good faith and fair dealing will, if 
material and not cured in time, discharge that duty of the other party (§ 237), eliminating the requirement that 
the other party perform or offer to perform it.  The discharge of the duty has the additional effect of excusing the 
non-occurrence of the condition.  But non-occurrence of the condition is excused only if the duty is discharged.  
The rule stated in this Section is, therefore, not applicable to such situations.  See Illustrations 4, 5, and 7 to § 
237.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 295.  Compare former § 315, which is now covered in § 205.  See 3A Corbin, 
Contracts §§ 767-71 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 677-77B (3d ed. 1968).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 295 and on former § 303(b); see also Haugen v. 
Raupach, 43 Wash.2d 147, 260 P.2d 340 (1953). See also Kooleraire Serv. & Installation Corp. v. Board of 
Educ., 28 N.Y.2d 101, 320 N.Y.S.2d 46, 268 N.E.2d 782 (1971); Allbrand Discount Liquors, Inc. v. Times 
Square Stores Corp., 60 A.D.2d 568, 399 N.Y.S.2d 700 (1977). Illustration 2 is based on Schinstock v. 
Butterfield, 141 Neb. 877, 5 N.W.2d 86 (1942), and Goldstein v. Rosenberg, 331 Ill. App. 374, 73 N.E.2d 171 
(1947). Illustration 3 is suggested by Lach v. Cahill, 138 Conn. 418, 85 A.2d 481 (1951). The facts in 
Illustrations 4 and 7 are suggested by those in Vanadium Corp. v. Fidelity & Deposit Co., 159 F.2d 105 (2d Cir. 
1947); cf.  Atlas Trading Corp. v. S.H. Grossman, Inc., 169 F.2d 240 (3d Cir. 1948); Security Nat'l Life Ins. Co. 
v. Pre-Need Camelback Plan, Inc., 19 Ariz. App. 580, 509 P.2d 652 (1973) (dictum).  As to hindrance or non-
cooperation by a contractor excusing the condition that a subcontractor carry out its duties without delay, 
compare Artcraft Cabinet, Inc. v. Watajo, Inc., 540 S.W.2d 918 (Mo. Ct. App. 1976), with Burgess Constr. Co. v. 
M. Morrin & Son Co., 526 F.2d 108 (10th Cir. 1975), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 866 (1976), and Commercial 
Contractors, Inc. v. United States Fidelity & Guar. Co., 524 F.2d 944 (5th Cir. 1975). For an interesting issue of 
non-cooperation not involving bad faith in connection with a right of first refusal, see Weber Meadow-View 
Corp. v. Wilde, 575 P.2d 1053 (Utah 1978).
Comment b.  Illustration 5 is based on Foreman State Trust & Sav. Bank v. Tauber, 348 Ill. 280, 180 N.E. 827 
(1932). But see Wolbarsht v. Donnelly, 302 Mass. 568, 20 N.E.2d 415 (1939) (promisee has burden of proving 

§ 245 Effect of a Breach by Non-Performance As Excusing the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
that the condition, the issuance of a permit, would have occurred).  Illustration 6 is suggested by E.I. Du Pont 
de Nemours Powder Co. v. Schlottman, 218 F. 353 (2d Cir. 1914), cert. denied, 235 U.S. 705 (1915).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 278(1)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 246
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 246 Effect of Acceptance as Excusing the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
(1)  Except as stated in Subsection (2), an obligor's acceptance or his retention for an unreasonable 
time of the obligee's performance, with knowledge of or reason to know of the non-occurrence of a 
condition of the obligor's duty, operates as a promise to perform in spite of that non-occurrence, under 
the rules stated in § 84.
(2)  If at the time of its acceptance or retention the obligee's performance involves such attachment to 
the obligor's property that removal would cause material loss, the obligor's acceptance or retention of 
that performance operates as a promise to perform in spite of the non-occurrence of the condition, 
under the rules stated in § 84, only if the obligor with knowledge of or reason to know of the defects 
manifests assent to the performance.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Acceptance or retention as a promise.  Section 84 states the circumstances in which a promise to perform a 
duty in spite of the non-occurrence of a condition is binding.  Non-verbal conduct, such as continued 
performance with knowledge of the non-occurrence, may amount to a promise under that section.  See 
Comment e and Illustration 4 to § 84.  Because acceptance and retention of the other party's performance in 
spite of the non-occurrence of a condition are both particularly important kinds of such conduct, this Section 
sets out in detail the circumstances in which acceptance or retention amounts to a promise under the rules 
stated in § 84.  In this context, acceptance of performance means merely voluntary receipt of it, with no 
implication that it is received in full satisfaction.  The acceptance or retention must, of course, be with 
knowledge of or reason to know of the non-occurrence of the condition.
b.  Effect of promise.  The rule stated in this Section applies to all conditions other than those excepted by § 84.  
A particularly important situation in which it finds application occurs where performances are being exchanged 
under an exchange of promises, and the party who has accepted or retained the other's performance asserts 
that because of defects in that performance there has been a non-occurrence of a condition of his remaining 
duties to perform (§ 237).  If the rule stated in this Section applies, however, the non-occurrence of the 
condition is excused, and even if the defects amount to a material failure they do not have the asserted effect.  
Under the Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-607, 2-608, and 2-709, for example, the buyer must pay the price for 
goods accepted and retained in spite of a defective tender if the acceptance was with knowledge of or reason 
to know of the defect.  But it does not follow from one party's mere voluntary receipt of performance that the 
other party's defective performance has discharged his own duty under § 235(1).  Therefore, subject to the 
rules on discharge in Chapter 12, he is liable for damages for partial breach because of his defective 
performance.  Under Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-607(2) and 2-714, for example, the buyer's acceptance 
and retention of the goods does not preclude him from recovering damages for any non-conformity of tender.  
Not only may a party excuse entirely the non-occurrence of a condition of his duty, but he may excuse a delay 
in its occurrence.  See Comment c to § 225.  He may then claim damages for partial breach because of the 
delay.  See Illustration 1.
Illustrations:
1.  A, a subcontractor, contracts to do excavation and earth moving on a housing subdivision project for B, the 
owner and general contractor, and to do all work "in a workmanlike manner." B is to make monthly progress 
payments for the work performed during the preceding month less a retainer of ten percent.  A negligently 

§ 246 Effect of Acceptance as Excusing the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
damages a building with his bulldozer causing serious damage and denies any liability for B's loss.  B refuses to 
make further progress payments until A repairs the damage or admits liability, but allows A to continue work on 
the project.  Without any advance notice, B then notifies A that he cancels the contract.  A has a claim against 
B for total breach of contract.  Even if a court would otherwise have determined that A's uncured material failure 
had continued long enough to discharge B's remaining duties of performance, B's acceptance of performance 
by A operated as a promise to perform, excusing the delay in cure.  Cf. Illustration 1 to § 241.
2.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a machine for $ 10,000, delivery to be on March 1 and payment to be within 
30 days thereafter.  A does not deliver the machine until March 10, in such circumstances that the delay is a 
material breach.  B accepts the machine but refuses to pay the price.  A has a claim against B for the price of $ 
10,000 under Uniform Commercial Code § 2-709, subject to a claim by B against A for damages for partial 
breach because of the delay under Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-607(2) and 2-714.
c.  Acceptance or retention of part.  The rule stated in this Section also applies where there has been only a 
part performance and this has been accepted or retained.  Therefore the acceptance of an installment has the 
same effect as to defects in that installment and in prior installments as the acceptance of the whole 
performance would have.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-612(3).  Furthermore, the recipient of a whole 
performance has no right as a general rule to accept part and reject part, and therefore his acceptance of part 
has the same effect as to defects in the whole as the acceptance of the whole would have.  (But cf. Uniform 
Commercial Code § 2-601(c), which permits a buyer of goods to accept "some commercial units" and reject the 
rest.) But sometimes a party will accept a conforming part of the other party's performance without knowing or 
having reason to know that there will subsequently be a failure as to the balance of the performance.  Such an 
acceptance of part will not amount to a promise under the rule stated in this Section.  But if the injured party 
retains that part for an unreasonable time after he knows or has reason to know of the failure with respect to the 
balance, that retention will amount to a promise, unless it comes within the exception stated in this Section.  A 
comparable rule governs revocation of acceptance under Uniform Commercial Code § 2-608.
Illustrations:
3.  A contracts to sell and B to buy 10,000 tons of steel, to be delivered in installments of 1,000 tons a month for 
ten months, payment to be made 90 days after each delivery.  A commits a material breach by delay in delivery 
of the first two installments under such circumstances that B's remaining duties of performance are discharged 
(§ 237).  B nevertheless accepts delivery of the third installment without complaining of the previous breach.  
B's acceptance amounts to a promise to accept future installments in spite of the material breach.  A has a 
claim against B for the price of each of the three installments, after the 90 day period has passed, under 
Uniform Commercial Code § 2-709, subject to a claim by B against A for damages for partial breach because of 
the delay under Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-607(2) and 2-714.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-612(3).
4.  A contracts to sell and B to buy a machine and governor that are sold as a single unit for $ 10,000, payment 
to be within 30 days of delivery.  A delivers the machine with a defective governor, which constitutes a material 
breach.  B accepts the machine but tenders back the defective governor.  B's acceptance of the machine 
amounts to a promise to pay $ 10,000 in spite of the defect in the governor.  A has a claim against B for the 
price of $ 10,000, subject to a claim by B against A for damages for partial breach because of the defect in the 
governor.  See Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-601 and 2-607.
5.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 4, A is entitled under the contract to deliver the machine 
first and the governor later.  B accepts the machine, but when he receives the governor he promptly revokes his 
acceptance and tenders back both the machine and the governor.  B's acceptance of the machine does not 
amount to a promise.  A has no claim against B.  B has a claim against A for damages for total breach of 
contract.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-608.
d.  Performance attached to obligor's property.  If the performance is so attached to the obligor's property, real 
or personal, that removal would cause him material expense or injury, it would be unfair to put him to the choice 
of either removing the performance or excusing the non-occurrence of the condition.  The Section therefore 
makes an exception for that case.  (See § 373 as to the possibility of a right to restitution in that case.) If, 
however, the obligor goes beyond mere acceptance and retention of the performance and manifests assent to it 
in spite of the non-occurrence of the condition, Subsection (2) provides that his conduct amounts to a promise 
under the rule stated in § 84.  In order to have this effect his assent need only be to treat the performance as 

§ 246 Effect of Acceptance as Excusing the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
the occurrence of the condition; it need not be to receive it in full satisfaction of the other's duty.  See Comment 
b.
Illustrations:
6.  A contracts to build a house for B on B's land for $ 50,000, payable in part in monthly progress payments 
with the balance due on completion.  A builds the house but unjustifiably departs from the specifications in a 
number of respects.  B moves into and uses the house, knowing of some of the departures and not knowing or 
having reason to know of others.  B refuses to pay the balance of $ 10,000.  B can rely on all of the departures, 
including those of which he knew, to show that A's breach is material and that A has no claim against B for the 
$ 10,000 balance under the contract.
7.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 6, B tells A that he "will take" the house in spite of those 
departures of which he knows.  B can rely on the departures of which he did not know or have reason to know, 
but not on the departures of which he knew, to show that A's breach is material and that A has no claim against 
B to the $ 10,000 balance under the contract.  If B fails to show that A's breach is material, A's claim against B 
for the $ 10,000 balance is subject to B's claim against A for damages for partial breach because of all of the 
departures, including those of which he knew.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 298.  See also former § 309.  It has been reworded to indicate that it involves 
a specific application of the general rule stated in § 84.  It accords with the principles behind Uniform 
Commercial Code §§ 2-607 and 2-608.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts §§ 699, 755 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 5 
Williston, Contracts §§ 700-25 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is based on K & G Constr. Co. v. Harris, 223 Md. 305, 164 A.2d 451 (1960); see also 
Dunn v. Steubing, 120 N.Y. 232, 24 N.E. 315 (1890); Grady-Gould Watershed Improvement Dist. v. 
Transamerica Ins. Co., 570 F.2d 720 (8th Cir. 1978); Longenecker v. Brommer, 59 Wash.2d 552, 368 P.2d 900 
(1962). Illustration 2 is based on Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-607(2) and 2-714.  See also Illustration 1 to 
former § 298.
Comment c.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 7 to former § 317; see also Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
612(3); Dangerfield v. Markel, 252 N.W.2d 184 (N.D. 1977). Illustration 4 is based on Uniform Commercial 
Code §§ 2-601 and 2-607.  Illustration 5 is based on Uniform Commercial Code § 2-206.  On what constitutes 
notice of defects inthese situations, see Bonebrake v. Cox, 499 F.2d 951 (8th Cir. 1974).
Comment d.  Illustration 6 is based on Cawley v. Weiner, 236 N.Y. 357, 140 N.E. 724 (1923) and on Illustration 
2 to former § 298.  Illustration 7 is based on Illustration 4 to former § 298.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 304
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 247
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 247 Effect of Acceptance of Part Performance as Excusing the Subsequent 
Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
An obligor's acceptance of part of the obligee's performance, with knowledge or reason to know of the 
non-occurrence of a condition of the obligor's duty, operates as a promise to perform in spite of a 
subsequent non-occurrence of the condition under the rules stated in § 84 to the extent that it justifies 
the obligee in believing that subsequent performances will be accepted in spite of that non-occurrence.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Acceptance or retention of part.  An obligor's acceptance or retention of part performance in spite of the non-
occurrence of a condition of his duty may have two effects.  First, it may operate as a promise to perform that 
duty in spite of that non-occurrence under the rule stated in the preceding section.  Second, it may operate as a 
promise to perform in spite of a subsequent non-occurrence of the condition under the rule stated in this 
Section.  It only has this second effect, however, to the extent that it justifies the obligee in believing that 
subsequent performance will be accepted in spite of that non-occurrence.  Where, for example, there have 
been successive acceptances of defective installments, the obligee may be justified in believing that 
subsequent installments will be accepted in spite of similar defects.  Not only may a party excuse entirely the 
non-occurrence of a condition of his duty, but he may excuse its non-occurrence during the period of time in 
which it would otherwise have to occur.  See Comment c to § 225 and Illustration 1.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to sell and B to buy land for $ 10,000, the price to be payable in a down payment and 36 
monthly installments and the deed to be delivered on payment of the last installment.  The agreement provides 
that payment of installments on the dates due is a condition of A's duty to deliver a deed.  B does not pay any of 
the first twelve installments on the dates due, but A accepts them without comment.  B tenders the thirteenth 
installment after the date due, but not later than was generally the case for the previous payments.  The non-
occurrence of the condition during the period of time in which it would otherwise have to occur, failure to pay 
the thirteenth installment on the date due, is excused and A's duty is not discharged.  A has, however, a claim 
against B for damages for partial breach because of the delay.
2.  A contracts to build a house for B for $ 50,000, payable in part in monthly progress payments with the 
balance due on completion, all payments to be made on condition that A present a certificate from B's architect 
showing that the work has been properly completed.  B makes the last six out of seven progress payments 
without presentation of an architect's certificate and without asking for one, and A materially changes his 
position in reliance on this.  Although A fully performs, B refuses to pay the $ 10,000 balance because of A's 
failure to present an architect's certificate.  The non-occurrence of the condition, presentation of the architect's 
certificate, is excused and A has a claim against B for $ 10,000.
b.  Reinstatement.  Since, under this Section, acceptance or retention amounts to a promise under the rules 
stated in § 84, the obligor can again make his duty subject to the condition by notifying the obligee of his 
intention to do so.  His right to reinstate the requirement of the condition is, however, subject to the restrictions 
stated in § 84(2), and he cannot reinstate it if, for example, to do so will be unjust because of a material change 
of position by the obligee.
Illustrations:

§ 247 Effect of Acceptance of Part Performance as Excusing the Subsequent Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
3.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A notifies B at the time that the twelfth installment is due 
that he intends to require prompt payment of the thirteenth and subsequent installments.  The non-occurrence 
of the condition during the period of time in which it would otherwise have to occur, failure to pay the thirteenth 
installment on the date due, is not excused by A's previous acceptance without comment of delayed 
installments.
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 2, B notifies A shortly before completion of construction 
and after A has materially relied that he intends to require presentation of the architect's certificate before 
paying the balance.  The non-occurrence of the condition, presentation of the architect's certificate, is 
nevertheless excused and A has a claim against B for $ 10,000.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 300.  See also former § 299.  See 3A Corbin §§ 755, 766 (1960 & Supp. 
1980); 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 687, 688 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment a.  When an obligor accepts performance despite the non-occurrence of a condition of his obligation, 
but consistently complains of the non-occurrence, the question is raised whether the obligee is justified in 
relying on the obligor's conduct to believe that subsequent performance will be similarly accepted.  See, e.g., 
Accessory Sales, Inc. v. Bedient, 95 Idaho 906, 523 P.2d 38 (1974); Northern Helex Co. v. United States, 197 
Ct. Cl. 118, 455 F.2d 546 (1972). Compare §§ 278-82 and Uniform Commercial Code § 1-207.  Illustration 1 is 
based on Illustration 1 to former § 300 and on Porter v. Harrington, 262 Mass. 203, 159 N.E. 530 (1928), and 
Sliwinski v. Gootstein, 234 Mich. 74, 208 N.W. 47 (1926); see also Sternberg v. Mason, 339 So.2d 373 (La. Ct. 
App. 1976), writ denied, 341 So.2d 901 (La. 1977); Fox v. Grange, 261 Ill. 116, 103 N.E. 576 (1913). As to the 
damages for partial breach due to delay, see City of Houston v. Gribble, 542 S.W.2d 242 (Tex. Civ. App. 1976). 
Illustration 2 is based on McKenna v. Vernon, 258 Pa. 18, 101 A. 919 (1917).
Comment b.  With respect to Illustration 3, see Voight v. Nanz, 61 Wis.2d 710, 213 N.W.2d 749 (1974).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Measure of damages recoverable by loan broker for breach of contract.  67 A.L.R.3d 1069.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 304
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 248
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 248 Effect of Insufficient Reason for Rejection as Excusing the Non-
Occurrence Of a Condition
Where a party rejecting a defective performance or offer of performance gives an insufficient reason for 
rejection, the non-occurrence of a condition of his duty is excused only if he knew or had reason to 
know of that non-occurrence and then only to the extent that the giving of an insufficient reason 
substantially contributes to a failure by the other party to cure.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Failure to give a reason for rejection.  Ordinarily a party whose performance or offer of performance has 
been rejected must determine at his peril the reason for that rejection.  Whether or not he is under a duty to 
give that performance, he is not entitled to a statement of reasons from the other party and the other party is 
not prejudiced if he refuses to give such a statement.  The following section states a limited exception to this for 
the case in which the payment of legal tender is required.  (And cf. Uniform Commercial Code § 2-605, under 
which a buyer who fails to particularize his reasons for rejection is precluded, in some circumstances, from 
relying on an unstated defect.)
b.  Giving insufficient reason for rejection.  Just as the injured party is not, as a general rule, precluded from 
relying on a reason for rejection because he stated no reasons (Comment a), he is not precluded by the mere 
fact that he stated an insufficient reason, even though he knew or had reason to know of a sufficient one.  The 
giving of an insufficient reason may, however, so mislead the other party as to induce his failure to cure the 
defective performance or offer of performance within the time allowed by the agreement.  If it does so, the non-
occurrence of the condition is excused, although the injured party still has a claim for damages.  This is a 
specific application of the general rule that requires good faith and fair dealing in the enforcement of contracts.  
See § 205 and Illustration 10 to that section.  As to the requirement that the giving of the insufficient reason 
contribute materially to the failure to cure, see Comment b to § 245.  Where there isa question of fact as to 
whether performance was defective or not, the failure to state a reason or the stating of an insufficient reason 
may be considered in resolving that question, but this Section does not deal with such problems of proof.
Illustrations:
1.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 6 to § 246, on moving into the house B gives A a list of 
seventeen defects to be cured, but omits three others of which he knew or had reason to know.  Absent a 
showing that A could have cured the three defects in time if B had specified them then, B can rely on all of the 
defects to show that A's breach is material and that A has no claim to $ 10,000 under the contract.
2.  A, a subcontractor, makes a contract with B, a contractor, to install a roof on a school that B is building.  
After A has begun work, B notifies him that the contract is cancelled because of A's failure to provide enough 
skilled workmen as required by the contract.  A sues B.  B attempts to show that, although A may have 
provided enough skilled workmen, A so failed to follow specifications as to constitute a material breach.  B is 
not precluded from showing this, even if he knew it at the time of the cancellation, unless A could have cured 
the defects in time if B had specified them then.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 304.  See also 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 743, 744 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Cawley v. Weiner, 236 N.Y. 357, 140 N.E. 724 (1923). Illustration 2 is 
based on New England Structures, Inc. v. Loranger, 354 Mass. 62, 234 N.E.2d 888 (1968).

§ 248 Effect of Insufficient Reason for Rejection as Excusing the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 321
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 249
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 249 When Payment Other Than by Legal Tender Is Sufficient
Where the payment or offer of payment of money is made a condition of an obligor's duty, payment or 
offer of payment in any manner current in the ordinary course of business satisfies the requirement 
unless the obligee demands payment in legal tender and gives any extension of time reasonably 
necessary to procure it.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  Ordinarily a party whose performance or offer of performance has been rejected is not entitled to 
a reason for its rejection (Comment a to § 248).  However, money claims are so generally paid by means other 
than legal tender that, absent a specific demand, the debtor is not likely to suppose that an insistence on legal 
tender is the reason behind a refusal to accept payment or offer to pay by check or in some other manner 
current in the ordinary course of business.  Moreover, if the debtor is informed that this is the reason for 
rejection, he can ordinarily obtain legal tender and cure his defective performance or offer of performance, at 
least if he is given a reasonable extension of time.  This Section, therefore, states an exceptional rule 
applicable to such cases.  What manner of payment is current in the ordinary course of business depends on 
the nature of the transaction involved.  Whether payment or an offer of payment must be in money is beyond 
the scope of this Section, and is to be determined by the rules of Chapter 9 on interpretation, including those on 
usage (§§ 221, 222) and course of dealing (§ 223).  Cf. Comment b to § 238.  If the contract explicitly requires 
payment in legal tender, this requirement will be given effect as a demand for legal tender given in advance of 
the time for performance, and renders any further demand or extension of time unnecessary.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to sell and B to buy land for $ 10,000, payment of the price and delivery of the deed to be "not 
later than July 30." On the morning of July 30, B offers to give A his certified check for $ 10,000.  A, giving no 
reason, rejects B's check and refuses to offer to deliver a deed.  B's offer to give his certified check satisfies the 
requirement of § 238 that B offer to pay A $ 10,000.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A demands legal tender when he rejects B's certified 
check, but his demand comes after banking hours and he refuses to give B the necessary time to procure it.  
B's offer to give his certified check satisfies the requirement of § 238 that B offer to pay A $ 10,000.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 305 and on Uniform Commercial Code § 2-511(2).  See also 3A Corbin, 
Contracts, § 758 (1960); 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 743, 744 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is adapted from Illustration 8 to former § 323.  Illustration 2 is suggested by Simmons 
v. Swan, 275 U.S. 113 (1927).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Water well-drilling contracts.  90 A.L.R.2d 1346.
Mining grubstake contracts.  70 A.L.R.2d 904.

§ 249 When Payment Other Than by Legal Tender Is Sufficient
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 308
Payment 11
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 250
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 3- Effect of Prospective Non-Performance        
§ 250 When a Statement or an Act Is a Repudiation
A repudiation is
(a)  a statement by the obligor to the obligee indicating that the obligor will commit a breach that would 
of itself give the obligee a claim for damages for total breach under § 243, or
(b)  a voluntary affirmative act which renders the obligor unable or apparently unable to perform 
without such a breach.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Consequences of repudiation.  A statement by a party to the other that he will not or cannot perform without 
a breach, or a voluntary affirmative act that renders him unable or apparently unable to perform without a 
breach may impair the value of the contract to the other party.  It may have several consequences under this 
Restatement.  If it accompanies a breach by non-performance that would otherwise give rise to only a claim for 
damages for partial breach, it may give rise to a claim for damages for total breach instead (§ 243).  Even if it 
occurs before any breach by non-performance, it may give rise to a claim for damages for total breach (§ 
253(1)), discharge the other party's duties (§ 253(2)), or excuse the non-occurrence of a condition (§ 255).
b.  Nature of statement.  In order to constitute a repudiation, a party's language must be sufficiently positive to 
be reasonably interpreted to mean that the party will not or cannot perform.  Mere expression of doubt as to his 
willingness or ability to perform is not enough to constitute a repudiation, although such an expression may give 
an obligee reasonable grounds to believe that the obligor will commit a serious breach and may ultimately result 
in a repudiation under the rule stated in § 251.  However, language that under a fair reading "amounts to a 
statement of intention not to perform except on conditions which go beyond the contract" constitutes a 
repudiation.  Comment 2 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-610.  Language that is accompanied by a breach by 
non-performance may amount to a repudiation even though, standing alone, it would not be sufficiently positive.  
See § 243(2).  The statement must be made to an obligee under the contract, including a third party beneficiary 
or an assignee.
Illustrations:
1.  On April 1, A contracts to sell and B to buy land, delivery of the deed and payment of the price to be on July 
30.  On May 1, A tells B that he will not perform.  A's statement is a repudiation.
2.  A contracts to build a house for B for $ 50,000, progress payments to be made monthly in an amount equal 
to 85% of the price of the work performed during the preceding month, the balance to be paid on the architect's 
certificate of satisfactory completion of the house.  Without justification B fails to make a $ 5,000 progress 
payment and tells A that because of financial difficulties he will be unable to pay him anything for at least 
another month.  If, after a month, it would be too late for B to cure his material failure of performance by making 
the delayed payment, B's statement is a repudiation.  See Illustration 2 to § 237.
3.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A does not tell B that he will not perform but says, "I am 
not sure that I can perform, and I do not intend to do so unless I am legally bound to." A's statement is not a 
repudiation.
4.  The facts being otherwise as in Illustration 1, A tells C, a third person having no right under the contract, and 
not B, that he will not perform.  C informs B of this conversation, although not requested by A to do so.  A's 
statement is not a repudiation.  But see Comments b and c to § 251.

§ 250 When a Statement or an Act Is a Repudiation
c.  Nature of act.  In order to constitute a repudiation, a party's act must be both voluntary and affirmative, and 
must make it actually or apparently impossible for him to perform.  An act that falls short of these requirements 
may, however, give reasonable grounds to believe that the obligor will commit a serious breach for the 
purposes of the rule stated in § 251.  The effect of bankruptcy is governed in large part by federal law.  In 
liquidation cases, for example, Bankruptcy Reform Act § 365(a), (d) and (e) gives the trustee the power to 
assume or reject an executory contract within a statutory period, and the obligee must give him the time to 
exercise this power.  A contract not assumed during this period is deemed to be rejected.  Under Bankruptcy 
Reform Act § 365(g)(1), notwithstanding state law, the trustee's rejection of a contract "constitutes a breach of 
such contract . . . immediately before the date of the filing of the petition . . . ." The rules stated in this 
Restatement apply to the extent that they are consistent with federal bankruptcy law.
Illustrations:
5.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A says nothing to B on May 1, but on that date he 
contracts to sell the land to C.  A's making of the contract with C is a repudiation.
6.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A says nothing to B on May 1, but on that date he 
mortgages the land to C as security for a $ 40,000 loan which is not payable until one year later.  A's 
mortgaging the land is a repudiation.  Compare Illustration 4 to § 251.
7.  A contracts to employ B, and B to work for A, the employment to last a year beginning in ten days.  Three 
days after making the contract B embarks on a ship for a voyage around the world.  B's embarking for the 
voyage is a repudiation.
d.  Gravity of threatened breach.  In order for a statement or an act to be a repudiation, the threatened breach 
must be of sufficient gravity that, if the breach actually occurred, it would of itself give the obligee a claim for 
damages for total breach under § 243(1).  Generally, a party acts at his peril if, insisting on what he mistakenly 
believes to be his rights, he refuses to perform his duty.  His statement is a repudiation if the threatened breach 
would, without more, have given the injured party a claim for damages for total breach.  Modern procedural 
devices, such as the declaratory judgment, may be used to mitigate the harsh results that might otherwise 
result from this rule.  Furthermore, if the threatened breach would not itself have given the injured party a claim 
for damages for total breach, the statement or voluntary act that threatens it is not a repudiation.  But where a 
party wrongfully states that he will not perform at all unless the other party consents to a modification of his 
contract rights, the statement is a repudiation even though the concession that he seeks is a minor one, 
because the breach that he threatens in order to exact it is a complete refusal of performance.
Illustrations:
8.  On April 1, A contracts to sell and B to buy land for $ 50,000, delivery of the deed and payment of the price 
to be on August 1.  On May 1, the parties make an enforceable modification under which delivery of the deed 
and payment of the price are to be on July 30 instead of August 1.  On June 1, A tells B that he will not deliver a 
deed until August 1.  A's statement is not a repudiation unless the one-day delay would, in the absence of a 
repudiation, have given B a claim for damages for total breach.  See Illustration 4 to § 242.
9.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 8, A tells B that he will not deliver a deed at all unless B 
agrees to accept it on August 1.  A's statement is a repudiation.  The result is the same even though A acts in 
the erroneous belief that the modification has no legal effect.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 318.  See also former § 284.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-610, which 
states a rule for repudiation "with respect to a performance . . . the loss of which will substantially impair the 
value of the contract to the other"; 4 Corbin, Contracts §§ 972-94 (1951 & Supp. 1980); 11 Williston, Contracts 
§§ 1322-25 (3d ed. 1968).
Comment b.  This Comment follows the Code in disapproving Dingley v. Oler, 117 U.S. 490 (1886), under 
which a party might avoid repudiating by attaching to his refusal a qualification, even though the qualification 
went beyond the contract.  But see City of Fairfax v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 582 F.2d 1321, 
1326-27 (4th Cir. 1978), cert. denied, 440 U.S. 914 (1979). As to how positive a statement must be to constitute 
a repudiation, compare both the verbal formulas and their application to the facts in City of Fairfax v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., supra ("absolute and unequivocal refusal to perform"), with those in 
Farwell Constr. Co. v. Ticktin, 59 Ill. App.3d 954, 17 Ill. Dec. 475, 376 N.E.2d 621 (1978) ("definite statement to 

§ 250 When a Statement or an Act Is a Repudiation
the promisee that the promisor either will not or cannot perform").  Illustration 2 is based on Petrangelo v. 
Pollard, 356 Mass. 696, 255 N.E.2d 342 (1970). Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 4 to former § 318.  See 
also Norrington v. Wright, 115 U.S. 188 (1885). Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 318.
Comment c.  In Bonebrake v. Cox, 499 F.2d 951 (8th Cir. 1974), an anticipatory repudiation was found under 
Uniform Commercial Code § 2-610 upon the death of the obligor and the apparent inability of his estate to 
perform his duties.  That the repudiation must threaten a material breach, see City of Fairfax v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 582 F.2d 1321, 1331 (4th Cir. 1978), cert. denied, 440 U.S. 914 (1979). Illustration 5 
is based on Illustration 9 to former § 318.  See also former § 284 and James v. Burchell, 82 N.Y. 108 (1880). 
Illustration 6 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 284 and on Fort Payne Coal & Iron Co. v. Webster, 163 Mass. 
134, 39 N.E. 786 (1895). On the problems raised by Illustrations 5 and 6, see 6 Corbin, Contracts § 1259 (1962 
& Supp. 1980); 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 878, 879 (3d ed. 1962).  Illustration 7 is based on Illustration 6 to 
former § 318.  On bankruptcy, see Countryman, Executory Contracts in Bankruptcy, 57 Minn. L. Rev. 439 
(1973), 58 Minn. L. Rev. 479 (1974); former § 324.  On the changes made by the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 
1978, Pub. L. 95-598 (1978), see Collier, Bankruptcy Appendix 1 (15th ed. 1979); Bankruptcy Service Law. Ed. 
§ 1:42 (1979).
Comment d.  Illustration 8 is suggested by Bannister v. Victoria Coal & Coke Co., 63 W.Va. 502, 61 S.E. 338 
(1908); see also Taylor v. Johnston, 15 Cal.3d 130, 123 Cal. Rptr. 641, 539 P.2d 425 (1975); cf.  Walker v. 
Shasta Minerals and Chem. Co., 352 F.2d 634 (10th Cir. 1965). Illustration 9 is suggested by Illustration 1 to 
former § 318; see also National Farmers Organization v. Bartlett and Co., 560 F.2d 1350 (8th Cir. 1977).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Revocation, prior to execution of formal written contract, of vote or decision of public body awarding contract to 
bidder.  3 A.L.R.3d 864.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 313(2)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 251
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 3- Effect of Prospective Non-Performance        
§ 251 When a Failure to Give Assurance May Be Treated as a Repudiation
(1)  Where reasonable grounds arise to believe that the obligor will commit a breach by non-
performance that would of itself give the obligee a claim for damages for total breach under § 243, the 
obligee may demand adequate assurance of due performance and may, if reasonable, suspend any 
performance for which he has not already received the agreed exchange until he receives such 
assurance.
(2)  The obligee may treat as a repudiation the obligor's failure to provide within a reasonable time such 
assurance of due performance as is adequate in the circumstances of the particular case.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  Ordinarily an obligee has no right to demand reassurance by the obligor that the latter will 
perform when his performance is due.  However, a contract "imposes an obligation on each party that the 
other's expectation of receiving due performance will not be impaired." Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609(1).  
When, therefore, an obligee reasonably believes that the obligor will commit a breach by non-performance that 
would of itself give him a claim for damages for total breach (§ 243), he may, under the rule stated in this 
Section, be entitled to demand assurance of performance.  The rule is a generalization, applicable without 
regard to the subject matter of the contract, from that of Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.  The latter applies 
only to contracts for the sale of goods and gives a party a right to adequate assurance of performance where 
"reasonable grounds for insecurity arise with respect to the performance" of the other party.  Both rules rest on 
the principle that the parties to a contract look to actual performance "and that a continuing sense of reliance 
and security that the promised performance will be forthcoming when due, is an important feature of the 
bargain." Comment 1 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.  This principle is closely related to the duty of good 
faith and fair dealing in the performance of the contract (§ 205).  See also Comment b to § 141.  The rule stated 
in this Section may be modified by agreement of the parties, and where they have done so their rights depend 
on the application of the rules on interpretation stated in Chapter 9, The Scope of Contractual Obligations.
b.  Relation to other rules.  An obligee who believes, for whatever reason, that the obligor will not or cannot 
perform without a breach, is always free to act on that belief.  If he is not himself under a duty to perform before 
the obligor, he may simply await the obligor's performance and, if his belief is confirmed, he will have a claim for 
damages for breach by non-performance.  If he can prove that his belief would have been confirmed, he is at 
least shielded from liability even if he has failed to give a performance that is due before that of the obligor or 
has, by making alternative arrangements, done an act that amounts to a repudiation.  For example, under § 
254, the obligee's duty to pay damages for total breach by repudiation is discharged if the obligor himself would 
not or could not have performed when his performance was due.  If, however, the obligee's belief is incorrect, 
his own failure to perform or his making of alternate arrangements may subject him to a claim for damages for 
total breach.  This Section affords him an opportunity, in appropriate cases, to demand assurance of due 
performance and thereby avoid the uncertainties that would otherwise inhere in acting on his belief.  If it is then 
reasonable for the obligee to suspend his own performance while he awaits assurance by the obligor, he may 
do so under Subsection (1).  Under the special rule stated in § 252, the obligee may always suspend his own 
performance where his belief that the obligor will commit a breach is based on the obligor's insolvency.  If the 
obligee does not, within a reasonable time, obtain adequate assurance of due performance, he may under 
Subsection (2) treat the obligor's failure to provide such an assurance as a repudiation.  His right to do so is, 
however, subject to the rule stated in § 256 under which the manifestation of doubt or the apparent inability, on 

§ 251 When a Failure to Give Assurance May Be Treated as a Repudiation
which the obligee bases his belief that the obligor will commit a breach, may be nullified.  In contrast to the 
situation where the obligor has actually repudiated under § 250, the obligee may choose not to treat the failure 
to provide assurances as a repudiation and may continue to perform without affecting his right to recover 
damages for subsequent loss that he could have avoided by so treating it.  See Comment a to § 257 and § 350.  
If he chooses to treat the obligor's failure as a repudiation, it may have any of the three effects that any other 
repudiation may have: it may give him a claim for damages for total breach (§ 253(1)), it may discharge his own 
remaining duties of performance (§ 253(2)), and it may excuse the non-occurrence of a condition of the other 
party's duty (§ 255).  The effect on the obligee's remaining duties of performance of prospective non-
performance by the obligor that would not be a breach because it would be justified on the ground of 
impracticability of performance is dealt with in § 268.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to let B use his concert hall on the evening of May 7 for a performance by B's string quartet, in 
return for B's promise to perform and to pay A a percentage of the receipts.  The contract provides that B is not 
discharged even if he is unable to transport his quartet to A's hall.  On May 6, because of an unexpected airline 
strike, A reasonably believes that B's quartet will be unable to come the 3,000 miles necessary to perform in his 
hall as scheduled.  Without demanding adequate assurance of due performance under the rule stated in this 
Section, A then contracts with C to let C hold a meeting in the hall on the evening of May 7.  A's contract with C 
is a repudiation of his contract with B (§ 250), which gives rise to a claim by B against A for damages for total 
breach (§ 253).  If, however, B is in fact unable to bring his quartet to A's hall on May 7, B's claim against A is 
discharged (§ 254).
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, B succeeds in chartering a plane and flies the 3,000 
miles with his quartet in his private plane.  He arrives in time to perform, but is unable to do so because C is 
using the hall.  B has a claim against A for damages for total breach (§ 243).
c.  Reasonable grounds for belief.  Whether "reasonable grounds" have arisen for an obligee's belief that there 
will be a breach must be determined in the light of all the circumstances of the particular case.  The grounds for 
his belief must have arisen after the time when the contract was made and cannot be based on facts known to 
him at that time.  Nor, since the grounds must be reasonable, can they be based on events that occurred after 
that time but as to which he took the risk when he made the contract.  But minor breaches may give reasonable 
grounds for a belief that there will be more serious breaches, and the mere failure of the obligee to press a 
claim for damages for those minor breaches will not preclude him from basing a demand for assurances on 
them.  Compare § 241(d), Comment e to that section, and Comment b to § 242.  Even circumstances that do 
not relate to the particular contract, such as defaults under other contracts, may give reasonable grounds for 
such a belief.  See Comment a to § 252.  Conduct by a party that indicates his doubt as to his willingness or 
ability to perform but that is not sufficiently positive to amount to a repudiation (see Comment b to § 250), may 
give reasonable grounds for such a belief.  And events that indicate a party's apparent inability, but do not 
amount to a repudiation because they are not voluntary acts, may also give reasonable grounds for such a 
belief.  One important application of the rule stated in this Section occurs when a party who has contracted to 
buy specific property, land or goods, discovers that the seller has neither present ownership of the property nor 
a right to become or at least a reasonable expectation of becoming the owner in time to perform.  Another 
important application of the rule occurs when an obligor who is allowed a period of time within which to perform 
makes an offer of defective performance.  It may still be possible for him, if the offer is refused, to make an offer 
of conforming performance within the period allowed.  Nevertheless, the offer of defective performance may 
give the obligee reasonable grounds to believe that the obligor will commit a breach under this Section.  A third 
important application of the rule occurs when a party becomes insolvent.  The effect of insolvency will vary 
according to the nature of the obligor's duty.  If, for example, it is merely to perform personal services, the fact 
of insolvency alone may not give reasonable grounds to believe that the obligor will commit a breach, but if it is 
to pay for goods on credit it will.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-702(1).  A special rule on insolvency is 
stated in § 252.  In any case, in order for this Section to apply, the breach that the obligee believes the obligor 
will commit must be a breach by non-performance that would so substantially impair the value of the contract to 
the obligee that it would of itself, unaccompanied by a repudiation, give him a claim for damages for total 
breach under § 243.
Illustrations:

§ 251 When a Failure to Give Assurance May Be Treated as a Repudiation
3.  On May 1, A contracts to sell and B to buy a parcel of land for $ 50,000, delivery of the deed and payment of 
the price to be on July 30.  Unknown to both A and B, C has a dower interest in the land.  On May 15, B 
discovers this and demands that A give him adequate assurance of due performance.  A fails to do so, and B 
commences an action against A on July 1.  B had reasonable grounds to believe that A would commit a breach 
by non-performance that would of itself have given B a claim for damages for total breach.  If the court 
concludes that a reasonable time for A to give assurances had passed on July 1, B properly treated A's failure 
to give assurances as a repudiation.  B then has a claim for damages against A for total breach.
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3, C's interest in the land is that of mortgagee under a 
mortgage that A can discharge at any time by payment of the mortgage debt.  B had no reasonable grounds to 
believe that A would commit a breach, B could not treat A's failure to give assurances as a repudiation, and B 
has no claim for damages against A.  Compare Illustration 6 to § 250.
5.  A contracts to sell and B to buy A's house, delivery of the deed and payment of the price to be made during 
September.  On September 1, A offers to deliver a deed to B which is defective in that a fence projects beyond 
the front line of the house and the swimming pool lacks a certificate of occupancy.  Both defects can be cured 
by A within the month, but A fails to reply to a demand by B that A assure B that A will cure them within that 
time.  On September 20, B notifies A that he cancels the contract.  On September 30, A, having cured the 
defects, offers to deliver a conforming deed to B.  A court may conclude that, as a result of A's apparent inability 
to perform, B had reasonable grounds to believe that A would commit a breach by non-performance that would 
of itself have given B a claim for damages for total breach, that A failed upon demand by B to give adequate 
assurance of due performance within a reasonable time, and therefore that B properly treated A's failure as a 
repudiation.  B then has a claim against A for damages for total breach.
d.  Nature of demand.  A party who demands assurances must do so in accordance with his duty of good faith 
and fair dealing in the enforcement of the contract (§ 205).  Whether a particular demand for assurance 
conforms to that duty will depend on the circumstances.  The demand need not be in writing.  Although a 
written demand is usually preferable to an oral one, if time is of particular importance the additional time 
required for a written demand might necessitate an oral one.  Compare Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609(1), 
which controls in the case of a sale of goods and which requires a demand "in writing." Harrassment by means 
of frequent unjustified demands may amount to a violation of the duty of good faith and fair dealing.
Illustration:
6.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, before contracting with C, A telephones B on May 6 and 
asks B to assure him that he will be there on May 7.  B says only "We will do our best to get there." B succeeds 
in chartering a plane and flies the 3,000 miles with his quartet.  He arrives in time to perform, but is unable to do 
so because C is using the hall.  In the absence of countervailing circumstances, a court should conclude that, 
as a result of B's apparent inability to perform, A had reasonable grounds to believe that B would commit a 
breach by non-performance that would of itself have given A a claim for damages for total breach, that because 
of the shortness of time a demand by telephone conformed to the duty of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205), 
that B failed upon such a demand to give adequate assurance of due performance, and therefore that A 
properly treated B's failure as a repudiation.  A then has a claim against B for damages for total breach.
e.  Nature and time of assurance.  Whether an assurance of due performance is "adequate" depends on what it 
is reasonable to require in a particular case taking account of the circumstances of that case.  The relationship 
between the parties, any prior dealings that they have had, the reputation of the party whose performance has 
been called into question, the nature of the grounds for insecurity, and the time within which the assurance 
must be furnished are all relevant factors.  (If the obligor's insolvency constitutes the grounds for the obligee's 
insecurity, the special rule stated in § 252 empowers him to suspend performance until he receives assurance 
in the form of actual performance, an offer of performance, or reasonable security.) What is a "reasonable time" 
within which to give assurance under Subsection (2) will also depend on the particular circumstances.  Like the 
demand, the assurance is subject to the general requirement of good faith and fair dealing in the enforcement 
of the contract (§ 205; see Comment d).
Illustrations:
7.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, before contracting with C, A telephones B on May 6 and 
asks B to assure him that he will be there on May 7.  B explains over the telephone that he has been able to 
charter a plane and expects to come as planned.  B then flies the 3,000 miles with his quartet.  He arrives in 

§ 251 When a Failure to Give Assurance May Be Treated as a Repudiation
time to perform, but is unable to do so because C is using the hall.  The assurance given by B was adequate in 
view of what it was reasonable to require, and therefore A could not treat B's failure to do more as a 
repudiation.  B then has a claim against A for damages for total breach.
8.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, before contracting with C, A telephones B on May 6 and 
asks B to assure him that he will be there on May 7.  B replies that he hopes to be able to charter a plane and 
that he will telephone A to let him know.  A tells B that he must know by noon on May 7 in order to make 
alternative arrangements with C.  B succeeds in chartering a plane and flies the 3,000 miles with his quartet.  
After he has arrived on the afternoon of May 7, he telephones A to assure him that he will perform.  A court may 
conclude that, as a result of B's apparent inability to perform, A had reasonable grounds to believe that B would 
commit a breach by non-performance that would of itself have given A a claim for damages for total breach, 
that the assurances given by B were not within a reasonable time, and therefore that B properly treated B's 
delay in giving them as a repudiation.  A then has a claim against B for damages for total breach.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.  It replaces former §§ 280, 283 and 323 and 
rejects, as founded on insufficient authority and as inferior to the Code rule in practice, the notion that, if an 
obligor manifests doubt or is apparently unable to perform, the obligee can, by mere change of position, deprive 
that obligor of his rights under the contract and subject him to a claim for its breach even if that obligor is 
prepared, in fact, to perform.  See Wardrop, Prospective Inability in the Law of Contracts, 20 Minn. L. Rev. 380, 
392-400 (1936); Patterson, Constructive Conditions in Contracts, 42 Colum. L. Rev. 903, 923 (1942); 6 Corbin, 
Contracts §§ 1259, 1260 (1962 & Supp. 1980); 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 875-79 (3d ed. 1962).  See also 
Hillman, Keeping the Deal Together After Material Breach -- Common Law Mitigation Rules, the UCC, and the 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts, 47 U. Colo. L. Rev. 553 (1976); Rosett, Contract Performance: Promises, 
Conditions and the Obligation to Communicate, 22 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 1083 (1975).
In Ranger Constr. Co. v. Dixie Floor Co., 433 F. Supp. 442 (D.S.C. 1977), the court reviewed the authorities on 
the applicability of Article 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code to contracts involving both goods and services and 
found Article 2, and thus § 2-609, inapplicable to the transaction before the court.  Nonetheless the court found 
it a question of fact for the jury whether one party's refusal to pay under an unrelated contract between the 
parties was a manifestation that it could not or would not substantially perform the present contract sufficient to 
constitute an anticipatory repudiation of the latter.  See also Schenectady Steel Co. v. Bruno Trimpoli Gen. 
Constr. Co., 34 N.Y.2d 939, 359 N.Y.S.2d 560, 316 N.E.2d 875 (1974), in which the court declined to consider 
whether § 2-609 applied to a contract to furnish and erect structural steel.
Comment a.  See Comment 1 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.
Comment b.  On the advantages of the demand for assurances, and the dangers of not using it, see National 
Farmers Organization v. Bartlett and Co., 560 F.2d 1350, 1355 (8th Cir. 1977) (dictum).  The facts in 
Illustrations 1 and 2 are suggested by Hathaway v. Sabin, 63 Vt. 527, 22 A. 633 (1891). As to Illustration 1, see 
Illustrations 1 and 2 to former § 277.
Comment c.  See L.E. Spitzer Co. v. Barron, 581 P.2d 213 (Alaska 1978), applying the Tentative Draft of this 
Section and citing the Tentative Draft of this Comment; see also Comment 3 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
609.  For discussions of inadequate grounds under § 2-609, see National Ropes, Inc. v. National Diving Serv., 
513 F.2d 53 (5th Cir. 1975); Westinghouse Elec. Corp. v. Garrett Corp., 437 F. Supp. 1301, 1338-39 (D. Md. 
1977). For a case finding adequate grounds for insecurity, relying on the common law and former § 280, see 
Ranger Constr. Co. v. Dixie Floor Co., 433 F. Supp. 442 (D.S.C. 1977). Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to 
former § 283.  Illustration 4 is supported by Clark v. Ingle, 58 N.M. 136, 266 P.2d 672 (1954). The facts in 
Illustration 5 are suggested by those in Cohen v. Kranz, 12 N.Y.2d 242, 238 N.Y.S.2d 928, 189 N.E.2d 473 
(1963).
Comment d.  In L.E. Spitzer Co. v. Barron, 581 P.2d 213 (Alaska 1978), a case not involving the sale of goods, 
a demand by telephone was held adequate, while in Kunian v. Development Corp. of America, 165 Conn. 300, 
334 A.2d 427 (1973), a sale of goods case, an oral demand at a meeting was held the equivalent of the written 
demand referred to in Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.
Comment e.  See Comment 4 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.

§ 251 When a Failure to Give Assurance May Be Treated as a Repudiation
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 313(2)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 252
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 3- Effect of Prospective Non-Performance        
§ 252 Effect of Insolvency
(1)  Where the obligor's insolvency gives the obligee reasonable grounds to believe that the obligor will 
commit a breach under the rule stated in § 251, the obligee may suspend any performance for which he 
has not already received the agreed exchange until he receives assurance in the form of performance 
itself, an offer of performance, or adequate security.
(2)  A person is insolvent who either has ceased to pay his debts in the ordinary course of business or 
cannot pay his debts as they become due or is insolvent within the meaning of the federal bankruptcy 
law.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Insolvency.  An obligor's insolvency is not a repudiation (Comment c to § 250) and may not even give the 
obligee reasonable grounds to believe that the obligor will commit a breach (Comment c to § 251).  It does, 
however, have this latter effect when the obligee is to pay for goods on credit, and Uniform Commercial Code § 
2-702(1) states a specific statutory rule for that situation.  This Section states a rule that applies more broadly to 
similar situations in which insolvency gives reasonable grounds to believe that the obligor will commit a breach.  
It supplements the rule stated in § 251 by giving the obligee the unqualified power to suspend his own 
performance until he receives from the obligor performance, an offer of performance (see Comment b to § 238), 
or reasonable security, which may, in an appropriate case, be by a guarantee of performance.  He need not 
show, as he must under § 251(1), that it is "reasonable" to suspend, and he need not perform unless he 
receives the assurance required by this Section.  Mere evidence of an ability to perform in spite of insolvency or 
a favorable report from a credit rating agency will not suffice.  However, the rule stated in this Section only 
empowers the obligee to suspend his own performance.  If he would treat the failure to give assurance as a 
repudiation, he must proceed under § 251.  Furthermore, in order for the obligee to have the benefit of this 
Section, the obligor must actually be insolvent.  The obligee who merely has doubts as to the obligor's solvency 
should also proceed under § 251.  See Comment b to § 251.  A party is insolvent for the purpose of this Section 
only if one of the three tests of insolvency stated in Subsection (2) is satisfied.  This statement follows the 
definition of insolvency under Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(23).  Mere doubts about the solvency of the 
other party or uncertainty as to his ability to perform may amount, under the rule stated in § 251, to reasonable 
grounds to believe that he will commit a serious breach, but they do not amount to insolvency.  The rule stated 
in this Section may be modified by agreement of the parties.
Illustrations:
1.  On April 1, A, a subcontractor, contracts with B, a contractor, to furnish labor and materials for the floors of 
an apartment building that B is building.  A is to begin work on May 1 and be paid 85% of the price in monthly 
payments as the work progresses and the balance on his completion of the work.  On April 10, A discovers that 
B is insolvent and demands that B pay for the work in advance or give reasonable security.  When B refuses to 
do so, A refuses to begin work on May 1.  B has no claim against A.
2.  On February 1, A contracts to work for B as a salesman for a year beginning March 1, for a monthly salary 
and $ 5,000 to be paid in advance on February 15.  On February 10, A becomes insolvent.  B refuses to pay 
the $ 5,000 on February 15 unless A gives reasonable security.  Because A's insolvency did not give 
reasonable grounds to believe that A would commit a breach, A has a claim against B for damages.
REPORTER'S NOTES

§ 252 Effect of Insolvency
Subsection (1) is based on former § 287 and is generally in accord with Uniform Commercial Code § 2-702(1).  
See also former § 324.  Subsection (2) is taken from Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(23).  See also 6 
Corbin, Contracts § 1261 (1962); 6 Williston, Contracts § 880 (3d ed. 1962).
Comment a.  The facts in Illustration 1 are suggested by Koppelon v. Ritter Flooring Corp., 97 N.J.L. 200, 116 
A. 491 (1922). See also Rock-Ola Mfg. Corp. v. Leopold, 98 F.2d 196 (5th Cir. 1938); Leopold v. Rock-Ola Mfg. 
Corp., 109 F.2d 611 (5th Cir. 1940); Martin v. Maldonado, 572 P.2d 763, 770 n.20 (Alaska 1977). Illustration 2 
is based on Illustration 3 to former § 287.  See also First State Bank v. Reorganized School Dist. R-3, 495 
S.W.2d 471 (Mo. Ct. App. 1973).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 310
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 253
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 3- Effect of Prospective Non-Performance        
§ 253 Effect of a Repudiation as a Breach and on Other Party's Duties
(1)  Where an obligor repudiates a duty before he has committed a breach by non-performance and 
before he has received all of the agreed exchange for it, his repudiation alone gives rise to a claim for 
damages for total breach.
(2)  Where performances are to be exchanged under an exchange of promises, one party's repudiation 
of a duty to render performance discharges the other party's remaining duties to render performance.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Breach.  An obligee under a contract is ordinarily entitled to the protection of his expectation that the obligor 
will perform.  For this reason, a repudiation by the obligor under § 250 or § 251 generally gives rise to a claim 
for damages for total breach even though it is not accompanied or preceded by a breach by non-performance.  
Such a repudiation is sometimes elliptically called an "anticipatory breach," meaning a breach by anticipatory 
repudiation, because it occurs before there is any breach by non-performance.  If there is a breach by non-
performance, in addition to the repudiation under § 250 or § 251 the breach is not one by repudiation alone and 
the rules stated in § 243 rather than those stated in Subsection (1) apply.  If, under § 251, it was a breach by 
non-performance that gave the obligee grounds to believe that the obligor would commit a more serious 
breach, the obligor's failure to give assurances cannot give rise to a breach by repudiation alone.  The measure 
of damages in the case of a claim under this Section is governed by the rules stated in Topic 2 of Chapter 16.
Illustrations:
1.  On April 1, A and B make a contract under which B is to work for A for three months beginning on June 1.  
On May 1, A repudiates by telling B he will not employ him.  On May 15, B commences an action against A.  B's 
duty to work for A is discharged and he has a claim against A for damages for total breach.
2.  On July 1, A contracts to sell and B to buy a quantity of barrel staves, delivery and payment to be on 
December 1.  On August 1, A repudiates by writing B that he will be unable to deliver staves at the contract 
price.  On September 1, B commences an action against A.  B's duty to pay for the staves is discharged and he 
has a claim against A for damages for total breach.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-610.
b.  Discharge.  Under Subsection (1) a breach by repudiation alone can only give rise to a claim for total 
breach, although a breach by non-performance, even if coupled with a repudiation, can generally give rise to 
either a claim for partial breach or to one for total breach (§§ 236, 237).  Of course, in appropriate 
circumstances, the injured party can, after a breach by repudiation alone, pursue alternative relief by seeking, 
for example, a decree of specific performance or an injunction.  See Topic 3 of Chapter 16.  Nevertheless, the 
rule stated in Subsection (1) is one of those rules that are peculiar to breach by repudiation alone and differ 
from those applicable to a breach by non-performance.  (Another such rule is that a breach by repudiation 
alone can be totally nullified by the party in breach (§ 257), while a breach by non-performance, whether 
coupled with a repudiation or not, cannot be.) Subsection (2) states a corollary of this rule that a breach by 
repudiation always gives rise to a claim for damages for total breach: where performances are to be exchanged 
under an exchange of promises, one party's repudiation discharges any remaining duties of performance of the 
other party with respect to the expected exchange.
c.  Scope.  If an obligor repudiates under § 250 or § 251 before he has received all of the agreed exchange for 
his promise, the repudiation alone gives rise to a claim for damages for total breach under Subsection (1).  The 
most important example of such a case occurs when performances are to be exchanged under an exchange of 

§ 253 Effect of a Repudiation as a Breach and on Other Party’s Duties
promises and one party repudiates a duty with respect to the expected exchange before the other party has 
fully performed that exchange.  See Illustrations 1 and 2.  (A repudiation of a duty whose performance is not 
part of the expected exchange, and for which there is therefore no agreed exchange, does not come within the 
rule stated in Subsection (1).  See, e.g., Illustration 3 to § 232.) Another example occurs when one party 
repudiates a duty under an option contract before the other party has exercised the option by giving the agreed 
exchange.  See Illustration 3.  However, it is one of the established limits on the doctrine of "anticipatory 
breach" that an obligor's repudiation alone, whether under § 250 or § 251, gives rise to no claim for damages at 
all if he has already received all of the agreed exchange for it.  The rule stated in Subsection (1) does not, 
therefore, allow a claim for damages for total breach in such a case.
Illustrations:
3.  On February 1, A and B make an option contract under which, in consideration for B's payment of $ 100, A 
promises to convey to B a parcel of land on May 1 for $ 50,000, if B tenders that sum by that date.  On March 1, 
A repudiates by selling the parcel to C.  On April 1, B commences an action against A.  Since A has not 
received the $ 50,000, the agreed exchange for his duty to sell the parcel to B, B has a claim against A for 
damages for total breach.
4.  On February 1, A and B make a contract under which, as consideration for B's immediate payment of $ 
50,000, A promises to convey to B a parcel of land on May 1.  On March 1, A repudiates by selling the parcel to 
C.  On April 1, B commences an action against A.  Since A has received the $ 50,000, the agreed exchange for 
his duty to sell the parcel to B, B has no claim against A for damages for breach of contract until performance is 
due on May 1.
5.  On February 1, A and B make a contract under which, as consideration for A's conveying a parcel of land to 
B, B promises to make annual payments of $ 10,000 for five years.  B makes the payments for the first two 
years and on March 1 of the third year repudiates by telling A that he will not make any further payments.  A 
commences an action against B.  Since B has received the land, the agreed exchange for his duty to pay the 
remaining installments, A has no claim against B for damages for breach of contract until performance is due 
on the following February 1.
6.  On January 15, A and B make a contract under which A promises to convey to B a parcel of land on 
February 1, and B promises to pay A $ 10,000 at that time and the balance of $ 40,000 in four annual 
installments.  A conveys the parcel to B and B pays A $ 10,000.  On March 1, B repudiates by telling A that he 
will not make any further payments.  A commences an action against B.  Since B has received the land, the 
agreed exchange for his duty to make the remaining payments, A has no claim against B for damages for 
breach of contract, until performance is due on the following February 1.
d.  Avoiding harsh results of limitation.  The limitation described in Comment c sometimes avoids difficult 
problems of forecasting damages and is supported by the clear weight of authority.  It has, however, been 
subjected to considerable criticism, and instances of its actual application are infrequent.  Compare, for 
example, Illustration 3 with Illustration 4.  A court can often avoid harsh results by making available other types 
of relief, such as a declaratory judgment or restitution.  See §§ 345, 373 and Comment a to § 373.  Insurance 
contracts are subject to special considerations which may make it appropriate to grant equitable relief in, for 
example, a suit for reinstatement.  The degree to which the limitationmight yield on a showing of manifest 
injustice, as where the refusal to pay is not in good faith, is unclear.  Compare Comment d to § 243.  
Furthermore, if the repudiation is coupled with a breach by non-performance that would otherwise give rise to a 
claim for damages for only partial breach, it may give rise instead to a claim for damages for total breach, but 
whether it does so is governed by § 243 and not by this Section.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is based on former § 318, as amended in 1948.  Restatement of the Law, 1948 Supplement 251 
(1949).  See also Uniform Commercial Code § 2-610; 4 Corbin, Contracts §§ 962-70 (1951 & Supp. 1980); 11 
Williston, Contracts §§ 1326-30 (3d ed. 1968).  Subsection (2) is based on former § 280.  See also former §§ 
397 and 398.  Former § 321, on the time when a repudiation by mail or telegram becomes a breach, is omitted 
and this Restatement takes no position on that point.  Former § 322, on the time when the period of the statute 
of limitations begins to run in the case of "anticipatory breach," is also omitted because this Restatement does 
not attempt to state rules on when that period begins to run in other situations.

§ 253 Effect of a Repudiation as a Breach and on Other Party’s Duties
Comment a.  That repudiation following partial breach by non-performance is to be treated as a total breach 
and not as an "anticipatory breach," see Fox v. Dehn, 42 Cal. App.3d 165, 116 Cal. Rptr. 786 (1974). 
Illustration 1 is based on Hochster v. De la Tour, 2 E. & B. 678, 118 Eng. Rep. 922 (1853). The facts in 
Illustration 2 are suggested by Reliance Cooperage Corp. v. Treat, 195 F.2d 977 (8th Cir. 1952).
Comment c.  On the rationale for the limit discussed here, compare the opinion of Denison, J., dissenting in 
Federal Life Ins. Co. v. Rascoe, 12 F.2d 693 (6th Cir.), cert. denied, 273 U.S. 722 (1926), with that of L. Hand, 
J., in Equitable Trust Co. v. Western Pac. Ry., 244 F. 485 (S.D.N.Y. 1917), aff'd, 250 F. 327 (2d Cir.), cert. 
denied, 246 U.S. 672 (1918). The Rascoe case was expressly disapproved in New York Life Ins. Co. v. Viglas, 
297 U.S. 672 (1936). See also the Comment and Reason for Changes in Restatement of the Law, 1948 
Supplement 252-53 (1949).  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 9 to former § 318; cf.  Long Island R.R. Co. v. 
Northville Indus., 41 N.Y.2d 455, 393 N.Y.S.2d 925, 362 N.E.2d 558 (1977), citing this Comment in Tentative 
Draft.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 10 to former § 318; cf.  Diamond v. University of Southern California, 
11 Cal. App.3d 49, 89 Cal. Rptr. 302 (1970). Illustration 5 is suggested by Phelps v. Herro, 215 Md. 223, 137 
A.2d 159 (1957). Illustration 6 is new; compare Phelps v. Herro, supra.
Comment d.  Cases dealing with remedies for wrongful cancellation of life, health, and accident insurance are 
collected in Annot., 34 A.L.R.3d 245 (1970).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 313(1)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 254
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 3- Effect of Prospective Non-Performance        
§ 254 Effect of Subsequent Events on Duty to Pay Damages
(1)  A party's duty to pay damages for total breach by repudiation is discharged if it appears after the 
breach that there would have been a total failure by the injured party to perform his return promise.
(2)  A party's duty to pay damages for total breach by repudiation is discharged if it appears after the 
breach that the duty that he repudiated would have been discharged by impracticability or frustration 
before any breach by non-performance.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Non-performance by injured party after repudiation.  If the parties are to exchange performances under an 
exchange of promises, each party's duties to render performance are generally regarded as conditional on the 
other party's performance, or at least on his readiness to perform (§§ 237, 238, 251, 253).  This principle 
applies even though one party is already in breach by repudiation.  His duty to pay damages is discharged if it 
subsequently appears that there would have been a total failure of performance by the injured party.  A failure 
is total in this context if it would have been sufficient to have discharged any remaining duties of the party in 
breach to render his performance.  See § 242.  The result follows even if it appears that the failure would have 
been justified and not a breach.  Cf. § 244.
Illustration:
1.  On April 1, A and B make a personal service contract under which A promises to employ B for six months 
beginning July 1 and B promises to work for A during that period.  On May 1, A repudiates the contract.  On 
June 1, B falls ill and is unable to perform during the entire period.  A's duty to pay B damages for total breach 
by repudiation is discharged.
b.  Impracticability or frustration after repudiation.  Under the rule stated in § 253(1), a party's breach by 
anticipatory repudiation immediately gives rise to a claim for damages for total breach.  If it subsequently 
appears that the duty that he repudiated would have been discharged by supervening impracticability (§ 261) or 
frustration (§ 265) before any breach by non-performance, his duty to pay damages is discharged.  
Impracticability or frustration that would have occurred after breach by non-performance may affect the 
measure of damages but does not discharge the duty to pay damages; cf. §§ 344, 347, 352.
Illustration:
2.  On April 1, A and B make a personal service contract under which A promises to employ B for 6 months 
beginning July 1 and B promises to work for A during that period.  On May 1, B repudiates the contract.  On 
June 1, B falls ill and is unable to perform during the entire period.  B's duty to pay damages to A for his 
anticipatory repudiation is discharged.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is based on former §§ 277 and 399(2).  Subsection (2) is based on former § 457.  See 6 Corbin, 
Contracts § 1256 (1962); 6 Williston, Contracts § 884 (3d ed. 1962).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 277; see also New York Trust Co. v. Island Oil & 
Transp. Corp., 34 F.2d 649 (2d Cir. 1929), cert. denied, 281 U.S. 724 (1930); Hodes v. Hoffman Int'l Corp., 280 
F. Supp. 252 (S.D.N.Y. 1968). In Gherman v. Colburn, 72 Cal. App.3d 544, 585-86, 140 Cal. Rptr. 330, 357 
(1977), the court said that "[a] defendant may not justify a repudiation by proof of subsequent failure of 
consideration. . . ."

§ 254 Effect of Subsequent Events on Duty to Pay Damages
Comment b.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 12 to former § 459; see also Alabama Football, Inc. v. 
Greenwood, 452 F. Supp. 1191 (W.D. Pa. 1978).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 313(1)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 255
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 3- Effect of Prospective Non-Performance        
§ 255 Effect of a Repudiation as Excusing the Non-Occurrence Of a 
Condition
Where a party's repudiation contributes materially to the non-occurrence of a condition of one of his 
duties, the non-occurrence is excused.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  This Section accords the same effect to a repudiation that § 245 accords to a breach by non-
performance.  No one should be required to do a useless act, and if, because of a party's repudiation, it 
appears that the occurrence of a condition of a duty would not be followed by performance of the duty, the non-
occurrence of the condition is generally excused.  In judging whether occurrence of the condition would be 
followed by performance of the duty the obligee may take the obligor at his word.  Nevertheless, the repudiation 
must contribute materially to the non-occurrence of the condition, and if the condition would not have occurred 
in any event, its non-occurrence is not excused.  In such a case both parties are discharged.
Illustrations:
1.  A, an insurance company, issues a policy insuring B against theft, and providing that no payment will be 
made unless written notice is given within 60 days after loss.  A loss occurs, and B immediately notifies A by 
telephone.  A repudiates by informing B without adequate reason that it will not pay the loss.  Because of this, B 
does not give written notice to A.  B has a claim against A for the amount of the loss.
2.  On February 1, A contracts to sell and B to buy a house for $ 50,000, B's duty being "conditional on approval 
by X Bank of B's pending mortgage application." On March 1, B repudiates by telling A that he will not buy the 
house.  On March 10, the X Bank, which is unaware of B's repudiation, disapproves B's application on financial 
grounds.  A has no claim against B.  The non-occurrence of the condition, approval by X Bank, is not excused 
because B's repudiation did not contribute materially to its non-occurrence.
b.  Exceptions.  Under §§ 237 and 238, it may be required as a condition of one party's duty that the other party 
perform or offer to perform his duty.  A repudiation by the first party will, in those circumstances, discharge that 
duty of the other party (§ 253(2)), eliminating the requirement that the other party perform or offer to perform it.  
The discharge has the additional effect of excusing the non-occurrence of the condition.  But non-occurrence of 
the condition is excused only if the duty is discharged.  See Comment c to § 245 and Illustrations 1 and 2 to § 
253.
Illustration:
3.  A, a contractor, makes a contract with B, a subcontractor, under which B is to be paid $ 300,000 for 
furnishing heating and air conditioning units for a housing project to be built by A, "on condition that Contractor 
is furnished with a performance bond within two weeks." No provision is made for progress payments.  A week 
after the making of the contract, A repudiates by telling B that he will not perform the contract.  Because of the 
repudiation, B does not furnish a performance bond.  B has a claim against A for damages for total breach.  
The non-occurrence of one condition, B's furnishing of a performance bond, is excused under this Section 
because A's repudiation contributed materially to its non-occurrence.  The non-occurrence of another condition, 
B's furnishing heating and air conditioning units, is excused because B's duty to furnish the units was 
discharged when A repudiated (§ 253(2)), and its performance was therefore no longer a condition under § 237.
REPORTER'S NOTES

§ 255 Effect of a Repudiation as Excusing the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
This Section is based on former § 306.  See also 4 Corbin, Contracts §§ 977, 978 (1951 & Supp. 1980); 5 
Williston, Contracts § 699 (1961).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 306.  See also Chemetron Corp. v. McLouth 
Steel Corp., 522 F.2d 469 (7th Cir. 1975). As to Illustration 2, see Alabama Football, Inc. v. Greenwood, 452 F. 
Supp. 1191 (W.D. Pa. 1978); Carlson v. Leonardo Truck Lines, 13 Wash. App. 795, 538 P.2d 130 (1975).
Comment b.  Illustration 3 is based on Craddock v. Greenhut Constr. Co., 423 F.2d 111 (5th Cir. 1970).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 313(1)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document