CHAPTER 7

GROUP CRIMINALITY
A. ACCOUNTABILITY FOR THE ACTS OF OTHERS

When only one individual commits a crime, the analysis is relatively straightforward. We ask whether that person committed all of the elements of the offense with the required mens rea. But crimes are often carried out by more than one
person. In the case of a burglary, for instance, one person might break and enter a dwelling with the intent to steal something inside, while another person serves as a lookout and a third person planned the entire scheme. The law thus needs to ac-
count for those individuals who do not themselves commit the elements of the offense, but who nevertheless participate in and further the criminal activity in other ways.
INTRODUCTORY NOTES

1. The theory of complicity. The relationship between the doctrine of complicity and other doctrines of criminal liability is explored in the following excerpt.
SANFORD H. KADISH, A THEORY OF COMPLICITY, in ISSUES IN CONTEMPORARY LEGAL PHILOSOPHY: THE INFLUENCE OF H.L.A. HART 288 (RUTH GAVISON ed., 1987): [We] regard a person's acts as the products of his choice, not of regularities
of nature which require that certain happenings will occur whenever certain conditions are present. Therefore, antecedent events do not cause a person to act in the same way they cause things to happen, and neither do the antecedent acts of
others. To treat the acts of others as causing a person's actions would be inconsistent with the premise on which we hold a person responsible. . . .2 The . . . implication [of this] is that when we seek to determine the responsibility of one person for
the volitional actions of another the concept of physical cause is not available to determine the answer, for whatever the relation of one person's acts to those of another, it cannot be described in terms of that sense of cause and effect appropri-
ate to the occurrence of natural events without doing violence to our concept of a human action as freely chosen. . . .

How, then, can the law reach those whose conduct makes it appropriate to punish for the criminal actions of others — a person, for example, who persuades or helps another to commit a crime? . . . If it were not for the very special way
in which we conceive of human actions, causation doctrine might serve this purpose, on the view that one who intentionally causes another to commit certain actions falls under
the prohibition against committing those actions. But our conception of human actions as controlled by choice will not allow that to work. . . . Some alternative doctrine is needed, therefore, which imposes liability on the actor who is to blame for
the conduct of another, but which does so upon principles that comport with our perception of human actions. This is the office of the doctrine of complicity.

2. From common law to statute. At the common law there were distinct categories of circumstances that rendered a person a liable participant in a course of criminal conduct. These distinctions had consequences for both proce-
dure and punishment. The following excerpts from 4 Blackstone, Commentaries, ch. 3, *84-39, broadly describe those categories.

Aman may be principal in an offence in two degrees. A principal, in the first degree, is he that is the actor, or absolute perpetrator of the crime; and, in the second degree, he is who is present, aiding, and abetting the fact

to be done. Which presence need not always be an actual immediate standing by, within sight or hearing of the fact; but there may be also a constructive presence, as when one commits a robbery or murder, and another

keeps watch or guard at some convenient distance. . . .

An accessory is he who is not the chief actor in the offence, nor present at its performance, but is some way concerned therein, either before or after the fact committed. . . .
As to... who may be an accessory before the fact, Sir Matthew Hale defines him to be one, who being absent at the time of the crime committed, doth yet procure, counsel, or command another to commit a

crime. Herein absence is necessary to make him an accessory; for if such procurer, or the like, be present, he is guilty of the crime as principal. .. .

An accessory after the fact may be, where a person, knowing a felony to have been committed, receives, relieves, comforts, or assists the felon. . . .

Modern statutes have largely eliminated the significance of these discrete modes of criminal participation. (1) Apart from the accessory after the fact, who is still generally subject to a lesser punishment, the punishment is the same for
principals and accessories. (2) It is no longer the case that accessories cannot be convicted until their principal is convicted (although, of course, it must be proved that a crime was committed by some principal for an accessory to be liable). (3) It
is no longer necessary in most states for a defendant to be charged as an accomplice; the defendant may simply be charged with the substantive crime committed by the person the defendant allegedly aided or encouraged.

These changes are the result of statutes antedating the MPC. These older statutes abolish all distinctions between principals and accessories before the fact and require that all be treated as principals.

See, for example, the federal complicity statute, 18 U.S.C. §2:

(a) Whoever commits an offense against the United States or aids, abets, counsels, commands, induces or procures its commission, is punishable as a principal.
(b) Whoever willfully causes an act to be done which if directly performed by him or another would be an offense against the United States, is punishable as a principal.
p.652

Statutes of more recent vintage, influenced by the MPC (see §2.06, in the Appendix to this book), typically make people who are accomplices of another person accountable for that person’s conduct and define people as accomplices
if they solicit that person to commit an offense or aid that person in planning or committing it. See, e.g., Nu. Stat. Ann. 2C, §20:2-6 (2021).

Note that under these statutory abrogations of the common law, complicity (variously termed “aiding and abetting” or “being an accomplice” or “being an accessory”) is not a separate offense with its own penalty. Rather, complicity is
one of the means of committing a substantive offense like murder or rape. The accessory or aider and abettor is charged with whatever substantive crime the accessory facilitated, not some separate crime of being an accomplice. In contrast, the
offense of accessory after the fact is maintained in many current codes as a separate offense with its own penalty, regardless of what substantive offense is committed by the principal.

3. Conspiracy as a doctrine of complicity. An additional basis for holding one person liable for the crimes of another derives from the doctrine of conspiracy. In general terms, a criminal conspiracy is an agreement by two or more
persons to commit a crime. Conspiracy is both a separate offense in its own right and a means by which individuals can be held responsible for the substantive crimes committed by others. In some jurisdictions, the individuals in a conspiracy,
known as co-conspirators, can be held responsible for the criminal acts of fellow conspirators committed in furtherance of the criminal enterprise, whether or not those particular criminal acts were planned, so long as they were reasonably fore-
seeable. Co-conspirators, therefore, may be liable in some jurisdictions for the criminal acts of fellow conspirators even though they did not intend those crimes and might not be responsible under the principles of accomplice liability. This problem
is explored in the Conspiracy section, in connection with Pinkerton v. United States, p. 707 infra, and the materials following.

4, Punishment. Under American law, accomplices and principals are guilty of the same crime and thus subject to the same range of penalties. Of course, degrees of culpability are not always equal between principals and accom-
plices. Often, accomplices play a minor role in the offense. But sometimes it is the principal who plays the less important role. For example, in the distribution of illegal drugs, the actual seller of the drugs is the principal, even though the seller

usually is a much lower-level participant than the accomplice who runs the distribution ring. American law deals with such differences in culpability through sentencing discretion or, in jurisdictions with sentencing guidelines, through specified re-
ductions in punishment for those who played only a minor role in the offense. See, e.g., U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual §§3B1.1-3B1.3 (2018).
In statutes with mandatory sentencing provisions, however, there is no room to differentiate between principals and accomplices who play a minor role. Judge Posner criticized this approach in United States v. Ambrose, 740 F.2d 505,
508-509 (7th Cir. 1985), in the course of explaining why a judge should not be bound by the harsh mandatory minimum penalty provisions of the federal “drug kingpin” statute in sentencing a kingpin’s aider and abettor:
[Although the language of] 18 U.S.C. §2(a) [supra] makes clear that an aider and abettor can be punished as severely as the principal, it does
p.659
p.654
not make clear that he must always be punished so severely. History is against such an interpretation. The distinction between “principal” and “aider and abettor” goes back to the time when all felonies carried the same
sanction — death. By enabling the courts to punish a class of less culpable offenders — aiders and abettors as distinct from principals — less severely, the distinction introduced a welcome element of gradation into the sen-
tencing of felons. But as judges acquired more and more sentencing discretion, the need to distinguish between principals and aiders and abettors diminished, and since it was sometimes a difficult decision to make there
was a movement to abolish it with regard to determining criminal liability. This movement culminated in 18 U.S.C. §2(a). But the purpose was not to make sure that aiders and abettors were always punished as severely as
principals. Indeed, in passing the statute Congress must have realized that judges would use their sentencing discretion to proportion the severity of the sentence to the aider and abettor's fault. The history suggests that,
rather than being intended to limit sentencing discretion, the abolition of the distinction between principals and aiders and abettors presupposed such discretion.
The Seventh Circuit, sitting en banc, eventually overturned its decision in Ambrose and held that an aider and abettor of a drug kingpin is subject to the statutory mandatory minimum penalty faced by the kingpin himself. United States
v. Pino-Perez, 870 F.2d 1230 (7th Cir. 1989). Judge Posner again wrote the majority opinion, noting that “[t]he historic purpose of aiding and abetting liability coexists uneasily with criminal offenses that carry mandatory minimum penalties, such as
the kingpin statute. . . . But simply lopping off a minimum statutory penalty for one class of violators (aiders and abettors) now strikes us . . . as exceeding the prudent bounds of judicial creativity.” Id. at 1237.
Academics likewise have criticized the American approach of treating all accomplices as guilty of the same offense as their principals. The proposals for drawing lines, however, vary. For example, Joshua Dressler argues that the law
should distinguish between three types of perpetrators: (1) those accomplices who causally contribute to the crime and play a substantial role in the offense; (2) those accomplices who causally contribute to the crime and play a minor role; and (3)
those who play no causal role and provide minor assistance. He would have the first two types of perpetrators be treated as principals but give the second category a lesser punishment than the principal. Dressler argues those in the third category
should be charged with some lesser crime but not the same crime as the principal. Dressler, Reforming Complicity Law: Trivial Assistance as a Lesser Offense?, 5 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 427, 447 (2008). Is Dressler correct that causation should be a
factor? How does that square with Kadish’s argument, p. 651 supra, that causation cannot be considered “without doing violence to our concept of a human action as freely chosen”? See also Alexander Sarch, Is Parity of Culpability a Constraint
‘on Accomplice Liability?, 15 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 336, 343 (2018) (arguing against the parity of culpability principle and advocating for a model that uses a desert constraint to prohibit excessively harsh punishments).
Other legal systems draw different lines. For example, the German Penal Code (§25) provides different punishment for the perpetrator, the instigator, and
p.654
p. 655
the aider, and the law is rich in doctrine for distinguishing among these classifications of participants. See C. Roxin, Taterschaft und Tatherrschaft (1984). See also Luis Chiesa, Comparative Analysis as an Antidote to Tunnel Vision in Criminal Law
Reform: The Example of Complicity, 70 Rutgers U. L. Rev. 1117 (2018) (comparing the American system with European and Latin American approaches that make distinctions based on the actor's contribution to the crime).

1. Mens Rea
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
The problem of mens rea for complicity is complicated by the presence of two levels of mens rea: that required of the accomplice (the helper or encourager) and that required of the principal (the actual perpetrator). We have already
‘explored in Chapter 3 the way in which mens rea is analyzed for the actual perpetrator. But the mens rea of the accomplice is distinct. A true purpose, often called a specific intent, is generally required to hold a person liable as an accomplice; that
is, accomplices must actually intend their actions to further the criminal action or conduct of the principal. We explore the meaning of this requirement and qualifications to it in Section A.1.a. We address whether this true purpose must extend to
the results and attendant circumstances of the offense in Section A.1.b.
a. Mens Rea for Actions of the Principal
Hicks v. United States
‘Supreme Court of the United States
150 US. 442 (1893)
Justice SHiras delivered the opinion of the Court.
John Hicks, an Indian, was jointly indicted with Stand Rowe, also an Indian, for the murder of Andrew J. Colvard, a white man, by shooting him with a gun on the 13th of February, 1892. Rowe was killed by the officers in the attempt to
arrest him, and Hicks was tried separately and found guilty in March, 1893. We adopt the statement of the facts in the case made in the brief for the government as correct and as sufficient for our purposes:
It appears that on the night of the 12th of February, 1892, there was a dance at the house of Jim Rowe, in the Cherokee Nation; that Jim Rowe was a brother to Stand Rowe, who was indicted jointly with the defendant; . . .
that Stand Rowe and the defendant were . . . eluding the United States marshals who were in search of them with warrants for their arrest, and were armed for the purpose of resisting arrest; they appeared at the dance, each
armed with a Winchester rifle; they were both Cherokee Indians. The deceased, Andrew J. Colvard, was a white man who had married a Cherokee woman; he [was also at] the dance. . . . A good deal of whiskey was drank
[sic] during the night by the persons present, and Colvard
p. 655
p. 656
appears to have been drunk at some time during the night. Colvard spoke Cherokee fluently, and appears to have been very friendly with Stand Rowe and the defendant Hicks. . . .
Some time after sunrise on the morning of the 13th [four witnesses] saw Stand Rowe, coming on horseback in a moderate walk, with his Winchester rifle lying down in front of him. . . . Stand Rowe halted within
five or six feet of the main road, and the men on the porch saw Mr. Colvard and the defendant Hicks riding together down the main road from the direction of Jim Rowe’s house.
As Colvard and Hicks approached . . . where Stand Rowe was sitting on his horse, Stand Rowe rode out into the road and halted. Colvard then rode up to him in a lope or canter, leaving Hicks, the defendant,
some 30 or 40 feet in his rear. The point where the three men were together on their horses was about 100 yards from where the four witnesses stood on the porch. The conversation between the three men on horseback
was not fully heard by the four men on the porch, and all that was heard was not understood, because part of it was carried on in the Cherokee tongue; but some part of this conversation was distinctly heard and clearly

understood by these witnesses; they saw Stand Rowe twice raise his rifle and aim it at Colvard, and twice he lowered it; they heard Colvard say, “I am a friend to both of you"; they saw and heard the defendant Hicks laugh

aloud when Rowe directed his rifle toward Colvard; they saw Hicks take off his hat and hit his horse on the neck or shoulder with it; they heard Hicks say to Colvard, “Take off your hat and die like a man”; they saw Stand

Rowe raise his rifle for the third time, point it at Colvard, fire it; .. . they saw Colvard fall from his horse; they went to where he was lying in the road and found him dead; they saw Stand Rowe and John Hicks ride off together

after the shooting.

Hicks testified [and denied] that he had encouraged Rowe to shoot Colvard, and alleging that he had endeavored to persuade Rowe not to shoot... .

The language attributed to Hicks, and which he denied having used, cannot be said to have been entirely free from ambiguity. It was addressed not to Rowe, but to Colvard. Hicks testified that Rowe was in a dangerous mood, and that
he did not know whether he would shoot Colvard or Hicks. The remark made — if made — accompanied with the gesture of taking off his own hat, may have been an utterance of desperation, occasioned by his belief that Rowe would shoot one or
both of them. That Hicks and Rowe rode off together after seeing Colvard fall was used as a fact against Hicks, pointing to a conspiracy between them. Hicks testified that he did it in fear of his life; that Rowe had demanded that he should show
him the road which he wished to travel. Hicks further testified, and in this he was not contradicted, that he separated from Rowe a few minutes afterwards, on the first opportunity, and that he never afterwards had any intercourse with him, nor had
he been in the company of Rowe for several weeks before the night of the fatal occurrence.

[Hicks challenged the jury instruction on two grounds. First, it failed to state] that the acts or words of encouragement and abetting must have been used by the

p.657
accused with the intention of encouraging and abetting Rowe. So far as the instruction goes, the words may have been used for a different purpose, and yet have had the actual effect of inciting Rowe to commit the murderous act. Hicks, indeed,
testified that the expressions used by him were intended to dissuade Rowe from shooting. But the jury were left to find Hicks guilty as a principal because the effect of his words may have had the result of encouraging Rowe to shoot, regardless
of Hicks’ intention. In another part of the charge the learned judge did make an observation as to the question of intention in the use of the words, saying:

If the deliberate and intentional use of words has the effect to encourage one man to kill another, he who uttered these words is presumed by the law to have intended that effect, and is responsible therefor.

This statement is itself defective in confounding the intentional use of the words with the intention as respects the effect to be produced. Hicks no doubt, intended to use the words he did use, but did he thereby intend that they were to be
understood by Rowe as an encouragement to act? However this may be, we do not think this expression of the learned judge availed to cure the defect already noticed in his charge, that the mere use of certain words would suffice to warrant the
jury in finding Hicks guilty, regardless of the intention with which they were used.

[Second, Hicks challenged the following] statement:

that if Hicks was actually present at that place at the time of the firing by Stand Rowe, and he was there for the purpose of either aiding, abetting, advising, or encouraging the shooting of Andrew J. Colvard by Stand Rowe,

and that, as a matter of fact, he did not do it, but was present for the purpose of aiding or abetting or advising or encouraging his shooting, but he did not do it because it was not necessary, it was done without his assis-

tance, the law says there is a third condition where guilt is fastened to his act in that regard.

We understand this language to mean that where an accomplice is present for the purpose of aiding and abetting in a murder, but refrains from so aiding and abetting because it turned out not to be necessary for the accomplishment of
the common purpose, he is equally guilty as if he had actively participated by words or acts of encouragement. Thus understood, the statement might, in some instances, be a correct instruction. Thus, if there had been evidence sufficient to show
that there had been a previous conspiracy between Rowe and Hicks to waylay and kill Colvard, Hicks, if present at the time of the killing, would be guilty, even if it was found unnecessary for him to act. But the error of such an instruction, in the
present case, is in the fact that there was no evidence on which to base it. The evidence . . . shows no facts from which the jury could have properly found that the encounter was the result of any previous conspiracy or arrangement. The jury might

well, therefore, have thought that they were following the court’s instructions, in finding the accused guilty because he was present at the time and place of the murder, although he contributed neither by word or action to the crime, and although
there was no substantial evidence of any conspiracy or prior arrangement between him and Rowe. . . . The judgment of the court below is reversed and the cause remanded, with directions to set aside the verdict and award a new trial.
p.657
p. 658
PROBLEM: VARIATIONS ON HICKS
Consider the responsibility of Hicks for the killing by Rowe in the following hypothetical situations.
i. Hicks hears that Rowe has set out to kill his old enemy, Colvard, and goes along to enjoy the spectacle.
ii, Same situation as in (), except that while watching Rowe's assault on Colvard with satisfaction, Hicks shouts such words of encouragement to Rowe as “Go get him!” and “Attaboy!”
ili, Same situation as in (), except that Hicks resolves to make certain Rowe succeeds — by helping him if necessary.
iv. Same situation as in (ji), except that Hicks tells Rowe on the way that he will help him if it seems necessary.
State v. Gladstone
‘Supreme Court of Washington
474 P.2d 274 (Wash. 1970)

Hate, J. A jury found defendant Bruce Gladstone guilty of aiding and abetting one Robert Kent in the unlawful sale of marijuana. . ..

Gladstone's guilt as an aider and abettor in this case rests solely on evidence of a conversation between him and one Douglas MacArthur Thompson concerning the possible purchase of marijuana from one Robert Kent. There is no
other evidence to connect the accused with Kent who ultimately sold some marijuana to Thompson. .. .

[Thompson, Kent, and defendant, Gladstone, were all students at the University of Puget Sound. Thompson was hired by the Tacoma Police Department to attempt a purchase of marijuana from Gladstone. Thompson visited defendant
at his home and asked to buy marijuana. Defendant replied that he did not have enough to sell him any but volunteered the name of Kent as someone who did have enough and who was willing to sell. He then gave Kent’s address to Thompson
and, at Thompson's request, drew a map to direct him to Kent's residence. Thompson went there and bought marijuana from Kent. There was no evidence of any communication between defendant and Kent concerning marijuana, but only, the
court said, of “a possible accommodation to someone who said he wanted to buy marijuana.”]

If all reasonable inferences favorable to the state are accorded the evidence, it does not, in our opinion, establish the commission of the crime charged. That vital element — a nexus between the accused and the party whom he is
charged with aiding and abetting in the commission of a crime — is missing. The record contains no evidence whatever that Gladstone had any communication by word, gesture or sign, before or after he drew the map, from which it could be
inferred that he counseled, encouraged, hired, commanded, induced or procured Kent to sell marijuana to Douglas Thompson as charged, or took any steps to further the commission of the crime charged. He was not charged with aiding and
abetting Thompson in the purchase of marijuana, but with Kent’s sale of it... .

p. 658
p.659

[Elven without prior agreement, arrangement or understanding, a bystander to a robbery could be guilty of aiding and abetting its commission if he came to the aid of a robber and knowingly assisted him in perpetrating the crime.

But . . . there is no aiding and abetting unless one “ ‘in some sort associate himself with the venture, that he participate in it as in something that he wishes to bring about, that he seek by his action to make it succeed.’ ” Nye & Nissen v. United
States, 336 U.S. 613, 619 (1949).

Gladstone's culpability, if at all, must be brought within R.C.W. 9.01.030, which makes a principal of one who aids and abets another in the commission of the crime. Although an aider and abettor need not be physically present at
the commission of the crime to be held guilty as a principal, his conviction depends on proof that he did something in association or connection with the principal to accomplish the crime. Learned Hand, J., we think, hit the nail squarely when, in
United States v. Peoni, 100 F.2d 401, 402 (2d Cir. 1938), he wrote that, in order to aid and abet another to commit a crime, it is necessary that a defendant “in some sort associate himself with the venture, that he participate in it as in something that
he wishes to bring about, that he seek by his action to make it succeed. Alll the words used — even the most colorless, ‘abet’ — carry an implication of purposive attitude towards it.”. . .

It would be a dangerous precedent indeed to hold that mere communications to the effect that another might or probably would commit a criminal offense amount to an aiding and abetting of the offense should it ultimately be
committed.

There being no evidence whatever that the defendant ever communicated to Kent the idea that he would in any way aid him in the sale of any marijuana, or said anything to Kent to encourage or induce him or direct him to do so, or
counseled Kent in the sale of marijuana, or did anything more than describe Kent to another person as an individual who might sell some marijuana, or would derive any benefit, consideration or reward from such a sale, there was no proof of an
aiding and abetting, and the conviction should, therefore, be reversed as a matter of law. Remanded with directions to dismiss.

HAMILTON, J. (dissenting). . . . | am satisfied that the jury was fully warranted in concluding that appellant, when he affirmatively recommended Kent as a source and purveyor of marijuana, entertained the requisite conscious design and
intent that his action would instigate, induce, procure or encourage perpetration of Kent's subsequent crime of selling marijuana to Thompson. . . .

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Aiding and abetting the purchase? The court emphasizes that the defendant was “not charged with aiding and abetting Thompson in the purchase of marijuana, but with Kent's sale of it.” Could Gladstone have been convicted of
aiding and abetting Thompson's purchase? One problem is that Thompson, the principal, might not be guilty of an offense because of his role as an agent of the police. This problem is treated at pp. 692-701 infra. (Note this would not be a prob-
lem in a jurisdiction that follows the MPC because the MPC provides for liability for attempt when someone aids and abets or attempts to aid and abet another who does not

p. 660
actually commit the crime. See MPC §2.06(3) & §5.01(3).) But suppose that the student who sought Gladstone's help was not a police agent. Could Gladstone then be charged with aiding and abetting the student's purchase? Would Gladstone's
state of mind as to the purchase by the student be any different from his state of mind as to the sale by Kent? In the case of the student purchaser, there would be a “nexus” between Gladstone and the student. If so, would his mens rea then be
sufficient to establish accomplice liability?

2. Aiding and abetting the sale? What kinds of actions by Gladstone might have satisfied the court that the evidence was sufficient to infer that he had the mens rea required for accomplice liability? What if, in an alternative scenario,
Gladstone lived with Kent and, observing Thompson hesitate over the price Kent quoted for the sale of marijuana, had commented that it was good stuff and well worth the money? In State v. Wilson, 631 P.2d 362, 364 (Wash. 1981), the court
found intent to encourage the sale under similar facts. Or, in another alternative scenario, what if Gladstone had called Kent to see if he was home and had marijuana to sell, and then remained present during the transaction? In a later case, a
Washington court of appeals found accomplice liability on similar facts and distinguished Gladstone. The court observed that in Gladstone, there was “no evidence . . . from which it could be inferred that [Gladstone] counseled, encouraged, hired,
commanded, induced or procured Kent to sell marijuana,” whereas in the facts before it, the defendant “was present at the scene of the sale, after having personally contacted the seller.” State v. McKeown, 596 P.2d 1100, 1105 (Wash. Ct. App.
1979). Are these decisions proper applications of the Gladstone standard? Is physical presence at the sale by itself enough to distinguish these cases from Gladstone, or are the critical facts the ones that suggest the association with the venture in
the form of touting the product or arranging the buy personally ahead of time?

3. The Model Penal Code’s struggle with the mens rea for complicity. Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.06 at 315-316 (1985), states the issue as follows:
[Should] knowingly facilitating the commission of a crime . . . be sufficient for complicity, absent a true purpose to advance the criminal end[?] The problem, to be sure, is narrow in its focus: often, if not usually, aid rendered
with guilty knowledge implies purpose since it has no other motivation. But there are many and important cases where this is the central question in determining liability. A lessor rents with knowledge that the premises
will be used to establish a bordello. A vendor sells with knowledge that the subject of the sale will be used in the commission of a crime. . . . An employee puts through a shipment in the course of his employment though
he knows the shipment is illegal. . .. Such cases can be multiplied indefinitely; they have given courts much difficulty when they have been brought, whether as prosecutions for conspiracy or for the substantive offense
involved.
The solution originally proposed by the MPC was contained in §2.04(3)(b) (Tentative Draft No. 1, 1953):
A person is an accomplice of another person in the commission of a crime if. . . acting with knowledge that such other person was committing or had the purpose of committing the crime, he knowingly, substantially facili-
tated its commission.
p. 660
p.661

In defense of this proposal the Commentary observed (id., Comment at 27-32):
Conduct which knowingly facilitates the commission of crimes is by hypothesis a proper object of preventive effort by the penal law, unless, of course, itis affirmatively justifiable. It is important in that effort to safeguard
the innocent but the requirement of guilty knowledge adequately serves this end — knowledge both that there is a purpose to commit a crime and that one’s own behavior renders aid. There are, however, infinite degrees of
aid to be considered. This is the point, we think, at which distinctions should be drawn. Accordingly, when a true purpose to further the crime is lacking, the draft requires that the accessorial behavior substantially facilitate
commission of the crime and that it do so to the knowledge of the actor. This qualification provides a basis for discrimination that should satisfy the common sense of justice. A vendor who supplies materials readily available
upon the market arguably does not make substantial contribution to commission of the crime since the materials could have as easily been gotten elsewhere.

[Whhen the only interest of the actor is his wish for freedom to forego concern about the criminal purposes of others, though he knowingly facilitates in a substantial measure the achievement of such purposes, it
is an interest that, we think, is properly subordinated generally to the larger interest of preventing crime.
Note that this proposal would have required an additional requirement when an individual knowingly, but not purposefully, aided an offense; in that situation, one would also need to evaluate the degree of aid rendered by the actor to

determine whether it “substantially facilitated” the offense.
The MPC's 1953 proposals were rejected by the American Law Institute. The Code now requires that the actor have “the purpose of promoting or facilitating” the commission of the crime. §2.06(3)(a).
QUESTION: What are the inadequacies, if any, in the reporter's arguments that led to its rejection? Consider Glanville Williams, Criminal Law: The General Part 369-370 (2d ed. 1961):

[T]he question is one of some complexity. On the one side are the policy of repressing crime, and the difficulty of distinguishing between the merchant who knowingly assists a crime and the ordinary accessory before the
fact. On the other side stand the undesirability of giving too great an extension to the criminal law, and the inconvenience to legitimate trade of requiring a merchant to concern himself with the affairs of his customers. The
difficulty is increased by the number of different modes in which the question may arise. The merchant may desire the crime, or he may foresee it as certain if he sells the commodity, or he may foresee it as belonging to one
of many degrees of probability. The sale may be completely in the ordinary course of business, or the order may in some way be a special one — as when a tailor makes a suit with secret pockets for poaching or smuggling.
The merchant may charge the usual price or an

p66
p. 662
extra price on account of the legal risk. The commodity may be appropriate only to a single crime (as with poison that is consumed only once), or may enable the purchaser to engage in a life of crime. The crime in contem-
plation may be a serious or a trivial one.
See also George Fletcher, Rethinking Criminal Law 676 (1978):

From the standpoint of the supplier, the problem of refusing services to known criminals closely resembles the problem of intervening to prevent impending harm. The grocery store, the gas station, the physician, the answer-

ing service all provide routine services. Does the business-person have a duty to make an exception just because he or she knows that the purchaser is engaged in illegal activity? That question of duty corresponds to the

problem of the motorist who must decide whether to stop his car and render aid to an accident victim. The assumption underlying both fields is that people are entitled to carry on their lives without deviating every time doing

so might help a person in distress or hamper the execution of a criminal plan.

The case against imposing liability for knowing aid is made in R.A. Duff, “Can | Help You?”: Accessorial Liability and the Intention to Assist, 10 Legal Stud. 167 (1990). Larry Alexander attacks the knowledge standard from the opposite
direction, arguing that recklessness should be sufficient for accomplice liability. See Alexander, Insufficient Concern: A Unified Conception of Criminal Culpability, 88 Cal. L. Rev. 931, 944-947 (2000). Alexander would address the issue of merchant
liability by creating a safe harbor for merchants who sell at market prices. But why should merchants be treated differently from every other person who knowingly or recklessly aids a criminal offense? If merchants should be treated differently,
would it be preferable to keep one standard for mens rea but allow a “shopkeeper's privilege” as an affirmative defense? For an argument along those lines, see Heidi M. Hurd & Michael S. Moore, Untying the Gordian Knot of Mens Rea Require-
ments for Accomplices, 32 Soc. Phil. & Pol'y 161, 180 (2016).

4, The seriousness of the substantive offense. Some courts have questioned the assumption that there should be only a single mens rea standard that applies to liability for aiding and abetting. Instead, they propose that the
seriousness of the offense should be considered in determining the mens rea required for complicity. In United States v. Fountain, 768 F.2d 790 (7th Cir. 1985), a person in prison (Gometz) was convicted of aiding and abetting another incarcerated
person (Silverstein) in murdering a guard. The evidence disclosed that Silverstein, in handcuffs, was being led down the corridor by some guards. When he reached Gometz's cell he thrust his manacled hands through the bars. Gometz came close
and pulled up his shirt to reveal a knife in his waistband. Somehow Silverstein got free of the handcuffs, seized the knife, and stabbed the guard with it. Judge Posner held that, to convict Gometz, it was not necessary to prove that it was Gometz's
purpose that Silverstein should kill the guard; it was enough that he knew when he helped Silverstein obtain the knife that Silverstein would use it to attack the guards. In holding that knowledge was enough, the court borrowed the approach of a
California conspiracy case (People v. Lauria, reported at p. 728 infra) that held that purpose was required to convict of lesser offenses, but that knowledge sufficed to convict of major crimes. Judge Posner stated (id. at 798):

p.662
p. 668

In People v. Lauria — not a federal case, but illustrative of the general point — the court, en route to holding that knowledge of the principal's purpose would not suffice for aiding and abetting of just any crime, said it would

suffice for “the seller of gasoline who knew the buyer was using his product to make Molotov cocktails for terroristic use.” Compare the following hypothetical cases. In the first, a shopkeeper sells dresses to a woman whom

he knows to be a prostitute. . . . Little would be gained by imposing criminal liability in such a case. Prostitution, anyway a minor crime, would be but trivially deterred, since the prostitute could easily get her clothes from

a shopkeeper ignorant of her occupation. In the second case, a man buys a gun from a gun dealer after telling the dealer that he wants it in order to kill his mother-in-law, and he does kill her. The dealer would be guilty of

aiding and abetting the murder. This liability would help to deter — and perhaps not trivially given public regulation of the sale of guns — a most serious crime. We hold that aiding and abetting murder is established by proof

beyond a reasonable doubt that the supplier of the murder weapon knew the purpose for which it would be used.

QUESTION: Does lowering the required mens rea to knowledge only in the case of serious crimes adequately address the objections, discussed in Note 3, to the initial draft of the MPC? In a case like Fountain, does this distinction even matter,
because a jury could easily infer purpose from knowledge under the facts? Or does this distinction matter because of what the jury is told it must find, with a knowledge standard lessening the government's burden?

Rosemond v. United States
Supreme Court of the United States
572 U.S. 65 (2014)

Justice KAGAN delivered the opinion of the Court.

[Defendant Rosemond and his friend Ronald Joseph accompanied Vashti Perez on a sale of marijuana. When the sale went bad, one of the men, either Rosemond or Joseph, exited the car and fired several shots from a semi-automatic
handgun]

The Government charged Rosemond with, inter alia, violating §924(c) by using a gun in connection with a drug trafficking crime, or aiding and abetting that offense under §2 of Title 18. Section 924(c) provides that “any person who,
during and in relation to any crime of violence or drug trafficking ctime[.] . .. uses or carries a firearm,” shall receive a five-year mandatory-minimum sentence, with seven- and ten-year minimums applicable, respectively, if the firearm is also bran-
dished or discharged. 18 U.S.C. §924(c)(1)(A).

. .. The Government prosecuted the §924(c) charge on two alternative theories. The Government's primary contention was that Rosemond himself used the firearm during the aborted drug transaction. But recognizing that the identity
of the shooter was disputed, the Government also offered a back-up argument: Even if it was Joseph who fired the gun as the drug deal fell apart, Rosemond aided and abetted the §924(c) violation.

p. 668
p. 664

[The district judge instructed the jury] that it could convict if “(1) the defendant knew his cohort used a firearm in the drug trafficking crime, and (2) the defendant knowingly and actively participated in the drug trafficking crime.”. . . The
jury convicted Rosemond of violating §924(c). ... The Tenth Circuit affirmed. .. . We granted certiorari. . . to resolve the Circuit conflict over what it takes to aid and abet a §924(c) offense. . . . We find that the trial court erred in instructing the jury.
We therefore vacate the judgment below.

The federal aiding and abetting statute, 18 U.S.C. §2, states that a person who furthers — more specifically, who “aids, abets, counsels, commands, induces or procures” — the commission of a federal offense “is punishable as a
principal.” That provision derives from (though simplifies) common-law standards for accomplice liability. . .. And in so doing, §2 reflects a centuries-old view of culpability: that a person may be responsible for a crime he has not personally carried
out if he helps another to complete its commission. . . .

As at common law, a person is liable under §2 for aiding and abetting a crime if (and only if) he (1) takes an affirmative act in furtherance of that offense, (2) with the intent of facilitating the offense’s commission. . . . The questions that
the parties dispute . . . concern how those two requirements . . . apply in a prosecution for aiding and abetting a §924 (c) offense. . . . The prosecutor must show the use or carriage of a gun; so too he must prove the commission of a predicate
(violent or drug trafficking) offense. ... Rosemond therefore could assist in §924(c)'s violation by facilitating either the drug transaction or the firearm use. . . . It is inconsequential . . . that his acts did not advance each element of the offense; all that
matters is that they facilitated one component. . . .

IAln aiding and abetting conviction requires not just an act facilitating one or another element, but also a state of mind extending to the entire crime. [U]nder that rule, a defendant may be convicted of abetting a §924(c) violation only if
his intent reaches beyond a simple drug sale, to an armed one. . . . And the canonical formulation of that needed state of mind — later appropriated by this Court and oft-quoted in both parties’ briefs — is Judge Leamed Hand's: To aid and abet a
crime, a defendant must not just “in some sort associate himself with the venture,” but also “participate in it as in something that he wishes to bring about” and “seek by his action to make it succeed.”. . .

We have previously found that intent requirement satisfied when a person actively participates in a criminal venture with full knowledge of the circumstances constituting the charged offense. . . . So for purposes of aiding and abetting
law, a person who actively participates in a criminal scheme knowing its extent and character intends that scheme's commission.? The same principle holds true here: An active participant in a drug transaction has the intent needed to aid and abet
a §924(c) violation when he knows that one of his confederates will carry a gun.

p.664

p. 665
In such a case, the accomplice has decided to join in the criminal venture, and share in its benefits, with full awareness of its scope — that the plan calls not just for a drug sale, but for an armed one.

For all that to be true, though, the §924(c) defendant's knowledge of a firearm must be advance knowledge — or otherwise said, knowledge that enables him to make the relevant legal (and indeed, moral) choice. When an accomplice
knows beforehand of a confederate’s design to carry a gun, he can attempt to alter that plan, or, if unsuccessful, withdraw from the enterprise; it is deciding instead to go ahead with his role in the venture that shows his intent to aid an armed
offense. But when an accomplice knows nothing of a gun until it appears at the scene, he may already have completed his acts of assistance; or even if not, he may at that late point have no realistic opportunity to quit the crime. And when that is
so, the defendant has not shown the requisite intent to assist a crime involving a gun.

Both parties here find something to dislike in our view of this issue. Rosemond argues that a participant in a drug deal intends to assist a §924(c) violation only if he affirmatively desires one of his confederates to use a gun. [A]ccording
to Rosemond, the instructions must [permit the jury to find] that although the defendant participated in a drug deal knowing a gun would be involved, he did not specifically want its carriage or use. That higher standard, Rosemond claims, is nec-
essary to avoid subjecting persons of different culpability to the same punishment. Rosemond offers as an example an unarmed driver assisting in the heist of a store: If that person spent the drive “trying to persuade [his confederate] to leave [the]
gun behind,” then he should be convicted of abetting shoplifting, but not armed robbery.

We think not. What matters for purposes of gauging intent, and so what jury instructions should convey, is that the defendant has chosen, with full knowledge, to participate in the illegal scheme — not that, if all had been left to him, he
would have planned the identical crime. Consider a variant of Rosemond's example: The driver of a getaway car wants to help rob a convenience store (and argues passionately for that plan), but eventually accedes when his confederates decide
instead to hold up a national bank. Whatever his original misgivings, he has the requisite intent to aid and abet bank robbery. . . . The same is true of an accomplice who knowingly joins in an armed drug transaction — regardless whether he was
formerly indifferent or even resistant to using firearms. The law does not, nor should it, care whether he participates with a happy heart or a sense of foreboding. Either way, he has the same culpability, because either way he has knowingly elected
to aid in the commission of a peculiarly risky form of offense. . .

The Government, for its part, thinks . . . the jury should convict such a defendant even if he became aware of the gun only after he realistically could have opted out of the crime.

But that approach, we think, would diminish too far the requirement that a defendant in a §924(c) prosecution must intend to further an armed drug deal. Assume, for example, that an accomplice agrees to participate in a drug sale on
the express condition that no one brings a gun to the place of exchange. But just as the parties are making the trade, the accomplice notices that one of his confederates has a (poorly) concealed firearm in his jacket. The Government would con-
viet the accomplice of aiding and abetting a §924(c) offense if he assists in completing the

p. 665

p. 666
deal without incident, rather than running away or otherwise aborting the sale. But behaving as the Government suggests might increase the risk of gun violence — to the accomplice himself, other participants, or bystanders; and conversely,
finishing the sale might be the best or only way to avoid that danger. In such a circumstance, a jury is entitled to find that the defendant intended only a drug sale — that he never intended to facilitate, and so does not bear responsibility for, a drug
deal carried out with a gun. A defendant manifests that greater intent, and incurs the greater liability of §924(c), when he chooses to participate in a drug transaction knowing it will involve a firearm; but he makes no such choice when that know!-
edge comes too late for him to be reasonably able to act upon it... .

The District Court erred in instructing the jury, because it did not explain that Rosemond needed advance knowledge of a firearm’s presence. . .

Justice ALITo, with whom Justice THomas joins, concurring in part and dissenting in part.

largely agree with the analysis . . . but . . . | reject the Court's conclusion that a conviction for aiding and abetting a violation of 18 U.S.C. §924(c) demands proof that the alleged aider and abettor had what the Court terms “a realistic
opportunity” to refrain from engaging in the conduct at issue. . . . This rule represents an important and, as far as | am aware, unprecedented alteration of the law of aiding and abetting and of the law of intentionality generally.

. .. [begin with our case law on the mens rea required to establish aiding and abetting. [S]ome of our cases suggest that an aider and abettor must act purposefully or with intent. . . . On the other hand, there are cases . . . that appear
to hold that the requisite mens rea is simply knowledge. . . . The Court refers interchangeably to both of these tests and thus leaves our case law in the same, somewhat conflicted state that previously existed. But because the difference between

acting purposefully . . . and acting knowingly is slight, this is not a matter of great concern.

[However] the Court veers off in a new and . . . unfortunate direction. The Court imagines the following situation:

“{AJn accomplice agrees to participate in a drug sale on the express condition that no one brings a gun to the place of exchange. But just as the parties are making the trade, the accomplice notices that one of his confeder-

ates has a (poorly) concealed firearm in his jacket.”

[The Court asks, “If the accomplice, despite spotting the gun, continues to assist in the completion of the drug sale, has the accomplice aided and abetted the commission of a violation of §924(c)?”] The Court's answer is “it depend-
s.” [T]he Court says that if the risk of walking away exceeds (by some unspecified degree) the risk created by completing the sale and if the alleged aider and abettor chooses to continue for that reason, the alleged aider and abettor lacks the mens
rea required for conviction. .. .

[he Court, having refrained . . . from deciding whether aiding and abetting requires purposeful, as opposed to knowing, conduct, quickly and without explanation jettisons the “knowing” standard and concludes that purposeful con-
duct is needed. This is a critical move because if it is enough for an alleged aider and abettor simply to know that his confederate is carrying a gun, then the alleged aider

p. 666
p.667
and abettor in the Court’s hypothetical case (who spots the gun on the confederate’s person) unquestionably had the mens rea needed for conviction. . . .

The Court confuses two fundamentally distinct concepts: intent and motive. It seems to assume that, if a defendant's motive in aiding a criminal venture is to avoid some greater evil, he does not have the intent that the venture
succeed. But the intent to undertake some act is of course perfectly consistent with the motive of avoiding adverse consequences which would otherwise occur. . . . People wake up, go to work, balance their checkbooks, shop for groceries —
and yes, commit crimes — because they believe something bad will happen if they do not do these things, not because the deepest desire of their heart is to do them. A person may only go to work in the morning to keep his or her family from
destitution; that does not mean he or she does not intend to put in a full day's work. In the same way, the fact that a defendant carries out a crime because he feels he must do so on pain of terrible consequences does not mean he does not intend
to carry out the crime. When Jean Valjean stole a loaf of bread to feed his starving family, he certainly intended to commit theft. . .

Irespectfully dissent from that portion of the Court's opinion which places on the Government the burden of proving that the alleged aider and abettor of a §924(c) offense had what the Court terms a “realistic opportunity” to refrain
from engaging in the conduct at issue.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Knowledge versus purpose. The Court in Rosemond says that it is a “basic(]” principle of aiding and abetting liability that the defendant must intend to facilitate the offense’s commission. But then the Court says that the intent
requirement is “satisfied when a person actively participates in a criminal venture with full knowledge of the circumstances constituting the charged offense.” Does that mean knowledge is the relevant standard after all? Is the Court effectively
adopting the rejected MPC rule by insisting on knowledge plus active participation? Is the line between active participation and incidental facilitation that the Court references in a footnote a clear one?

2. Advance knowledge. The majority in Rosemond suggests that if the crime is already in progress when defendants first become aware of the use of a gun, defendants may not have sufficient notice to be held responsible for it. The
dissent argues that defendants should be liable as long as they are aware of the gun and persist with the drug deal with that knowledge. Are these competing views based on different assumptions about how easy it would be for a defendant to
cease participation in a drug deal without causing additional harm? Or do the majority and dissent have a more fundamental disagreement about the proper scope of accomplice liability that transcends its application to §924(c)? Steiner v. United
States, 940 F.3d 1282 (11th Cir. 2019), is an example of a case applying Rosemond. The Eleventh Circuit concluded that “continued participation can support an inference of advance knowledge under Rosemond” but “the government must ‘prove
that the defendant learned about the gun with enough time to try to change his confederate’s plan or to remove himself from the venture altogether.”” Does the Eleventh Circuit's elaboration of Rosemond mean that defendants must try to walk
away from a drug deal as

p.667

p. 668
soon as they first become aware that a co-defendant has a gun? Does it necessarily depend on whether defendants reasonably fear for their own safety or the safety of others? What if the reason defendants do not walk away from the deal is a
concern that the co-defendant will tum them into the authorities?

3. Criminal facilitation as a stand-alone crime. One response to the debate over the appropriate mens rea for accomplice liability is to compromise: Make aid without a true purpose a separate crime with a lesser penalty than the
crime aided. New York has pioneered this approach with a crime called “criminal facilitation.” N.Y. Penal Code §115.05 (2020) provides:

A person is guilty of criminal facilitation in the second degree when, believing it probable that he is rendering aid to a person who intends to commit a class A felony, he engages in conduct which provides such person with

means or opportunity for the commission thereof and which in fact aids such person to commit such class A felony. Criminal facilitation in the second degree is a class C felony.2

Note that the formula of liability is wider than that originally proposed by the MPC, which would have required “knowing” aid as a basis of accomplice liability. It is enough under the New York formulation that the aider believes it “prob-
able” that the person aided will commit a crime.

QUESTION: Would the defendant in the Gladstone case be guilty of criminal facilitation under the New York statute?
NOTE ON SUBSTANTIVE CRIMES OF FACILITATION

Traditional accomplice liability and liability for some lesser crime of facilitation are not the only options for responding to conduct that aids another to commit an offense. Some legislatures have passed statutes aimed at particular kinds
of assistance. There is wide variation in how statutes of this type define the offenses that must be facilitated and the conduct that constitutes unlawful facilitation. In considering the following three examples, weigh the gap-filling potential of each
statute against the risks that such statutes may pose, such as the risk of imposing punishment disproportionate to wrongdoing, of chilling speech and association, and of burdening legitimate business.

1. Juvenile gun possession When two teenagers purchased an assault weapon and then murdered 13 people before taking their own lives at Columbine High School in Colorado in 1999, attention focused on Mark Manes, the 22-
year-old computer programmer who sold the boys a TEK-DC9 assault pistol, and later sold them 100 rounds of ammunition the night before the killings. The teenage killers

p. 668

p. 669
had made a videotape before the crime in which they thanked Manes by name: “[T]hank you to Mark. . . . Very cool. You helped us do what we needed to.” But the videotape also absolved Manes and others of knowledge of the killers’ plans. One
boy said, “Let me tell you this much, they have no clue. So don’t blame them and arrest them for what we did.” The other boy added, “Yeah, you know it’s not their fault. ... We would have found someone else.” Michael Janofsky, Columbine
Killers, on Tape, Thanked 2 for Gun, N.Y. Times, Nov. 13, 1999, at A1.

What punishment should Manes have received? For what offense? Law enforcement officials had no reason to think that Manes knew, much less intended, that the Columbine shootings would occur. Thus, liability for the murders as an
accomplice of the two boys was not an option. Yet, liability under a misdemeanor facilitation statute, such as New York's, would have resulted in relatively minor penalties. The statute under which Manes was convicted and sentenced to a six-year
prison term (from a maximum penalty of 18 years) lies somewhere between these two options; it specifically targeted the selling of handguns to juveniles: “Any person who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly provides a handgun with or without
remuneration to any person under the age of eighteen years . . . commits [a] crime. . . .” Colo. Rev. Stat. §18-12-108.7. This statute obviated the difficulty of an accomplice prosecution by eliminating any mens rea requirement with respect to in-
juries the juvenile might inflict, and by requiring only recklessness as to the age of the handgun recipient. The statute also avoided the leniency of a general facilitation statute by providing for stiff felony penalties.

QUESTIONS: Does the Colorado statute provide a satisfactory solution for defendants like Manes? In cases where the defendant provides a handgun knowing that it will be used in a violent assault, is the statutory penalty severe enough? Con-
versely, in cases where the defendant only recklessly allows a juvenile access to an unloaded gun and no one is injured, are the statute's felony sanctions too severe?

2. Material support to terrorism. Federal legislation punishes the “knowing” provision of “material support” to “terrorists” or to “designated foreign terrorist organizations” (FTOs). 18 U.S.C. §2339A and §2339B. The legislation
defines “material support” as broadly including “any property, tangible or intangible, or service, including currency or . . . financial services, lodging, training, expert advice or assistance . .. communications equipment, . . . lethal substances, . .
personnel (1 or more individuals who may be or include oneself), and transportation, except medicine or religious materials.” §2339A(b). The material support is to “terrorists” if the actor knows or intends that it will be used in carrying out one of a
long list of specified federal offenses, such as damage to property, illegal use of explosives, the killing of government officials, and the destruction of aircraft. See §2339A(a). The USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 increased the maximum term of imprison-
ment from 10 to 15 years and provided for life imprisonment if the death of any person results from a violation.

One commentator has described this statutory scheme as follows (Norman Abrams, The Material Support Terrorism Offenses: Perspectives Derived from the (Early) Model Penal Code, 1 J. Nat'l Sec. L. & Pol’y 5, 18 (2005):

[A] trade-off was made between the mens rea required for the offenses and the actus reus or conduct required to hold the aiding person

p.669
p.670

criminally liable. Thus, the statutes require that the contribution of the actor be material, and they put content into the concept of material support by defining it in terms of substantial forms of aid through the specification of

listed categories. By thus “hardening up” the actus reus, the drafters made more acceptable a diluted mens rea of knowledge. . . .

Is Abrams right that the material support provisions “harden up” the actus reus of the offense?

In Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project, challengers to the law hoped to convince the Court to read into the statute a heightened mens rea standard based on their view that the actus reus required by the statute was not, in fact,
sufficiently stringent. The challengers were citizens and humanitarian organizations that wanted to train members of designated terrorist groups in “how to use humanitarian and international law to peacefully resolve disputes” and “how to petition
various representative bodies such as the United Nations for relief.” 561 U.S. 1, 14-15 (2010). The Court concluded that these activities fit within the statutory definitions of “training” and “expert advice or assistance” because the statute defined
those terms to include imparting a “specific skill” and passing on “specialized knowledge,” which the Court thought covered these activities. Id. at 21-22. The Court rejected the argument that the material support statute should be read to require
a specific intent to further the illegal ends of an FTO in order to satisfy due process. Id. at 16-17. The Court concluded that Congress clearly selected knowledge of the organization's connection to terrorism as the relevant mens rea standard. That
reading posed no constitutional vagueness problems, according to the Court, even when it applied to the kinds of acts at issue in the case. Id. Is the Court's reading consistent with Abrams’s claim that the actus reus is sufficiently limited to justify
the “diluted mens rea of knowledge”?

The Court also rejected the argument that Congress could not, consistent with the First Amendment, ban support to the legitimate activities of an FTO: “At bottom, plaintiffs simply disagree with the considered judgment of Congress
and the Executive that providing material support to a designated [FTO] — even seemingly benign support — bolsters the terrorist activities of that organization. That judgment, however, is entitled to significant weight. . ..” Id. at 36.

In light of the Court's decision, should the “material support” provisions be amended to require that the support be “substantial” or that it actually facilitate a completed terrorism offense? Without such amendments, is the statute vul-
nerable to the same criticism leveled at the original MPC proposal with regard to accomplice liability?

Another concern about possible statutory overbreadth arises in the context of social media. Individuals (including a 17-year-old) who have used social media to promote and encourage ISIS, for example, have been charged under the
material support laws.2 Should the material support laws reach such conduct? Did the Court's decision do enough to avoid chilling constitutionally protected speech and association (especially of those who support religious or cultural organiza-
tions that may be

p.670
pert

designated as FTOs)? Some scholars have argued that the material support law chills charitable giving to Muslim organizations. See Sam Adelsberg et al., The Chilling Effect of the “Material Support” Law on Humanitarian Aid: Causes, Conse-
quences, and Proposed Reforms, 4 Harv. Nat'l Sec. J. 282 (2013). Or are these concerns mitigated by the seriousness of the crimes that must be supported and the national security context in which they occur? Other scholars have argued that
a social media company can be prosecuted for material support of terrorism if it knowingly provides a platform to organizations or individuals who advocate the commission of terrorist acts. See Alexander Tsesis, Social Media Accountability for
Terrorist Propaganda, 86 Fordham L. Rev. 605 (2017). Putting aside the First Amendment implications, would it be an appropriate use of the criminal law to hold social media companies responsible? What would be some likely consequences of
that policy?

3. Money laundering. The broadest and most widely used substantive crime of facilitation is the federal legislation against money laundering. The two main federal statutes — 18 U.S.C. §1956 and §1957 — were, like many state
statutes against money laundering, passed as part of the war on drugs. People v. Mays, 55 Cal. Rptr. 3d 356, 363 (Ct. App. 2007). Section 1956, the most frequently used money laundering statute, makes it a crime punishable by up to 20 years’
imprisonment “to conduct [any] financial transaction . .. knowing that the transaction is designed . . . to conceal or disguise the nature, the location, the source, the ownership, or the control of the proceeds of specified unlawful activity.” The gov-
ernment is not required to prove the defendant knew the particular offense from which the proceeds were derived; it must prove only that the defendant knew they came from illegal activity of some sort.

Section 1956 shares with other targeted facilitation statutes a lowered mens rea of knowledge. What is distinctive about money laundering — and crucial to its wide use by prosecutors — is that the “specified unlawful activity” covered
by the law is broad; the statutory list includes all of the most common crimes and many truly obscure ones. In this way, the offenses facilitated through money laundering are not “targeted” at all. Rather, the mode of facilitation — the “financial
transaction” — is targeted. Yet financial transactions are hardly a narrow category; they are defined to include any transaction involving cash or checks. Thus, §1956 potentially reaches any acceptance of ill-gotten gains by a merchant or service
provider with whom a wrongdoer deals.

The second major federal money laundering statute, §1957, is in some ways even broader. It applies only to transactions involving more than $10,000, while §1956 has no minimum dollar threshold.‘ But §1957 requires knowledge only
of the fact that the transaction involves money from some illegal source, without §1956's additional requirement of knowledge that the transaction is designed to “conceal or disguise” the tainted nature of the money. The less stringent mens rea of
§1957 heightens the risk that ordinary citizens will face prosecution if they deal with someone who has illegal income.

pert
p.672

Although a conviction under either §1956 or §1957 requires proof that the defendant knew the transaction involved illegal proceeds, this requirement narrows the statute less than might appear. Consider United States v. Campbell, 977
F.2d 854 (4th Cir. 1992). Campbell, a real estate agent, arranged for a client, Lawing, to purchase a vacation home. She sensed that Lawing might be involved with illegal activity because he wanted to pay in cash and seemed somewhat secretive.
The Fourth Circuit upheld her conviction under §1957, finding sufficient evidence of the required mens rea because, under the doctrine of “willful blindness” (see pp. 304-312 supra), she had deliberately avoided learning where Lawing’s money
came from. (Some of the most troublesome convictions under a knowledge mens rea involve a willful blindness theory.) Although Campbell made no unusual profit on the transaction, all that mattered for the §1957 conviction was that she was
deemed to know that Lawing was paying with money from some illegal source.

Campbell illustrates how modem legislation undercuts the traditional reluctance to impose law enforcement duties on law-abiding citizens: People carrying on normal businesses can be convicted of money laundering if they become
aware of the criminal activities of their clients, or if they make a deliberate effort to look the other way. If they aren't cautious enough, they face prosecution for a serious federal felony. Samuel Buell notes the odd evolution of the money laundering
statute from one designed “to deal with the elusive international heroin boss” to one that covers a situation like Campbell's where “the actor . . . gave no thought to, indeed had no interest in, structuring her activities or otherwise investing re-
sources to evade sanctioning.” As Buell notes, “[o]nly prosecutorial discretion is left to sort the heroin boss from the realtor.” Samuel W. Buell, The Upside of Overbreadth, 83 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1491, 1537 (2008). What makes legislative drafters think
there should be liability in these situations that are so far afield from the “elusive international heroin boss” scenario? Is it a retributive impulse, or is it based on utilitarian needs of law enforcement? Some combination of the two?

There is a converse problem if people seeking to avoid liability under the money laundering statutes become overly cautious. Consider John K. Villa, A Critical View of Bank Secrecy Act Enforcement and the Money Laundering Statutes,
37 Cath. U. L. Rev. 489, 500-501 (1988):

One who suspects a person of offering stolen goods for sale may protect himself by merely declining to purchase the suspect goods. . .. If, on the other hand, it is a crime to do any business at all with one who deals in the

proceeds of illegal activity, then those who are merely suspected of crimes will find that . . . no one will risk dealing with them. The impact on the suspected individual can be severe . . ., yet there may be no means by which

the suspected individual can clear himself. The social cost of imposing such a stigma on individuals — especially those who have not been convicted of, let alone charged with, any crime — should present grave civil liberties
concerns even for the most ardent law-and-order legislator. . . .
b. Mens Rea for Results and Attendant Circumstances
Recall that the description of forbidden conduct in an offense often consists of more than conduct elements: It often includes results and attendant circumstances
p.672
p.673
as well. The following material discusses the mens rea required for these elements in the case of accomplice liability.
State v. McVay
Supreme Court of Rhode Island
132 A. 436 (R.I. 1926)

Barrows, J. Heard on a certification of a question of law before trial. Three indictments for manslaughter, each containing four counts, were brought against the captain and engineer of the steamer Mackinac, as principals, and against
Kelley, as accessory before the fact. The steamer carried several hundred passengers from Pawtucket to Newport via Narragansett Bay. The boiler producing the steam by which the vessel was propelled burst near Newport and many lives were
lost. The present indictments are for causing the deaths of three persons killed by escaping steam after the explosion of the boiler... .

The same question is raised upon each indictment . .. :

May a defendant be indicted and convicted of being an accessory before the fact to the crime of manslaughter arising through criminal negligence as set forth in the indictment?

. .. The charge against Kelley as accessory is that “before said felony and manslaughter was committed,” he did, at Pawtucket, “feloniously and maliciously aid, assist, abet, counsel, hire, command and procure the said George W.
McVay and John A. Grant [the captain and engineer, respectively], the said felony and manslaughter in manner and form aforesaid to do and commit.”. .

Because the manslaughter charge is “without malice” and “involuntary,” Kelley contends that he cannot be indicted legally as an accessory before the fact. The argument is that manslaughter, being a sudden and unpremeditated crime,
inadvertent and unintentional by its very nature, cannot be “maliciously” incited before the crime is committed. . . .

While every one must agree that there can be no accessory before the fact when a killing results from a sudden and unpremeditated blow, we do not think it can be broadly stated that premeditation is inconsistent with every charge of
manslaughter. Manslaughter may consist, among other things, of doing an unlawful act resulting in unintentional killing, such as violation of motor vehicle laws or administration of drugs to procure an abortion. Manslaughter is likewise committed
if an unintentional killing is occasioned by gross negligence in the doing of an act lawful in itself. There is no inherent reason why, prior to the commission of such a crime, one may not aid, abet, counsel, command, or procure the doing of the un-
lawful act or of the lawful act in a negligent manner. A premeditated act may be involved in such unlawful homicides.

[The present indictment for involuntary manslaughter is not self-contradictory when it charges Kelley to be an accessory before the fact. It was possible for him at Pawtucket to intentionally direct and counsel the grossly negligent act
which the indictment charges resulted in the crime. Involuntary manslaughter . .. means that defendants exercised no conscious volition to take life, but their negligence

p.673
p.674

was of such a character that criminal intention can be presumed. The crime was consummated when the explosion occurred. The volition of the principals was exercised when they chose negligently to create steam which the boiler could not

carry. The doing of the act charged or failure to perform the duty charged was voluntary and intentional in the sense that defendants exercised a choice among courses of conduct. It is obvious that Kelley could participate and is charged with

participating in procuring defendants to act in a grossly negligent manner prior to the explosion. . . . Specific duties are stated to have been laid upon the captain and engineer. Defendant is charged with full knowledge of those duties and of the

fact that the boiler was unsafe. He is charged with counseling and procuring the principals at Pawtucket to disregard their duties and negligently create steam... . . [A] jury might find that defendant Kelley, with full knowledge of the possible danger

to human life, recklessly and willfully advised, counseled, and commanded the captain and engineer to take a chance by negligent action or failure to act. ..

Commonwealth v. Roebuck

© Supreme Court of Pennsyivanig
32 A.3d 613 (Pa. 2011)

SayLor, J. In this appeal, we consider whether it is possible, as a matter of law, to be convicted as an accomplice to third-degree murder.

[)he victim was lured to an apartment complex, where he was ambushed, shot, and mortally wounded. Appellant participated, with others, in orchestrating the events, but he did not shoot the victim.

. . .As he did not physically perpetrate the homicide, the Commonwealth relied upon accomplice theory, [t]he matter proceeded to a bench trial, and a verdict of guilt ensued.

. . Appellant argued that there is no rational legal theory to support accomplice liability for third-degree murder. He rested his position on the following syllogism: accomplice liability attaches only where the defendant intends to
facilitate or promote an underlying offense; third-degree murder is an unintentional killing committed with malice; therefore, to adjudge a criminal defendant guilty of third-degree murder as an accomplice would be to accept that the accused in-
tended to aid an unintentional act, which is a logical impossibility.

[The relevant Pennsylvania statute mirrors MPC §2.06(4): “When causing a particular result is an element of an offense, an accomplice in the conduct causing such result is an accomplice in the commission of that offense, if he acts with
the kind of culpability, if any, with respect to that result that is sufficient for the commission of the offense.” 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. §306(d).]

[The Commonwealth replies] that accomplice liability readily pertains to murder of the third degree [because] it is the shared criminal intent motivating the underlying conduct (here, designing to stage a very dangerous altercation) which
establishes the requisite criminal culpability. . . . According to the Commonwealth, it is both rational and sensible to hold one who aids another in malicious conduct to account to the same degree as the principal for foreseeable consequences of
the wrongful actions. . .

p.674
p.676
[Two MPC provisions address the mens rea requirement for an accomplice]
(3) A person is an accomplice of another person in the commission of an offense if . . . with the purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of the offense, he . . . aids or agrees or attempts to aid such
other person in planning or committing it{]
(4) When causing a particular result is an element of an offense, an accomplice in the conduct causing such result is an accomplice in the commission of that offense if he acts with the kind of culpability, if any,

with respect to that result that is sufficient for the commission of the offense.

Section 2.06(4) thus prescribes that an accomplice may be held legally accountable where he is an “accomplice in the conduct” — or, in other words, aids another in planning or committing the conduct with the purpose of promoting or
facilitating it — and acts with recklessness (e., the “kind of culpability . . . sufficient for the commission of” a reckless-result offense).

[The MPC] commentary explains that the term “commission of the offense,” as used in Section 2.06(3), focuses on the conduct, not the result. See id. §2.06, cmt. 6(b), at 310. . . . This diffuses any impression that an accomplice must
always intend results essential to the completed crime. ... The commentary then points to the fourth subsection as supplying the essential culpability requirement, as follows:

One who solicits an end, or aids or agrees to aid in its achievement, is an accomplice in whatever means may be employed, insofar as they constitute or commit an offense fairly envisaged in the purposes of the association.

But when a wholly different crime has been committed, thus involving conduct not within the conscious objectives of the accomplice, he is not liable for it unless the case falls within the specific terms of Subsection (4).

[Id.] at 311 (emphasis added). According to the commentary, the purport of the fourth subsection is to hold the accomplice accountable for contributing to the conduct to the degree his culpability equals what is required to support liability of a
principal actor... .

Eakin, J., concurring: . . . As Appellant's syllogism is based on a false premise, his argument fails. Indeed, an accomplice to third degree murder does not intend to aid an unintentional murder; he intends to aid a malicious act which
results ina killing. Suppose an accomplice hands a gun to the principal and says “shoot that victim — | don’t care if he dies or not, but shoot him.” The principal shoots the victim in the leg, but the victim dies — it is classic third degree murder,
there being no proof of specific intent to kill, but a clearly malicious act regardless of the consequences. The same logic that enables a murder charge against the principal binds the accomplice as well — both committed an intentional malicious
act that resulted in the death of another, and both are guilty of the murder charge that follows. . . .

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Accomplice liability based on the same mental state as the substantive offense. We have already seen the debate over specific intent versus knowledge,
pp. 655-668 supra, and the general rule that accomplice liability requires specific intent. But specific intent with respect to which offense elements? McVay and Roebuck make clear that there is a distinction between conduct elements and result
elements. These cases recognize that for accomplice liability, the accomplice must have specific intent to further the underlying conduct committed by the principal, but for the result, the accomplice need only have the mens rea required for the
result element of the substantive offense.

2. The Model Penal Code on the mens rea required for results. As Roebuck makes clear, the MPC is in accord with the analysis in McVay. Is the MPC’s approach with respect to results consistent with its rejection of knowledge as
a sufficient mens rea for accomplice liability? Why might the drafters have drawn a distinction between the mens rea one needs with respect to conduct and the mens rea one needs with respect to results?

3. Problems. Consider the following problems: (a) Passenger is in a hurry to catch a flight and asks Taxi Driver to “do whatever it takes” to get to the airport on time. Taxi Driver drives over the speed limit in an aggressive way. Taxi
Driver hits and kills the driver of another car after speeding through a stop sign. If Taxi Driver is guilty of negligent homicide, does it make sense for Passenger to avoid any criminal liability?

(b) Drew and Jesse are roommates. Jesse has been drinking all day and asks to borrow Drew's car. Drew agrees even though aware that Jesse is drunk. Jesse drives drunk and hits and kills a pedestrian. Under the principles of McVay
and Roebuck, is Drew guilty of involuntary manslaughter or is this case distinguishable? Does Drew have the required mens rea with respect to the result? Does Drew have the requisite mens rea with respect to the conduct element? What if before
giving Jesse the keys, Drew asked Jesse to pick up some pretzels at a convenience store on the way home? See People v. Childress, 363 P.3d 155, 166 (Colo. 2015).

4, The Model Penal Code on the mens rea required for attendant circumstances. The MPC takes the position that purpose is required as to “the commission of the offense,” but the Code is silent on whether this requirement
applies to attendant-circumstance elements of the offense. The drafters of the MPC explained in the accompanying Commentary that this silence reflected a deliberate choice not to resolve the issue:

There is deliberate ambiguity as to whether the purpose requirement extends to circumstance elements of the contemplated offense or whether, as in the case of attempts, the policy of the substantive offense on this point

should control. The result, therefore, is that the actor must have a purpose with respect to the proscribed conduct, with his attitude towards the circumstances to be left to resolution by the courts. . ..

Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.06 at 311 n.37 (1985). How should the question of the proper mens rea for attendant circumstances in cases of accomplice liability be resolved? Consider the following problems.
(@) A was convicted of a felony in a jurisdiction where it is a crime for people with felony convictions to possess firearms. B provides A with a firearm without knowing of 4’s felony conviction. Should B be liable as an accomplice to A’s
offense of possession? Hasn't B helped A to violate the statute? On the other hand, has B
p.676
p.6r7
intended to help A commit a crime? One court has held liability improper, absent proof that B knew or should have known of 4’s status as a convicted felon. United States v. Gardner, 488 F.3d 700, 714 (6th Cir. 2007). Another court, in contrast, has
held that because people charged with the substantive offense are strictly liable for knowing that they have been convicted of a felony, no greater mens rea should be required for accomplices like B. United States v. Canon, 993 F.2d 1439 (Sth Cir.
1993). Are the justifications for strict liability in the case of A equally strong with respect to B? If not, is the Gardner court right to permit liability on the basis of negligence? If Gladstone's knowing assistance was insufficient for liability in the ab-
sence of purpose to aid, why should mere negligence be sufficient in the case of B?

(b) B encourages A to have sexual relations with C, and A does so. C is under the age of consent, but A and B both reasonably believe that C is an adult. If the crime of statutory rape imposes strict liability, A is guilty of rape. Should B be
liable as an accomplice? B did, after all, assist A in committing the rape. But did B intend to aid a crime? A Massachusetts court concluded that it was appropriate to hold B liable without instructing the jury that it had to find that B had knowledge
of the victim's age, at least where B was present at the scene and had the opportunity to make judgments about the child's age. Commonwealth v. Harris, 904 N.E.2d 478, 485 (Mass. App. Ct. 2009). But a contrary decision from North Carolina
requires the jury to find that B had knowledge of the victim's age. State v. Bowman, 656 S.E.2d 638, 648-650 (N.C. Ct. App. 2008). Which is the better view? Are the arguments for and against strict liability for the principal perpetrator in the context
of statutory rape equally relevant for the accomplice or is the case for strict liability less powerful for the latter?

5. Reconsidering Rosemond. Recall that the Supreme Court in Rosemond, p. 663 supra, concluded that a defendant need not intend that a gun be used during a drug sale to be guilty of violating 18 U.S.C. §924(c) under an accomplice
theory. Some scholars suggest that the only way in which Rosemond is consistent with precedent is to consider the gun element an attendant circumstance and not a conduct element and to view the drug transaction as the conduct. See Kit Kin-
sport, Rosemond, Mens Rea, and the Elements of Complicity, 52 San Diego L. Rev. 133, 156 (2015). Compare Stephen P. Garvey, Reading Rosemond, Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 233, 243 (2014) (arguing that to characterize the firearm aspect of §924(c) as
an attendant circumstance is not convincing given the conduct involved in “usfing] and carry[ing]” a firearm).

6. Comparison to liability for attempt. With respect to the result element of crimes, we have seen that the MPC, along with the common law and most American statutes, is more demanding in prosecutions for attempt than in
prosecutions for complicity. When a defendant is charged with attempt, the MPC requires that the defendant have the purpose to produce the proscribed result or the belief that the conduct committed will cause the result, even when recklessness
or some lesser mens rea would suffice for conviction of the completed offense. Recall the Smallwood case, p. 604 supra. But when a defendant is charged with complicity in an offense, the required mens rea for resulting harm is not purpose, but
only the mens rea required for the commission of the charged offense. What difference between aiding and abetting a completed crime and the offense of attempt might explain the different mens rea provisions for results? Is it that the retaliatory
impulse is stronger when there is resulting harm?

p.er7
p.678

When it comes to attendant circumstances, in contrast, the MPC is less demanding in cases of attempt than in cases of complicity, holding that the mens rea for attendant circumstances in cases of attempt is not purpose, but only
the mens rea required for the completed crime. So in a statutory rape hypothetical like the one in Note 4(b), a person who tries but is prevented from having sex with a person who is underage would be guilty of attempted statutory rape, even
without having grounds to suspect that that person was underage. Why does the MPC refuse to impose the same mens rea for attendant circumstances in cases of complicity but instead leave this decision to the courts? What might have led to
the greater caution about mens rea for attendant circumstances in the context of complicity than in the context of attempt? Do the examples in Note 4 offer guidance? Consider the sweep of this approach if the MPC adopted the same mens rea
for attendant circumstances in strict liability cases. In the Dotterweich case (p. 330 supra), would it mean that the defendant's spouse could be held liable for waking Dotterweich in the morning and driving Dotterweich to work, and therefore aid-
ing Dotterweich in selling what turns out to be contaminated aspirin?

People v. Russell
Court of Appeals of New York
693 N.E.2d 193 (N.Y. 1998)

Chier Juoce Kaye. [The three defendants battled each other in a shootout on the central mall of the Red Hook Housing Project in Brooklyn. During the course of the battle, Patrick Daly, a public school principal looking for a child who
had left school, was fatally wounded by a single stray bullet. Defendants were all charged with second-degree murder. Although ballistics tests were inconclusive in determining which defendant fired the bullet that killed Daly, the theory of the
prosecution was that each of them “intentionally aided” the defendant who fired the fatal shot (Penal Law §20.00). The jury convicted defendants of second-degree, depraved-indifference murder (Penal Law §125.25[2)).]

A depraved indifference murder conviction requires proof that defendant, under circumstances evincing a depraved indifference to human life, recklessly engaged in conduct creating a grave risk of death to another person, and thereby
caused the death of another person (Penal Law §125.25[2)). .. .

Although defendants underscore that only one bullet killed Patrick Daly and it is uncertain which of them fired that bullet, the prosecution was not required to prove which defendant fired the fatal shot when the evidence was sufficient
to establish that each defendant acted with the mental culpability required for the commission of depraved indifference murder, and each defendant “intentionally aided” the defendant who fired the fatal shot. Defendants urge, however, that the
evidence adduced at trial did not support a finding that they — as adversaries in a deadly gun battle — shared the “community of purpose” necessary for accomplice liability. We disagree. The fact that defendants set out to injure or kill one another
does not rationally preclude a finding that they intentionally aided each other to engage in the mutual combat that caused Daly's death.

p.67e
p.679

People v. Abbott (445 N.Y.S.2d 344 [1981]) provides an apt illustration. That case involved two defendants — Abbott and Moon — who were engaged in a “drag race” on a residential street when Abbott lost control and smashed into
another automobile, killing the driver and two passengers. Both defendants were convicted of criminally negligent homicide, but Moon asserted that he was not responsible for Abbott's actions and that his conviction should be set aside. Rejecting
this argument, the court found that, although Moon did not strike the victim's car and was Abbott's adversary in a competitive race, he intentionally participated with Abbott in an inherently dangerous and unlawful activity and therefore shared Ab-
bott’s culpability. Moon's “conduct made the race possible” in the first place, as there would not have been a race had Moon not “accepted Abbott's challenge.”

In the present case, the jurors were instructed: “If you find that the People have proven beyond a reasonable doubt that defendants took up each other's challenge, shared in the venture and unjustifiably, voluntarily and jointly created a
zone of danger, then each is responsible for his own acts and the acts of the others . . . [and] it makes no difference [whose bullet] penetrated Mr. Daly and caused his death.”

[There was adequate proof to justify the finding that the three defendants tacitly agreed to engage in the gun battle that placed the life of any innocent bystander at grave risk and ultimately killed Daly. Indeed, unlike an unanticipated
ambush or spontaneous attack that might have taken defendants by surprise, the gunfight in this case only began after defendants acknowledged and accepted each other's challenge to engage in a deadly battle on a public concourse... .

The evidence adduced at trial was also sufficient for the jury to determine that all three defendants acted with the mental culpability required for depraved indifference murder, and that they intentionally aided and encouraged each other
to create the lethal crossfire that caused the death of Patrick Daly.

[Alffirmed.

NOTES

1. Being an accomplice in the conduct. Is it clear in Abbott, the drag racing case cited in Russell, that the concept of “accomplice in the conduct” would apply? Did participating in the race make Moon an accomplice in Abbott's
conduct of crashing into the victim's car? Did Moon want Abbott to drive through the intersection in the manner he did? Or was he just reckless as to the possibility that Abbott would drive in that manner? And how about Russell? If Russell's own
shots didn’t kill the victim, did Russell want the opposing gang members to shoot back at him?

2. Causation and complicity. Russell and Abbott revisit the drag race problem, which we considered in the Causation section, Chapter 6.A.2.b, in connection with Commonwealth v. Root, p. 595 supra, and State v. McFadden, p. 598
supra. While those cases dealt with the liability of the defendants in terms of causation, Russell and Abbott deal with it in terms of complicity; that is, Russell and Abbott asked not whether the defendants personally caused the deaths, but whether
they are accomplices of those who did. Which of these doctrinal approaches, causation or complicity, is the more satisfactory way to determine the criminal liability of the defendants? See Christopher Kutz, Complicity: Ethics and Law for a Collec-
tive Age 230-235 (2002).

p.679
p.660
¢. The Natural and Probable Consequences Theory

The material thus far rests on the premise that liability as an accomplice for the criminal conduct of another requires that the accomplice have either specific intent to aid that conduct or, in rarer circumstances, knowledge of that con-
duct. There are, however, a number of cases and statutes that relax that traditional requirement. They are the subject of the material that follows.

People v. Luparello
California Court of Appeal, Fourth District
231 Cal. Rptr. 832 (1987)

Kremer, J. [Defendant Luparello wanted to locate Terri, his former lover who had deserted him to marry another. He thought he could discover her whereabouts from Mark Martin, a good friend of her current husband. To that end he
enlisted the help of several friends, telling them that he wanted the information at any cost. His friends visited Martin but failed to get the information they sought. They returned the next evening armed with gun and sword, but without Luparello ap-
parently, and lured Martin outside. Thereupon one of their group, waiting in a car, shot and killed Martin, Luparello was convicted of murder.]

The trial court charged the jury with several different theories by which Luparello’s guilt for first degree murder could be affixed; among these were . . . aiding and abetting. On appeal . . . Luparello .. . attacks the theoretical underpin-
nings of . . . aiding-and-abetting liability, and specifically argues the murder here was the unplanned and unintended act of a coconspirator and therefore not chargeable to Luparello under complicity theory.

Luparello first faults [the] theorly] for “imposing” the mens rea of the perpetrator upon him. As Luparello views it, [the] theorly] work[s] to presume conclusively the accomplice shares the perpetrator's intent. . .. Luparello errs when he
concludes the perpetrator and accomplice must “share” an identical intent to be found criminally responsible for the same crime. Technically, only the perpetrator can (and must) manifest the mens rea of the crime committed. Accomplice liability
is premised on a different or, more appropriately, an equivalent mens rea. This equivalence is found in intentionally encouraging or assisting or influencing the nefarious act. . . . Thus, to be a principal to a crime . . . the aider and abettor must intend
to commit the offense or to encourage or facilitate its commission. Liability is extended to reach the actual crime committed, rather than the planned or “intended” crime, on the policy [that] aiders and abettors should be responsible for the crimi-
nal harms they have naturally, probably and foreseeably put in motion. And it is precisely this policy which Luparello next challenges. . .

The California Supreme Court [stated] in . . . People v. Croy, 710 P.2d 392 [(Cal. 1985)]:

The requirement that the jury determine the intent with which a person tried as an aider and abettor has acted is not designed to ensure that his conduct constitutes the offense with which he is charged. His liability is

p.660

p68

vicarious. . . . [H]e is guilty not only of the offense he intended to facilitate or encourage, but also of any reasonably foreseeable offense committed by the person he aids and abets. . . .

Adopting the reasoning of the Supreme Court, we find the . . . aiding and abetting theor{y] proffered here dofes] not suffer the theoretical infirmities of which Luparello complains. In the circumstances of this case, [it] provides a sound
basis to derive Luparello’s criminal responsibility for first degree murder. . . .

Judgments affirmed.

Wiener, J., concurring: | concur .... in the result reached by the majority under the compulsion of . . . People v. Croy. [That case] require[s] a holding that an aider and abettor or co-conspirator is liable not only for those crimes committed
by a co-felon which he intended or agreed to facilitate but also for any additional crimes which are “reasonably foreseeable.” . . . This does not mean, however, that the announced principle is either logically consistent or theoretically sound.

. .. The major fallacy | see in the “foreseeable consequence” doctrine is not so much that it attributes an unintended act to the accomplice/co-conspirator but rather that it assesses the degree of his culpability for that act not by his own
mental state but rather by the mental state of the perpetrator and/or the circumstances of the crime. . . . The assault on Mark Martin contemplated by the conspiracy involved a foreseeable risk of death or serious injury. We can assume (although
there was no jury finding on the issue) that Luparello was criminally negligent in failing to appreciate the degree of risk. Under usual circumstances, a person negligently causing the death of another is guilty, at most, of involuntary manslaughter.
Here, however, Luparello’s liability is not based on his individual mental state but instead turns on the jury’s finding that the unidentified shooter intentionally killed Martin while lying in wait. Thus, Luparello is guilty of first degree murder. If the
circumstances of Luparello’s participation were exactly the same but the shooter did not “lie in wait,” Luparello could only be convicted of second degree murder. | am intrigued by the notion that if unknown to Luparello, the shooter ingested drugs
and/or alcohol to the point where he did not in fact harbor the requisite malice, Luparello would presumably be guilty only of voluntary manslaughter. . . . | find such fortuity of result irrational. So too, apparently, do Professors LaFave and Scott in
their treatise [Handbook on Criminal Law (1972) p. 516]:

The “natural and probable consequence” rule of accomplice liability, if viewed as a broad generalization, is inconsistent with more fundamental principles of our system of criminal law. It would permit liability to be

p68
p. 662

predicated upon negligence even when the crime involved requires a different state of mind. Such is not possible as to one who has personally committed a crime, and should likewise not be the case as to those who have

given aid or counsel.

[T]he “foreseeable consequence” doctrine [and] the . . . felony-murder rule [are] . . . both founded on the same outmoded and logically indefensible proposition that if a person exhibits some intent to violate the law, we need not be
terribly concerned that the contemplated crime was far less serious than the crime which actually took place. . .

The artificial imputation of stepped-up intent, inherent in both the felony-murder rule and the “foreseeable consequence” doctrine, is inconsistent with the “universal and persistent” notion that criminal punishment must be proportional
to the defendant's culpable mental state. Justice Mosk’s dissent in Taylor v. Superior Court, 477 P.2d 131 (Cal. [1970]) expressed it well: “Fundamental principles of criminal responsibility dictate that the defendant be subject to a greater penalty
only when he has demonstrated a greater degree of culpability.” The fact that the accomplice or co-conspirator intended to facilitate some less serious criminal act does not render these fundamental principles inapplicable.

ROY v. UNITED STATES, 652 A.2D 1098 (D.C. 1995): [Peppi Miller was a paid police informant who approached defendant Roy in an attempt to make an undercover buy of a handgun. Roy told him to return later with $400, and when he did so, he
was referred to Ross, who took him to another area. There Ross gave Miller the gun while Miller counted out the $400, but then Ross asked for the gun back, said he changed his mind, and robbed Miller of the $600 in his possession. To Miller's

request for an explanation, he replied that he was avenging Miller's earlier stickup of one of his own group. Roy was convicted as an accomplice to Ross's armed robbery. The trial court included an instruction that it would suffice to find defendant
liable if the robbery was the natural and probable consequence of the illegal attempt to sell a handgun, even if he did not intend Ross to rob Miller. At the same time, however, the judge invited a reexamination of the natural and probable conse-

quence rule, stating:]

The criminal law is trying . . . in these cases . . . to draw a line to serve two different policies that are . . . inconsistent with each other. On the one hand, there's clearly a policy in the criminal law not to hold people responsible for things
that they did not intend to do. . . . On the other hand, there is a competing policy that says, if you put criminal conduct in motion, or you intentionally assist in the commission of a crime, then you are held responsible for the natural and probable
consequences of that crime, even if they go beyond what you put in motion. . .. Somewhere between those two things, the law draws a line in what you can be held liable for, and what you can’t.

The natural and probable consequence doctrine of aiding and abetting . . . ought to be examined again by our Court of Appeals. . . . An early court borrowed a doctrine that was really an exception applicable in the case of the felony
murder doctrine and then grafted it onto the law of aiding and abetting generally, actually borrowed it [also] from the law of conspiracy, and then grafted it onto the law of aiding and abetting as it applies to [any] offense and then repeated it so
often that it became self-fulfilling without much analysis in the later cases.

p.662
p. 688

[The court of appeals reversed, finding the evidence insufficient to support a conviction on the “natural and probable consequences” theory, stating:] By invoking the “natural and probable consequences” theory, the government insists
that we sustain Roy's convictions of armed robbery . . . without requiring a showing that Roy intended to participate in the robbery of Miller or in any other crime of violence. Armed robbery is a felony punishable by life imprisonment; selling a
handgun, on the other hand, constitutes . . . a misdemeanor of which Roy has been independently convicted. The government's application of the “natural and probable consequences” doctrine would thus dramatically expand Roy's exposure
even where . . . he did not intend that a crime of violence be committed.

This court has stated that “an accessory is liable for any criminal act which in the ordinary course of things was the natural and probable consequence of the crime that he advised or commanded, although such consequence may not
have been intended by him.”. . . The phrase “in the ordinary course of things” refers to what may reasonably ensue from the planned events, not to what might conceivably happen, and in particular suggests the absence of intervening factors. . . .
Itis not enough for the prosecution to show that the accomplice knew or should have known that the principal might conceivably commit the offense which the accomplice is charged with aiding and abetting. Without inserting additional phrases
or adjectives into the calculus, we think that our precedents require the government to prove a good deal more than that. A “natural and probable” consequence in the “ordinary course of things” presupposes an outcome within a reasonably pre-
dictable range. . ..

The government contends that the armed robbery of Miller was in furtherance of the common purpose because it resulted in the defendants’ obtaining Miller's money — an achievement which, according to the government, was the
defendant's prime design and plan in the first place. In our view, however, an exchange of a handgun for $400 is qualitatively different from an armed robbery in which Ross stole $600 and retained for himself the object which, in Roy's contempla-
tion, was supposed to be sold. . . . The government [also] argues that Peppi Miller was a logical target of a robbery because, “given the illegal nature of the activity in which he was involved, [he] was unlikely to file a complaint with the police about
the robbery.” This reasoning, however, recognizes no apparent limiting principle. If we were to accept the government's position, then the robbery of any buyer or seller in a drug or unlicensed pistol sale would be viewed as the “natural and prob-
able consequence” of that transaction, for a participant in any illegal project may well be reluctant to invoke the aid of the constabulary. . . .

Viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, the evidence would perhaps support a finding that Roy should have known that it was conceivable that Ross might rob Miller. The evidence was insufficient, however, to show that
a robbery would follow in the “ordinary course of events,” or that it was a “natural and probable consequence” of the activities in which Roy was shown to have engaged.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. State of the law. A substantial number of jurisdictions have embraced the natural and probable consequences test used in the Luparello case. See John F.

p. 688
p. 684

Decker, The Mental State Requirement for Accomplice Liability in American Criminal Law, 60 S.C. L. Rev. 237 (2008). But the natural and probable consequences test remains controversial, and only 20 states clearly endorse it. Id. at 312. For an
example of a court rejecting the test, see McMillan v. Kelly, 304 Or. App. 299, 315 (2020). Even the California Supreme Court has limited the reach of Luparello. In People v. Chiu, 59 Cal. 4th 155 (2014), the court reaffirmed the general validity of the
natural and probable consequences doctrine applied in Luparello, including in the context of second-degree murder prosecutions, but held that an aider and abettor could not be convicted of first-degree premeditated murder under that doctrine.
The court reasoned:

[The mental state required for first-degree murder] is uniquely subjective and personal. It requires more than a showing of intent to kill; the killer must act deliberately, carefully weighing the considerations for and against a

choice to kill before he or she completes the acts that caused the death. [T]he connection between the defendant's culpability and the perpetrator’s premeditative state is too attenuated to impose aider and abettor liability

for first degree murder under the natural and probable consequences doctrine, especially in light of the severe penalty involved. .. .

Is the court's carve-out for first-degree murder persuasive? Is the mental state for first-degree murder “uniquely subjective and personal,” or does Luparello generally hold individuals responsible for many crimes that have subjective and personal
mental states? While the Supreme Court in Rosemond expressed no view on the natural and probable consequence doctrine, some have argued that the Court’s focus on culpable mens rea in Rosemond undercuts the viability of using that doctrine
in federal criminal law. See Evan Goldstick, Note, Accidental Vitiation: The Natural and Probable Consequence of Rosemond v. United States on the Natural and Probable Consequence Doctrine, 85 Fordham L. Rev. 1281, 1318 (2016). Does Rose-
mond call into question the viability of the natural and probable consequence doctrine, or is it possible to reconcile them? Does it depend on what kind of notice Rosemond deems sufficient for a defendant to be liable? As the next Note explains,
even if federal criminal law cannot embrace the natural and probable consequence doctrine as a matter of accomplice liability, federal criminal law accepts a similar doctrine under conspiracy law.

2. Comparison to Pinkerton doctrine. The natural and probable consequences doctrine is similar, though not identical, to the Pinkerton doctrine developed in conspiracy law. Under Pinkerton, a defendant who is guilty of conspiring
to commit one offense may be convicted of other offenses that co-conspirators commit, if those additional offenses further the conspiratorial objective and are reasonably foreseeable consequences of the conspiratorial agreement. In a jurisdiction
that embraces the natural and probable consequences doctrine for accomplice liability, the Pinkerton doctrine does not add much because any case that could be brought under Pinkerton could also be brought under the natural and probable
consequence theory of accomplice liability. But in the majority of jurisdictions that reject the natural and probable consequences doctrine, Pinkerton provides an avenue for going beyond the limits of traditional accomplice liability. Note, however,
that Pinkerton liability is a more limited expansion of traditional accomplice liability

p.684
p. 685
than the natural and probable consequences doctrine because Pinkerton requires an agreement and imposes the additional requirement that, to charge any crimes beyond the crime the conspirators conspire to commit, the prosecution must
show that those additional crimes were committed to further the conspiracy. See the discussion of the Pinkerton case at pp. 707-721 infra.
QUESTION: Could Luparello be held liable for the murder of Martin under the Pinkerton doctrine? Why not?

3. Model Penal Code. The MPC rejects the natural and probable consequences doctrine for accomplice liability. Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.06 at 310-313 (1985) states:

Subsection (3)(a) requires that the actor have the purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of the offense. . .. This does not mean, of course, that the precise means used in the commission of the crime must have

been fixed or contemplated or, when they have been, that liability is limited to their employment. One who solicits an end, or aids or agrees to aid in its achievement, is an accomplice in whatever means may be employed,

insofar as they constitute an offense fairly envisaged in the purposes of the association. But when a wholly different crime has been committed, thus involving conduct not within the conscious objectives of the accomplice,

he is not liable for it... . [I]t is submitted that the liability of an accomplice ought not to be extended beyond the purposes that he shares. Probabilities have an important evidential bearing on these issues; to make them in-

dependently sufficient is to predicate the liability on negligence when, for good reason, more is normally required before liability is found.

2. Actus Reus

a. Encouragement
Wilcox v. Jeffery

King’s Bench Division [1951]

1 AILE.R. 464

Lorp Gopparp, C.J. This is a Case stated by the metropolitan magistrate at Bow Street Magistrate’s Court before whom the appellant, Herbert William Wilcox, the proprietor of a periodical called “Jazz Illustrated,” was charged on an
information that

on Dec. 11, 1949, he did unlawfully aid and abet one Coleman Hawkins in contravening art. 1(4) of the Aliens Order, 1920, by failing to comply with a condition attached to a grant of leave to land, to wit, that the said Coleman

Hawkins should take no employment paid or unpaid while in the United Kingdom, contrary to art. 18(2) of the Aliens Order, 1920... . .

The case is concerned with the visit of a celebrated professor of the saxophone, a gentleman by the name of Hawkins who was a citizen of the United States.

p. 685

p. 686
He came here at the invitation of two gentlemen of the name of Curtis and Hughes, connected with a jazz club which enlivens the neighborhood of Willesden. . . . Mr. Hawkins . . . arrived with four French musicians. When they came to the airport,
among the people who were there to greet them was the appellant. He had not arranged their visit, but he knew they were coming and he was there to report the arrival of these important musicians for his magazine. So, evidently, he was regarding
the visit of Mr. Hawkins as a matter which would be of interest to himself and the magazine which he was editing and selling for profit. Messrs. Curtis and Hughes arranged a concert at the Princes Theatre, London. The appellant attended that
concert as a spectator. He paid for his ticket. Mr. Hawkins went on the stage and delighted the audience by playing the saxophone. The appellant did not get up and protest in the name of the musicians of England that Mr. Hawkins ought not to be
here competing with them and taking the bread out of their mouths or the wind out of their instruments. It is not found that he actually applauded, but he was there having paid to go in, and, no doubt, enjoying the performance, and then, lo and be-
hold out comes his magazine with a most laudatory description, fully illustrated, of this concert. On those facts the magistrate has found that he aided and abetted.

Reliance is placed by the prosecution on R. v. Coney ((1882), 8 Q.B.D. 534) which dealt with a prize fight. This case relates to a jazz band concert, but the particular nature of the entertainment provided, whether by fighting with bare fists
or playing on saxophones, does not seem to me to make any difference to the question which we have to decide. The fact is that a man is charged with aiding and abetting an illegal act, and | can find no authority for saying that it matters what
that illegal act is, provided that the aider and abettor knows the facts sufficiently well to know that they would constitute an offence in the principal. In R. v. Coney the prize fight took place in the neighborhood of Ascot, and four or five men were
convicted of aiding and abetting the fight. The conviction was quashed on the ground that the chairman had not given a correct direction to the jury when he told them that, as the prisoners were physically present at the fight, they must be held
to have aided and abetted. That direction, the court held, was wrong, it being too wide. The matter was very concisely put by Cave, J., whose judgment was fully concurred in by that great master of the criminal law, Stephen, J. Cave, J., said (8
Q.B.D. 540): “Where presence may be entirely accidental, it is not even evidence of aiding and abetting. Where presence is prima facie not accidental it is evidence, but no more than evidence, for the jury.”

There was not accidental presence in this case. The appellant paid to go to the concert and he went there because he wanted to report it. He must, therefore, be held to have been present, taking part, concurring, or encouraging,
whichever word you like to use for expressing this conception. It was an illegal act on the part of Hawkins to play the saxophone or any other instrument at this concert. The appellant clearly knew that it was an unlawful act for him to play. He

had gone there to hear him, and his presence and his payment to go there was an encouragement. He went there to make use of the performance, because he went there, as the magistrate finds and was justified in finding, to get “copy” for his
newspaper. It might have been entirely different, as | say, if he had gone there and protested, saying: “The musicians’ union do not like you foreigners coming here and playing and you ought to get off the stage.” If he had booed, it might have been
some

p. 686

p.687
evidence that he was not aiding and abetting. If he had gone as a member of a claque to try to drown the noise of the saxophone, he might very likely be found not guilty of aiding and abetting. In this case it seems clear that he was there, not only
to approve and encourage what was done, but to take advantage of it by getting “copy” for his paper. In those circumstances there was evidence on which the magistrate could find that the appellant aided and abetted, and for these reasons | am
of opinion that the appeal fails. ...

Appeal dismissed with costs.

QUESTIONS ON ENCOURAGEMENT AS ACTUS REUS

1. Onlookers. Would the finding of accomplice liability for Wilcox apply equally to any member of the audience who, knowing that it was illegal for Coleman Hawkins to perform in the United Kingdom, clapped politely? Does that act
seem too minimal under the circumstances? Does it seem equally troubling to hold liable as accomplices those who clap, cheer, or yell encouragement during a violent assault, like a rape? In an infamous Massachusetts case, on which the film The
Accused was loosely based, six men were charged with raping a young woman on a pool table in a New Bedford tavern. Four were convicted, based on evidence that they had each committed forced sex acts on the woman, but two were acquitted
in the absence of any evidence of direct participation in the assaults, despite evidence that they had verbally encouraged the sex acts, including one man’s admission that he had yelled, “Go for it! Go for it!” while the others were raping the victim.
See Two Convicted, Two Acquitted in Barroom Gang Rape, U.P.I., Mar. 23, 1984. Should the two men who were acquitted have been convicted as accomplices to the rapes? Should mere presence, without clapping or cheering, be sufficient for
crimes like gang rape, dog fighting, and drag racing, that are, in many respects, motivated by a desire to perform for an audience? Although mere presence is generally insufficient for accomplice liability, 48 states have outlawed the knowing and
intentional presence at a dog fight as has the federal government with passage of the Animal Fighting Spectator Prohibition Act in 2014. Other states have done the same for being present at drag races. Some argue this approach should apply to
those who witness gang rapes by imposing upon them a duty to report the offense. Zachary D. Kaufman, Protectors of Predators or Prey: Bystanders and Upstanders Amid Sexual Crimes, 92 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1317 (2019). What is (or should be) the
liability of a person who turns the corner of a side street and sees two people raping a third person? Does the bystander have a duty to intervene or summon help? If the bystander does not do so but stays to watch, does the bystander become an
accomplice to the rape?

2. Speech. Because the actus reus for accomplice liability can consist entirely of speech, it arguably raises First Amendment concerns, which the Wilcox case highlights. (Recall that Wilcox was covering the concert as a reporter. His
article pointed out the possible liability Hawkins and the promoters faced and noted how they tried to get around it by referring to the performance as an “informal jam-session.”) Does the requirement that the accomplice intend to facilitate crimi-
nal conduct act as a sufficient check against prosecutors who might threaten First Amendment interests? Eugene Volokh argues that this heightened standard does

p.687

p. 668
not do much work: “Tests that ostensibly turn on the speaker's purpose are likely to unacceptably deter even speech that is said without such a purpose. And a speaker's purpose doesn’t affect the harm caused (or not caused) by the speech.”
Eugene Volokh, The Freedom of Speech and Bad Purposes, 63 UCLA L. Rev. 1366, 1370 (2016). What limits, if any, should be placed on accomplice liability to account for this concern? Wilcox remains good law, but should accomplice liability be
modified to require more of an actus reus? Should accomplice liability require a showing of significant or substantial aid or encouragement? Consider the materials that follow.

b. The Materiality of the Aid
STATE EX REL. ATTORNEY GENERAL v. TALLY, JUDGE, 15 SO. 722, 739 (ALA. 1894): [On an impeachment proceeding against Judge Tally, it was established as follows: Ross had seduced Judge Tally’s sister-in-law. Her brothers, the Skeltons,
followed Ross to the nearby town of Stevenson, in order to kill him. Judge Tally went to the local telegraph office at Scottsboro and while there learned that one of Ross's relatives had sent Ross a telegram warning, “Four men on horseback with
guns following. Look out.” Judge Tally then sent his own telegram to the telegraph operator at Stevenson (whom he knew), telling him not to deliver the warning telegram to Ross. The operator received both telegrams and failed to deliver the mes-
sage to Ross. The Skelton brothers caught up with Ross and Killed him. On these facts, the court held that the judge was an accomplice of the Skelton brothers in the killing:]

We are therefore clear to the conclusion that before Judge Tally can be found guilty of aiding and abetting the Skeltons to kill Ross, it must appear that his vigil at Scottsboro to prevent Ross from being warned of his danger was by
preconcert with them, or at least known to them, whereby they would naturally be incited, encouraged and emboldened, “given confidence” to the deed, or that he aided them to kill Ross, contributed to Ross's death in point of physical fact by
means of the telegram he sent to Huddleston [the telegraph operator]. .. .

The assistance given, however, need not contribute to the criminal result in the sense that but for it the result would not have ensued. It is quite sufficient if it facilitated a result that would have transpired without it. It is quite enough if
the aid merely renders it easier for the principal actor to accomplish the end intended by him and the aider and abettor, though in all human probability the end would have been attained without it. If the aid in homicide can be shown to have put
the deceased at a disadvantage, to have deprived him of a single chance of life, which but for it he would have had, he who furnishes such aid is guilty though it can not be known or shown that the dead man, in the absence thereof, would have
availed himself of that chance. As where one counsels murder he is guilty as an accessory before the fact, though it appears to be probable that murder would have been done without his counsel, and as where one being present by concert to
aid if necessary is guilty as a principal in the second degree, though had he been absent murder would have been committed, so where he who facilitates murder, even by so much as destroying a single chance of life the assailed might otherwise
have had, he thereby supplements the efforts of the perpetrator, and he is guilty as principal in the second degree at common law, and is principal in the first degree under our statute, notwithstanding it may be found that in all human probability
the chance would not have been availed of, and death would have resulted anyway.

p. 668
p. 669
PROBLEMS ON THE MATERIALITY OF THE AID OR ENCOURAGEMENT GIVEN

1. Causation and complicity. As Tally and Wilcox make clear, it is not necessary to establish a but-for relation between the defendant's action and the criminal conduct of another to establish accomplice liability. What is the justi-
fication for holding someone liable for a crime if it would have occurred anyway? Is it based on retributive concerns? Utilitarian arguments? Both? Consider in this respect the New Bedford gang rape case. The spectators certainly seem morally
blameworthy. And even if encouragement or aid may not be a but-for cause of criminal conduct, it makes crime more likely to occur.

2. Attempted complicity? We just noted that even a minimal possibility of actual aid or encouragement suffices for accessorial liability.

QUESTION: Need there be any actual aid or encouragement at all? Consider these variations on cases we have just read.

In Hicks, suppose the defendant deliberately shouted encouragement to Rowe to spur him on to kill Colvard, but it is shown at trial that Rowe was completely deaf and was, moreover, totally unaware of Hicks’s presence. Is Hicks still
liable?

In Tally, what would have been the result:

a. if the telegraph operator had disregarded the judge's instructions and had tried, though in vain, to deliver the warning telegram?
b. if the telegraph operator followed the judge’s instructions and did not deliver the warning, but the pursuers never succeeded in catching up with their intended victim?

c. if the telegraph operator followed the judge's instructions and did not deliver the warning, and the pursuers did catch up but the intended victim effectively resisted after a struggle?

In the Hicks and the first Tally hypothetical, there is attempted encouragement or aid to the person who commits the crime, but none is in fact rendered. What should be the liability of the defendants? Under the law before the MPC,
there would be no liability. See J.C. Smith, Aid, Abet, Counsel or Procure, in Reshaping the Criminal Law 132-133 (P.R. Glazebrook ed., 1978): “An attempt to counsel . . . does not amount to counselling. Advice or encouragement proffered at the
scene of the crime but not communicated to the mind of the principal offender does not amount to aiding and abetting.”

These difficulties are avoided by the MPC, §2.06(3), and the jurisdictions that follow its lead.° Defendants in the first Tally hypothetical would be accomplices because a person acting with the required mens rea is an accomplice
whether the person aids or “attempts to aid” another person in planning or committing the offense. Moreover, §2.06(3)(a)() makes solicitation the basis for accomplice liability, and §5.02(2) provides that solicitation is established

p. 669

p.690
even if the actor fails to communicate with the person solicited to commit the crime. (Note that in the third Tally hypothetical, the defendants are accomplices at common law and under the MPC to an attempted homicide because the pursuers
passed the line of mere preparation by getting close enough to engage in a struggle with the intended victim.) In support of its position, the Comment to the MPC observes (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.06 at 314 (1985):

The inclusion of attempts to aid may go in part beyond present law, but attempted complicity ought to be criminal, and to distinguish it from effective complicity appears unnecessary where the crime has been committed.

Where complicity is based upon agreement or solicitation, one does not ask for evidence that they were actually operative psychologically on the person who committed the offense; there ought to be no difference in the

case of aid.

Note the difficulty introduced in the second Tally hypothetical. Here the crime the defendant tried to aid is not committed. Section 2.06(8) does not cover the situation. Do you see why? How should it be dealt with? The MPC solution to
this problem is sketched in the Comment to §2.06 supra, at 314 n.46:

Section 2.06(3) of the Model Code is predicated .. . on the actual commission of an offense by the person aided. Assuming the requisite culpability, one who aids, or attempts to aid, or agrees to aid, is thus liable under this

section only if the principal actor actually commits an offense. . ..

Where the principal actor commits neither the completed offense nor an attempt, however, a different situation is presented. The purported accomplice in that situation would not be liable under Section 2.06

because he did not aid in the commission of a crime. His conduct designed to render aid may be criminal, however, either as an attempt (Section 5.01(3)) or, in the case of preconcert, as criminal conspiracy (Section 5.03(1)

(b). In both situations liability for the abortive effort plainly seems appropriate.

3. Complicity by omission. Can a person become an accomplice by failing to act to prevent another from committing a crime? Consistent with the general approach to determining criminal liability for omissions, the MPC provides
that people can be accomplices if they have a legal duty to prevent the offense and they fail to do so with the purpose of promoting or facilitating the crime. §2.06(3)(a)(ii). In support of its position, the Commentary states (at 320):

The policeman or the watchman who closes his eyes to a burglary fails to present an obstacle to its commission that he is obliged to interpose. If his purpose is to promote or facilitate its perpetration, a fact that normally can

be proved only by preconcert with the criminals, no reason can be offered for denying his complicity. But if the dereliction is not purposeful in that respect, as when it rests upon timidity or inefficiency, it is unduly harsh to

view it as participation in the crime.

p.690
p69

Can complicity by omission be found even in the absence of preconcert? Consider People v. Stanciel, 606 N.E.2d 1201 (Ill. 1992). Violetta Burgos was charged as an accomplice to murder when her boyfriend, Stanciel, beat her three-
year-old daughter to death. Burgos had violated a court order to keep Stanciel away from the child and had authorized Stanciel to discipline the child despite his past and ongoing abusive behavior. Though Burgos did not perform any of the acts
that led to her daughter's death, the court ruled that her failure to protect her child from Stanciel rendered Burgos an accomplice to her daughter’s murder. Most courts agree with Stanciel that parents can be liable under an aiding and abetting
theory for a crime committed by a third party when they fail to protect their children from the abuse. People v. Rolon, 73 Cal. Rptr. 3d 358, 366 (Ct. App. 2008). See generally Dorothy E. Roberts, Motherhood and Crime, 79 lowa L. Rev. 95 (1993).
Parents are not the only ones who have been found liable for failing to protect a child. In Staples v. Commonwealth, 454 S.W.3d 803 (Ky. 2014), the defendant was the live-in boyfriend of a mother whose child abuse killed her five-month-old baby.
The court found that the jury could hold the boyfriend responsible for manslaughter under a breach-of-duty theory of complicity because the boyfriend resided indefinitely with the child in a parent-like role and had assumed a substantial responsi-
bility for necessities such as food, shelter, and protection. For an argument that liability in this context “exposes already vulnerable and marginalized women to criminal prosecution” because of “(1) the strong correlation between domestic violence
and child abuse occurring simultaneously, and (2) the high prevalence and under-reporting of domestic violence in minority communities,” see Jacqueline Mabatah, Note, Blaming the Victim: The Intersections of Race, Domestic Violence, and Child
Neglect Laws, 8 Geo. J.L. & Mod. Critical Race Persp. 355, 357 (2016). How should courts balance the potential disproportionate impact of these laws on women in communities of color, given that the child victims whom the law seeks to protect
are also likely to disproportionately be members of those same communities?

4. Omissions and mens rea. Would the result in Stanciel be the same under the MPC? Plainly the mother was under a legal duty, but is there enough evidence to support a finding that she acted with the purpose that Stanciel should
beat the child to death? Suppose she had not authorized him to discipline the child and had stood by out of fear?

How should the law address workers at child welfare agencies who fail to protect children from abusive parents? Can the worker's failure to act be the basis of criminal charges on an aiding and abetting theory? New York prosecutors
believed the answer is yes, because they brought the city’s first-ever cases of negligent criminal homicide against child services caseworkers for failing to prevent the death of a child at the hands of her abusive mother. Jennifer Gonnerman, The
Knock at the Door, N.Y. Mag., Sept. 11, 2011. The workers ultimately pleaded guilty to endangering the welfare of a child, and the other criminal charges were dropped. Is this an example of criminal law reaching too far into issues of regulatory in-
competence, or is criminal law necessary to ensure that government workers do their jobs?

p.691
p.692
3. The Relationship Between the Liability of the Parties
State v. Hayes
‘Supreme Court of Missouri
16 S.W. 514 (Mo. 1891)

Tomas, J. The defendant appeals from a sentence of five years’ imprisonment in the penitentiary for burglary and larceny. [Defendant proposed to one Hill that he join him in the burglary of a general store. Hill, actually a relative of the
store owners, feigned acquiescence in order to obtain the arrest of defendant and advised the store owners of the plan. On the night of the planned burglary, defendant and Hill arrived at the store together. Defendant raised the window and as-
sisted Hill in climbing through into the building. Hill handed out a side of bacon. Shortly thereafter they were apprehended ] It will be seen the trial court told the jury in [its] instruction that defendant was guilty of burglary if he, with a felonious intent,
assisted and aided Hill to enter the building, notwithstanding Hill himself may have had no such intent. In this we think the court erred. One cannot read this record without being convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that Hill did not enter the
warehouse with intent to steal. . .. We may assume, then, for the sake of the argument, that Hill committed no crime in entering the wareroom. The act of Hill, however, was by the instruction of the court imputed to defendant. This act, according
to the theory of the instructions, so far as Hill was concerned, was not a criminal act, but when it was imputed to defendant it became criminal because of the latter's felonious intent. This would probably be true if Hill had acted under the control
and compulsion of defendant, and as his passive and submissive agent. But he was not a passive agent in this transaction. He was an active one. He acted of his own volition. He did not raise the window and enter the building with intent to com-
mit crime, but simply to entrap defendant in the commission of crime, and have him captured.

Judge Brewer sets this idea in a very clear light in State v. Jansen, 22 Kan. 498. He says: “The act of a detective may perhaps be not imputable to the defendant, as there is a want of community of motive. The one has a criminal intent,
while the other is seeking the discovery and punishment of crime.” Where the owner learns that his property is to be stolen, he may employ detectives and decoys to catch the thief. And we can do no better than to quote again from Judge Brewer
in the case above cited, as to the relation of the acts of detectives and the thief when a crime is alleged to have been committed by the two. He says: “Where each of the overt acts going to make up the crime charged is personally done by the
defendant, and with criminal intent, his guilt is complete, no matter what motives may prompt or what acts be done by the party who is with him, and apparently assisting him. Counsel have cited and commented upon several cases in which detec-
tives figured, and in which defendants were adjudged guiltless of the crimes charged. But this feature distinguishes them: that some act essential to the crime charged was in fact done by the detective, and not by the defendant, and, this act not
being imputable to the defendant, the latter's guilt was not made out. The intent and act must combine, and alll the elements of the act must exist and be imputable to the defendant.”

p.692
p. 689

Applying the principle here announced to the case at bar, we find that defendant did not commit every overt act that went to make up the crime. He did not enter the warehouse, either actually or constructively, and hence he did not
commit the crime of burglary, no matter what his intent was, it clearly appearing that Hill was guilty of no crime. To make defendant responsible for the acts of Hill, they must have had a common motive and common design. The design and the
motives of the two men were not only distinct, but dissimilar, even antagonistic. . .. The court should instruct the jury that if Hill broke into and entered the wareroom with a felonious intent, and defendant was present, aiding him with the same
intent, then he is guilty; but if Hill entered the room with no design to steal, but simply to entrap defendant, and capture him in the commission of crime, and defendant did not enter the room himself, then he is not guilty of burglary and larceny as
charged. He may be found guilty, however, of petit larceny, in taking and removing the bacon after it was handed to him. This overt act he did in fact commit. . . . The judgment is reversed, and the cause remanded for new trial.

VADEN v. STATE, 768 P.2d 1102 (ALASKA 1989): [Fish and Wildlife Protection officers received a tip that Vaden, a local guide, was promoting illegal hunting practices by his customers. The officers assigned one of their undercover agents, John
Snell, to pose as a hunter and to commission Vaden's services. On the hunt, Vaden piloted the aircraft and maneuvered it to facilitate Snell's shooting game from the plane with a shotgun Vaden had lent him for the purpose. Snell shot and killed
four foxes. Vaden was convicted, as Snell's accomplice, of hunting in violation of Alaskan law. On appeal, the Supreme Court of Alaska affirmed the convictions, rejecting Vaden's argument that because Snell's action was justified in light of the
needs of law enforcement (the “public authority justification defense”), no criminal action occurred for which he could be convicted of being an accomplice. The court reasoned that the action of Snell was not justified, but that even if it were, it
would not avail Vaden, because the justification would be personal to the agent. The majority also found that no entrapment had been shown and that the actions of Snell, while unlawful, were not so outrageous as to constitute a denial of due
process]

[The dissenting opinion reasoned:] The accomplice liability charges should fail on [the] ground [of] the long-standing common law rule that the act of a feigned accomplice may never be imputed to the targeted defendant for purposes
of obtaining a conviction. In State v. Neely, 300 P. 561 (Mont. 1931), the Montana Supreme Court applied this principle under circumstances akin to those in the case at bar. In Neely, a cattle owner employed a detective, Harrington, to “get in” with
suspected cattle thieves during an act of cattle rustling. Harrington associated himself with the criminal enterprise, and the crime was carried out. Harrington himself, however, committed the principal offense of purloining the cattle, while the tar-
geted suspect merely stood watch outside the premises and offered various

p. 689

— p. 694
other forms of assistance before and after commission of the offense. The court reversed Neely’s conviction as an accomplice to the crime. . . 2 The principle enunciated in Neely, which has been repeated by numerous courts under a variety
of factual circumstances . . . is based in sound reason. It is the general rule that one who aids and abets another in criminal activity is liable for all of the “natural and probable consequences” of his accomplice’s criminal acts. Thus, the potential
for abuse inherent in law enforcement methods such as those employed in the case at bar is substantial. Once an agent has succeeded in persuading an individual to take some substantial act in furtherance of his general criminal scheme, the
ultimate liability of the targeted defendant, if any, will depend upon which foreseeable crimes the agent chooses to commit in order to secure convictions against his criminal “accomplice.” In this case, Officer Snell shot four foxes. Vaden, as pilot
of the plane from which they were shot, was charged with four separate criminal counts of taking foxes from the air out of season. Had Snell opted to shoot a fifth fox, one more count could have been added to Vaden’s indictment. In my view, it is
clearly inconsistent with due process principles, and manifestly unjust, that the ultimate criminal liability of a defendant should be made to depend upon the good aim and/or the good intentions of the police officer charged with securing his arrest.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Distinguishing Hayes from Vaden. The dissent in Vaden invokes the rule that acts of a feigned principal may not be imputed to the targeted defendant for the purpose of convicting the defendant as an accomplice. This appears
to be what underlay the decision to reverse the conviction in the Hayes case. But is the situation in the Vaden case distinguishable? Snell did shoot the foxes in violation of law, and Vaden did help him do so. How can it be that Snell's motive in
violating the hunting laws (to secure a conviction against Vaden) could render Vaden not guilty? In the Vaden case there are plausible answers, turning on the public policy of discouraging unacceptable law enforcement practices. But the dissent
in Vaden relies on a principle that is not confined to law enforcement personnel. If Snell were a private individual with a grudge against Vaden, would the dissent’s argument hold up? Was Snell a “feigned” principal at all?

2. Role reversal and the importance of shared intent. Could Hill, the feigned principal, have been charged as an accomplice to Hayes if their roles in the burglary had been reversed but Hill still lacked the intent to steal the bacon?
In Wilson v. People, 87 P.2d 5 (Colo. 1939), Wilson, angry at Pierce for allegedly stealing his watch, helped Pierce break into a drug store by boosting him through a transom. While Pierce was inside the store, Wilson left briefly to telephone the po-
lice and returned to receive bottles of whiskey that Pierce handed to him through the transom. When the police arrived, Wilson helped the police capture Pierce and

p.694

p. 695
identified Pierce as the burglar. Wilson later admitted to the police his connection to the burglary but explained that he helped Pierce only in the hopes of framing Pierce, not because Wilson had the specific intent that they commit larceny. Larceny
requires the intent to permanently deprive the owner of his property, so Wilson's defense is that he never had the intent to deprive the drugstore of the whiskey bottles permanently. And if Wilson lacked the intent for larceny, he lacked the intent for
burglary as well, because he did not break and enter with the intent to commit a felony. Wilson was charged and convicted of aiding in the commission of the burglary. The Colorado Supreme Court reversed Wilson's conviction holding, quoting 1
F. Wharton, Criminal Law §271 (12th ed. 1932):

[Whhile detectives, when acting as decoys, may apparently provoke the crime, the essential element of dolus, or malicious determination to violate the law, is wanting in their case. And it is only the formal, and not the

substantive, part of the crime that they provoke. They provoke, for instance, in larceny, the asportation of the goods, but not the ultimate loss by the owner. They may be actuated by the most unworthy of motives, but the an-

imus furandi in larceny is not imputable to them... .

Wilson thus serves as a reminder of the importance of the accomplice’s mens rea in those jurisdictions that follow the traditional rule that the accomplice must have the specific intent that the crime be committed. See pp. 655-668
supra. What if the facts in Wilson were different and Wilson's goal had been to help Pierce kill the owner of the drug store in order to see Pierce do time for murder? In that situation, is it clear that Wilson could not be charged with the killing under
a theory of accomplice liability?

3. Entrapment. In some cases involving feigned accomplices, the defendant may have a defense of “entrapment” — which most American jurisdictions define as government inducement of a defendant who is not “predisposed” to
commit the offense — but only when the accomplice is a government agent who improperly induces the defendant's criminal activity. Routine undercover drug purchases and other “sting” operations generally do not trigger such a defense. In
contrast, in Jacobson v. United States, 503 U.S. 540 (1992), the court reversed a defendant's conviction for receiving child pornography through the mail because no inference of predisposition was warranted when government agents subjected
the defendant to 26 months of fictitious mailings promoting child pornography, and there was no evidence that the defendant had otherwise sought or received illegal child pornography from nongovernmental sources. Why should the entrapment
defense rest on whether the feigned accomplice is a government actor or a private one?

Even if a suspect is predisposed to commit the offense (thereby negating the entrapment defense), why should a defendant's sentence depend on attendant circumstances manipulated by the government? As the dissenting opinion in
Vaden observed, accepting law enforcement agents as principals gives them the discretion to determine the charges an accomplice faces and often the sentence as well. Law enforcement officers can engage in “sentencing entrapment” — where
the government creates or induces a far greater crime than the suspect originally intends, for example, by having defendants cook powder cocaine into crack or engage in a drug transaction in a school zone, thereby exposing the defendant to a
much

p. 695

p. 696
higher sentence. Derrick Augustus Carter, To Catch the Lion, Tether the Goat: Entrapment, Conspiracy, and Sentencing Manipulation, 42 Akron L. Rev. 135, 137 (2009). For an argument that defendants of color are disproportionately affected by
sentencing entrapment, see Norman L. Reimer & Lisa M. Wayne, From the Practitioners’ Perch: How Mandatory Minimum Sentences and the Prosecution’s Unfettered Control over Sentence Reductions for Cooperation Subvert Justice and Exac-
erbate Racial Disparity, 160 U. Pa. L. Rev. PENNumbra 159 (2011).

NOTES AND PROBLEMS ON THE DERIVATIVE NATURE OF ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY

The derivative nature of accomplice liability is an axiom in the doctrine of complicity: “It is hornbook law that a defendant charged with aiding and abetting the commission of a crime by another cannot be convicted in the absence of
proof that the crime was actually committed.” United States v. Ruffin, 613 F.2d 408, 412 (2d Cir. 1979). “[T]he Government must first prove that someone committed the underlying substantive offense. Otherwise there was no crime. . . to have
abetted.” United States v. Martinez, 921 F.3d 452, 472 (6th Cir. 2019). “In a prosecution for aiding and abetting a crime, the [glovernment need not identify a specific person or group of individuals as the principal . . . only that ‘some person” com-
mitted the crime. United States v. Bowens, 907 F.3d 347, 351 (Sth Cir. 2018).

Itis important, however, not to confuse derivative liability with vicarious liability. Accomplice liability does not involve imposing liability on one party for the wrongs of another solely because of the relationship between the parties.
Liability requires culpability and conduct by the secondary actor — intentional conduct designed to encourage or help — that makes it appropriate to blame the secondary actor for what the primary actor does. The term “derivative” merely means
that liability is dependent on the principal's violating the law. What is at issue is the responsibility of the secondary party for the principal actor's violation of law. Unless the latter occurs, there can be no accomplice liability.

This axiom of accessorial liability gives rise to many problems. To a large extent these problems can be solved by making an attempt to aid a sufficient basis to convict the secondary actor for the crime of attempt as a principal. See
Model Penal Code §5.01(3). But traditionally (and under the present law of many jurisdictions) this option has not been available, so the problems persist.

1. The nonculpable principal as innocent agent. Suppose a factual situation similar to that in State v. Hayes, p. 692 supra, but with Hayes asking a six-year-old child named Hill to go through the window and take the bacon. In this
case, Hayes would be held guilty of burglary through the use of Hill, his innocent agent. This standard doctrine, the so-called innocent agent doctrine, is expressed in §2.06(2)(a) of the MPC as follows: “A person is legally accountable for the con-
duct of another person when . . . acting with the kind of culpability that is sufficient for the commission of the offense, he causes an innocent or irresponsible person to engage in such conduct.” The drafter’s comment states (Model Penal Code and
Commentaries, Comment to §2.06 at 300 (1985):

p. 696

p.697

Subsection (2)(a) is based upon the universally acknowledged principle that one is no less guilty of the commission of a crime because he uses the overt conduct of an innocent or irresponsible agent. He is accountable in

such cases as if the conduct were his own. At common law, he was considered a principal for such behavior.

2. Limits of the innocent agent doctrine. There may be difficulties in employing an innocent agent doctrine even where the mens rea of the defendant and the innocence of the agent are established.

(a) One such case is where the statute defines the crime so that it can only be committed by designated classes of persons of which the defendant is not a member. For example, if a statute prohibits an officer or employee of a bank
from entering false records of transactions, then one who is not an officer or an employee cannot commit the offense. If the outsider helps or encourages an officer who intentionally does so, the outsider can be held as an accomplice; the accom-
plice’s liability is derived from that of the culpable officer. If, however, the outsider dupes an innocent officer into doing so unknowingly, the outsider cannot be held liable as an accomplice to a crime committed by the officer, because the officer
committed no crime. The usual recourse is to apply the innocent agent concept to treat the instigators as principals who have done the prohibited act themselves, using the officer or employee as their instrument. But because the instigators are
not officers or employees, they cannot violate the statute. Thus, in this case, the innocent agent doctrine cannot be used to hold the instigators liable.

Federal courts have solved the difficulty by interpreting the federal aiding and abetting statute to mean that one is criminally liable as a principal for causing another to commit criminal acts where the other, even though innocent, has the
capacity to commit the criminal acts and the defendant does not. See United States v. Ruffin, 613 F.2d 408 (2d Cir. 1979). The federal statute, 18 U.S.C. §2(b), reads: “Whoever willfully causes an act to be done which if directly performed by him or
another would be an offense against the United States, is punishable as a principal.” (Emphasis added.)

(b) A second situation where this difficulty can arise is rarer: where the action prohibited can only be done personally by the principal's own physical conduct. For example, a sober defendant may take a heavily intoxicated, disorderly
person to a public place. We could hardly say that the sober person has (using the other person as an instrumentality) committed the criminal action of being drunk and disorderly in a public place.

QUESTIONS: How would 18 U.S.C. §2(b) handle this case? How should it be handled? For a discussion of these situations, see Sanford H. Kadish, Blame and Punishment 172 (1987).
3. The culpable-but-unconvictable principal. Another class of cases raising questions for the traditional derivative liability doctrine is where the principals would be guilty except for a policy-based defense that means they cannot
be convicted. Consider, for example, Farnsworth v. Zerbst, 98 F.2d 541 (Sth Cir. 1938), where the defendant conspired with and aided another in the commission of
p.697
p. 698
espionage, but the latter could not be convicted because of diplomatic immunity; or United States v. Azadian, 436 F.2d 81 (9th Cir. 1971), where the defendant aided a principal who had been acquitted on grounds of entrapment. As the courts held
in these cases, there is no reason to grant the accomplice a defense simply because the principal has a defense — the grounds of granting the principal a defense are reasons of policy that are inapplicable to the accomplice. Yet how can convict-
ing the accomplice be squared with the rule that makes the liability of the accomplice turn on the liability of the principal?

4. The acquitted principal. We have seen that in general there can be no guilty aider and abettor without a guilty principal; the situations in the above Notes are distinguishable or are exceptions to that rule. What happens when the
principal has been acquitted? May the accomplice who is subsequently tried raise that acquittal as a defense? In a situation of this kind where the principal had been acquitted of federal bribery charges, the United States Supreme Court affirmed
a conviction of the accomplice, stating in United States v. Standefer, 447 U.S. 10, 25-26 (1980), as follows:

This case does no more than manifest the simple, if discomforting, reality that “different juries may reach different results under any criminal statute. That is one of the consequences we accept under our jury system.” Roth v.

United States, 354 U.S. 476, 492 (1957). While symmetry of results may be intellectually satisfying, it is not required. Here, [defendant] received a fair trial at which the Government bore the burden of proving beyond reason-

able doubt that [the principal] violated 26 U.S.C. §7214(a)(2) and that petitioner aided and abetted him in that venture. He was entitled to no less — and to no more.

The MPC is in accord with this position. See Model Penal Code §2.06(7).

5. When the accomplice is a victim. May accomplices have a defense even though they act with the required mens rea? Consider the following.

(a) In The Queen v. Tyrell, [1894] 1 Q.B. 710, the court reversed a conviction of a minor for aiding, abetting, and encouraging statutory rape upon herself by an adult, stating:

[lit is impossible to say that the Act, which is absolutely silent about aiding or abetting, or soliciting or inciting, can have intended that the girls for whose protection it was passed should be punishable under it for the of-

fences committed upon themselves.

The same reasoning has been applied to victims charged with conspiracy to commit an offense. See Gebardi v. United States, p. 752 infra. For further discussion of the victim rule, see Glanville Williams, Victims and Other Exempt
Parties in Crime, 10 Legal Stud. 245 (1990). Do these decisions suggest that juveniles who voluntarily take sexual images of themselves and send them to adults or other juveniles should not be prosecuted under laws that prohibit the distribution
of child pornography? Prosecutors have brought charges in such cases, but some argue these prosecutions are inappropriate given the purpose of these laws. See Amy F. Kimpel, Using Laws Designed to Protect as a Weapon: Prosecuting Minors
Under Child Pornography Laws, 34 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 299 (2010). For a broader historical analysis

p. 698

p.699
of prosecutions involving teenage sexual activity, see Mae C. Quinn, From Turkey Trot to Twitter: Policing Puberty, Purity, and Sex-Positivity, 38 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 51 (2014).

(b) The Model Penal Code contains a provision, followed in a number of states, that a defendant is not an accomplice in an offense committed by another if the offense is so defined that the defendant’s conduct is inevitably incident to
its commission. §2.06(6)(a), (b). The Comment on this provision states (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.06 at 324-325 (1985):

Should . . . the purchaser [be considered] an accomplice in the unlawful sale, the unmarried party to a bigamous marriage an accomplice of the bigamist, the bribe-giver an accomplice of the taker? . .. What is common to

these cases .. . is that the question is before the legislature when it defines the individual offense involved. No one can draft a prohibition of [bigamy] without awareness that two parties to the conduct necessarily will be in-

volved. The provision, therefore, is that the general section on complicity is inapplicable, leaving to the definition of the crime itself the selective judgment that must be made.

NOTES ON DIFFERENCES IN THE DEGREE OF CULPABILITY

1. Lesser culpability of principal actor. Does it follow from the derivative nature of accomplice liability that the secondary party cannot be convicted of a more serious crime than that committed by the principal actor? Consider the
following situations.

(a) Regina v. Richards, [1974] Q.B. 776. The defendant, Isabelle Richards, hired two men to beat up her husband. She told them she “wanted them to beat him up bad enough to put him in the hospital for a month.” The men accosted
Mr. Richards and struggled with him, but he escaped without suffering any serious injuries. Mrs. Richards and the two men were tried together on charges of felonious assault, requiring proof of wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm,
and misdemeanor assault, requiring proof of intent to cause harm, but not necessarily serious harm. The two men were acquitted on the felony charges and convicted on the misdemeanor count. Mrs. Richards, tried as their accomplice, was con-
victed of felonious assault. On appeal, the court reversed her felony conviction, stating:

[The prosecution] says that here one can properly look at the actus reus, that is the physical blows struck upon Mr. Richards, and separately the intention with which the blows were struck. . .. We do not take that view. . . .

There is proved on the evidence in this case one offence and one offence only, namely, the offence of unlawful wounding without the element of specific intent. . .. If there is only one offence committed, and that is the of-

fence of unlawful wounding, then the person who has requested that offence to be committed, or advised that that offence be committed, cannot be guilty of a graver offence than that in fact which was committed.

p.699

.700
QUESTION: Was the decision correct? Commentators have disagreed. See Sanford H. Kadish, Blame and Punishment 181-186 (1987). The argument against the decision is that the blows struck by Mrs. Richards’s hirelings should be treated as
her own actions on the ground that she “caused” them. Therefore, she struck the blows and had the specific intent to cause grievous bodily harm when she did so. The contrary argument is that this would be true only if the hirelings were innocent
agents, her unwitting instrument not knowing fully what they were doing. But since that apparently was not the case, their actions are their own and could not be said to be “caused” by Mrs. Richards, any more than any accomplice “causes” the
actions of the principal. In that case, she can probably be convicted only of whatever crime they committed, or of soliciting the felonious assault. See Sanford H. Kadish, A Theory of Complicity, supra pp. 651-652, and compare the result and rea-
soning in State v. Hayes, p. 692 supra.

(b) People v. McCoy, 24 P.3d 1210 (Cal. 2001). McCoy and Lakey participated in a drive-by shooting, with McCoy firing the fatal shots. Both were convicted of murder — McCoy as a principal and Lakey as an aider and abettor. McCoy
testified at trial that he had been shot at earlier the same day at the same intersection where the fatal shooting took place and that he armed himself and shot only in self-defense. McCoy's conviction was overturned because the jury was not
instructed properly on McCoy's defense — that he had an unreasonable but good-faith belief in the need to use self-defense — which, if believed by the jury, would have negated the element of malice in murder and reduced McCoy's murder con-
viction to voluntary manslaughter.

Should Lakey's conviction for aiding and abetting McCoy similarly have been reversed? The court held that it should not, comparing Lakey to lago in Shakespeare's Othello (id. at 1216):

[Alssume someone, let us call him lago, falsely tells another person, whom we will call Othello, that Othello’s wife, Desdemona, was having an affair, hoping that Othello would kill her in a fit of jealousy. Othello does so

without lago’s further involvement. In that case . . . Othello might be guilty of manslaughter, rather than murder, on a heat of passion theory. Othello’s guilt of manslaughter, however, should not limit lago’s guilt if his own

culpability were greater. lago should be liable for his own acts as well as Othello’s, which he induced and encouraged. But lago’s criminal liability, as Othello’s, would be based on his own personal mens rea. If as our hypo-

thetical suggests, lago acted with malice, he would be guilty of murder even if Othello, who did the actual killing, was not.

We thus conclude that when a person, with the mental state necessary for an aider and abettor, helps or induces another to kill, that person's guilt is determined by the combined acts of all the participants as well
as that person's own mens rea. If that person's mens rea is more culpable than another's, that person's guilt may be greater even if the other might be deemed the actual perpetrator.
Professor Glanville Williams has offered the following argument for permitting the accessory to be held liable for a greater offense than the principal's in cases like these: “In effect the primary party is an innocent agent in respect of part
p.700
p.701
of the responsibility of the secondary party.”° He also stated: “If a person can act through a completely innocent agent, there is no reason why he should not act through a semi-innocent agent. It is wholly unreasonable that the partial guilt of the
agent should operate as a defence to the instigator.”7

An alternative argument is that the actions of the principal perpetrator (Othello in the court’s example) are not fully volitional. As a result, those actions cannot pose a barrier to our treating the actions of an instigator (such as lago) as
the cause of the resulting death. See the material on Causation, pp. 567-601 supra. When that is so, there is no difficulty in making the crime each party commits dependent on that party's own mens rea, because each is treated as a principal who
has caused the death.® This rests on the premise that volition does not have the nature of an on/off switch, but rather exists along a spectrum. That is, the action of an intervening actor (like Othello) can be insufficiently volitional to break the causal
chain, but sufficiently volitional to support some degree of responsibility for that action.

2. Greater culpability of principal actor. Does it follow from the theory of derivative liability that the instigator cannot be held for a lesser crime than that committed by the perpetrator? For example, suppose that an enraged Othello
had hired someone else to kill Desdemona. The hired killer, presumably, would be guilty of murder. Does it follow that Othello is also guilty of murder? In Moore v. Lowe, 180 S.E. 1, 2 (W. Va. 1935), a hired killer murdered the defendant's husband
at her instigation. The court held that, as an accessory to the murder, the defendant could be convicted of manslaughter. In support of its position, the court quoted 1 Wharton, Criminal Law 363-364 (12th ed. 1932):

[T]he offense of the instigator is not necessarily of the same grade as that of the perpetrator. The instigator may act in hot blood, in which case he will be guilty only of manslaughter, while the perpetrator may act coolly, and

thus be guilty of murder.

B. CONSPIRACY
INTRODUCTORY NOTES

1. The two meanings of conspiracy. Conspiracy has two key aspects. First, like attempt and solicitation, it is an inchoate crime that aims at preparatory conduct — the agreement to commit a crime — before it matures into commis-
sion of the substantive offense. This is the stand-alone crime of conspiracy. Second, conspiracy is a form of accessory liability. It is a means by which individuals who agree to commit a crime are held liable for the actions of others in the group.

2. Conspiracy as an inchoate offense. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes offered a one-sentence summary of the stand-alone crime of conspiracy: “A conspiracy is a partnership in criminal purposes.” United States v. Kissel, 218 U.S.
601, 608 (1910).

p.701

p. 702
Generally, conspiracy is defined as the crime of agreeing with another to commit a criminal offense. It is an inchoate offense because the conspiratorial agreement is punishable whether or not the agreed-upon offense ever occurs. But unlike
attempt, the crime of conspiracy does not “merge” into the completed offense. Rather, conspiracy is generally punishable separately and in addition to the completed offense — a recognition that the law of conspiracy is designed not only to pun-
ish preparatory activity, but also to address the “special danger” posed by group criminal activity.

The traditional approach to grading is to treat the inchoate crime of conspiracy as a generic offense and to prescribe a punishment range that is unrelated to the sentence associated with whatever crime is the target of the conspiracy.
For example, 18 U.S.C. §371 provides that the punishment for conspiracy is up to five years’ imprisonment, regardless of the seriousness of the object offense. Under §371, an agreement to commit murder carries the same five-year maximum
sentence as an agreement to commit a minor theft or embezzlement, and an agreement to commit a felony carrying a two-year maximum subjects the conspirators to the five-year sentence, even though an individual who commits the object of-
fense alone faces only the two-year maximum. In other words, the sentence for conspiracy could be greater than the sentence for the crime that is the object of the conspiracy.

Maryland offers an example of one solution to this problem: Its code provides that “[t]he punishment of a person who is convicted of conspiracy may not exceed the maximum punishment for the crime that the person conspired to
commit.” Rudder v. State, 956 A.2d 791, 794 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2008). The current federal statute addresses this issue only with respect to misdemeanors, specifying that when the object crime is a misdemeanor, punishment for the conspiracy
shall not exceed the punishment authorized for the misdemeanor. Some jurisdictions have failed to take even this step, and still accept the common-law doctrine that made it a felony to conspire to commit a misdemeanor. Under Cal. Penal Code
§182 (2021), a conspiracy to commit a crime against certain federal or state officials is a felony punishable by imprisonment for five, seven, or nine years; an agreement to throw a tomato at such an official would call for a minimum sentence of five
years, though actually throwing the tomato, without a prior agreement, would be a misdemeanor assault carrying a maximum sentence of one year.

Though this generic approach — grading conspiracy without regard to the sentence for the object of the conspiracy — survives in a number of jurisdictions, the majority of states now reject it. Most fix the punishment for conspiracy at
some term that is tied to but less than the sentence provided for the object crime. See Note, Conspiracy: Statutory Reform Since the Model Penal Code, 75 Colum. L. Rev. 1122, 1183-1188 (1975). Roughly a third of the states, following the lead
of the MPC, make the punishment for conspiracy the same as that authorized for the object crime, except in the case of the most serious felonies. See Model Penal Code §5.05(1), in the Appendix in this book. Recall that this is the same approach
that the MPC uses in the case of attempts. But are conspiracy and attempt really comparable for grading purposes? Note that an attempt is not punishable under the Code until the defendant has taken a “substantial step” that is “strongly corrob-
orative” of the criminal purpose. In such a case, punishment is permitted up to the level authorized for the object crime. But a conspiracy may be punishable from the

p.702
p. 703
moment that an agreement is made. When defendants have not taken significant steps to put their plan into action, is it appropriate to impose the same punishment authorized for successful commission of the object crime?

3. Other significant consequences of a conspiracy charge. There are additional features of conspiracy charges that make conspiracy the “darling of the modern prosecutor's nursery,” Harrison v. United States, 7 F.2d 259, 263 (2d
Cir. 1925). These features prompted Clarence Darrow to remark that “any citizens interested in protecting human liberty” should “study the conspiracy laws of the United States.” Clarence Darrow, The Story of My Life 64 (1932). While Darrow’s
view was once shared among Supreme Court justices, a recent observer notes that now the Court does not appear as concerned with the excesses of conspiracy law (Paul Marcus, The Crime of Conspiracy Thrives in Decisions of the United
States Supreme Court, 64 U. Kan. L. Rev. 373, 407-08 (2016)):

There was a time . . . when [the] Justices . . . were quite concerned with the elasticity of the conspiracy charge and the manner in which that charge was prosecuted. [Numerous opinions mandate[ed] caution and re-

straint. . .. That view seemingly has vanished from the Court. [In recent decisions,] the Justices instead have repeatedly emphasized [conspiracy's dangers to society, with] strong reaffirmations of prosecutorial positions... .

[Although] conspiracies may, without question, need to be sanctioned|,] overuse of the conspiracy doctrine . . . can create terribly difficult and unfair trial situations.

Consider the following implications of a conspiracy charge:

(a) Procedural consequences. The procedural advantages a conspiracy case offers the government are discussed in Krulewitch v. United States, 336 U.S. 440 (1949):

An accused, under the Sixth Amendment, has the right to trial “by an impartial jury of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been committed.” The leverage of a conspiracy charge lifts this limitation from the

prosecution and reduces its protection to a phantom, for the crime is considered so vagrant as to have been committed in any district where any one of the conspirators did any one of the acts, however innocent, intended

to accomplish its object. The Government may, and often does, compel one to defend at a great distance from any place he ever did any act because some accused confederate did some trivial and by itself innocent act in

the chosen district. ..

When the trial starts, the accused feels the full impact of the conspiracy strategy. Strictly, the prosecution should first establish prima facie the conspiracy and identify the conspirators, after which evidence of

acts and declarations of each in the course of its execution are admissible against all. But the order of proof of so sprawling a charge is difficult for a judge to control. As a practical matter, the accused often is confronted

with a hodgepodge of acts and statements by others which he may never have authorized or intended or even known about, but which help to persuade the jury of existence of the conspiracy itself. . .. The naive assumption

that prejudicial effects can be overcome by instructions to the jury all practicing lawyers know to be unmitigated fiction.

p. 703
p. 708
The trial of a conspiracy charge doubtless imposes a heavy burden on the prosecution, but it is an especially difficult situation for the defendant. . .
co-defendant in a conspiracy trial occupies an uneasy seat. There generally will be evidence of wrongdoing by somebody. It is difficult for the individual to make his own case stand on its own merits in the

minds of jurors who are ready to believe that birds of a feather are flocked together. If he is silent, he is taken to admit it and if, as often happens, co-defendants can be prodded into accusing or contradicting each other, they

convict each other. .. .

(b) Spillover effects. The larger the conspiracy, the more significant are the procedural consequences and the greater is the potential for accessory liability. Conspiracy prosecutions in recent decades have grown increasingly
complex. A single case involving almost two dozen defendants in a drug conspiracy with a trial lasting for more than a year is not unusual. See, e.g., United States v. Simpson, 2008 WL 4758588 (D. Kan. 2008). Consider Paul Marcus, Criminal Con-
spiracy Law: Time to Turn Back from an Ever Expanding, Ever More Troubling Area, 1 Wm. & Mary Bill Rts. J. 1, 8-11 (1992):

[An] enormous number of cases involv[e] many defendants, complex evidentiary issues, and dozens and dozens of complicated charges. . .. It is difficult to imagine how a jury goes about sorting the testimony of hundreds

of witnesses, or considering evidence it heard more than a year earlier. Indeed, how does a jury begin to apply the reasonable doubt standard when there are more than fifty counts charging more than a dozen different indi-

viduals? In today's world of conspiracy prosecution, however, such a situation — while perhaps not the norm — occurs with great frequency.

In these large conspiracy trials, defendants’ primary protection against the spillover effect of evidence unrelated to their guilt is the limiting instruction given by the trial judge. These instructions generally take the form of admonitions
to the jury to consider certain pieces of evidence only against some defendants and not against others. Judges typically assume that limiting instructions can cure any prejudice. See, e.g., United States v. Defreitas, 701 F. Supp. 2d 309, 316-317
(E.D.N.Y. 2010). Yet in Krulewitch, Justice Jackson called faith in the efficacy of such instructions “unmitigated fiction.” His skepticism was echoed by the Ninth Circuit in its review of a 16-month drug conspiracy trial involving dozens of defen-
dants, some of whom were charged with major crimes, including murder, and others of whom were charged only with relatively minor offenses (United States v. Baker, 10 F.3d 1374, 1391 (8th Cir. 1993):

[T]he human limitations of the jury system and the consequent risk of spillover prejudice cannot be ignored. This risk is particularly acute for comparatively peripheral defendants. . .. At oral argument in this case, the Assis-

tant United States Attorney averred that his multiple violations of the district court's limiting instructions during closing argument were the inadvertent result of confusion. When a seasoned prosecutor is unable to keep track

of nearly 200 limiting instructions given over the course of 16-month trial, our faith in a lay jury's ability to do so is stretched to the

p. 708
p. 705

limit. Our presumption that a jury is able to follow the trial court's instructions is “rooted less in the absolute certitude that the presumption is true than in the belief that it represents a reasonable practical accommodation of

the interests of the state and the defendant in the criminal justice process.”

(c) Criminalizing non-criminal objectives. At common law, an agreement became punishable as a conspiracy if the objectives were criminal or “unlawful.” “Unlawful” objectives could include acts deemed offensive to “public
morals” and acts that violate civil law regulations or precedents. As Justice Jackson noted in his concurrence in Krulewitch, this means that “at common law and under some statutes a combination may be a criminal conspiracy even if it contem-
plates only acts which are not crimes at all when perpetrated by an individual.” Krulewitch v. United States, 336 U.S. at 449.

() Public morals. In Shaw v. Director of Public Prosecutions, [1962] A.C. 220, the House of Lords upheld a conviction for “conspiracy to corrupt public morals,” on the basis of a defendant's agreement to publish a directory listing
prostitutes and their services. In the United States, most states reject this doctrine and confine criminal conspiracy to those agreements whose objectives are themselves criminal. See Note, Conspiracy: Statutory Reform Since the Model Penal
Code, 75 Colum. L. Rev. 1122, 1129 (1975). But in some states an agreement to pursue non-criminal objectives can be a criminal conspiracy. For example, Cal. Penal Code §182(a)(5) (2021) makes it a punishable conspiracy for two or more per-
sons to agree “[t]o commit any act injurious to the public health, to public morals, or to pervert or obstruct justice, or the due administration of the laws. . ..”

QUESTION: Can a prosecution under §182(a)(5) survive a challenge for unconstitutional vagueness? Reconsider City of Chicago v. Morales, p. 216 supra.

(i) Other non-criminal objectives. Even where the “public morals” doctrine is not invoked, statutes may use the conspiracy concept to punish those who agree to pursue objectives that are unlawful because they violate the civil
code but not the criminal law. Consider Cal. Penal Code §182(a)(3) (2021), which makes it a punishable conspiracy “[tJo falsely move or maintain any suit, action or proceeding.”

(d) Sentencing consequences. What should be the appropriate level of punishment when the conspirators have committed the object crimes? The traditional view permits separate punishments, with consecutive sentences, for the
object crime and the conspiracy to commit it. In Callanan v. United States, 364 U.S. 587 (1961), the defendant was convicted of obstructing interstate commerce by extortion and of conspiring to obstruct commerce by that same extortion. The
maximum punishment for obstructing commerce was 20 years. The trial court imposed a sentence of 12 years on the obstruction count and another 12 years to run consecutively on the conspiracy count. The defendant alleged that Congress did
not intend to authorize punishment for both the conspiracy and the obstruction itself. The Court rejected the claim, stating (id. at 593-594):

Concerted action both increases the likelihood that the criminal object will be successfully attained and decreases the probability that the individuals involved will depart from their path of criminality. Group association for

criminal purposes often, if not normally, makes possible the

p. 705
p. 706
attainment of ends more complex than those which one criminal could accomplish. Nor is the danger of a conspiratorial group limited to the particular end toward which it has embarked. Combination in crime makes more

likely the commission of crimes unrelated to the original purpose for which the group was formed. In sum, the danger which a conspiracy generates is not confined to the substantive offense which is the immediate aim of the

enterprise.

The MPC takes a different position. Section 1.07(1)(b) provides that a defendant may not be convicted of more than one offense if “one offense consists only of a conspiracy or other form of preparation to commit the other.” But when
an agreement seeks to achieve various criminal objectives and is not limited to a specific crime, the MPC allows for cumulative sentences. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §5.03 at 390 (1985):

When a conspiracy is declared criminal because its object is a crime, it is entirely meaningless to say that the preliminary combination is more dangerous than the forbidden consummation; the measure of its danger is the

risk of such a culmination. On the other hand, the combination may and often does have criminal objectives that transcend any particular offenses that have been committed in pursuance of its goalss. In the latter case, cumu-

lative sentences for conspiracy and substantive offenses ought to be permissible, subject to the general limits on cumulation that the Code prescribes. In the former case, when the preliminary agreement does not go beyond

the consummation, double conviction and sentence are barred.

Developments in federal sentencing law reflect the continuing controversy over the imposition of separate punishments for conspiracy and the object offense. The Federal Sentencing Guidelines reject separate punishments for con-
spiracy and the object offense. Some laud this position for limiting the unfair treatment that might flow from count manipulation. Jacqueline E. Ross, Damned Under Many Headings: The Problem of Multiple Punishment, 29 Am. J. Crim. L. 245, 257
(2002). Despite the Guidelines, however, the proliferation of federal statutory offenses allows prosecutors to seek separate punishments by “stacking” charges for substantive offenses on top of charges for conspiracy-like enterprise crimes, result-
ing in “compound liability” in which a single act can sustain liability for multiple offenses. See Susan W. Brenner, RICO, CCE, and Other Complex Crimes: The Transformation of American Criminal Law, 2 Wm. & Mary Bill Rts. J. 239 (1993).

(e) Accessory liability. When individuals agree to commit a crime, they may, of course, be charged with conspiracy, and they may also be charged with the target offense that they conspired to commit, if it is completed or attempted.
But beyond those consequences, they may find themselves charged with additional crimes committed by co-conspirators, crimes in which they did not directly participate.

In some jurisdictions, most notably the federal system, the impact of this kind of accessory liability is compounded several times over, because sentences are tied in part to the amounts of drugs or money involved in a criminal offense.
As aresult, individuals charged with drug conspiracies can be sentenced on the basis of much larger quantities of drugs than the ones they personally deal because they are held

p. 706

p.707
responsible for all the drugs sold by the entire conspiracy. Similarly, individuals in fraud conspiracies can be held responsible not only for the dollar losses they cause directly but also for all the foreseeable losses caused by their co-conspirators as
well. See Jillian Hewitt, Fifty Shades of Gray: Sentencing Trends in Major White-Collar Cases, 125 Yale L.J. 1018 (2016).

Holding every member of the conspiracy equally liable for the total damage can have the perverse effect that individuals who rank low in the conspiracy will receive longer sentences than those higher up. That is because individuals with
greater roles in the conspiracy often have more information to offer the government, and thus can get a bigger sentence reduction for cooperating and providing substantial assistance, while lower ranking participants often have little information to
offer.2 Judge Bright highlights the irony of this system (United States v. Griffin, 17 F.3d 269, 274 (8th Cir. 1994) (Bright, J., dissenting)):

What kind of criminal justice system rewards the drug kingpin or near-kingpin who informs on all the criminal colleagues he or she has recruited, but sends to prison for years and years the least knowledgeable or culpable

conspirator, one who knows very little about the conspiracy and is without information for the prosecutors?

Section 1 below examines these doctrines of accessory liability in detail; they are one of the most important and controversial aspects of conspiracy law. The two sections that follow consider the substantive elements of the conspiracy
offense itself: Section 2 examines the required actus reus, and Section 3 examines the required mens rea. Keep in mind the various collateral implications of conspiracy law in assessing where the lines of culpability for the substantive offense
should be drawn.

1. Conspiracy as a Form of Accessorial Liability
Pinkerton v. United States

‘Supreme Court of the United States
328 U.S. 640 (1946)

Justice Dous_as delivered the opinion of the Court.

Walter and Daniel Pinkerton are brothers who live a short distance from each other on Daniel's farm. They were indicted for violations of the Internal Revenue Code. The indictment contained ten substantive counts and one conspiracy
count. The jury found Walter guilty on nine of the substantive counts and on the conspiracy count. It found Daniel guilty on six of the substantive counts and on the conspiracy count. Walter was fined $500 and sentenced generally on the substan-
tive

p.707

p. 708
counts to imprisonment for thirty months. On the conspiracy count he was given a two year sentence to run concurrently with the other sentence. Daniel was fined $1,000 and sentenced generally on the substantive counts to imprisonment for
thirty months. On the conspiracy count he was fined $500 and given a two year sentence to run concurrently with the other sentence. The judgments of conviction were affirmed by the Circuit Court of Appeals. . . .

Itis contended that there was insufficient evidence to implicate Daniel in the conspiracy. But we think there was enough evidence for submission of the issue to the jury.

There is, however, no evidence to show that Daniel participated directly in the commission of the substantive offenses on which his conviction has been sustained, although there was evidence to show that these substantive offenses
were in fact committed by Walter in furtherance of the unlawful agreement or conspiracy existing between the brothers. The question was submitted to the jury on the theory that each petitioner could be found guilty of the substantive offenses, if
it was found at the time those offenses were committed petitioners were parties to an unlawful conspiracy and the substantive offenses charged were in fact committed in furtherance of it.©

Daniel relies on United States v. Sall (C.C.A. 3d) 116 F.2d 745. That case held that participation in the conspiracy was not itself enough to sustain a conviction for the substantive offense even though it was committed in furtherance of
the conspiracy. The court held that, in addition to evidence that the offense was in fact committed in furtherance of the conspiracy, evidence of direct participation in the commission of the substantive offense or other evidence from which partic-
ipation might fairly be inferred was necessary.

We take a different view. We have here a continuous conspiracy. There is here no evidence of the affirmative action on the part of Daniel which is necessary to establish his withdrawal from it. Hyde v. United States, 225 U.S. 347, 369.
As stated in that case, “Having joined in an unlawful scheme, having constituted agents for its performance, scheme and agency to be continuous until full fruition be secured, until he does some act to disavow or defeat the purpose he is in no
situation to claim the delay of the law. As the offense has not been terminated or accomplished, he is still offending. And we think, consciously offending, offending as certainly, as we have said, as at the first moment of his confederation, and con-
sciously through every moment of its existence.” And so long as the partnership in crime continues the partners act for each other in carrying it forward. It is settled that “an overt act of one partner may be the act of all without any new agreement
specifically directed to that act.” Motive or intent may be proved by the acts or declarations of some of the conspirators in furtherance of the common objective. The governing principle is the same when the substantive offense is committed by
one of the conspirators in furtherance of the unlawful project. The criminal intent to do the act is established by the formation of the conspiracy. Each conspirator instigated the commission of the crime. The unlawful agreement contemplated pre-
cisely what was done. It

p. 708

p. 709
was formed for the purpose. The act done was in execution of the enterprise. The rule which holds responsible one who counsels, procures, or commands another to commit a crime is founded on the same principle. That principle is recognized in
the law of conspiracy when the overt act of one partner in crime is attributable to all. An overt act is an essential ingredient of the crime of conspiracy under §37 of the Criminal Code, 18 U.S.C.A. §88 [now §371]. If that can be supplied by the act of
‘one conspirator, we fail to see why the same or other acts in furtherance of the conspiracy are likewise not attributable to the others for the purpose of holding them responsible for the substantive offense.

A different case would arise if the substantive offense committed by one of the conspirators was not in fact done in furtherance of the conspiracy, did not fall within the scope of the unlawful project, or was merely a part of the ramifica-
tions of the plan which could not be reasonably foreseen as a necessary or natural consequence of the unlawful agreement. But as we read this record, that is not this case.

Affirmed.

Justice RUTLEDGE, dissenting in part.

The judgment concerning Daniel Pinkerton should be reversed. In my opinion it is without precedent here and is a dangerous precedent to establish.

Daniel and Walter, who were brothers living near each other, were charged in several counts with substantive offenses, and then a conspiracy count was added naming those offenses as overt acts. The proof showed that Walter alone
committed the substantive crimes. There was none to establish that Daniel participated in them, aided and abetted Walter in committing them, or knew that he had done so. Daniel in fact was in the penitentiary . . . when some of Walter's crimes
were done.

There was evidence, however, to show that over several years Daniel and Walter had confederated to commit similar crimes concerned with unlawful possession, transportation, and dealing in whiskey, in fraud of the federal revenues.
On this evidence both were convicted of conspiracy. Walter also was convicted on the substantive counts on the proof of his committing the crimes charged. Then, on that evidence without more than the proof of Daniel's criminal agreement with
Walter and the latter's overt acts, which were also the substantive offenses charged, the court told the jury they could find Daniel guilty of those substantive offenses. They did so. . . .

Daniel has been held guilty of the substantive crimes committed only by Walter on proof that he did no more than conspire with him to commit offenses of the same general character. There was no evidence that he counseled, advised
or had knowledge of those particular acts or offenses. There was, therefore, none that he aided, abetted or took part in them. There was only evidence sufficient to show that he had agreed with Walter at some past time to engage in such transac-
tions generally. As to Daniel this was only evidence of conspiracy, not of substantive crime.

The Court's theory seems to be that Daniel and Walter became general partners in crime by virtue of their agreement and because of that agreement without more on his part Daniel became criminally responsible as a principal for
everything Walter did thereafter in the nature of a criminal offense of the general sort the agreement contemplated, so long as there was not clear evidence that Daniel had withdrawn from or revoked the agreement. Whether or not his commitment
to

p.709

p.710
the penitentiary had that effect, the result is a vicarious criminal responsibility as broad as, or broader than, the vicarious civil liability of a partner for acts done by a co-partner in the course of the firm's business. . ..
STATE v. BRIDGES, 133 N.J. 447, 628 A.2d 270 (1993) (HANDLER, J.): [At a birthday party for a 16-year-old friend, defendant got into a heated argument with another guest, Andy Strickland. Defendant left, yelling that he would return with help. He
recruited two acquaintances, Bing and Rolle, to accompany him back to the party, where he expected a confrontation. On the way back, they stopped at Bing’s house and picked up guns, to be used to hold Strickland’s supporters at bay while
defendant fought it out with him. When they returned to the party, defendant began fighting with a friend of Strickland’s, while Bing and Rolle stood by. A member of the crowd hit Bing in the face, whereupon Bing and Rolle drew their guns and
began firing — first into the air and then into the crowd, as onlookers tried to flee. One of the onlookers was fatally wounded. At trial defendant was convicted of conspiracy to commit aggravated assault and of several substantive crimes including
murder. On the murder count defendant was sentenced to life imprisonment, with parole ineligibility for a minimum of 30 years. The intermediate appellate court (the Appellate Division) held that defendant was not responsible for the murder com-
mitted by Rolle and Bing in the course of the conspiracy. The prosecution appealed to the New Jersey Supreme Court]

The Appellate Division majority determined that the Code of Criminal Justice, which provides that the involvement in a conspiracy can be the basis for criminal liability for the commission of substantive crimes, N.J.S.A. 2C:2-6b(4),
requires a level of culpability and state of mind that is identical to that required of accomplice liability. The Appellate Division therefore ruled that a conspirator is vicariously liable for the substantive crimes committed by co-conspirators only when
the conspirator had the same intent and purpose as the co-conspirator who committed the crimes.

The provision of the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice . . . that posits criminal liability on the basis of participation in a conspiracy is silent with respect to its culpability requirement. It provides:

A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another person when: . . . He is engaged in a conspiracy with such other person.

The majority below concluded that the Code contemplated “complete congruity” between accomplice and vicarious conspirator liability. . . . The Appellate Division majority reasoned that Pinkerton . .. mandates that a crime “must have
been within [a co-conspirator’s] contemplation when he entered into the agreement and reasonably comprehended by his purpose and intention in entering into the agreement.”

. .. That understanding of Pinkerton is not supported. . .. [I]t has not been disputed that [Pinkerton] purported to impose vicarious liability on each conspirator for the acts of others based on an objective standard of reasonable
foreseeability. . .. [I]t was understood that the liability of a co-conspirator under the objective standard of reasonable foreseeability would be broader than that of an accomplice, where the defendant must actually foresee and intend the result of
his or her acts.

p.710
p7it

That understanding of Pinkerton is also widely accepted by commentators and treatises, whether they are critical of its rule, or only expounding the existing law... .

We appreciate the concern of the concurring opinion that such a standard of vicarious liability for conspirators differs from that of accomplices. Although conspirator liability is circumscribed by the requirement of a close causal
connection between the conspiracy and the substantive crime, that standard concededly is less strict than that defining accomplice accountability. It is, however, evident that the Legislature chose to address the special dangers inherent in group
activity and therefore intended to include the crime of conspiracy as a distinctive basis for vicarious criminal liability.2. ..

Accordingly, we conclude, and now hold, that a co-conspirator may be liable for the commission of substantive criminal acts that are not within the scope of the conspiracy if they are reasonably foreseeable as the necessary or natural
consequences of the conspiracy. . .

The conspiracy [here] did not have as its objective the purposeful killing of another person. Nevertheless, the evidence discloses that the conspiratorial plan contemplated bringing loaded guns to keep a large contingent of young hostile
partygoers back from a beating of one of their friends, and that it could be anticipated that the weapon might be fired at the crowd. .. .

From that evidence a jury could conclude that a reasonably foreseeable risk and a probable and natural consequence of carrying out a plan to intimidate the crowd by using loaded guns would be that one of the gunslingers would
intentionally fire at somebody, and, under the circumstances, that act would be sufficiently connected to the original conspirational plan to provide a just basis for a determination of guilt for that substantive crime.

[Reversed]

O’HERn, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part. An interpretation of the provisions of the Code of Criminal Justice that would allow a sentence of life imprisonment to be imposed on the basis of the negligent appraisal of a risk that
another would commit a homicide, conflicts with the internal structure of the Code. . . . I we assume, as the majority does, that Bridges did not intend that Shawn Lockley be killed, he could not have been convicted of attempted murder.

Nor could defendant have been convicted as an accomplice to the murder. . . .

And finally, defendant could not even have been found guilty of conspiracy to commit murder. A person is guilty of a conspiracy to commit an offense only if “with the purpose of promoting or facilitating its commission he” or she agrees
with another person that they will “engage in conduct which constitutes such crime” or agrees to aid such person “in the planning or commission of such crime.” N.J.S.A. 2C:5-2a (emphasis added).

p7it
p.7i2

The Code establishes a carefully-measured grid of criminal responsibility. .. . Thus, one who causes the death of another with the knowledge or purpose to kill will be guilty of murder and can be sentenced to death in certain circum-
stances or to life imprisonment with a minimum of thirty years without parole. . . .

The manstaughter offenses require a finding that an actor causing death has exhibited a reckless disregard for human life. When that recklessness is in disregard of a probability that death may occur, the offense is aggravated man-
slaughter and carries a penalty of up to thirty years in prison. When the proof shows reckless disregard of a possibility of causing death, the offense is reckless manslaughter and carries the penalty of a first-degree crime, up to twenty years in
prison. Except for one form of vehicular homicide, N.J.S.A. 2C:11-4b(3), no negligent homicide exists under New Jersey law, much less a crime of negligent murder.

. .. This case is an example of the most extreme sort — life imprisonment with no possibility of parole for thirty years on the basis of a negligent mental state. . . . The most reasonable construction of N.J.S.A. 2C:2-6b(4) is that the
Legislature intended that the conspirator to the commission of an offense, like an accomplice to the commission of an offense, be punished as a principal. . .. No liability is foreseen [under the statute] other than for the crime or crimes that were the
object of the conspiracy.

NOTES ON THE MERITS OF PINKERTON

1. In favor of Pinkerton. (a) Consider the statement of Deputy Assistant Attorney General Kenney to a Senate subcommittee considering this issue in the context of a revision of the federal criminal law (quoted in Note, 75 Colum. L.

Rev. 1122, 112 (1978):

The ever-increasing sophistication of organized crime presents a compelling reason against abandonment of Pinkerton. Complicated and highly refined stock frauds . . . and narcotics conspiracies represent a substantial
and ever-increasing threat to society justifying retention of the Pinkerton doctrine. Empirical evidence has repeatedly demonstrated that those who form and control illegal enterprises are generally well insulated from pros-
ecutions, with the exception of prosecutions predicated upon the theory of conspiracy. To preclude uniformly their exposure to additional sanctions, regardless of the circumstances, for the very crimes which sustain their
illegal ventures, would have the most unfortunate and inequitable consequences.
QUESTIONS: Is Kenney correct that overruling Pinkerton would preclude liability for those who “form and control illegal enterprises”? Wouldn't they be liable under traditional accomplice liability?
(b) A federal trial attorney with experience prosecuting gang-related homicides points to another practical advantage of Pinkerton for the government. In cases involving drive-by shootings, Pinkerton had “huge advantages, almost
beyond measure” because the government “didn’t have to worry about whose gun actually
p72
p71
fired the fatal shot.” Due to chaos at the scene, this prosecutor said, it would have been virtually impossible to prove “beyond a reasonable doubt whose gun killed which victim. Almost all of the bullets passed through the victim's bodies and were
never recovered.” See Seth Adam Meinero, A Capital of Conspiracies: Prosecuting Violent-Crime Conspiracies in District of Columbia Superior Court, 61 U.S. Att'ys Bull. 26, 35 (2013).
QUESTION: Again, is Pinkerton necessary to solve this kind of problem? Can ordinary principles of accomplice liability suffice in this situation, or would they be inadequate? Reconsider People v. Russell, p. 678 supra.
(©) Scholarly commentators have echoed Kenney's suggestion that the functional justification for Pinkerton derives from the same source as the functional justification for conspiracy law more generally — the need to counteract the
special advantages (to criminals) of group organization:
Thinking of conspiracy and related doctrines as a collective sanction regime casts light on several functional advantages they might bring to law enforcement. . . . First, where individual members of conspiracies are difficult
to apprehend, conspiracy law makes it possible to inflict costs on them indirectly by punishing other members who are more accessible. For example, if high-level managers of a drug organization are difficult to identify or
reach, conspiracy law allows the government to punish lower-level drug dealers, who will in turn demand higher compensation from the managers in exchange for bearing greater liability risks. Second, like other forms of
collective sanctions, conspiracy liability can serve as an information-forcing tool. Conspiracy law makes it possible for prosecutors to threaten low-level conspirators with severe sentences and then offer them reductions
in exchange for inculpatory evidence about higher-level conspirators. . . . Third, conspiracy law, along with other accomplice liability doctrines, gives criminal groups an incentive to monitor and control excessively harmful
activity. Under Pinkerton, every member of a drug organization is liable for every [foreseeable] murder committed by another member of the organization [in furtherance of the drug conspiracy] and therefore has an incentive
to police unnecessary violence.
Daryl J. Levinson, Collective Sanctions, 56 Stan. L. Rev. 345, 398-399 (2003). See also Steven M. Morrison, Relational Criminal Liability, 44 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 636 (2017); Neal Kumar Katyal, Conspiracy Theory, 112 Yale Lu. 1307, 1372-1375 (2003).
QUESTIONS: Is it realistic to expect low-level drug dealers “to monitor and control” “unnecessary violence” by those higher up in the organization? Even if so, is it legitimate to uphold Pinkerton for functional reasons such as these, if doing so will
mean that some individuals in a conspiracy will face criminal sanctions beyond their personal fault? Are there any limits to using the criminal law in this way? For example, should parents be liable for the crimes of their children, if there is a func-
tional reason for believing that they can to some degree control the behavior of their children? Or is individual fault too important a principle to abandon in the name of utilitarian goals?
p.719
pris
(d) Another argument in favor of Pinkerton rests on the notion of a “group will.” Consider Jens David Ohlin, Group Think: The Law of Conspiracy and Collective Reason, 98 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 147, 180, 182-183 (2007):

When an individual joins a group deliberation, she makes a commitment to submit her reasons to collective rationality in order to achieve rational unity at the group level. . . . This is hardly a difficult phenomenon to visualize;

every soldier who joins a military unit understands that [he gives up his] autonomy (in some matters) in pursuit of collective goals.

This view of Pinkerton liability would require greater attention to the cohesion of the group and the nature of decision making within the group, id. at 197-198:

It should be clear now that [liability] should be reserved for tightly knit conspiracies with shared decision-making . . . because the agent in question closely participates in the deliberative structure of the [organization] and

helps form the collective intention. It is this fact that generates culpability, for the simple reason that he participated closely in the decision-making process and, in a sense, made it his own.

2. Against Pinkerton. Compare People v. McGee, 399 N.E.2d 1177, 1181-1182 (N.Y. 1979), where the court observed, in rejecting the Pinkerton doctrine:

It is not offensive to permit a conviction of conspiracy to stand on the overt act committed by another, for the act merely provides corroboration of the existence of the agreement and indicates that the agreement has

reached a point where it poses a sufficient threat to society to impose sanctions. . . . But it is repugnant to our system of jurisprudence, where guilt is generally personal to the defendant, . . . to impose punishment, not for the

socially harmful agreement to which the defendant is a party, but for substantive offenses in which he did not participate. . . .

The National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers further observes that “the Pinkerton doctrine violates the principle of individual criminal liability” in a context where “proof is often notoriously uncertain” because “convictions for
conspiracies themselves often rest on dubious evidence.” 1° Professor Kimberly Kessler Ferzan points out (Conspiracy, Complicity, and the Scope of Contemplated Crime, 53 Ariz. St. L.J. 453, 455 (2021)) that the support for Pinkerton rests in part
on the high barrier to liability under accomplice theory — the requirement that the prosecution prove the defendant's purpose to aid or encourage the specific object crime. Therefore, she suggests, “we may need to broaden the criminal law in
order to effectively narrow it.” Professor Ferzan proposes a two-part solution: “expanding the reach of complicity to include knowing, as opposed to only intentional, aid [but] narrow[ing] the reach of Pinkerton liability [to cover] nontarget crimes
only if the defendant had the mental state required for that offense.” Id.

pris

p71
QUESTIONS: (a) The tradeoff Professor Ferzan proposes would address the overreach of the criminal law that allegedly results from Pinkerton, but what are the drawbacks of the suggestion to relax the mens rea required for accomplice liability?
Reconsider Gladstone, p. 658 supra, and the potential liability of a supplier who knows that a customer will make illegal use of the goods sold. Would criminal law overreach by imposing accomplice liability on the supplier who has knowledge but
not purpose in that situation?

(b) To what extent would relaxing the mens rea of accomplice liability address the concerns of Pinkerton supporters like Kenney and Levinson?

3. The MPC. The MPC rejects Pinkerton outright, imposing liability on conspirators for the substantive crimes of their co-conspirators only when the strict conditions for accomplice liability are met. Supporting that position, the drafters
of the MPC explain (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.06(3) at 307 (1985)):

[There appears to be no better way to confine within reasonable limits the scope of liability to which conspiracy may theoretically give rise. In People v. Luciano [14 N.E.2d 433 (N.Y. 1938)], for example, Luciano and others

were convicted of sixty-two counts of compulsory prostitution, each count involving a specific instance of placing a girl in a house of prostitution, receiving money for so doing or receiving money from the earnings of a pros-

titute — acts proved to have been committed pursuant to a combination to control commercialized vice in New York City.

Liability was properly imposed with respect to these defendants, who directed and controlled the combination. They solicited and aided the commission of numberless specific crimes. . . . But would so extensive
liability be just for each of the prostitutes or runners involved in the plan? They have, of course, committed their own crimes; they may actually have assisted in others but they exerted no substantial influence on the behav-
ior of a hundred other prostitutes or runners, each pursuing his own ends within the shelter of the combination. A court would and should hold that they are parties to a conspiracy. . . . And they should also be held for those

crimes they actually committed, or . . . for those to which they were accomplices. However, law would lose all sense of just proportion if simply because of the conspiracy itself each were held accountable for thousands of

additional offenses of which he was completely unaware and which he did not influence at all... .

4, Continuing controversy over Pinkerton. The federal courts and some states continue to permit vicarious liability for the substantive offenses of co-conspirators. E.g., Martin v. State, 852 S.E.2d 834 (Ga. 2020). Other states have
joined New York in rejecting it. E.g., Commonwealth v. Stasiun, 206 N.E.2d 672 (Mass. 1965). But the doctrine is far from settled. State supreme courts continue to reconsider their acceptance or rejection of the Pinkerton rule. For example, the
Connecticut Supreme Court reaffirmed its embrace of Pinkerton, rejecting a defendant's constitutional challenge to the doctrine under the Due Process Clause. State v. Coltherst, 620 A.2d 1024 (Conn. 2008). The court stated, “When the defen-
dant has ‘played a necessary part in setting in motion a discrete course of criminal conduct,’ he

p71
p.716
cannot reasonably complain that it is unfair to hold him vicariously liable, under the Pinkerton doctrine, for the natural and probable result of . . . conduct that, although he did not intend, he should have foreseen.” Id. at 1039-1040. In contrast, the
Washington Supreme Court rejected the Pinkerton doctrine as inconsistent with the mens rea requirements of Washington's statutory provisions on accomplice liability. State v. Stein, 27 P.3d 184 (Wash. 2001). And, in a Solomonic decision, the
Nevada Supreme Court overturned the defendant's convictions under Pinkerton for a co-conspirators “specific intent” offenses (burglary and kidnapping), while upholding the defendant's convictions for “general intent” offenses (such as home
invasion). The court reasoned that permitting Pinkerton liability for specific intent crimes would allow the state to “sidestep” the statutory mens rea requirement for those offenses. Bolden v. State, 124 P.3d 191 (Nev. 2005).
NOTES ON APPLICATIONS OF PINKERTON

1. Liability of a new conspirator for prior acts of co-conspirators. It is often said that upon joining an ongoing conspiracy, people become liable for all acts committed by co-conspirators in furtherance of the conspiracy, including
acts committed prior to their joining. See, e.g., 16 Am. Jur. 2d Conspiracy §20 (1979). Such statements are sometimes misinterpreted to suggest that defendants are liable under Pinkerton for substantive crimes that co-conspirators committed be-
fore they joined the conspiracy. But Pinkerton liability is not retroactive. As explained in United States v. Blackmon, 839 F.2d 900, 908-909 (2d Cir. 1988):

The confusion here is that with regard to liability for conspiracy, a defendant may be legally responsible for acts of co-conspirators prior to that defendant's entry into the conspiracy [in the sense that such acts may be used

as evidence against him in the prosecution for the stand-alone crime of conspiracy], whereas, with regard to substantive offenses, a defendant cannot be retroactively liable for offenses committed prior to his joining the

conspiracy.

2. Pinkerton and Luparello liability compared. Under the traditional view of accomplice liability, as discussed in the Bridges case, liability as an accomplice requires proof that the accomplice intended to promote or facilitate the
specific offense for which the prosecution seeks to hold the accomplice accountable. In jurisdictions adhering to this view, liability as a co-conspirator under a Pinkerton theory represents a considerable expansion of the liability that the co-con-
spirator would face under the normal rules of accomplice liability.

But, as we saw in the section on Complicity, pp. 680-685 supra, some jurisdictions now use an objective foreseeability test to determine the liability of an accomplice for originally unintended crimes committed by the principal in the
course of the criminal endeavor. In these jurisdictions, the objective theory of accomplice liability often produces results similar to those produced by Pinkerton. Indeed, in such jurisdictions, accomplice liability may reach even further than Pinker-
ton liability. Consider the Luparello case, p. 680 supra: The defendant, attempting to locate his former girlfriend, Terri, agreed with several friends to beat up a man named

p.716
p7i7

Martin, in order to force Martin to disclose Terri's whereabouts. When one of the conspirators lured Martin out of his house, another conspirator, who was waiting in a parked car, fired six shots at Martin and killed him. Luparello, who was not
present at the scene, was convicted of first-degree murder. The Luparello court upheld murder liability under its expansive doctrine of accomplice liability because the killing of Martin was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of Luparello’s con-
ceded offense of assault. But could liability be sustained under Pinkerton in such a situation? Was the shooter's action “in furtherance” of the conspiratorial agreement?

3. Pinkerton and drug sentencing. Studies suggest that large numbers of individuals are serving lengthy federal prison sentences because of the way Pinkerton takes into account drug quantities much larger than those an individual
conspirator personally transported or distributed. See Elizabeth McKinley, The Importance of Drug Quantity in Federal Sentencing: How Circuit Courts Should Determine the Mandatory Minimum Sentence for Conspiracy to Distribute Controlled
Substances in Light of United States v. Stoddard, 87 U. Cin. L. Rev. 1145 (2019). This sentencing practice can have especially harsh impact on women who associate with street gangs or drug cartels, often at the behest of an intimate partner.
Because of the power dynamic in these settings, women are typically excluded from high-level decision making. As a result, they can be ensnared by the high mandatory minimum sentences triggered by the wider conspiracy's entire distribution,
with little opportunity to qualify for sentencing reductions based on substantial assistance to the prosecution. See Marylyn Harrell, Note, Serving Time for Falling in Love: How the War on Drugs Operates to the Detriment of Women of Circumstance
in Poor Urban Communities of Color, 11 Geo. J.L. & Mod. Critical Race Persp. 139 (2019). One solution proposed is to carve out a special limitation on Pinkerton liability in these situations (Amanda E. Smallhorn, Excusing Women of Circumstance:
Redefining Conspiracy Law to Hold Culpable Offenders Accountable, 36 Quinnipiac L. Rev. 409 (2018)):

When domestic partners are charged as co-conspirators in a larger conspiracy involving third parties, the jury should be required to find that the woman of circumstance was actively initiating and encouraging the criminal

scheme as a conspirator and not merely aiding and abetting under coercion from her husband or boyfriend.

Would this be an appropriate reform? Or should potentially unfair implications of Pinkerton be addressed in more general terms?

4, Expansive applications of Pinkerton. (a) In People v. Brigham, 265 Cal. Rptr. 486 (Ct. App. 1989), the defendant and Bluitt set out to kill a man named “Chuckie.” They saw a teenager on the street, the defendant said, “That is
Chuckie,” and the two men walked toward the teenager, carrying their weapons. When they got closer, the defendant said to Bluitt, “[T]hat is not Chuckie. . . . Don’t do it. .. . That's not the dude.” Bluitt rejected the defendant's advice, saying that
he wanted to let people “know we [are] serious.” Bluitt fired twice, killing the teenager. Because of Bluitt's “hardheaded and erratic nature,” the prosecution argued and the jury found that the defendant could “reasonably foresee” that Bluitt, once
set in motion, might knowingly kill someone other than his assigned target. On this basis the defendant was convicted of first-degree murder. Is the conviction proper under the Pinkerton doctrine? Under any other doctrine?

p7i7
p78

(b) In United States v. Walls, 225 F.3d 858 (7th Cir. 2000), defendant Williams had a prior felony conviction and was charged with violating 18 U.S.C. §922(g)(1), which makes it a crime for a person with a previous felony conviction to
possess a gun that had traveled in interstate commerce. Williams herself never had possession of the gun in question. But the government sought to establish her guilt under a vicarious liability theory premised on Pinkerton. It proved that she had
conspired with Walls to distribute cocaine, and then argued that since Walls had possessed the gun, that possession could be attributed to Williams, even though it was not a crime for Walls (who had no prior felony record) to possess the gun. Is
this a legitimate application of Pinkerton? The court thought not, concluding:

[T]he government uses a cut-and-paste approach, taking the firearm possession by one conspirator, adding it to the felon status of another conspirator, and thereby creating a substantive offense for that second conspira-

tor. It is a significant expansion of the Pinkerton doctrine that appears to be difficult to limit.

Do you agree? Suppose defendant A, who has a prior felony conviction, intentionally seeks out someone who has no prior convictions, so that the second person (B) can carry a necessary weapon on A’s behalf. On these facts, is it fair
for A to face conviction for the felon-in-possession offense? If so, should there be the same result — liability for A — if A doesn't know that B is carrying a weapon, B can legally do so, and A is charged with the felon-in-possession offense on the
basis that A should have foreseen the possibility that B would carry the weapon?

(©) Pinkerton can be especially useful to the government when it seeks to extend criminal liability to persons at the outer edges of a complex conspiracy. Consider the case that follows.

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ, 755 F.2d 830 (11th Cir. 1985) (KRAVITCH,J.): [A motel in Miami, Florida, was the scene of a drug “buy” that had been arranged after long negotiation. Undercover agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms (BATF) were in the motel room with the drug dealers, waiting for another dealer to return with cocaine the agents had agreed to buy for $147,000. When the cocaine arrived, other agents outside converged on the motel and a shoot-out
started. One of the BATF agents was killed and another agent, along with two of the cocaine dealers, was seriously wounded. All the dealers were convicted of conspiracy to commit and commission of various drug offenses. Two of them, who
shot the agents, were also convicted of first-degree murder. Three of the conspirators, Portal, Concepcion, and Hernandez, were convicted of second-degree murder, though they played no part in the shooting.] Appellants Portal, Concepcion, and
Hernandez contend that their murder convictions . . . were based on an unprecedented and improper extension of Pinkerton. . . . Thely] argue that murder is not a reasonably foreseeable consequence of a drug conspiracy, and that their murder
convictions therefore should be reversed. We conclude that, although [their] murder convictions may represent an unprecedented application of Pinkerton, such an application is not improper. . . .

[Wie find ample evidence to support the jury's conclusion that the murder was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the drug conspiracy alleged in the indictment. In making this determination, we rely on two critical factors. First,
the

p78

p.719
evidence clearly established that the drug conspiracy was designed to effectuate the sale of a large quantity of cocaine. ... Second, based on the amount of drugs and money involved, the jury was entitled to infer that, at the time the cocaine sale
was arranged, the conspirators must have been aware of the likelihood (1) that at least some of their number would be carrying weapons, and (2) that deadly force would be used, if necessary, to protect the conspirators’ interests. . . . In our opin-
ion, these two critical factors provided ample support for the jury's conclusion that the murder was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the drug conspiracy alleged in the indictment. . . .

The three appellants also contend that, even if the murder was reasonably foreseeable, their murder convictions nevertheless should be reversed. The appellants argue that the murder was sufficiently distinct from the intended pur-
poses of the drug conspiracy, and that their individual roles in the conspiracy were sufficiently minor, that they should not be held responsible for the murder. We are not persuaded. . . .

We acknowledge that the instant case is not a typical Pinkerton case. Here, the murder of Agent Rios was not within the originally intended scope of the conspiracy, but instead occurred as a result of an unintended turn of events. We
have not found, nor has the government cited, any authority for the proposition that all conspirators, regardless of individual culpability, may be held responsible under Pinkerton for reasonably foreseeable but originally unintended substantive
crimes.25

Furthermore, we are mindful of the potential due process limitations on the Pinkerton doctrine in cases involving attenuated relationships between the conspirator and the substantive crime.

Nevertheless, these considerations do not require us to reverse the murder convictions of Portal, Concepcion, and Hernandez. . . . All three were more than “minor” participants in the drug conspiracy. Portal served as a lookout . ..
during part of the negotiations that led to the shoot-out, and the evidence indicated that he was armed. Concepcion introduced the agents to Alvarez, the apparent leader of the conspiracy, and was present when the shoot-out started. Finally, Her-
nandez, the manager of the motel, allowed the drug transactions to take place on the premises and acted as a translator during part of the negotiations that led to the shoot-out.

p.719
p.720

In addition, all three appellants had actual knowledge of at least some of the circumstances and events leading up to the murder. The evidence that Portal was carrying a weapon demonstrated that he anticipated the possible use of
deadly force to protect the conspirators’ interests. Moreover, both Concepcion and Hernandez were present when Alvarez stated that he would rather be dead than go back to prison, indicating that they, too, were aware that deadly force might be
used to prevent apprehension by Federal agents.

. .. We therefore hold that Pinkerton liability for the murder of Agent Rios properly was imposed on the three appellants. . .. 27
NOTE ON PINKERTON AND MINOR PARTICIPANTS

The limitation suggested by the Alvarez court in footnote 27 — that Pinkerton liability might be negated by a defendant’s minor role in a conspiracy or lack of knowledge about the unintended substantive offense — has been developed
by other courts as a possible restraint on the reach of the Pinkerton doctrine. For example, when the Connecticut Supreme Court first explicitly adopted the Pinkerton rule, it suggested that the rule might apply only when the defendant was a
“leader” of the conspiracy. State v. Walton, 630 A.2d 990 (Conn. 1993). In a later case, a defendant sought to avoid substantive liability under this limitation. He argued that although he was one of several men who ambushed a truck and fired
multiple shots into it, killing an eight-year-old boy, he was neither the actual shooter of the boy nor the leader of the conspiracy to ambush and thus should not be held liable for the boy’s murder under Connecticut's version of Pinkerton. The Con-
necticut Supreme Court rejected this argument, but in doing so cautioned:

[T]here may be occasions when it would be unreasonable to hold a defendant criminally liable for offenses committed by his coconspirators even though the state has demonstrated technical compliance with the Pinkerton

rule. [T]he nexus between the defendant's role in the conspiracy and the illegal conduct of a coconspirator [may be] so attenuated or remote . . . that it would be unjust to hold the defendant responsible for the criminal con-

duct of his coconspirator.
State v. Diaz, 679 A.2d 902, 911 (Conn. 1996).
QUESTION: What would it take to show that a defendant's role was “so attenuated . . . that it would be unjust to hold [him] responsible for the criminal conduct of his coconspirator”? For example, in Alvarez, why didn’t Concepcion or Hernandez
qualify as “minor” participants? In practice, few individuals are exempt from Pinkerton liability under the minor role theory. Indeed, the liability of minor players under Pinkerton is so commonplace that the federal Sentencing Guidelines, §3B1.2

p.720
p.721

(2021), explicitly account for individuals with minor roles by providing for a modest reduction in their sentence.
TRANSITIONAL NOTE

As the preceding material makes clear, establishing a conspiracy carries a wide range of distinctive implications. The procedural and sentencing implications can be significant even in jurisdictions that do not recognize Pinkerton
liability, and of course the consequences become especially important in jurisdictions that do, the federal courts in particular. All those implications depend on proving that a conspiracy in fact existed. And apart from its collateral implications, con-
spiracy is a stand-alone offense that carries its own significant punishment. For both reasons, it is critical to understand the basic elements of the crime: its actus reus and mens rea. The next two sections turn to those issues.

2. The Actus Reus of Conspiracy
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The stand-alone, inchoate crime of conspiracy is typically defined as an agreement by two or more persons to commit a crime. The actus reus of the offense is thus the agreement itself. But agreements to commit crime are rarely
reduced to writing, and even oral agreements are more likely to be expressed in shorthand or code than to clearly and explicitly state all the terms and conditions of the joint undertaking. How then can the necessary agreement be described and
proved? For a representative statement of the applicable standard, consider State v. Millan, 966 A.2d 699, 706 (Conn. 2009):

[The existence of a formal agreement between the conspirators need not be proved because |[It is only in rare instances that conspiracy may be established by proof of an express agreement to unite to accomplish an

unlawful purpose. . . . [T]he requisite agreement or confederation may be inferred from proof of the separate acts of the individuals accused as coconspirators and from the circumstances surrounding the commission of

these acts.

United States v. Alvarez
United States Court of Appeals, Fifth Circuit (en banc)
625 F.2d 1196 (1981)

REAVLEY, J.:.. . Alvarez was convicted of conspiring to import marijuana. . . A panel of this court reversed the conviction because it concluded that the government had failed to produce sufficient evidence that Alvarez had joined in the

agreement to engage in illegal activity. Sitting en banc we now reach a different conclusion; the evidence was sufficient to convict.
pret
p.722

[Miewed in the light most favorable to the government, . . . the evidence shows that John Cifarrelli and Edward Peterson during April and May of 1978 discussed with undercover DEA agents Martinez and Caton their scheme for impor-
tation of marijuana from a farm in Colombia to the Miami area. The transportation was to be by aircraft to be loaded at a farm in Colombia owned by a co-conspirator, refueled at a small island in the Caribbean and off-loaded at a rural site west of
Miami... .

The owner of the Colombian farm, Genaro Cruz, arrived in Miami from Colombia on May 16. He spent the night with his friend [appellant Alvarez]. The following morning Alvarez drove a pickup truck, in which Cruz was riding and which
was loaded with household appliances, to the Opa Locka airport. There they met Cifarrelli, who directed them to the plane which had been supplied by the undercover agents. . . . Cifarrelli told Agent Martinez that the other two men in the pickup
truck were the farmer from Colombia and the one who would be at the off-loading site on return. . . . Martinez then asked Alvarez if he was going to be there at the unloading site. Alvarez smiled, nodded affirmatively, and asked Martinez if he was
going on the plane. After Alvarez had loaded appliances on the plane and was about to leave in the truck, the identity of the agents was revealed and the conspirators were placed under arrest... .

The conspiracy to accomplish the unlawful purpose is plain. [But] did Alvarez know of the unlawful purpose and of the agreement between the others to accomplish it, and did Alvarez join the agreement? . . . The government was not
required to prove that Alvarez had knowledge of all the details of the conspiracy or each of its members, provided that [the] prosecution established his knowledge of the essentialls] of the conspiracy. Nor can a defendant escape criminal respon-
sibility on the grounds that he did not join the conspiracy until well after its inception or because he plays only a minor role in the total scheme.

We agree with the panel that the aggregate of the evidence is sufficient to infer that Alvarez knew that criminal activity was afoot. It must also have been obvious to him that there was [a] conspiracy to import the contraband because
prior planning and concerted action would be required to load the marijuana in Colombia, fly it into this country, and unload it upon its arrival. Alvarez’ joinder in the illicit compact is inferable on two fronts. First, there is direct evidence that Alvarez
intended to be at the off-loading site. A jury may well conclude that his intended presence manifested a prior agreement to assist in the unloading. Alternatively, the nodded head may be viewed as assurance to Martinez, then thought to be one
in confederacy with Cifarrelli and Cruz, that Alvarez would be at the unloading site to insure that the aircraft was unloaded rapidly. The evidence would have been insufficient to support the conviction without the proof that Cifarrelli and Alvarez
assured agent Martinez that Alvarez would be on hand at the place and time of the airplane's return to Florida. That proof, combined with all of the other evidence, clearly warranted the verdict of guilt. A reasonable jury could very well conclude
that only one with knowledge of the marijuana, and who had agreed to participate in the scheme to accomplish its importation, would promise to be on hand at a remote and unlikely area for the unloading of cargo. . . . [AJnyone agreeing to perform
[that duty] would, without any doubt, understand that the operation was illegal. .. .

The judgment of conviction is [alffirmed.

p.722
p.728

Vance, J., dissenting: Alvarez nodded his head and smiled. For this he will go to the penitentiary.

In another case a smile and the nod of the head may be sufficient to establish guilt. Here it clearly was not.

This is not a case where an alleged conspirator was engaged in an illegal act or in the presence of a large quantity of contraband so that it reasonably may be inferred that he knew what was afoot. Neither is it a case where he was
shown to have participated in or even been present during any conspiratorial conversation. Alvarez was engaged in a completely legal act. He was loading a washing machine onto an airplane. He was asked whether he was going to be there at the
unloading site when the plane got back. It was in response to this innocuous inquiry that he smiled and nodded his head. This is all the admissible evidence to which we are cited to show that Alvarez knew of the unlawful conspiracy and agreed to
join in it.

The majority points to Alvarez’ association with other defendants under suspicious circumstances and recounts suggestive remarks by conspirators outside Alvarez’ presence. But it is not enough that he was associating with bad
people. Neither will merely suspicious circumstances substitute for proof of his guilt. The conversations of participants in the conspiracy to which the majority alludes were not even admissible as to Alvarez unless it be shown that he too was a
conspirator... .

Alvarez may have been a guilty coconspirator or he may have been a humble workman performing a lawful act totally unrelated to any conspiracy, who simply indicated that he would report back to work as instructed. To my mind the
majority opinion suggests no way that a jury reasonably could accept one hypothesis to the exclusion of the other.

The conspiracy statutes are vitally important to the protection of society. Yet the potential for injustice in conspiracy cases is enormous. . . . We should use particular care to ensure that the prosecution actually proved that the defen-
dant was a participant in the conspiracy before he is sent to prison. Our concept of justice rests on the basic notion that it is only for personal guilt that punishment is justified. In this case the evidence simply falls short. | would reverse.

NOTES

1. Conspiracy versus attempt versus accomplice liability. The interface between theories of liability can be important, and often it turns on fine doctrinal distinctions. And although conspiracy liability is usually broader than liability
based on a theory of attempt or aiding and abetting, this is not always the case:

(@) Consider first whether the Alvarez defendants could have been convicted of an attempt to import marijuana. The answer is: probably not. (Do you see why?) But a conspiracy, once proved, permits conviction on the basis of prepara-
tory conduct that is not in itself suspicious and is very far removed (in both time and place) from the commission of the crime.

(b) Assume that (1) the agents wait to make an arrest until the plane returns to Florida loaded with marijuana; (2) Alvarez fails to appear to help unload it; but (3) another person — Smith — is at the landing strip, offers to help unload the
marijuana, and starts to do so just before federal agents appear and make the arrests.

p.728

p.724
Assume further that, on the basis of these facts, Cifarrelli and Cruz are convicted of possessing 500 Ibs. of marijuana with intent to distribute. Using accomplice theory, can Smith be convicted of this offense? Using conspiracy theory together with
Pinkerton, can Smith be convicted of this offense?

2. The preceding principal case illustrates the difficulty of inferring an agreement from actions that are inherently ambiguous. In contrast, the case that follows, United States v. Apple, Inc., involved detailed written contracts. But those
contracts were not in themselves illegal; the crucial question was whether they evidenced another agreement, unwritten and implicit, to commit a serious crime.
United States v. Apple, Inc.

United States Court of Appeals, Second Circuit
791 F.3d 290 (2015)

Livineston, J.:.. . In late 2007, Amazon.com, Inc. (‘Amazon’) introduced the Kindle, a portable device that carries digital copies of books, known as “ebooks.” This innovation had the potential to change the centuries-old process for
producing books by eliminating the need to print, bind, ship, and store them. [Amazon] encouraged consumers to buy the Kindle by offering . . . new releases and New York Times bestsellers for $9.99. Publishing companies . .. saw Amazon's
ebooks, and particularly its $9.99 pricing, as a threat to their way of doing business.

[By November 2009, Apple, Inc. (“Apple”) had plans to release a new tablet computer, the iPad. Five of the major publishing companies (the “Publisher Defendants”) agreed to sell ebooks on the iPad at prices as high as $19.99. Within
a few months, they took control over pricing on Kindle and raised the prices on many of their ebooks sold on that device. The Justice Department filed suit, alleging that Apple had conspired with the Publisher Defendants to raise prices across the
ebook market, in violation of §1 of the Sherman Antitrust Act, 15 U.S.C. §1 et seq.2...

[Apple had offered each publisher a contract allowing the publisher to sell books on the iPad for up to $19.95, but only if the publisher barred Amazon from selling the same book for less on Kindle. After a three-week bench trial, the
district court found that (1) Apple needed a critical mass of publishers willing to sell their ebooks on the iPad, (2) Apple's proposed contracts were attractive to publishers only if they acted collectively, because no publisher had sufficient leverage
to negotiate with Amazon on its own; and thus (3) each Publisher Defendant could profitably agree to Apple's proposed contract only if it knew that other major publishers would do so too. The district court concluded that Apple had orchestrated
a conspiracy among the Publisher Defendants to raise the price of ebooks, in violation of the Sherman Act. On appeal, Apple argued that the district court's finding of a conspiracy was erroneous]

p.724
p. 726

Parallel action is not, by itself, sufficient to prove . . .a conspiracy; such behavior could be the result of “coincidence, independent responses to common stimuli, or mere interdependence unaided by an advance understanding among
the parties.”. . . Because of the risk of condemning parallel conduct that results from independent action . . . , the Supreme Court has cautioned against drawing an inference of conspiracy from evidence that is equally consistent with independent
conduct. . . . Thus, a finding of conspiracy requires “evidence that tends to exclude the possibility” that the defendant was “acting independently.”. . .

Apple's basic argument is that because its Contracts with the Publisher Defendants were fully consistent with its independent business interests, those agreements provide only “ambiguous” evidence of a §1 conspiracy. [Its argument]
is not persuasive — not because those Contracts themselves were independently unlawful, but because, in context, they provide strong evidence that Apple consciously orchestrated a conspiracy among the Publisher Defendants. . . . Apple was
fully aware that its proposed Contracts would entice a critical mass of publishers only if these publishers perceived an opportunity collectively to shift [Amazon's pricing].

[Clonduct resulting solely from competitors’ independent business decisions — and not from any “agreement” — is not unlawful . . ., even if it is anticompetitive. [But] “a conspiracy may be inferred if a defendant's action would have
been contrary to its self-interest in the absence of advance agreement.”. . . Apple’s Contracts created a set of economic incentives pursuant to which the Contracts were only attractive to the Publisher Defendants to the extent they acted collec-
tively. In short, we have no difficulty on this record . . . in concluding that Apple “conspirled] with the Publisher Defendants to eliminate retail price competition and to raise e-book prices.”. ..

Affirmed.

PROBLEMS

As the preceding case demonstrates, a key inquiry in cases involving multiple parties is to determine whether their actions were coordinated (at least implicitly) or parallel but independent. Consider these problems:

1. Fighting broke out at a party attended by members of rival gangs A and B. Members of both gangs drew guns, and several began shooting. One member of gang A shot and seriously wounded a member of gang B. Garcia, a member
of gang A, was charged with conspiracy to commit aggravated assault, but there was no evidence that Garcia had fired a weapon or injured anyone present. Is Garcia guilty of conspiracy (and therefore liable for the assault in furtherance of it
committed by the other member of gang A), on the theory that members of gang A had an implicit understanding to “have each other's backs” in the event of trouble? Or is this evidence insufficient to establish a preexisting agreement to commit
illegal acts? Would convicting Garcia on these facts “smack . . . of guilt by association”? See United States v. Garcia, 151 F.3d 1243, 1245-1246 (9th Cir. 1998).

2. During an urban riot, one teenager shouts to three friends, “There's great stuff in that store, and the owner's a cheat. Let's go get it!” All four run into the store and start grabbing goods. Seeing the looting, two passersby (P and Q),
who are strangers to each other, enter the store and join in the looting.

p.726
p.726
(a) Are the four teenagers guilty of conspiracy? Are the two passersby guilty of conspiracy with each other? Are they guilty of conspiracy with the four teenagers?
(b) Assume that the storeowner and a police officer both try to stop the looting. Teenager T assaults the storeowner, and passerby P assaults the officer. Can passerby Q be convicted of the assault on the storeowner? Can passerby Q
be convicted of the assault on the officer?
3. When stopped for a traffic violation, Motorist M loudly protests and pushes the arresting officer away. A crowd gathers, and several of them then assault the officer, inflicting severe injuries. Is M guilty of conspiracy? Griffin v. State,
455 S.W.2d 882 (Ark. 1970), finds a conspiracy on similar facts. Do you agree, or is this a case of parallel but independent action?
NOTES ON THE OVERT-ACT REQUIREMENT
Both at common law and under statutory formulations, conduct can be punishable as a conspiracy at points much farther back in the stages of preparation than the point where liability begins to attach for attempt. In some jurisdictions,
the agreement alone is sufficient, without any requirement that a member of the conspiracy commit an overt act in furtherance of it. In other situations an overt act must be proved, but the act may fall well short of the kind of conduct sufficient to
constitute an attempt.
1. Liability without an overt act. At common law, no “overt act” was required. Does this mean that the offense becomes purely mental? Consider Mulcahy v. The Queen, L.R. 3 E. & |. App. 306, 316-317 (HLL. Ire. 1868). Defendants
were indicted for conspiracy to foment the Irish rebellion. They argued that the indictment was defective for failing to charge some overt act, such as publishing writings or procuring arms. The court rejected the argument, stating:
A conspiracy consists not merely in the intention of two or more, but in the agreement of two or more to do an unlawful act, or to do a lawful act by unlawful means. So long as such a design rests in intention only, it is not
indictable. When two agree to carry it into effect, the very plot is an act in itself, and the act of each of the parties, promise against promise, actus contra actum, capable of being enforced, if lawful, punishable if for a crim-
inal object or for the use of criminal means. And so far as proof goes, conspiracy . . . is generally a matter of inference deduced from certain criminal acts of the parties accused, done in pursuance of an apparent criminal
purpose in common between them. The number and the compact give weight and cause danger, and this is more especially the case in a conspiracy like those charged in this indictment. Indeed, it seems a reduction to ab-
surdity, that procuring a single stand of arms should be a sufficient overt act to make the disloyal design indictable, and that conspiring with a thousand men to enlist should not.
2. Statutes requiring an overt act. American conspiracy statutes have typically added an overt-act requirement. Note, for example, the wording of 18 U.S.C. §371: “If one or more persons conspire . . . to commit any offense... and
one or more
p.726
p.727
of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy. . . .” But it is not unusual for statutes to dispense with this overt-act requirement in the case of conspiracies to commit the most serious offenses. See, e.g., N.J. Stat. Ann. §2C:5-2
(2021); Model Penal Code §5.03(6), in the Appendix in this book. Many statutes are silent on the subject. In Whitfield v. United States, 543 U.S. 209, 213-214 (2005), the Supreme Court considered whether the federal money laundering law, 18
U.S.C. §1956, required an overt act despite the statute's silence. The Court held that when a federal statute’s text is silent, no overt-act requirement should be read into it, in light of the principle of statutory construction that, absent contrary indi-
cations, Congress intends to adopt the common-law definition of statutory terms. Applying this approach, the court in United States v. Jett, 908 F.3d 252 (7th Cir. 2018), held that a conviction for conspiracy to violate the Hobbs Act, which prohibits
robbery and extortion affecting interstate commerce, does not require proof of an overt act.

When an overt act is a required element, the usual reason for requiring it is explained in Yates v. United States, 354 U.S. 298, 334 (1957): “The function of the overt act in a conspiracy prosecution is simply to manifest ‘that the conspir-
acy is at work’ . . . and is neither a project still resting solely in the minds of the conspirators nor a fully completed operation no longer in existence.” Thus, even when an overt-act requirement applies, it generally can be satisfied by acts that would
be considered equivocal or merely preparatory in the law of attempts. Consider, for example, United States v. Bertling, 510 F.3d 804, 810 (8th Cir. 2007), in which the court concluded that the same telephone conversation established both the
agreement and the overt act, because in the first part of the conversation two brothers discussed the need to murder a potential witness, and in the remaining part of the conversation, they discussed how to find the witness: “We see no reason
why these plans and arrangements cannot constitute overt acts in furtherance of the conspiracy simply because they were contained in the same phone conversation in which the conspiracy was also established.” Does the latter part of the con-
versation establish “that the conspiracy is at work”?

By contrast, some states have required a more substantial overt act. Ohio, for example, provides that an overt act must be “substantial,” defined as “of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of the actor that the object of the
conspiracy should be completed.” Ohio Rev. Code Ann. tit. 29, §2923.01(B) (2021). Maine goes even further with its overt-act requirement and uses a standard similar to what is required for attempt: The statute requires a “substantial step,” which
it defines as “conduct which, under the circumstances in which it occurs, is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor's intent to complete commission of the crime”; it further provides that “speech alone may not constitute a substantial
step.” Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 17-A, §151(4) (2021).

3. Justifications for the traditional approach. Unlike the Maine and Ohio statutes just mentioned, the traditional view is that any “overt act” (or sometimes merely the act of agreement alone) suffices to render conduct punishable as
a conspiracy. But what is there about an agreement to commit a crime that justifies dispensing with the requirement of substantial preparatory conduct we use for attempts? Consider Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §5.03 at
388 (1985):

p.727
p.728
First: The act of agreeing with another to commit a crime, like the act of soliciting, is concrete and unambiguous; it does not present the infinite degrees and variations possible in the general category of attempts.
The danger that truly equivocal behavior may be misinterpreted as preparation to commit a crime is minimized; purpose must be relatively firm before the commitment involved in agreement is assumed.
Second: If the agreement was to aid another to commit a crime or if it otherwise encouraged the crime’s commission, complicity would be established in the commission of the substantive offense. It would be
anomalous to hold that conduct that would suffice to establish criminality, if something else is done by someone else, is insufficient if the crime is never consummated. . . .
Third: [The act of combining with another is significant both psychologically and practically, the former because it crosses a clear threshold in arousing expectations, the latter because it increases the likelihood

that the offense will be committed.

3. The Mens Rea of Conspiracy
People v. Lauria

California District Court of Appeal
59 Cal. Rptr. 628 (Dist. Ct. App. 1967)

FLEMING, J. In an investigation of call-girl activity the police focused their attention on three prostitutes actively plying their trade on call, each of whom was using Lauria’s telephone answering service, presumably for business purposes.

On January 8, 1965, Stella Weeks, a policewoman, signed up for telephone service with Lauria’s answering service. Mrs. Weeks, in the course of her conversation with Lauria’s officer manager, hinted broadly that she was a prostitute
concerned with the secrecy of her activities and their concealment from the police. She was assured that the operation of the service was discreet and “about as safe as you can get.”

On February 11, Mrs. Weeks talked to Lauria on the telephone and told him her business was modeling and she had been referred to the answering service by Terry, one of the three prostitutes under investigation. She complained that
because of the operation of the service she had lost two valuable customers, referred to as tricks. Lauria defended his service and said that her friends had probably lied to her about having left calls for her. But he did not respond to Mrs. Weeks’
hints that she needed customers in order to make money, other than to invite her to his house for a personal visit in order to get better acquainted. In the course of his talk he said “his business was taking messages.”

On February 15, Mrs. Weeks talked on the telephone to Lauria’s office manager and again complained of two lost calls, which she described as a $50 and a $100 trick. On investigation the office manager could find nothing wrong, but
she said she would alert the switchboard operators about slip-ups on calls.

p.728
p.729

On April 1, Lauria and the three prostitutes were arrested. Lauria complained to the police that this attention was undeserved, stating that Hollywood Call Board had 60 to 70 prostitutes on its board while his own service had only 9 or
10, that he kept separate records for known or suspected prostitutes for the convenience of himself and the police. When asked if his records were available to police who might come to the office to investigate call girls, Lauria replied that they
were whenever the police had a specific name. However, his service didn’t “arbitrarily tell the police about prostitutes on our board. As long as they pay their bills we tolerate them.” In a subsequent voluntary appearance before the Grand Jury
Lauria testified he had always cooperated with the police. But he admitted he knew some of his customers were prostitutes, and he knew Terry was a prostitute because he had personally used her services, and he knew she was paying for 500
calls a month. ...

To establish agreement, the People need show no more than a tacit, mutual understanding between co-conspirators to accomplish an unlawful act. . . . Here the People attempted to establish a conspiracy by showing that Lauria, well
aware that his codefendants were prostitutes who received business calls from customers through his telephone answering service, continued to furnish them with such service. This approach attempts to equate knowledge of another's criminal
activity with conspiracy to further such criminal activity, and poses the question of the criminal responsibility of a furnisher of goods or services who knows his product is being used to assist the operation of an illegal business. Under what circum-
stances does a supplier become a part of a conspiracy to further an illegal enterprise by furnishing goods or services which he knows are to be used by the buyer for criminal purposes?

The two leading cases on this point face in opposite directions. In United States v. Falcone, 311 U.S. 205, the sellers of large quantities of sugar, yeast, and cans were absolved from participation in a moonshining conspiracy among
distillers who bought from them, while in Direct Sales Co. v. United States, 319 U.S. 703, a wholesaler of drugs was convicted of conspiracy to violate the federal narcotic laws by selling drugs in quantity to a codefendant physician who was sup-
plying them to addicts. The distinction between these two cases appears primarily based on the proposition that distributors of such dangerous products as drugs are required to exercise greater discrimination in the conduct of their business than
are distributors of innocuous substances like sugar and yeast.

In the earlier case, Falcone, the sellers’ knowledge of the illegal use of the goods was insufficient by itself to make the sellers participants in a conspiracy with the distillers who bought from them. [E]vidence on the volume of sales was
too vague to support a jury finding that respondents knew of the conspiracy [with others] from the size of the sales alone.

In the later case of Direct Sales, the conviction of a drug wholesaler for conspiracy to violate federal narcotic laws was affirmed on a showing that it had actively promoted the sale of morphine sulphate in quantity and had sold
codefendant physician, who practiced in a small town in South Carolina, more than 300 times his normal requirements of the drug, even though it had been repeatedly warned of the dangers of unrestricted sales of the drug. The court contrasted
the restricted goods involved in Direct Sales with the articles of free commerce involved in Falcone: “Alll articles of commerce may be put to illegal ends,” said the court. “But all do not have inherently the same susceptibility to harmful and illegal
use. . .. This

p.729

p. 730
difference is important for two purposes. One is for making certain that the seller knows the buyer's intended illegal use. The other is to show that by the sale he intends to further, promote and cooperate in it. This intent, when given effect by
overt act, is the gist of conspiracy. While it is not identical with mere knowledge that another proposes unlawful action, it is not unrelated to such knowledge. . . . The step from knowledge to intent and agreement may be taken. There is more than
suspicion, more than knowledge, acquiescence, carelessness, indifference, lack of concern. There is informed and interested cooperation, stimulation, instigation. And there is also a ‘stake in the venture’ which, even if it may not be essential, is

not irrelevant to the question of conspiracy.” While Falcone and Direct Sales may not be entirely consistent with each other . . ., they do provide us with a framework for the criminal liability of a supplier of lawful goods or services put to unlawful
use. Both the element of knowledge of the illegal use of the goods or services and the element of intent to further that use must be present in order to make the supplier a participant in a criminal conspiracy.

Proof of knowledge is ordinarily a question of fact and requires no extended discussion. . . . Because Lauria knew in fact that some of his customers were prostitutes, it is a legitimate inference he knew they were subscribing to his
answering service for illegal business purposes and were using his service to make assignations for prostitution. . ..

The more perplexing issue in the case is the sufficiency of proof of intent to further the criminal enterprise. . . . Direct evidence of participation, such as advice from the supplier of legal goods or services to the user of those goods or
services on their use for illegal purpose, such evidence as appeared in a companion case we decide today, People v. Roy, 59 Cal. Rptr. 636, provides the simplest case... . . But in cases where direct proof of complicity is lacking, intent to further
the conspiracy must be derived from the sale itself and its surrounding circumstances in order to establish the supplier's express or tacit agreement to join the conspiracy.

In the case at bench the prosecution argues that since Lauria knew his customers were using his service for illegal purposes but nevertheless continued to furnish it to them, he must have intended to assist them in carrying out their
illegal activities... .

1. Intent may be inferred from knowledge, when the purveyor of legal goods for illegal use has acquired a stake in the venture. (United States v. Falcone, 2d Cir. 109 F.2d 579, 581.) For example, in Regina v. Thomas, (1957), 2 All E.R.
181, 342, a prosecution for living off the eamings of prostitution, the evidence showed that the accused, knowing the woman to be a convicted prostitute, agreed to let her

p. 730

p.731
have the use of his room between the hours of 9 p.m. and 2 a.m. for a charge of £3 a night. The Court of Criminal Appeal refused an appeal from the conviction, holding that when the accused rented a room at a grossly inflated rent to a prostitute
for the purpose of carrying on her trade, a jury could find he was living on the earnings of prostitution.

In the present case, no proof was offered of inflated charges for the telephone answering services furnished the codefendants.

2. Intent may be inferred from knowledge, when no legitimate use for the goods or services exists. [In a] leading California case . . . the court upheld a conviction of the suppliers of horse-racing information by wire for conspiracy to
promote bookmaking, when it had been established that wire service information had no other use than to supply information needed by bookmakers to conduct illegal gambling operations. . ..

However, there is nothing in the furnishing of telephone answering service which would necessarily imply assistance in the performance of illegal activities. Nor is any inference to be derived from the use of an answering service by
women, either in any particular volume of calls, or outside normal working hours. Nightclub entertainers, registered nurses, faith healers, public stenographers, photographic models, and free lance substitute employees, provide examples of
women in legitimate occupations whose employment might cause them to receive a volume of telephone calls at irregular hours.

3. Intent may be inferred from knowledge, when the volume of business with the buyer is grossly disproportionate to any legitimate demand, or when sales for illegal use amount to a high proportion of the seller's total business. In such
cases an intent to participate in the illegal enterprise may be inferred from the quantity of the business done. For example, in Direct Sales, supra, the sale of narcotics to a rural physician in quantities 300 times greater than he would have normal
use for provided potent evidence of an intent to further the illegal activity. In the same case the court also found significant the fact that the wholesaler had attracted as customers a disproportionately large group of physicians who had been con-
victed of violating the Harrison Act... .

No evidence of any unusual volume of business with prostitutes was presented by the prosecution against Lauria.

Inflated charges, the sale of goods with no legitimate use, sales in inflated amounts, each may provide a fact of sufficient moment from which the intent of the seller to participate in the criminal enterprise may be inferred . . . because in
‘one way or another the supplier has acquired a special interest in the operation of the illegal enterprise. His intent to participate in the crime of which he has knowledge may be inferred from the existence of his special interest.

Yet there are cases in which it cannot reasonably be said that the supplier has a stake in the venture or has acquired a special interest in the enterprise, but in which he has been held liable as a participant on the basis of knowledge
alone. . . . In Regina v. Bainbridge (1959), 3 W.L.R. 656 (CCA 6), a supplier of oxygen-cutting

p73
p. 732

equipment to one known to intend to use it to break into a bank was convicted as an accessory to the crime. . . . It seems apparent from these cases that a supplier who furnishes equipment which he knows will be used to commit a serious crime
may be deemed from that knowledge alone to have intended to produce the result. . . . For instance, we think the operator of a telephone answering service with positive knowledge that his service was being used to facilitate the extortion of ran-
som, the distribution of heroin, or the passing of counterfeit money who continued to furnish the service with knowledge of its use, might be chargeable on knowledge alone with participation in a scheme to extort money, to distribute narcotics, or
to pass counterfeit money. The same result would follow the seller of gasoline who knew the buyer was using his product to make Molotov cocktails for terroristic use.

Logically, the same reasoning could be extended to crimes of every description. Yet we do not believe an inference of intent drawn from knowledge of criminal use properly applies to the less serious crimes classified as misdemeanors.
The duty to take positive action to dissociate oneself from activities helpful to violations of the criminal law is far stronger and more compelling for felonies than it is for misdemeanors or petty offenses. . .. We believe the distinction between the
obligations arising from knowledge of a felony and those arising from knowledge of a misdemeanor continues to reflect basic human feelings about the duties owed by individuals to society. Heinous crime must be stamped out, and its suppres-
sion is the responsibility of all. Venial crime and crime not evil in itself present less of a danger to society, and perhaps the benefits of their suppression through the modern equivalent of the posse, the hue and cry, the informant, and the citizen's
arrest, are outweighed by the disruption to everyday life brought about by amateur law enforcement and private officiousness in relatively inconsequential delicts which do not threaten our basic security...

With respect to misdemeanors, we conclude that positive knowledge of the supplier that his products or services are being used for criminal purposes does not, without more, establish an intent of the supplier to participate in the
misdemeanors. With respect to felonies, we do not decide the converse, viz. that in all cases of felony knowledge of criminal use alone may justify an inference of the supplier's intent to participate in the crime. The implications of Falcone make the
matter uncertain with respect to those felonies which are merely prohibited wrongs. . . . But decision on this point is not compelled, and we leave the matter open.

From this analysis of precedent we deduce the following rule: the intent of a supplier who knows of the criminal use to which his supplies are put to participate in the criminal activity connected with the use of his supplies may be estab-
lished by (1) direct evidence that he intends to participate, or (2) through an inference that he intends to participate based on, (a) his special interest in the activity, or (b) the aggravated nature of the crime itself.

[Wie find no proof that Lauria took any direct action to further, encourage, or direct the call-girl activities of his codefendants and we find an absence of circumstances from which his special interest in their activities could be inferred.
Neither excessive charges for standardized services, nor the furnishing of services without a legitimate use, nor an unusual quantity of business with call girls, are present. The offense which he is charged with furthering is a misdemeanor, a cate-
gory of crime which has never been made a required subject of positive disclosure to public authority. [Although Lauria knew] of the criminal activities of his patrons... ,

p. 732
p. 733
there was insufficient evidence that he intended to further their criminal activities, and hence insufficient proof of his participation in a criminal conspiracy. . . .

[Plublic authorities are [not] without remedies to combat modern manifestations of the world’s oldest profession. Licensing of telephone answering services . . ., together with the revocation of licenses for the toleration of prostitution,
is a possible civil remedy. The furnishing of telephone answering service in aid of prostitution could be made a crime. . .. Other solutions will doubtless occur to vigilant public authorities if the problem of call-girl activity needs further suppression.

The order is affirmed.

NOTES ON MENS REA

1. Purpose or knowledge in felony cases. Does the Lauria court's analysis imply that knowledge alone is a sufficient mens rea for conspiracy when the object crime is a felony? What should be the result when the object offense is a
very serious crime? Recall that in United States v. Fountain, p. 662 supra, the court held (relying on Lauria) that Gometz, who supplied a knife knowing that it would be used to kill, could be an accomplice in the murder. Should the same facts be
sufficient to hold Gometz responsible for conspiracy to commit murder? Even if knowledge alone is considered sufficient for aiding and abetting liability, might it make sense to require more to make the supplier and a customer “partners in crime”?
In this regard, recall that conspiracy, unlike accomplice liability, is an inchoate offense and that it carries many broad procedural and substantive consequences.

The MPC solution to these problems is to require purpose for both conspiracy and accomplice liability. See §§2.06(3)(a), 5.03(1). For the Commentary relevant to these provisions, see the MPC discussion of accomplice mens rea, set
out at pp. 660-661 supra. Most states likewise require purpose in conspiracy cases, even when the object crime is a serious felony. Thus, in Commonwealth v. Camerano, 677 N.E.2d 678 (Mass. App. Ct. 1997), the defendant rented land to Howell

and permitted him to erect a garden enclosure in which, as Camerano knew, Howell was growing a large amount of marijuana. Though Camerano could have evicted Howell at any time, he allowed Howell to remain and collected $200 per month
in rent, money that Howell allegedly could not have obtained from any legal source. Camerano’s conviction for conspiracy to possess and distribute marijuana was nonetheless reversed, with the court noting (id. at 681) that “[iJntent is a requisite
mental state for conspiracy, not mere knowledge or acquiescence.” In United States v. Scotti, 47 F.3d 1237 (2d Cir. 1995), Scotti threatened to “break Egnat’s legs and burn down [his] house” unless he came up with $50,000 to pay an extortionate
debt. Scotti then asked Rodriguez, a mortgage broker, to help Egnat arrange a mortgage to obtain the cash. Rodriguez did so, knowing that Egnat had been threatened and had only agreed to the transaction reluctantly. But Rodriguez's assis-
tance, with full knowledge of the circumstances, was held insufficient to make him guilty of conspiracy to commit extortion. Was the decision correct?

2. Problems. (a) Zahm wanted to use Lawrence's house trailer as a site for manufacturing methamphetamine. The chemicals used to “cook” methamphetamine can soil or damage the work area, and there is a risk of explosion when
the volatile ingredients are heated to high temperatures. Lawrence agreed to accept

p. 738

p. 734
$1,000 for leasing the trailer to Zahm for one day. The “cook” was never carried out, but prosecutors want to charge Zahm and Lawrence with conspiracy. Is Lawrence guilty of conspiracy to manufacture methamphetamine? United States v.
Blankenship, 970 F.2d 283 (7th Cir. 1992), holds that he is not. Do you agree? What arguments can be made in support of the court's conclusion?

(b) Morse owned a Beechcraft light plane that had no passenger seats, leaving more room for cargo. Though witnesses testified that the plane was worth $50,000 to $70,000, he asked two young buyers to pay $80,000 for it and then
raised his price to $115,000, to be paid in cash installments. The buyers agreed, took possession of the plane, and used it to smuggle marijuana from Mexico to Texas. Is Morse guilty of conspiracy to import marijuana? In United States v. Morse,
851 F.2d 1317, 1319-1320 (11th Cir. 1988), the court held:

The circumstantial evidence . . . adequately supports Morse’s conspiracy convictions. First, the plane . . . that Morse sold to Colding was particularly suited for smuggling: there were no passenger seats . . . , leaving more

room for hauling marijuana; [a customs agent] testified that “a Beechcraft Queen Aire happens to be one of the profile aircraft that is involved in narcotic smuggling.” Second, Morse sold the plane for $115,000, almost twice

its market value; he had raised the price from $80,000 after meeting with Cauthen and Colding. Third, all payments were made in cash of low denominations. Fourth, Morse sold the plane to Colding, a twenty-three-year old,

without any contract or receipt to evidence the transaction. Fifth, Morse, who never had registered his purchase of the plane with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), sold the plane without providing the FAA with an

aircraft registration application or bill of sale as required by law. Sixth, Morse was informed that the plane had been used to smuggle marijuana; yet he made no attempt to contact law enforcement officials. Seventh, when

Colding failed to pay the balance of the agreed purchase price, Morse did not threaten to file suit to recover the money.

QUESTION: Is this analysis consistent with the reasoning of Lauria, Direct Sales, and Falcone?

(c) Heras drove Correa, whom Heras knew to be a drug dealer, to a hotel near the airport, knowing that the purpose of the trip was for Correa to take possession of a large quantity of drugs. Is that knowledge alone sufficient to infer
Heras's intent to facilitate drug distribution? While the district court thought this evidence was insufficient to infer purpose, the Second Circuit disagreed. United States v. Heras, 609 F.3d 101 (2d Cir. 2010). Which court was correct?

(d) Sanchez and others imported large quantities of methamphetamine (about two pounds per month) from Mexico to Idaho, where they then sold it to a number of regular buyers, including Loveland. Loveland, who purchased two
ounces of methamphetamine at a time every month, was charged with conspiracy to possess methamphetamine with the intent to distribute. He acknowledged that he was guilty of the substantive offense (possessing the drug with intent to dis-
tribute). But he argued he was not guilty of conspiring with Sanchez to do so, even though Sanchez presumably knew he was reselling the drugs, because Sanchez had no stake in those sales. The Ninth Circuit agreed, finding that Sanchez's stake

p. 734

p. 736
in Loveland’s enterprise “was no different from a big-box store's stake in a convenience store’s financial success from the resale of individually packaged peanuts purchased from the carton from the big-box store”; in short, “regular purchase on
standard terms” does not “transform a customer into a co-conspirator.” United States v. Loveland, 825 F.3d 555, 563 (9th Cir. 2016).

What additional facts would point to conspiracy in a situation like this? The Ninth Circuit mentioned that if the seller fronted drugs to the buyer on credit, to be repaid after the drugs were resold, this would be evidence of a stake in the
buyer's resale enterprise. The court also thought evidence of a closer buyer-seller relationship — such as frequent texts and calls — might also suffice. Id. at 561. Are these facts more persuasive than the large quantities involved? Why? Should it
matter that Loveland, if found guilty of conspiring with Sanchez, faced a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment because of the larger quantities of drugs involved in Sanchez's operation?

3. Corrupt motive. In a leading common-law precedent, People v. Powell, 63 N.Y. 88 (1875), the court held that to be criminal, a conspiracy must be animated by a “corrupt” motive or an intention to engage in conduct known to be
wrongful. To understand the operation of the Powell doctrine, consider the following factual scenario: Suppose an election officer and a clerk agree to enter votes on the official tally sheets before the time set by law, but do so in good faith (there is
no opposition candidate) and without knowing that such action is criminal. Under the Powell doctrine, they could not be convicted of conspiracy to enter false figures on the tally sheets. Cf. Commonwealth v. Gormley, 77 Pa. Super. 298 (1921) (cit-
ing Powell to require the admission of evidence of good faith and ignorance of the criminality of the act under such circumstances).

QUESTION: Doesn't this approach in effect make mistake of law a defense in a conspiracy prosecution? The Powell doctrine has been widely criticized. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §503 at 417-418 (1985):

The Powell rule . .. may be viewed as a judicial endeavor to import fair mens rea requirements into statutes creating regulatory offenses that do not rest on traditional concepts of personal fault and culpability. This should,

however, be the function of the statutes defining such offenses. Section 2.04(8) specifies the limited situations when ignorance of the criminality of one’s conduct is a defense in general. There is no good reason why the for-

tuity of concert should be used as a device for limiting criminality in this area. .. .

The Powell doctrine has been rejected in England, see Churchill v. Walton, [1967] 2 A.C. 224, and in most of the state codifications enacted in the wake of the MPC. See Note, Conspiracy: State Statutory Reform Since the Model Penal
Code, 75 Colum. L. Rev. 1122, 1131 n.48 (1975).

4, Attendant circumstances. How should the law treat a situation where the defendant claims a mistake of fact as to some attendant circumstance? That is, should mistake of fact be a defense to a conspiracy charge even if it would
not be a defense in a prosecution for the substantive offense? Consider the following situations:

p. 736
p. 736

(a) Facts that increase the gravity of the offense. Suppose that Supplier and Dealer meet with Buyer and negotiate terms for a large purchase of drugs. At Buyer's request, they agree to deliver the drugs to Buyer at Seedy's Bar.
Before the delivery is made, Supplier and Dealer are arrested. Buyer turns out to be an undercover agent, and (unknown to Dealer and Supplier) Seedy’s Bar turns out to be directly across the street from a public school. State law imposes much
higher penalties for drug sales that occur within 1,000 feet of a school. Can Dealer and Supplier be convicted of conspiracy to distribute drugs within 1,000 feet of a school? Consider United States v. Freed, 401 U.S. 601 (1971), p. 336 supra. In that
case, the Supreme Court upheld an indictment charging both possession and conspiracy to possess unregistered hand grenades, despite its failure to allege that the defendant knew the grenades were unregistered. The Court treated the substan-
tive offense of possessing unregistered hand grenades as imposing strict liability with respect to the attendant circumstance of registration. The Court disposed of the challenge to the conspiracy charge as follows (id. at n.14):

We need not decide whether a criminal conspiracy to do an act “innocent in itself” and not known by the alleged conspirators to be prohibited must be actuated by some corrupt motive other than the intention to do the act

which is prohibited and which is the object of the conspiracy. An agreement to acquire hand grenades is hardly an agreement innocent in itself. Therefore what we have said of the substantive offense satisfies on these spe-

cial facts the requirements for a conspiracy.

QUESTIONS: Is this holding sound? So far as the conspiracy count was concerned, was the defendant arguing only that he did not know it was a crime to possess grenades or that he did not agree to possess unregistered grenades? Did the
Court confuse two separate defenses, namely, the defense of ignorance of the criminality of the agreement and the defense of lack of agreement to do the prohibited act?

(b) Facts essential to criminality. Suppose that, in contrast to United States v. Freed, supra, the alleged conspiracy involves an act “innocent in itself.” For example, suppose that Finley and Skyler, after spending an evening together,
decide to go to a motel where they intend to have consensual sexual relations. Drew agrees to drive them there, knowing their intentions, but just before they leave, Skyler’s parents arrive on the scene and foil the plan. Though neither Finley nor
Drew could have known it, Skyler is underage. Can Finley and Drew be convicted of conspiracy to commit statutory rape?

We considered variations on this hypothetical at two earlier points above. With respect to attempt liability, the MPC Commentary states that a person in Finley’s position would be guilty of attempted statutory rape. See pp. 610-611
supra. With respect to Drew's liability as an accomplice, the Commentary argues that the Code is ambiguous and states that the issue was left for the courts to decide. See pp. 676-677 supra. With respect to the mens rea for conspiracy, the
Commentary likewise states that the Code is ambiguous and that the issue was left to the courts. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §5.03 at 413 (1985). Yet the text of §5.03(1) provides that people are guilty of conspiracy to
‘commit a crime only if they act “with the purpose of promoting or facilitating its commission.” How can it be said that either Finley or Drew has “the purpose of promoting or facilitating [the] commission” of the crime of statutory rape?

p.736
p.737

Apart from the question of textual interpretation, what is the sensible way to resolve this problem? Some would argue that the policies that determine the mens rea for the object crime logically govern the matter on the conspiracy
charge as well. Under this view, if the attendant circumstance is a strict liability element, defendants can be guilty of conspiracy no matter what their mens rea is with respect to that attendant circumstance. Under this view Finley and Drew would
be guilty of conspiracy. But, given the very early point at which conspiracy liability can attach, is it important to require subjective culpability with respect to the crucial attendant circumstance even if the substantive offense does not require it?
Whatever may be the right solution to this problem for complicity and attempts, how can a mens rea that is less than purpose or knowledge ever suffice for conspiracy, which — by definition — consists of an agreement to engage in the prohibited
conduct?

The English approach acknowledges these concerns. The English Criminal Law Act, 1977, ch. 45, §1(2) states:

Where liability for any offence may be incurred without knowledge on the part of the person committing it of any particular fact or circumstance necessary for the commission of the offence, a person shall nevertheless not be

guilty of conspiracy to commit that offence . . . unless he and at least one other party to the agreement intend or know that that fact or circumstance shall or will exist at the time when the conduct constituting the offence is

to take place.

4. The Duration and Scope of a Conspiracy
NOTES

Particularly in jurisdictions where a defendant is liable for crimes committed in furtherance of the conspiracy by co-conspirators under a Pinkerton theory, questions of a conspiracy’s scope and duration become critically important.
Even in jurisdictions that reject the Pinkerton doctrine, the conspiracy’s scope and duration have major consequences for procedural and evidentiary issues.

1, Duration of a conspiracy. Conspiracy traditionally has been viewed as a continuing offense. The basic rule is that once formed, a conspiracy remains in effect until its objectives have either been achieved or abandoned. See United
States v. Kissel, 218 U.S. 601 (1910). Thus, unlike most criminal offenses, the statute of limitations for conspiracy begins to run not when the offense is committed (that is, when the agreement is made), but when the conspiracy terminates. One
effect of this concept is that a conspiracy often can remain subject to prosecution long after the initial agreement was made and long after some of its members have ceased any active participation in it. In addition, because the various collateral
‘consequences of conspiracy come into play only with respect to the period when the conspiracy is in existence, it may be crucial for defendants to try to shorten that period or for prosecutors to try to extend it.

2. Completion and concealment of the conspiratorial objectives. In Krulewitch v. United States, 336 U.S. 440 (1949), the government argued that defendants who conspired to violate the Mann Act, a statute prohibiting interstate
transportation

p.737

p. 738
for the purposes of prostitution, continued their conspiracy long after the transportation itself was completed. The government urged that conspirators always implicitly agree with each other to conceal facts in order to prevent detection and
prosecution for the principal offense. The Supreme Court rejected the government's theory. In Grunewald v. United States, 353 U.S. 391, 404 (1957), the Court held that a conspiracy cannot be treated as including a cover-up agreement unless
there is “direct evidence [of] an express original agreement among the conspirators to continue to act in concert in order to cover up . . . traces of the crime. . . .” The Court explained (id. at 402):

[A] subsidiary conspiracy to conceal may not be implied from circumstantial evidence showing merely that the conspiracy was kept a secret and that the conspirators took care to cover up their crime. . . . Acts of covering up,

even though done in the context of a mutually understood need for secrecy, cannot themselves constitute proof that concealment of the crime after its commission was part of the initial agreement. . . .

In accord with Krulewitch and Grunewald, most courts today refuse to infer that an implicit agreement to cover up the crime is inherent in every conspiracy. See United States v. Turner, 548 F.3d 1094, 1097-1098 (D.C. Cir. 2008). If
conspirators do agree to help each other cover up the crime, when would the objective of such a conspiracy be achieved? When would the statute of limitations begin to run?

Efforts to conceal are not the only way for conspiracies to continue after the object crime is committed. Conspirators may engage in other activities to fully realize the crime’s underlying goals — such as distributing proceeds, pawning
or fencing the stolen goods, or dismantling a stolen car for its parts. In United States v. Franklin, 415 F.3d 537 (6th Cir. 2005), Stinson, a former employee of an armored car company, conspired with Franklin and Clarke to rob an armored truck.
Stinson gave the others keys to the truck and suggested where to rob it so as to reap the most cash and avoid capture. The day after the robbery, Stinson went to Franklin's apartment to pick up his share of the proceeds. Franklin then described
the heist and cautioned Stinson not to get caught. The court held that Franklin's statements, uttered “only hours after the robbery and in the context of dispersing the ill-gotten proceeds,” were made “during the course and in furtherance of the
conspiracy.” Id. at 552.

3. Impossibility. What if the government intervenes to frustrate the success of a conspiracy, without alerting all of the conspirators? Should a conspiracy be considered terminated when its object becomes impossible to achieve? In
United States v. Jimenez Recio, 537 U.S. 270 (2003), the police stopped a truck carrying illegal drugs, seized the drugs, and with the assistance of the truck’s drivers, set up a sting. The drivers paged two other men who arrived and drove away
with the truckload of drugs. When these two other men were prosecuted for conspiracy to possess and distribute the drugs, the Ninth Circuit held that their convictions could not be sustained absent evidence that they had joined the conspiracy
before the drug seizure. The Supreme Court unanimously rejected this rule of automatic termination as “inconsistent with . . . basic conspiracy law.” Id. at 274-275.

The crime of conspiracy “poses a threat to the public” over and above the threat of the commission of the relevant substantive crime — both

p. 738
p. 739

because the “combination in crime makes more likely the commission of [other] crimes” and because it “decreases the probability that the individuals involved will depart from their path of criminality.” Callanan v. United

States, 364 U.S. 587, 593-594 (1961). . .. Where police have frustrated a conspiracy’s specific objective but conspirators (unaware of that fact) have neither abandoned the conspiracy nor withdrawn, these special conspir-

acy-related dangers remain. . . . So too remains the essence of the conspiracy — the agreement to commit the crime.

The Court also noted that the Ninth Circuit's rule would threaten the viability of properly run sting operations. It reasoned that the potential for abuse in such sting operations could be addressed by the defense of entrapment, see p. 695 supra,
rather than by limiting the appropriate scope of conspiracy doctrine. Does the entrapment defense really provide an adequate check? Are the concerns with government overreach greater in the conspiracy context because of the sweep of
Pinkerton?

4, Abandonment, withdrawal, and renunciation. Abandonment, withdrawal, and renunciation are closely related but distinct concepts.

(a) Abandonment. A conspiracy is generally considered to be abandoned when none of the conspirators is engaging in any action to further the conspiratorial objectives. If that inactivity continues for a period equal to the statute of
limitations, prosecution will be barred. See Model Penal Code §5.03(7)(b).

(b) Renunciation. What if some of the conspirators remain active, but one of them, a particular defendant, “wants out”? Can that defendant avoid liability entirely or (if not) at least cut off responsibility for subsequent acts and state-
ments of the remaining conspirators? This Note examines the first possibility, a complete defense called renunciation. The next Note examines the second possibility, a distinct but partial defense called withdrawal.

Can “opting out” ever afford a complete defense to the conspiracy charge? As in the case of abandoned attempts, the common-law answer was no. See pp. 615-616 supra. The theory was that once the crime was committed, it could
not be “uncommitted.” Post-offense conduct was considered relevant only to sentencing. Today, most states, following the MPC, allow the complete defense under some circumstances. See Evan Tsen Lee, Cancelling Crime, 30 Conn. L. Rev.
117, 121 (1997). The Code allows the defense only if the circumstances manifest renunciation of the actor's criminal purpose and the actor prevents the other conspirators from achieving the conspiracy's criminal objectives. MPC §5.03(6). Some
states consider this second requirement too severe and require only that the actor make a substantial effort to prevent the crime. See, e.g., Ark. Code Ann. §5-3-405(2)(B) (2021).

(c) Withdrawal. A defendant who cannot qualify for the complete defense of renunciation may nonetheless be able to withdraw, that is, terminate any ongoing association with the conspirators. By doing so, defendants can start the
statute of limitations running as to themselves and avoid responsibility for subsequent crimes of the remaining conspirators. But the requirements for a successful withdrawal defense are stringent. A defendant must show “[alffirmative acts incon-
sistent with the object of the conspiracy and communicated in a manner reasonably calculated to reach co-conspirators.” United States v. United States Gypsum Co., 438 U.S. 422,

p. 739
p. 740
464-465 (1978). See also MPC §5.03(7)(c), in the Appendix in this book. And in federal cases, the defendant bears the burden of proving withdrawal. See Smith v. United States, 568 U.S. 106, 114 (2014):

Having joined forces to achieve collectively more evil than he could accomplish alone, Smith tied his fate to that of the group. His individual change of heart (assuming it occurred) could not put the conspiracy genie back in

the bottle. We punish him for the havoc wreaked by the unlawful scheme, whether or not he remained actively involved. It is his withdrawal that must be active, and it was his burden to show that.

This test means, for example, that a long period of activities inconsistent with gang membership do not suffice. See United States v. Randall, 661 F.3d 1291 (10th Cir. 2011)):

Randall relies on the testimony of a gang expert who explained at trial that gang members could leave by “maturing out,” or in other words “getting a good job, having children, or just getting more involved in other activities

in life.” [But “maturing out”), without more, does not meet the legal definition of withdrawal from a conspiracy. If Randall matured out of the gang and explicitly communicated to the [gang] members that he no longer would

be involved with the gang in any way, then this would be a different case. . . . Merely hoping that [the gang] would infer his withdrawal from his absence is not enough. The communication must be unambiguous and effective.

Under this standard, telling a previously instructed hit man not to go through with the plan can suffice. People v. Greco, 2020 Ill. App. Unpub. LEXIS 1168. But compare Bost v. United States, 178 A.3d 1156 (D.C. Ct. App. 2018), where
defendant Williams, riding with associates who were on their way to carry out a drive-by shooting, told them to stop and “let me out right here.” The court held this action insufficient because it did not demonstrate “decisive and positive steps
which indicate a full and complete disassociation.” Id. at 1200-1201.

Even after arrest, a defendant can remain liable for subsequent acts of co-conspirators who remain at large, because the arrest does not necessarily show the defendant's complete disassociation from the conspiratorial plan. United
States v. Serr, 817 F. Appx. 598 (10th Cir. 2020). Similarly, resigning from a company engaged in tax fraud and selling all ownership interest does not suffice because those acts do not “communicat[e] to his co-conspirators that he has abandoned
the enterprise and its goals.” United States v. Desu, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 172625, at "15 (D.N.J. Sept. 21, 2020). And it is not enough to tell only some of a defendant's co-conspirators; the defendant must tell all of them, because (People v.
Godines, 2018 Cal. App. Unpub. LEXIS 5049, at *53)

[the “group danger” and “moral support of the group” components are still active when a defendant fails to communicate his or her withdrawal to all the members of a conspiracy. [Otherwise], coconspirators still act with

perseverance strengthened by the defendant's support.

p.740
p74
QUESTIONS: Are these arguments sufficient to justify the withdrawal defense’s strict requirements? Would a more flexible standard give conspirators a stronger incentive to withdraw? Consider Carroll v. State, 371 P.3d 1023 (Nev. 2016). Carroll
told police about a murder conspiracy and volunteered to wear a recording device in order to get incriminating statements from his erstwhile co-conspirators. After he successfully did so, the police arrested him for the conspiracy, and at trial the
prosecution used those co-conspirator statements against him, even though they had been made while Carroll was cooperating with the police. The court held that Carroll had not effectively withdrawn from the conspiracy at that time, and that the
co-conspirator statements therefore were admissible against him, in part because “Carroll did not make his withdrawal known to his coconspirators.” Id. at 1030.
Does the notify-all-conspirators requirement make sense in this context? Would the co-conspirators have talked so freely to Carroll if he had told them he was opting out? And apart from potentially defeating the value of Carroll's
cooperation, does notifying co-conspirators about withdrawal pose a problem for the one who wants to withdraw? How might the other conspirators respond to that news? See Cecelia M. Harper, Note, How Do | Divorce My Gang?: Modifying the
Defense of Withdrawal for a Gang-Related Conspiracy, 50 Val. U. L. Rev. 765 (2016).
5. Single or Multiple Conspiracies?
MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT to $5.03 at 422-423 (1985): Much of the most perplexing litigation in conspiracy has been concerned less with the essential elements of the offense than with the scope to be accorded to a
combination, i.e., the singleness or multiplicity of the conspiratorial relationships typical in a large, complex and sprawling network of crime. . ... [IIn most of these cases it is clear that each defendant has committed or conspired to commit one or
more crimes; the question now is, to what extent is he a conspirator with each of the persons involved in the larger criminal network to commit the crimes that are its objects. . . .
Kotteakos v. United States

‘Supreme Court of the United States

328 U.S. 750 (1946)

Justice RUTLEDGE delivered the opinion of the Court.

The only question is whether petitioners have suffered substantial prejudice from being convicted of a single general conspiracy by evidence which the Government admits proved not one conspiracy but some eight or more different
‘ones of the same sort executed through a common key figure, Simon Brown. Petitioners were convicted under the general conspiracy section of the Criminal Code, 18 U.S.C.A. §88 [now §371], of conspiring to violate the provisions of the National
Housing Act. The judgments were affirmed by the Circuit Court of Appeals. . . .

p74
p.742

The indictment named thirty-two defendants, including the petitioners. The gist of the conspiracy, as alleged, was that the defendants had sought to induce various financial institutions to grant credit, with the intent that the loans for
advances would then be offered to the Federal Housing Administration for insurance upon applications containing false and fraudulent information.

Of the thirty-two persons named in the indictment nineteen were brought to trial and the names of thirteen were submitted to the jury. Two were acquitted; the jury disagreed as to four; and the remaining seven, including petitioners,
were found guilty.

The government's evidence may be summarized briefly, for the petitioners have not contended that it was insufficient, if considered apart from the alleged errors relating to the proof and the instructions at the trial.

Simon Brown, who pleaded guilty, was the common and key figure in all of the transactions proven. He was president of the Brownie Lumber Company. Having had experience in obtaining loans under the National Housing Act, he
undertook to act as broker in placing for others loans for modernization and renovation, charging a five per cent commission for his services. Brown knew, when he obtained the loans, that the proceeds were not to be used for the purposes stated
in the applications. [The Court then summarized the evidence against several defendants.]

The evidence against the other defendants whose cases were submitted to the jury was similar in character. They too had transacted business with Brown relating to National Housing Act loans. But no connection was shown between
them and petitioners, other than that Brown had been the instrument in each instance for obtaining the loans. In many cases the other defendants did not have any relationship with one another, other than Brown's connection with each transac-
tion. As the Circuit Court of Appeals said, there were “at least eight, and perhaps more, separate and independent groups, none of which had any connection with any other, though all dealt independently with Brown as their agent.” As the Gov-
ernment puts it, the pattern was “that of separate spokes meeting at a common center,” though we may add without the rim of the wheel to enclose the spokes.

The proof therefore admittedly made out a case, not of a single conspiracy, but of several, notwithstanding only one was charged in the indictment. The Court of Appeals aptly drew analogy in the comment, “Thieves who dispose of
their loot to a single receiver — a single ‘fence’ — do not by that fact alone become confederates; they may, but it takes more than knowledge that he is a ‘fence’ to make them such.” It stated that the trial judge “was plainly wrong in supposing that
upon the evidence there could be a single conspiracy; and in the view which he took of the law, he should have dismissed the indictment.” Nevertheless the appellate court held the error not prejudicial, saying among other things that “especially
since guilt was so manifest, it was ‘proper’ to join the conspiracies,” and “to reverse the conviction would be a miscarriage of justice.” This is indeed the Government's entire position. . . .

[)he trial court itself was confused in the charge which it gave to guide the jury in deliberation. The court instructed:

The indictment charges but one conspiracy, and to convict each of the defendants of a conspiracy the Government would have to prove, and you

p. 742
p. 749

would have to find, that each of the defendants was a member of that conspiracy. You cannot divide it up. It is one conspiracy, and the question is whether or not each of the defendants or which of the defendants, are

members of that conspiracy.

On its face, as the Court of Appeals said, this portion of the charge was plainly wrong in application to the proof made; and the error pervaded the entire charge, not merely the portion quoted. The jury could not possibly have found,
upon the evidence, that there was only one conspiracy. The trial court was of the view that one conspiracy was made out by showing that each defendant was linked to Brown in one or more transactions, and that it was possible on the evidence
for the jury to conclude that all were in a common adventure because of this fact and the similarity of purpose presented in the various applications for loans.

The view .. . confuses the common purpose of a single enterprise with the several, though similar purposes of numerous separate adventures of like character. It may be that, notwithstanding the misdirection, the jury actually under-
stood correctly the purport of the evidence, as the Government now concedes it to have been, and came to the conclusion that the petitioners were guilty only of the separate conspiracies in which the proof shows they respectively participated.
But, in the face of the misdirection and in the circumstances of this case, we cannot assume that the lay triers of fact were so well informed upon the law or that they disregarded the permission expressly given to ignore that vital difference.

As we have said, the error permeated the entire charge, indeed the entire trial. Not only did it permit the jury to find each defendant guilty of conspiring with thirty-five other potential co-conspirators, . .. when none of the evidence would
support such a conviction. . . . It had other effects... . Carrying forward his premise that the jury could find one conspiracy on the evidence, the trial judge further charged that, if the jury found a conspiracy,

then the acts or the statements of any of those whom you so find to be conspirators between the two dates that | have mentioned, may be considered by you in evidence as against all of the defendants whom you so find to

be members of the conspiracy.

(Emphasis added). . .

On those instructions it was competent not only for the jury to find that all of the defendants were parties to a single common plan, design and scheme, where none was shown by the proof, but also for them to impute to each defendant
the acts and statements of the others without reference to whether they related to one of the schemes proven or another, and to find an overt act affecting all in conduct which admittedly could only have affected some. . .. Here toleration went too
far...

Reversed.

ANDERSON v. SUPERIOR COURT, 78 CAL. APP. 2d 22, 24-25, 177 P.2d 315, 317 (1947): [Petitioner challenged her indictment for conspiring to commit abortions. Evidence before the grand jury revealed that petitioner was one of several people who,
in exchange for a fee, referred women to Stern for abortions. The indictment alleged that the conspiracy embraced not only Stern and petitioner but the greater enterprise among Stern and the others who referred women to him. She was also
p. 749
p. 744
indicted for the substantive offenses of abortions performed on women she had referred to Stern and abortions committed by Stern upon women referred by others. Denying the challenge, the court stated:] The inference is almost compelled, if the
evidence is believed, that this petitioner knew that Stern was engaged in the commission of abortions not casually but as a regular business and that others, like herself, had conspired with him to further his operations. If the grand jury concluded
that, with this knowledge, she saw fit to join with him and those others, even though unknown to her, in furthering the unlawful activities of the group we cannot say that the grand jury did not have substantial evidence upon which to find the indict-
ment. If she did join the conspiracy she is responsible for the substantive offenses later committed as a part of the conspiracy.
QUESTIONS: Is the result in Anderson consistent with the reasoning of Kotteakos? Was there a “rim” to the “wheel” that united Anderson and the other “spokes” who referred abortion patients to Stern? As a prosecutor, what kind of evidence
would you look for to establish a rim uniting all of the spokes and the center in a single conspiracy in a case like Kotteakos or Anderson?
United States v. Bruno
United States Court of Appeals, Second Circuit
105 F.2d 921, rev'd on other grounds, 308 U.S. 287 (1939)

Per Curiam. Bruno and lacono were indicted along with 86 others for a conspiracy to import, sell and possess narcotics; some were acquitted; others, besides these two, were convicted, but they alone appealed. They complain .. . that
if the evidence proved anything, it proved a series of separate conspiracies, and not a single one, as alleged in the indictment. . . .

The evidence allowed the jury to find that there had existed over a substantial period of time a conspiracy embracing a great number of persons, whose object was to smuggle narcotics into the Port of New York and distribute them to
addicts both in this city and in Texas and Louisiana. This required the cooperation of four groups of persons: the smugglers who imported the drugs; the middlemen who paid the smugglers and distributed to retailers; and two groups of retailers —
‘one in New York and one in Texas and Louisiana — who supplied the addicts. The defendants assert that there were, therefore, at least three separate conspiracies: one between the smugglers and the middlemen, and one between the middlemen
and each group of retailers. The evidence did not disclose any cooperation or communication between the smugglers and either group of retailers, or between the two groups of retailers themselves; however, the smugglers knew that the middle-
men must sell to retailers, and the retailers knew that the middlemen must buy from importers of one sort or another. Thus the conspirators at one end of the chain knew that the unlawful business would not, and could not, stop with their buyers;
and those at the other end knew that it had not begun with their sellers. That being true, a jury might have found that all the accused were embarked upon a venture, in all parts of which each was a participant, and an abettor in the sense that the
success of that part with which he was immediately concerned, was dependent upon

p. 748
p. 746

the success of the whole. . .. It might still be argued that there were two conspiracies; one including the smugglers, the middlemen and the New York group, and the other, the smugglers, the middlemen and the Texas & Louisiana group, for there
was apparently no privity between the two groups of retailers. That too would be fallacious. Clearly, quoad the smugglers, there was but one conspiracy, for it was of no moment to them whether the middlemen sold to one or more groups of retail-
ers, provided they had a market somewhere. So too of any retailer; he knew that he was a necessary link in a scheme of distribution, and the others, whom he knew to be convenient to its execution, were as much parts of a single undertaking or
enterprise as two salesmen in the same shop. We think therefore that there was only one conspiracy.

UNITED STATES v. BORELLI, 336 F.2d 376 (2d Cir. 1964): [In this case, dealing with an elaborate heroin importing and distributing operation, Judge Friendly wrote:] As applied to the long-term operation of an illegal business, the common pictorial

distinction between “chain” and “spoke” conspiracies can obscure as much as it clarifies. The chain metaphor is indeed apt in that the links of a narcotics conspiracy are inextricably related to one another, from grower, through exporter and im-

porter, to wholesaler, middleman, and retailer, each depending for his own success on the performance of alll the others. But this simple picture tends to obscure that the links at either end are likely to consist of a number of persons who may have
no reason to know that others are performing a role similar to theirs — in other words the extreme links of a chain conspiracy may have elements of the spoke conspiracy.2 Moreover, whatever the value of the chain concept where the problem is to
trace a single operation from the start through its various phases to its successful conclusion, it becomes confusing when, over a long period of time, certain links continue to play the same role but with new counterparts, as where importers who
regard their partnership as a single continuing one, having successfully distributed one cargo through X distributing organization, turn, years later, to moving another cargo obtained from a different source through Y. . . .

The basic difficulty arises in applying the seventeenth century notion of conspiracy, where the gravamen of the offense was the making of an agreement to commit a readily identifiable crime or series of crimes, such as murder or
robbery, to what in substance is the conduct of an illegal business over a period of years. . . . Although it is usual and often necessary in conspiracy cases for the agreement to be proved by inference from acts, the gist of the offense remains the
agreement, and it is therefore essential to determine what kind of agreement or understanding existed as to each defendant. It is a great deal harder to tell just what agreement can reasonably be inferred from the purchase, even the repeated pur-
chase, of contraband, than from the furnishing of dynamite to prospective bank robbers or the exchange of worthless property for securities to be subsequently distributed. . . .

p. 746
p. 746
Asceller of narcotics in bulk surely knows that the purchasers will undertake to resell the goods over an uncertain period of time, and the circumstances may also warrant the inference that a supplier or a purchaser indicated a willingness to repeat.
But a sale or a purchase scarcely constitutes a sufficient basis for inferring agreement to cooperate with the opposite parties for whatever period they continue to deal in this type of contraband, unless some such understanding is evidenced by
other conduct. . . .
PROBLEM

What degree of interdependence between parties should be necessary to show that they are part of the same “agreement”? When should antagonism or indifference between two parties be considered inconsistent with their mem-
bership in a single “conspiracy”? The issue has proved especially troublesome in drug conspiracy prosecutions. In United States v. Swafford, 512 F.3d 833 (6th Cir. 2008), defendant Swafford sold iodine, a key ingredient in the production of
methamphetamine, to different meth “cooks.” The government charged Swatford with two conspiracies: one to aid and abet the manufacture of meth, and another to distribute iodine to be used in the production of meth. Swafford successfully ar-
gued on appeal that there were instead multiple conspiracies because the cooks who purchased the iodine had no relationship with each other, and there was no collective venture with a common goal. The rim was therefore absent.
QUESTION: How could one establish some interdependence between the various cooks?

The Seventh Circuit in United States v. Torres-Ramirez, 213 F.3d 978, 981-982 (7th Cir. 2000), addressed the question of how far the relationship extends between a drug supplier and the distributors. Torres-Ramirez, “a big-time drug
dealer” in California, sold two kilos of cocaine to Hardin in Los Angeles. He invited Hardin to make future purchases when he was in California but would not commit to specific terms. Hardin returned to Indiana and sold the cocaine there. Torres-
Ramirez was convicted of conspiracy to distribute cocaine in the latter state, but the court of appeals reversed, explaining:

The district court told the jury . . .: “To establish [that] the seller has joined a conspiracy . . ., the government must [prove] an enduring relationship that directly or indirectly shows the seller has knowledge of the conspiracy
to distribute drugs.” This sentence is . . . false. . . . Knowing of a conspiracy differs from joining a conspiracy. Every seller of large quantities knows that his buyer intends to resell, and thus knows that his buyer is involved
in acriminal conspiracy. No one distributes two kilograms on the street by himself. [But the] district judge needed to tell the jury to look for an agreement to join the Indiana distribution network, not just for knowledge of its
existence.
[Wie conclude [moreover] that the evidence would not have supported a conviction under the proper legal standard. [T]his is a one-sale case. . . . Torres-Ramirez did not care whether the [Indiana] redistribution
venture succeeded; he had his money already.
p. 746
p.747
Contrast Swafford and Torres-Ramirez with United States v. Morris, 46 F.3d 410, 416 (5th Cir. 1995), in which various suppliers had sold cocaine to Costa, who in turn distributed it to dealers. The participants, some 23 individuals, were
convicted of being members of a single conspiracy. One of the suppliers challenged that finding on appeal. The court wrote:
The success of this conspiracy depended on the continued willingness of each member to perform his function. If the [suppliers] discontinued selling, there would be no cocaine for Costa and the [dealers] to buy. . .. If [the
dealers] ceased to buy, there would be no reason for Costa to buy from the [suppliers].
. .. Munoz, [however], argues that his organization could not have been in the same conspiracy as the other suppliers, such as the Laredo Organization, which were [his] competitors. [Costa] stated that he initially
approached the Laredo Organization for cocaine after becoming unhappy with Munoz. . . . We are not persuaded by this argument. [T]he larger, common plan was the purchase and sale of drugs through Costa for profit.
Munoz is no less a part of this larger, common plan because Costa also purchased from others. . . . Indeed such purchases may in fact be necessary from time to time to keep the larger, common plan in existence.
QUESTION: Which court's analysis is more consistent with Kotteakos?
United States v. McDermott
United States Court of Appeals, Second Circuit
245 F.3d 133 (2001)
Oakes, Senior Circuit Judge. Defendant James J. McDermott appeals from a judgment . . . convicting him of conspiracy to commit insider trading in violation of 18 U.S.C. §371 [among other counts]. ... On appeal, McDermott contends
principally that . . . the evidence was insufficient as a matter of law to support his convictions. . . . We agree that there is insufficient evidence to support the conspiracy count. .. .
The present prosecution arose out of a triangulated love affair involving the president of a prominent investment bank, a pornographic film star and a New Jersey businessman.
Until May 1999, McDermott was the president, CEO and Chairman of Keefe Bruyette & Woods (“KBW”), an investment bank headquartered in New York City... . Around 1996, McDermott began having an extramarital affair with Kathryn
Gannon{.] an adult film star and an alleged prostitute. . .. During the course of their affair, McDermott made numerous stock recommendations to Gannon. Unbeknownst to McDermott, Gannon was simultaneously having an affair with Anthony
Pomponio and passing these recommendations to him. Although neither Gannon nor Pomponio had extensive training or expertise in securities trading, together they earned around $170,000 in profits during the period relevant to this case.
p.7ar
p. 748

The government indicted McDermott, Gannon and Pomponio for conspiracy to commit insider trading. ... McDermott and Pomponio were tried together, but Gannon was not present. . . . The Government built its case against
McDermott almost entirely on circumstantial evidence linking records of telephone conversations between McDermott and Gannon with records of Gannon's and Pomponio’s trading activities. Telephone records revealed that McDermott and
Gannon engaged in approximately 800 telephone calls during the charged period, including up to 29 calls in one day. Trading records revealed correlations between the telephone calls and stock trades. In addition to these records, the sensational
highlight of the government's evidence . . . consisted of audiotape recordings of Pomponio's SEC deposition. These tapes undermined Pomponio’s defense and credibility, as they recorded him poorly telling lies, evading questions and affecting
incredulous reactions. . . .

McDermott challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to establish his conviction . . . for a single conspiracy. .. . [W]e find that the evidence was insufficient as a matter of law on the conspiracy count. .. .

The government argues that from the perspective of Gannon and Pomponio, albeit not from McDermott’s perspective, there was a unitary purpose to commit insider trading based on information furnished by McDermott. According to
the government, therefore, McDermott was part of the conspiracy even though he did not agree to pass information to both Gannon and Pomponio.

United States v. Carpenter, 791 F.2d 1024 (2d Cir. 1986), aff'd, 484 U.S. 19 (1987), forecloses the government's argument. In Carpenter, we reversed the conspiracy conviction of defendant Winans, a Wall Street Journal reporter who
participated in a scheme with his friends Felis and Brant to misappropriate insider information and to use it for personal gain. . .. Felis then passed the insider information to Spratt. .. . We reversed Winans’ conspiracy conviction to the extent that
it involved Spratt's trades. . .. Because Winans’ original trading agreement with Felis and Brant was narrowly limited to specific persons not including Spratt, about whom Winans had no knowledge, we found that by passing the information to
Spratt, Felis had “used the information obtained from Winans beyond the scope of the original agreement.”. . .

In Carpenter, we left open three hypothetical avenues of liability against Winans. First, we emphasized that Winans “might have been liable for the Spratt trades had the scope of the trading agreement been broader, to include trading
by or for persons other than the small group of conspirators herein.”. . . Second, we noted that Winans might have been liable for the Spratt trades had the trades been “part of the ramifications of the plan which could . . . be reasonably forseen
[sic] as a necessary or natural consequence of the unlawful agreement.”. . . Third, we suggested that Winans might have been liable had he “at least known of the Felis-Spratt relationship.”. . . Because none of these avenues of liability is applicable
to this case, we find that McDermott is not liable for the trades made by Pomponio. [AJs a matter of law, no rational jury could find McDermott guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of a single conspiracy with Pomponio to commit insider trading. The
government has failed to show the most basic element of a single conspiracy, namely, an agreement to pass insider information to Gannon and possibly to another person, even if unknown. . .

p. 748
p.749
QUESTIONS

1. Nonreciprocal conspiracy? Could Pomponio be charged with conspiring with McDermott, even though McDermott could not be charged with conspiring with him? On the one hand, Pomponio knew that McDermott was the source
of the tips. On the other hand, a conspiracy requires an agreement, and McDermott certainly never agreed to tip Pomponio. Without much discussion, Judge Oakes resolved Pomponio’s appeal on the conspiracy issue in the same way he had
resolved McDermott’s, noting only that “the government failed to prove a single conspiracy amongst all three co-defendants.” United States v. McDermott, 277 F.3d 240, 242 (2d Cir. 2002). Compare the doctrine of “unilateral” conspiracy, pp.
756-759 infra.

2. Insider trading and drug conspiracies compared. The hypothetical avenues of liability generated by the Second Circuit in the insider trading cases cited in McDermott seem very broad. This doctrine would hold a tipster liable
whenever it is reasonably foreseeable that the information would be passed along. Should these broad avenues of liability be applicable in other chain conspiracies? For example, in a drug-distribution case, should a drug supplier be guilty of
conspiring with a remote purchaser whenever that purchase could be “reasonably foreseen” as the natural consequence of selling to a middleman? Or do the differences between the two contexts call for different liability requirements? Note that
an insider trading defendant is unlikely to want the information passed along to others, because further use of the information makes getting caught more likely. Thus, when the tipster knows of the likelihood of further use, one can infer that the
agreed relationship has a broader scope than the ordinary tipster-tipee transaction. In contrast, drug suppliers always expect a buyer of large quantities to resell to others, and these further sales are always, directly or indirectly, in the original sup-
plier’s interest. Should every drug supplier therefore be considered a party to an “agreement” with all remote purchasers?

NOTE ON MULTIPLE OBJECTIVES

In all of the foregoing cases, prosecutors sought to establish a single, inclusive conspiracy, while defendants attempted to break up the alleged relationship into smaller conspiracies. This is the usual situation: The prosecution prefers to
prove a single, inclusive conspiracy, so as to hold as many defendants as possible responsible for the statements and crimes of as many confederates as possible. E.g., United States v. Vargas, 2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 22420 (Sth Cir. 2021); United
States v. Brown, 811 F. Appx. 818 (4th Cir. 2020). But sometimes the strategic positions are reversed:

In United States v. Mier-Garces, 967 F.3d 1003 (10th Cir. 2020), the defendant played a role in distributing drugs from Mexico to Texas and Colorado. When he was convicted for conspiracy to distribute in Texas and then prosecuted
separately for conspiracy to distribute in Colorado, he argued that there was only a single conspiracy and therefore that the Colorado prosecution should be blocked on double jeopardy grounds. Although many cases find that similar drug-distri-
bution situations involve a single, encompassing cartel, in Mier-Garces the court held that there were two separate conspiracies, and therefore upheld the separate Colorado prosecution.

p.749
p. 750

In People v. Kopp, 250 Cal. Rptr. 3d 852 (Ct. App. Sth Dist. 2019), defendant H, in pretrial custody on serious drug-distribution charges, sought to intimidate one of the witnesses against him and kill another witness. Kopp, the defen-
dant's secretary, passed messages between H and an “enforcer” designated to deal with the two witnesses. Kopp was convicted for two conspiracies (one involving each of the witnesses) but argued that there was only a single conspiracy. The
court agreed and reversed the convictions, holding that the efforts to deal with the two witnesses were part of a single plan to prevent a successful prosecution of H.

United States v. Braverman, 317 U.S. 49 (1942), is one of the leading cases in which the Supreme Court resisted a prosecution effort to charge multiple conspiracies for a single course of conduct. Prosecutors indicted a group of
defendants on seven counts, each charging a conspiracy to violate a separate provision of the internal revenue laws. The applicable statute carried a maximum penalty of two years on each count. Defendants were convicted on all seven counts
and each defendant was sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment. The Supreme Court reversed:

The gist of the crime of conspiracy as defined by the statute is the agreement to commit one or more unlawful acts. . . . Whether the object of a single agreement is to commit one or many crimes, it is in either case that

agreement which constitutes the conspiracy which the statute punishes. The one agreement cannot be taken to be several agreements and hence several conspiracies because it envisages the violation of several statutes

rather than one. . . . For such a violation, only the single penalty prescribed by the statute can be imposed.

QUESTION: If conspiracy is regarded as an inchoate offense, punishing combinations that threaten a substantive harm, does it make sense to treat an agreement to commit seven different crimes as only a single offense?

Albernaz v. United States, 450 U.S. 333 (1981), sharply limited the Braverman rule. In Albernaz, the defendant had conspired with others to import and distribute marijuana. He was convicted on two counts, one charging conspiracy
to import and the other conspiracy to distribute. Accepting the premise that there was only a single agreement, the Court nonetheless upheld the two convictions, emphasizing that, unlike cases involving only the general conspiracy statute, here
separate statutes proscribed conspiracy to import and conspiracy to distribute. The Court held that by enacting two statutes, each with its own penalties, Congress had manifested its intention to authorize separate convictions and punishments.
The Court distinguished Braverman on the ground that “the conspiratorial agreement in Braverman, although it had many objectives, violated but a single statute.” Id. at 339.

NOTE ON THE MODEL PENAL CODE APPROACH
The MPC proposes an innovative solution to the problems of defining the scope of a conspiratorial relationship.
MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT to $5.03 at 425-431 (1985): .. . Subsections (1) and (2) limit the scope of his conspiracy both in terms of its criminal objectives, to those crimes that he had the purpose of promoting or
p. 750

p.751
facilitating, and in terms of parties, to those with whom he agreed, except when the same crime that he conspired to commit is, to his knowledge, also the object of a conspiracy between one of his co-conspirators and another person or persons.
Subsection (3) provides that his conspiracy is a single one despite a multiplicity of criminal objectives, as long as such crimes are the object of the same agreement or continuous conspiratorial relationship. . . .

The Model Code provision would require a different approach to a case such as Bruno and might produce different results. Since the overall operation involved the separate crimes of importing by the smugglers and possession and
sale by each group [smugglers, distributors, and retailers], the question as to each defendant would be whether and with whom he conspired to commit each of these crimes, under the criteria set forth in Subsections (1) and (2). The conspiratorial
objective for the purpose of this inquiry could not be characterized in the manner of the Bruno court, as “to smuggle narcotics into the Port of New York and distribute them to addicts both in [New York] and in Texas and Louisiana.” This is indeed
the overall objective of the entire operation. It also may be true that some of the participants conspired to commit all of the crimes involved in the operation; under Subsection (3), as under prevailing law, they would be guilty of only one conspiracy
if all these crimes were the object of the same agreement or continuing conspiratorial relationship, and the objective of that conspiracy or relationship could fairly be phrased in terms of the overall operation. But this multiplicity of criminal objec-
tives affords a poor referent for testing the culpability of each individual who is in any manner involved in the operation.

With the conspiratorial objectives characterized as the particular crimes and the culpability of each participant tested separately, it would be possible to find . . . that the smugglers conspired to commit the illegal sales of the retailers,
but that the retailers did not conspire to commit the importing of the smugglers. Factual situations warranting such a finding may easily be conceived. For example, the smugglers might depend upon and seek to foster their retail markets, while the
retailers might have many suppliers and be indifferent to the success of any single source. The court’s approach in Bruno does not admit of such a finding, for treating the conspiratorial objective as the entire series of crimes involved in smuggling,
distributing, and retailing requires a finding either of no conspiracy or of a single conspiracy in which all three links in the chain conspired to commit all of each other's crimes.

It also would be possible to find, with the inquiry focused on each individual’s culpability as to each criminal objective, that some of the parties in a chain conspired to commit the entire series of crimes while others conspired to commit
‘only some of these crimes. Thus the smugglers and the middlemen in Bruno may have conspired to commit, promote, or facilitate the importing and the possession and sales of all of the parties down to the final retail sale; the retailers might have
conspired with them as to their own possession and sales, but might be indifferent to all the steps prior to their receipt of the narcotics. In this situation, a smuggler or a middleman might have conspired with all three groups to commit the entire
series of crimes, while a retailer might have conspired with the same parties but to achieve fewer criminal objectives. Such results are conceptually difficult to reach under existing doctrine not only because of the frequent failure to focus separately
on the different criminal objectives, but also because of the traditional view of the agreement as a bilateral relationship between each of the parties, congruent in scope both as to its party and its objective dimensions.

p.751

p.752

6. Parties

Because conspiracy liability shares with accomplice liability the need for the participation of another party, both doctrines pose similar issues concerning the nature of the required relationship between the parties. Consider the parallels
and differences in the legal treatment of these issues in the two kinds of liability.

Gebardi v. United States
‘Supreme Court of the United States
287 U.S. 112 (1932)
Justice Stone delivered the opinion of the Court.

This case is here on certiorari to review a judgment of conviction for conspiracy to violate the Mann Act. [At the time this case was decided, the Mann Act read as follows: “Whoever knowingly persuades, induces, entices, or coerces
any woman or girl to go from one place to another in interstate or foreign commerce . . . for the purpose of prostitution or debauchery, or for any other immoral purpose .. . whether with or without her consent, and thereby knowingly causes such
woman or girl to go and to be carried or transported as a passenger . . . in interstate or foreign commerce . . . shall be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.”] Petitioners, a man and a woman, not then husband
and wife, were indicted in the District Court for Northern Illinois, for conspiring together, and with others not named, to transport the woman from one state to another for the purpose of engaging in sexual intercourse with the man. At the trial
without a jury there was evidence from which the court could have found that the petitioners had engaged in illicit sexual relations in the course of each of the journeys alleged; that the man purchased the railway tickets for both petitioners for at
least one journey, and that in each instance the woman, in advance of the purchase of the tickets, consented to go on the journey and did go on it voluntarily for the specified immoral purpose. There was no evidence supporting the allegation that
any other person had conspired. The trial court. . . gave judgment of conviction, which the Court of Appeals . . . affirmed.

Congress set out in the Mann Act to deal with cases which frequently, if not normally, involve consent and agreement on the part of the woman to the forbidden transportation. In every case in which she is not intimidated or forced into
the transportation, the statute necessarily contemplates her acquiescence. Yet this acquiescence, though an incident of a type of transportation specifically dealt with by the statute, was not made a crime under the Mann Act itself. Of this class
of cases we say that the substantive offense contemplated by the statute itself involves the same combination or community of purpose of two persons only which is prosecuted here as conspiracy. If this were the only case covered by the Act,
it would be within those decisions which hold, consistently with the theory upon which conspiracies are punished, that where it is impossible under any circumstances to commit the substantive offense without cooperative action, the preliminary
agreement between the same parties to commit the offense is not an indictable conspiracy

p.752

p. 753
either at common law or under the federal statute. . .. But criminal transportation under the Mann Act may be effected without the woman's consent as in cases of intimidation or force (with which we are not now concerned). We assume, there-
fore, . .. that the decisions last mentioned do not in all strictness apply. We do not rest our decision upon the theory of those cases. . .. We place it rather upon the ground that we perceive in the failure of the Mann Act to condemn the woman's
participation in those transportations which are effected with her mere consent, evidence of an affirmative legislative policy to leave her acquiescence unpunished. . . . It would contravene that policy to hold that the very passage of the Mann Act
effected a withdrawal by the conspiracy statute of that immunity which the Mann Act itself confers.

Itis not to be supposed that the consent of an unmarried person to adultery with a married person, where the latter alone is guilty of the substantive offense, would render the former an abettor or a conspirator, or that the acquiescence
of a woman under the age of consent would make her a co-conspirator with the man to commit statutory rape upon herself. The principle, determinative of this case, is the same.

On the evidence before us the woman petitioner has not violated the Mann Act and, we hold, is not guilty of a conspiracy to do so. .. .

As there is no proof that the man conspired with anyone else to bring about the transportation, the convictions of both petitioners must be reversed.

NOTES

1. The Gebardi rule. The general principle reflected in Gebardi is widely accepted. See Glanville Williams, Criminal Law: The General Part 673 (2d ed. 1961): “One may submit with some confidence that a person cannot be convicted of
conspiracy when there is a recognized rule of justice or policy exempting him from prosecution from the substantive crime.” For a statutory statement of a similar principle, see Model Penal Code §5.04(2), in the Appendix in this book. The Supreme
Court relied on Gebardi’s analysis in rejecting the government's claim that a defendant who uses a cell phone to buy drugs can be guilty of “facilitating” drug distribution. The Court noted that “where a statute treats one side of a bilateral transac-
tion more leniently, adding to the penalty of the party on that side for facilitating the action by the other would upend the calibration of punishment set by the legislature.” Abuelhawa v. United States, 556 U.S. 816, 820 (2009).

2. The acquitted co-conspirator. A related question is what to do when all the co-conspirators but one are acquitted. The general trend is to reject a rule of consistency and allow a co-conspirator to be convicted even if all others
have been acquitted. Commonwealth v. Campbell, 539 Pa. 212, 217-221 (1994).

3. Wharton's rule. Justice Stone notes that the Gebardi case was not governed by the line of precedent holding that “where it is impossible under any circumstances to commit the substantive offense without cooperative action,
the preliminary agreement between the same parties to commit the offense is not an indictable conspiracy.” That line of precedent exemplifies what has become known as “Wharton's rule.” It was explained as follows (2 F. Wharton, Criminal Law
§1604 at 1862 (12th ed. 1932)):

p. 759
p. 754

[When] plurality of agents is logically necessary, conspiracy, which assumes the voluntary accession of a person to a crime of such a character that it is aggravated by a plurality of agents, cannot be maintained. . . . In other

words, . . . when the law says, such an offense — e.g., adultery — shall have a certain punishment, it is not lawful for the prosecution to evade this limitation by indicting the offense as conspiracy.

Compare the MPC, which rejects Wharton's rule. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §5.04 at 482-483 (1985):

The classic Wharton's rule cases involve crimes such as dueling, bigamy, adultery, and incest, but it has also been said to apply to gambling, the giving and receiving of bribes, and the buying and selling of contraband

goods. The rule has been unevenly applied and has been subject to a number of exceptions and limitations.

It seems clear that Wharton's rule . . . completely overlooks the functions of conspiracy as an inchoate crime. That an offense inevitably requires concert is no reason to immunize criminal preparation to commit it.

Further, the rule operates to immunize from a conspiracy prosecution both parties to any offense that inevitably requires concert, thus disregarding the legislative judgment that at least one should be punishable and taking

no account of the varying policies that ought to determine whether the other should be. The rule is supportable only insofar as it avoids cumulative punishment for conspiracy and the completed substantive crime, for it is

clear that the legislature would have taken the factor of concert into account in grading a crime that inevitably requires concert. This consideration is of course irrelevant under the Model Code, which precludes cumulative

punishment in any case for a conspiracy with a single criminal objective and the completed substantive crime.

Although the MPC Commentary describes bribery as an instance where Wharton's rule may apply, many courts have disagreed. See United States v. Dimora, 829 F. Supp. 2d 574 (N.D. Ohio 2011); United States v. McNair, 605 F.3d
1152 (11th Cir. 2010). Which approach makes more sense? How much should the answer depend on whether a jurisdiction adopts a rule like the MPC’s, which precludes cumulative punishment?

How should courts treat the relationship between a buyer and a seller of drugs? The buyer-seller agreement does not by itself establish a conspiracy. United States v. Wheat, 988 F.3d 299 (6th Cir. 2021). As the Sixth Circuit explained,
that agreement alone cannot suffice because conspiracy requires “not just the presence of any agreement, but an agreement with the same joint criminal objective — here the joint objective of distributing drugs.” United States v. Delgado, 631 F.3d
685, 695 (Sth Cir. 2011). In Delgado, according to the court, the seller's objective was distribution, whereas the buyer's was possession. But the dissenting opinion disagreed on the facts of the case because the quantity of drugs involved was so
large that the jury could infer the buyer was also involved in distribution. Id. at 714-715 (Clement, J., dissenting). What additional facts, beyond the buyer-seller agreement itself,

p. 754

p. 755
should suffice to establish a conspiracy to distribute? Should it matter whether the buyer purchases the drugs on credit? Or makes regular purchases every month? Or refers other purchasers to the seller? See United States v. Moe, 781 F.3d 1120,
1125-1126 (9th Cir. 2015); Keegan Murphy, Buying into Criminal Liability: Resolving the Circuit Split over the Buyer-Seller Rule in Federal Drug Conspiracy Jurisprudence, 97 Or. L. Rev. 183 (2018).

4, Problems. (a) 21 U.S.C. §861 makes it a crime “for any person at least 18 years of age to knowingly and intentionally [employ] a person under 18 years of age” to sell or distribute drugs. Palmer and Harris organized a group of
juveniles to sell cocaine. They both knew that the youngsters working for them were under 18. The prosecution proved that Palmer was over 18, and he was therefore liable under §861. But because the prosecution did not prove Harris's age, Har-
ris could not be convicted of violating §861 personally. Can Harris be convicted of conspiring with Palmer to violate §861? Cf. United States v. Harris, 959 F.2d 246, 262-264 (D.C. Cir. 1992).

(b) The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) makes it a crime for any U.S. citizen to bribe a foreign government official, but it does not make it an offense for such an official to accept the bribe. Can Canadian officials who took bribes
from U.S. citizens be convicted of conspiracy to violate the FCPA? See United States v. Castle, 925 F.2d 831 (Sth Cir. 1991).

(©) Arizona criminalizes human smuggling, which it defines as “the transportation [of] persons [who] are not United States citizens [or] permanent resident aliens.” Ariz. Rev. Code §13-2319(F)(3). Should Wharton's rule bar a prosecution
against the person being smuggled for conspiracy to commit human smuggling? See State v. Barragan-Sierra, 196 P.3d 879 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2008).

(d) Ocasio, a Baltimore police officer, participated in a scheme with owners of an auto repair shop, whereby its owners would give the officer kickbacks for referring stranded motorists to their shop. The officer and owners of the shop
were charged with conspiracy to commit extortion under the Hobbs Act, which defines extortion as “the obtaining of property of another, with his consent, under color of official right.” 18 U.S.C. §1951. In a prior decision, Evans v. United States,
504 U.S. 255 (1992), the Supreme Court interpreted extortion under the Hobbs Act to include bribery. Ocasio argued for a jury instruction stating that the government had to prove that the conspiracy was to obtain money or property from some
person who was not a member of the conspiracy. The Supreme Court disagreed. Ocasio v. United States, 136 S. Ct. 1423 (2016). In dissent, Justice Thomas argued that “it is illogical and wrong to say that two people conspired to extort one of
themselves.” Id. at 1438. He noted that the majority's reading would allow the government to “prosecute bribe-payors with sweeping conspiracy charges,” making it “easier to induce those payors to plead out and testify against state and local
officials.” Id. at 1439. Which approach makes more sense as a matter of policy? Justice Thomas thought the majority's view would give the federal government too much control over state officials and that local corruption should be a matter for
state control. What are the dangers of federal involvement? On the other hand, why might state and local prosecutions provide an inadequate check?

p. 755
p. 756
Garcia v. State
‘Supreme Court of Indiana
394 N.E.2d 106 (Ind. 1979)

Prenrice, J. Defendant was convicted in a trial by jury of conspiracy to commit murder. . . . On appeal she raises the . . . issue . . . whether the defendant can be convicted of conspiracy when the only person with whom the defendant
conspired was a police informant who only feigned his acquiescence in the scheme. .. .

The evidence introduced at trial consisted of the following: On September 30, 1977, State's witness, Allen Young, was first contacted by the defendant with regard to certain marital problems that she was having. She stated that her
husband constantly beat her and her children and . . . that she wanted her husband Killed. [After several subsequent conversations with defendant,] Young went to the [police] and discussed the matter with two detectives. He offered to call the
defendant and let them listen and record the conversation, which they did. During the conversation, Young again asked the defendant if she wanted him to help her find someone to kill her husband, and she responded affirmatively. Young replied
that he would try to find someone. Several more conversations took place. . . . At their final meeting, Young, accompanied by a plain-clothed detective, introduced the defendant to the detective, stating that here was a man who might be willing to
do the job. The defendant then produced $200, a picture of her husband, and a record of his daily habits and gave them to the detective. She agreed to pay the balance of the contract price when the “job” was completed. Defendant was subse-
quently arrested. At trial, Young testified that he only feigned his acquiescence in the plan and at no time did he intend to actually carry it out.

The issue is whether the conspiracy section of our new penal code adopts the Model Penal Code’s “unilateral” concept or whether it retains the traditional “bilateral” concept.

The bilateral concept is the traditional view of conspiracy as derived from common law. It is formulated in terms of two or more persons agreeing to commit a crime, each with intent to do so. In cases where the person or persons with
whom the defendant conspired only feigned his acquiescence in the plan, the courts have generally held that neither person could be convicted of conspiracy because there was no “conspiratorial agreement.” . . .

Reacting to criticism of this viewpoint, the drafters of the Model Penal Code, though not without internal disagreement, adopted a “unilateral” concept, as follows: [The court then quoted Model Penal Code §§5.03(1) and 5.04(1). See the
Appendix in this book.]

In explanation of their new approach, the Drafters of the Model Penal Code commented:

. .. The definition of the Draft departs from the traditional view of conspiracy as an entirely bilateral or multilateral relationship. . . . Attention is directed instead to each individual's culpability by framing the definition in terms

of the conduct which suffices to establish the liability of any given actor, rather than the conduct of a group of which he is charged to be a part — an approach which in this comment we have designated “unilateral.”

p. 756
p.757
One consequence of this approach is to make it immaterial to the guilt of a conspirator whose culpability has been established that the person or all of the persons with whom he conspired have not been or

cannot be convicted. . .. Under the unilateral approach of the Draft, the culpable party's guilt would not be affected by the fact that the other party's agreement was feigned. . .. True enough, the project’s chances of success

have not been increased by the agreement; indeed, its doom may have been sealed by this turn of events. But the major basis of conspiratorial liability — the unequivocal evidence of a firm purpose to commit a crime — re-

mains the same. ...

MPP.C. §5.03 [Tent. Draft No. 10,] Comments at pp. 104-105... .

This concept has been adopted, in whole or in part, in at least 26 states and is under consideration in most of the remaining states. See Note, Conspiracy: Statutory Reform Since the Model Penal Code, 75 Colum. L. R. 1122, 1125
(1975).

In 1976, our Indiana Legislature repealed the existing conspiracy statute and adopted Ind. Code §35-41-5-2 . . . which [provides]

(c) Itis no defense that the person with whom the accused person is alleged to have conspired:

(1) has not been prosecuted;

(2) has not been convicted;

(3) has been acquitted;

(4) has been convicted of a different crime;
(6) cannot be prosecuted for any reason; or
(6) lacked the capacity to commit the crime.

. .  [llt is clear upon the face of the act that defenses available under the multilateral concept were to be eliminated. The inclusion of the “catch-all” sub-proviso (6) can leave no doubt. Clearly “any reason,” as recited therein, includes
the absence of criminal culpability on the part of a co-conspirator — including a sole co-conspirator. The words “agrees” and “agreement” have not been used as words of art denoting a “meeting of the minds” and “contract.” Rather, the former is
descriptive of the defendant's state of mind at the time he communicated with another in furtherance of the felony; and the latter refers to the defendant's understanding.

Defendant has cited us. . . numerous cases supporting the bilateral concept requiring “concurrence of sentiment and cooperative conduct in the unlawful and criminal enterprise”; however, those cases were not decided under statutes
remotely similar to our own. . .. Her argument that, by definition, an agreement requires the concurrence of sentiment of at least two individuals . . . is not persuasive in the light of the express wording of the entire enactment. . . .

The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.

NOTES

1. The traditional offense of conspiracy. In jurisdictions that have not reformulated their definition of conspiracy, the requirement of bilateral agreement remains, and conspiracy charges will not lie when the defendant's only collab-
orators are undercover informants or other feigned participants. See, e.g., United States v. Delgado, 631 F.3d 685 (5th Cir. 2011); Longley v. State, 32 So. 3d 736 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2010).

p.757
p. 758

2. Modern conspiracy statutes. In jurisdictions that have adopted definitions of conspiracy similar to that proposed by the MPC, many courts have held, in accord with Garcia, that defendants can be guilty of conspiracy if they agree
to commit a crime with a feigned accomplice or with a person who otherwise lacks the requisite intent for conspiracy. E.g., State v. Roldan, 714 A.2d 351, 355 (NJ. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1998); Suding v. State, 945 N.E.2d 731 (Ind. Ct. App. 2011).
But in Connecticut and Illinois, two states with conspiracy statutes patterned on the MPC, courts have held that the requirement of bilateral agreement survives. See State v. Grullon, 562 A.2d 481 (Conn. 1989); People v. Foster, 457 N.E.2d 405,
407 (II 1983). The Illinois statute states that a “person commits conspiracy when, with intent that an offense be committed, he agrees with another to the commission of that offense.” Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 720, 5/8-2(a) (2021). In Foster, the Illinois
Supreme Court held that the required “agree{ment]” could not exist unless at least two parties genuinely intended to carry out the plan. Rejecting the reasoning of the Garcia case, the court said (457 N.E.2d at 407): “We doubt .. . that the drafters
could have intended what represents a rather profound change in the law of conspiracy without mentioning it. ...” The court noted, however, that the Illinois solicitation statute would (like the corresponding MPC provision) “embrace virtually every
situation in which one could be convicted of conspiracy under the unilateral theory.” Id. at 408.

3. Rationale for the traditional approach. The case in favor of the traditional view is stated as follows in United States v. Escobar De Bright, 742 F.2d 1196, 1198-1200 (9th Cir. 1984):

Criminal conspiracy is an offense separate from the actual criminal act because of the perception “that collective action toward an antisocial end involves a greater risk to society than individual action toward the same end.”

In part, this view is based on the perception that group activity increases the likelihood of success of the criminal act and of future criminal activity by members of the group, and is difficult for law enforcement officers to

detect. ...

Such dangers, however, are non-existent when a person “conspires” only with a government agent. There is no continuing criminal enterprise and ordinarily no inculcation of criminal knowledge and practices.

Preventive intervention by law enforcement officers also is not a significant problem in such circumstances. The agent, as part of the “conspiracy,” is quite capable of monitoring the situation in order to prevent the comple-

tion of the contemplated criminal plan; in short, no cloak of secrecy surrounds any agreement to commit the criminal acts.
Finally, the [traditional] rule responds to the same concern that underlies the entrapment defense: the legitimate law enforcement function of crime prevention “does not include the manufacturing of crime.” Allow-

ing a government agent to form a conspiracy with only one other party would create the potential for law enforcement officers to “manufacture” conspiracies when none would exist absent the government's presence.

4, Attempted conspiracy? In states that adhere to the bilateral approach, can a defendant who “agrees” to commit a crime with an undercover agent be convicted of attempting to conspire? In State v. Kihnel, 488 So. 2d 1238, 1241
(La. Ct. App. 1986), the court held in the negative:

p. 758
nnn 758
Attempt and conspiracy are both inchoate crimes. Just as there can be no attempt to commit an attempt, such as “attempted assault” . . . we conclude that under the bilateral formulation of conspiracy there can be no “at-

tempted conspiracy.”

As part of the very foundation of criminal law, crimes include both a criminal act (or omission) and a criminal intent. “Attempted conspiracy” suggests a crime formed only of criminal intent, as it is the agreement

which constitutes the act. We are not prepared to judicially legislate such a crime.

For thorough discussion of this problem, see Ira Robbins, Double Inchoate Crimes, 26 Harv. J. on Legis. 1, 54-58, 80-83, 91-94 (1989). See also Wilson v. State, 53 Ga. 205, 206 (1874), where the court rejected liability for attempted
assault as “absurd.” But some courts and commentators have found nothing wrong with liability for attempted assault, even though assault (like conspiracy) is an inchoate offense in the nature of an attempt. One scholar noted that, “[alithough no
jurisdiction recognizes the crime of attempted simple assault, an increasing number of state courts have convicted defendants of attempted aggravated assaults.” Robbins, supra, at 39. Are there good reasons to permit attempt liability in such
cases? Should courts also permit liability for an attempt to conspire, if the crime intended is a serious one? Note that, while it is uncommon, some jurisdictions accept the crime of attempted conspiracy. See, e.g., People v. Hackett, 939 N.Y.S.2d
886 (2012).

7. Reassessing the Law of Conspiracy

Compare the following observations on the fairness and utility of conspiracy doctrine:
PHILLIP JOHNSON, THE UNNECESSARY CRIME OF CONSPIRACY, 61 CAL. L. REV. 1137, 1139-1140 (1973): The law of criminal conspiracy is not basically sound. It should be abolished, not reformed.

The central fault of conspiracy law and the reason why any limited reform is bound to be inadequate can be briefly stated. What conspiracy adds to the law is simply confusion, and the confusion is inherent in the nature of the doctrine.
The confusion stems from the fact that conspiracy is not only a substantive inchoate crime in itself, but the touchstone for invoking several independent procedural and substantive doctrines. We ask whether a defendant agreed with another
person to commit a crime initially for the purpose of determining whether he may be convicted of the offense of conspiracy even when the crime itself has not yet been committed. If the answer to that question is in the affirmative, however, we find
that we have also answered a number of other questions that would otherwise have to be considered independently. Where there is evidence of conspiracy, the defendant may be tried jointly with his criminal partners and possibly with many other
persons whom he has never met or seen, the joint trial may be held in a place he may never have visited, and hearsay statements of other alleged members of the conspiracy may be used to prove his guilt. Furthermore, a defendant who is found
guilty of conspiracy is subject to enhanced punishment and may also be found guilty of any crime committed in furtherance of the conspiracy, whether or not he knew about the crime or aided in its commission.

Each of these issues involves a separate substantive or procedural area of the criminal law of considerable importance and complexity. The essential vice of

p. 759
p. 760

conspiracy is that it inevitably distracts the courts from the policy questions or balancing of interests that ought to govern the decision of specific legal issues and leads them instead to decide those issues by reference to the conceptual framework
of conspiracy. Instead of asking whether public policy or the interests of the parties require a particular holding, the courts are led instead to consider whether the theory of conspiracy is broad enough to permit it. What is wrong with conspiracy,
in other words, is much more basic than the overbreadth of a few rules. The problem is not with particular results, but with the use of a single abstract concept to decide numerous questions that deserve separate consideration in light of the var-
ious interests and policies they involve.
NEAL KUMAR KATYAL, CONSPIRACY THEORY, 112 YALE L.J. 1307, 1309-1314 (2003): Psychologists have made many advances in understanding the ways in which people in groups act differently than they do as individuals. So, too, economists
have developed sophisticated explanations for why firms promote efficiency, leading to new theories in corporate law. These insights can be “reverse-engineered” to make conspiracies operate less efficiently. [In other words, if we understand the
features that make groups efficient, we can work backwards to undermine those features. — Eps.] In reverse engineering corporate law principles and introducing lessons from psychology, a rich account of how government should approach con-
spiracy begins to unfold... .

[Conspiracy] law strives to prevent conspiracies from forming with high up-front penalties for those who join, but also uses mechanisms to obtain information from those who have joined and decide to cooperate with the government.
Federal law itself has come to recognize [the advantages of this dual approach], although scholars have not, and this can explain the function of doctrines such as Pinkerton liability and the exclusion from merger [resulting in the separate punish-
ment for conspiracy and the object offense]. These doctrines not only further information extraction, they also make conspiracies more difficult to create and maintain by forcing them to adopt inefficient practices. The possibility of defection forces
the syndicate to use expensive monitoring of its employees for evidence of possible collusion with the government. Mechanisms for defection also erode trust within the group and lead members to think that others are acting out of self-interest.
This analysis will suggest that other doctrines in criminal law . . . have information-extraction advantages; today, however, conspiracy law is a primary vehicle equipped for the task... .

[This Article does not aspire to defend every aspect of federal conspiracy law. Rather, it contends that the criticism of some of the doctrine’s various features (such as its inchoate nature, Pinkerton liability, the exclusion from merger,
and its extension to agreements whose successes are “factually impossible”) has not appreciated their functional benefits.

C. LIABILITY WITHIN THE CORPORATE FRAMEWORK

A special case of group crime occurs within the context of corporations, which raises three main problems:

p. 760
p. 761

The first problem of corporate liability is when the company should be punished as a supplement or substitute for punishment of the individual actors; it also involves the legal criteria for determining which actions, of which employees
and officials, render the corporation criminally liable.

The second question raised by corporate criminal responsibility is how to punish an organization. With imprisonment not an option, what can be done? If fines are the main weapon, does that sufficiently distinguish criminal penalties
from civil ones?

The third issue deals with the personal criminal liability of individual employees and officials who act for the corporation. The lesser employees present no special issue; the normal legal doctrines of personal and accomplice liability
suffice. The difficulty concerns the individual liability of high officials of corporations, who arguably should sometimes be accountable for the actions of lower-echelon employees even though they would not be liable under the rigorous require-
ments imposed by the usual doctrines of accomplice liability.

1. Liability of the Corporate Entity
New York Central & Hudson River Railroad Co. v. United States

United States Supreme Court
212 U.S. 481 (1909)

Justice Day delivered the opinion of the court.

[The federal Elkins Act, passed in 1903, required common carriers such as railroads to post rates and forbade them from charging less than their posted rates. In this case, both the railroad company and one of its employees, an assis-
tant traffic manager, were convicted for paying rebates to certain companies who shipped products with them, thus effectively lowering the shipping rate in violation of the Elkins Act]

The principal attack in this court is upon the constitutional validity of certain features of the Elkins act. 32 Stat. 847. That act, among other things, provides:

(1) That anything done or omitted to be done by a corporation common carrier subject to the act to regulate commerce, and the acts amendatory thereof, which, if done or omitted to be done by any director or officer thereof,

or any receiver, trustee, lessee, agent or person acting for or employed by such corporation, would constitute a misdemeanor under said acts, or under this act, shall also be held to be a misdemeanor committed by such

corporation, and upon conviction thereof it shall be subject to like penalties as are prescribed in said acts, or by this act, with reference to such persons, except as such penalties are herein changed. . .. In construing and

enforcing the provisions of this section, the act, omission or failure of any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any common carrier, acting within the scope of his employment, shall in every case be also

deemed to be the act, omission or failure of such carrier, as well as of that person.

p. 761

p. 762

Itis contended that these provisions of the law are unconstitutional because Congress has no authority to impute to a corporation the commission of criminal offenses, or to subject a corporation to a criminal prosecution by reason of
the things charged. The argument is that to thus punish the corporation is in reality to punish the innocent stockholders, and to deprive them of their property without opportunity to be heard, consequently without due process of law... . As no
action of the board of directors could legally authorize a crime, and as indeed the stockholders could not do so, the arguments come to this: that owing to the nature and character of its organization and the extent of its power and authority, a cor-
poration cannot commit a crime of the nature charged in this case.

Some of the earlier writers on common law held the law to be that a corporation could not commit a crime. . . . In Blackstone’s Commentaries, chapter 18, §12, we find it stated: “A corporation cannot commit treason, or felony, or other
crime in its corporate capacity, though its members may in their distinct individual capacities.” The modern authority, universally, so far as we know, is the other way. In considering the subject, Bishop's New Criminal Law, §417, devotes a chapter
to the capacity of corporations to commit crime, and states the law to be: “Since a corporation acts by its officers and agents their purposes, motives, and intent are just as much those of the corporation as are the things done. If, for example, the
invisible, intangible essence of air, which we term a corporation, can level mountains, fill up valleys, lay down iron tracks, and run railroad cars on them, it can intend to do it, and can act therein as well viciously as virtuously.”. ..

Itis now well established that in actions for tort the corporation may be held responsible for damages for the acts of its agent within the scope of his employment. And this is the rule when the act is done by the agent in the course of his
employment, although done wantonly or recklessly or against the express orders of the principal. In such cases the liability is not imputed because the principal actually participates in the malice or fraud, but because the act is done for the bene-
fit of the principal, while the agent is acting within the scope of his employment in the business of the principal, and justice requires that the latter shall be held responsible for damages to the individual who has suffered by such conduct. . . .

It is true that there are some crimes, which in their nature cannot be committed by corporations. But there is a large class of offenses, of which rebating under the Federal statutes is one, wherein the crime consists in purposely doing
the things prohibited by statute. In that class of crimes we see no good reason why corporations may not be held responsible for and charged with the knowledge and purposes of their agents, acting within the authority conferred upon them... .

It is a part of the public history of the times that statutes against rebates could not be effectually enforced so long as individuals only were subject to punishment for violation of the law, when the giving of rebates or concessions inured
to the benefit of the corporations of which the individuals were but the instruments. This situation, developed in more than one report of the Interstate Commerce Commission, was no doubt influential in bringing about the enactment of the Elkins
Law, making corporations criminally liable. . .

We see no valid objection in law, and every reason in public policy, why the corporation, which profits by the transaction, and can only act through its agents and officers, shall be held punishable by fine because of the knowledge and
intent of its agents to whom it has intrusted authority to act in the subject-matter of

p. 762
p. 763
making and fixing rates of transportation, and whose knowledge and purposes may well be attributed to the corporation for which the agents act. [T]he law . . . cannot shut its eyes to the fact that the great majority of business transactions in
modern times are conducted through [corporations], and particularly that interstate commerce is almost entirely in their hands, and to give them immunity from all punishment because of the old and exploded doctrine that a corporation cannot
commit a crime would virtually take away the only means of effectually controlling the subject-matter and correcting the abuses aimed at... .
QUESTIONS

1. Corporate liability in tort versus crime. As the Court in New York Central notes, corporations must pay damages to tort victims for the acts of corporate agents within the scope of their employment. Are the considerations that
support criminal liability for corporations the same or different from those that support tort liability? In New York Central, which victims would be in a position to sue the defendant for damages? How would damages be measured? If New York Cen-
tral had destroyed documents, which victims would be in a position to sue for damages? How would those damages be measured?

2. Corporate criminal liability for which crimes? The Court states: “It is true there are some crimes, which in their nature cannot be committed by corporations.” But as the Court acknowledges, a corporation can act only through
its agents, so in theory, a corporation could commit any act that an individual agent could commit, as long as the agent acts within the scope of his or her employment and with the intent to benefit the corporation. To be sure, some crimes (such as
murder and rape) are far less likely than others (such as financial crimes) to be committed with an intent to benefit corporate entities, but that does not mean that they cannot be committed by corporations in some situations.

United States v. Hilton Hotels Corp.
United States Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit
467 F.2d 1000 (1972)

BROWNING, J. This is an appeal from a conviction under an indictment charging a violation of section 1 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. §1.

Operators of hotels, restaurants, hotel and restaurant supply companies, and other businesses in Portland, Oregon, organized an association to attract conventions to their city. To finance the association, members were asked to make
contributions in predetermined amounts. Companies selling supplies to hotels were asked to contribute an amount equal to one per cent of their sales to hotel members. To aid collections, hotel members, including appellant [Hilton Hotels], agreed
to give preferential treatment to suppliers who paid their assessments, and to curtail purchases from those who did not. [The Sherman Antitrust Act, passed by Congress in 1890, prohibits all combinations in restraint of trade. In this case, the court
of appeals noted that the alleged boycott by the hotel members of suppliers who refused to pay their assessments, if proved, would constitute a per se

p. 763
p. 764
violation of the Sherman Act. The court then went on to address the separate claim that the hotel could not be liable because it had not authorized the acts of the hotel’s purchasing agent who participated in the boycott.]

[The president of Hilton Hotels] testified that it would be contrary to the policy of the corporation for the manager of one of its hotels to condition purchases upon payment of a contribution to a local association by the supplier. The
manager of appellant's Portland hotel and his assistant testified that it was the hotel's policy to purchase supplies solely on the basis of price, quality, and service. They also testified that on two occasions they told the hotel’s purchasing agent that
he was to take no part in the boycott. The purchasing agent confirmed the receipt of these instructions, but admitted that, despite them, he had threatened a supplier with loss of the hotel’s business unless the supplier paid the association assess-
ment. He testified that he violated his instructions because of anger and personal pique toward the individual representing the supplier.

Based upon this testimony, appellant requested certain instructions bearing upon the criminal liability of a corporation for the unauthorized acts of its agents. These requests were rejected by the trial court. The court instructed the jury
that a corporation is liable for the acts and statements of its agents “within the scope of their employment,” defined to mean “in the corporation's behalf in performance of the agent's general line of work,” including “not only that which has been
authorized by the corporation, but also that which outsiders could reasonably assume the agent would have authority to do.” The court added:

A corporation is responsible for acts and statements of its agents, done or made within the scope of their employment, even though their conduct may be contrary to their actual instructions or contrary to the corporation's

stated policies.

Appellant objects only to the court's concluding statement.

Congress may constitutionally impose criminal liability upon a business entity for acts or omissions of its agents within the scope of their employment. Such liability may attach without proof that the conduct was within the agent's
actual authority, and even though it may have been contrary to express instructions.

The intention to impose such liability is sometimes express, New York Central & Hudson R.R. Co. v. United States, 212 U.S. 481, but it may also be implied. The text of the Sherman Act does not expressly resolve the issue. For the
reasons that follow, however, we think the construction of the Act that best achieves its purpose is that a corporation is liable for acts of its agents within the scope of their authority even when done against company orders. . ..

Legal commentators have argued forcefully that it is inappropriate and ineffective to impose criminal liability upon a corporation, as distinguished from the human agents who actually perform the unlawful acts. . . . But it is the legislative
judgment that controls, and “the great mass of legislation calling for corporate criminal liability suggests a widespread belief on the part of legislators that such liability is necessary to effectuate regulatory policy.” ALI Model Penal Code, Comment
on §2.07, Tentative Draft No. 4, p. 149 (1956). Moreover, the strenuous efforts of corporate defendants to avoid conviction, particularly under the Sherman Act, strongly suggest that Congress is justified in its judgment that exposure of the

p.764
p. 765
corporate entity to potential conviction may provide a substantial spur to corporate action to prevent violations by employees.

Because of the nature of Sherman Act offenses and the context in which they normally occur, the factors that militate against allowing a corporation to disown the criminal acts of its agents apply with special force to Sherman Act
violations.

Sherman Act violations are commercial offenses. They are usually motivated by a desire to enhance profits.‘ They commonly involve large, complex, and highly decentralized corporate business enterprises, and intricate business pro-
cesses, practices, and arrangements. More often than not they also involve basic policy decisions, and must be implemented over an extended period of time.

Complex business structures, characterized by decentralization and delegation of authority, commonly adopted by corporations for business purposes, make it difficult to identify the particular corporate agents responsible for Sherman
Act violations. At the same time, it is generally true that high management officials, for whose conduct the corporate directors and stockholders are the most clearly responsible, are likely to have participated in the policy decisions underlying Sher-
man Act violations, or at least to have become aware of them.

Violations of the Sherman Act are a likely consequence of the pressure to maximize profits that is commonly imposed by corporate owners upon managing agents and, in turn, upon lesser employees. In the face of that pressure,
generalized directions to obey the Sherman Act, with the probable effect of foregoing profits, are the least likely to be taken seriously. And if a violation of the Sherman Act occurs, the corporation, and not the individual agents, will have realized the
profits from the illegal activity.

In sum, identification of the particular agents responsible for a Sherman Act violation is especially difficult, and their conviction and punishment is peculiarly ineffective as a deterrent. At the same time, conviction and punishment of the
business entity itselt is likely to be both appropriate and effective.

For these reasons we conclude that as a general rule a corporation is liable under the Sherman Act for the acts of its agents in the scope of their employment, even though contrary to general corporate policy and express instructions
to the agent.

Thus the general policy statements of appellant's president were no defense. Nor was it enough that appellant's manager told the purchasing agent that he was not to participate in the boycott. The purchasing agent was authorized to
buy all of appellant's supplies. Purchases were made on the basis of specifications, but the purchasing agent exercised complete authority as to source. He was in a unique position to add the corporation's buying power to the force of the boy-
cott. Appellant could not gain exculpation by issuing general instructions without undertaking to enforce those instructions by means commensurate with the obvious risks. . . . Affirmed.

p. 765
p. 766
NOTES

1. The case for corporate liability. Proponents of corporate criminal liability embrace it for expressive and instrumental reasons. Gregory M. Gilchrist explains the expressive function of corporate criminal liability, arguing that
“falbsent the possibility of holding corporations criminally liable, the legal system sends a message that criminal conduct is merely priced, not forbidden, when engaged in on behalf of a corporation. This message is at odds with social norms; it is
corrosive, and it threatens the perceived legitimacy of the legal system.” Gilchrist, Individual Accountability for Corporate Crime, 34 Ga. St. U. L. Rev. 335, 337-338 (2018). David M. Uhlmann similarly outlines the importance of the expressive func-
tion of corporate criminal liability:

[Whhen we do not impose criminal liability upon corporations that commit egregious violations of the law, we blur the lines that the criminal law establishes between conduct that is acceptable and conduct that will not be

tolerated. We express to the companies that break the law that their conduct is not so egregious that it warrants criminal prosecutions. We tell companies that are diligent about meeting legal obligations that their efforts are

valued less by society. In the process, we weaken adherence to the rule of law and our ability to send societal messages about what corporate behavior is unacceptable and what corporate behavior we want to promote.

Uhimann, The Pendulum Swings: Reconsidering Corporate Criminal Prosecution, 49 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1235, 1263-1264 (2016). Professor Samuel W. Buell argues that, in order to more fully exploit criminal law's expressive power, the blamewor-
thiness of the corporate entity should play a larger role in shaping the prerequisites for corporate criminal liability, as well as the manner in which prosecutorial discretion is exercised. Buell, The Blaming Function of Entity Criminal Liability, 81 Ind.
LJ. 473 (2006).

The instrumental view emphasizes that corporate criminal liability provides incentives for managers to patrol lower ranking officers and employers and to create a law-abiding corporate culture. This view is reflected in the Justice
Manual (formerly known as the U.S. Attorneys’ Manual) put out by the Department of Justice to guide United States Attorneys, which states that “li]ndicting corporations for wrongdoing enables the government to be a force for positive change of
corporate culture, and a force to prevent, discover, and punish serious crimes.” Justice Manual §9-28.200(A).

Mihailis E. Diamantis Functional Corporate Knowledge, 61 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 319, 354-355 (2019)) explains why corporations might be especially responsive to this sort of structural guidance:

[Corporations] are malleable in response to the right incentives. While people cannot reorganize their psychology, corporations can. This is something legal policymakers bank on. . .. If criminal law gives corporations incen-

tives to know or not to know something (e.g., by making such knowledge an element of a crime), they will find any available way

p. 766
p.767

to adapt — by implementing new policies and procedures, replacing or retraining employees, and reorganizing their corporate structure. The equivalent adaptations for individuals would require a reordering that is biologi-

cally and psychologically impossible.

After BP's Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 — the largest marine oil spill in history, which resulted in the deaths of 11 workers — Uhlmann argued that “criminal prosecution of the Gulf oil spill is appropriate under
a deterrence theory of criminal law and because it expresses societal condemnation of the spill,” see David M. Uhimann, After the Spill Is Gone: The Gulf of Mexico, Environmental Crime, and the Criminal Law, 109 Mich. L. Rev. 1413, 1420 (2011).
BP ultimately pleaded guilty to 14 criminal charges, including felony manslaughter. As part of its plea deal with the Department of Justice, BP also agreed to pay more than $4 billion in criminal fines and penalties. In addition, DOJ required BP to
retain an ethics monitor, a safety and risk management monitor, and an independent auditor." BP later agreed to pay $20 billion as part of a civil settlement.2 Did the criminal charges against BP more effectively express condemnation of the spill
than the civil penalties? If the civil penalties were $24 billion instead, thus equaling BP’s payout in criminal and civil penalties combined, would there have been a separate need for criminal penalties? For what purpose?

2. The case against corporate liability. Critics of corporate criminal liability question both the expressive and instrumental lines of analysis. Albert W. Alschuler condemns the expressive view, arguing that “attributing blame to a
corporation is no more sensible than attributing blame to a dagger, a fountain pen, a Chevrolet, or any other instrumentality of crime.” Alschuler, Two Ways to Think About the Punishment of Corporations, 46 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1359, 1392 (2009). Is
Alschuler correct that corporations are mere instrumentalities? The Supreme Court has recognized constitutional rights for corporations, including free speech rights, most prominently in Citizens United v. FEC, 558 U.S. 310 (2010). If corporations
enjoy constitutional protections as entities, why shouldn't they be subject to criminal penalties as well? Sara Sun Beale argues that accepting corporations as separate legal entities dictates that shareholders take the bad with the good. Beale, A
Response to Critics of Corporate Criminal Liability, 46 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1481, 1485 (2009). Is there a meaningful difference between the criteria for conferring privileges and the criteria for importing blame? If so, what is it?

The instrumental view of corporate criminal liability has also come under attack, with critics questioning whether punishment of the corporation deters crime. Some commentators argue that corporate criminal liability spurs excessive

p.767
p. 768

monitoring and litigation costs. Daniel R. Fischel & Alan O. Sykes, Corporate Crime, 25 J. Legal Stud. 319 (1996). They argue for a scheme of government-imposed civil penalties based on a claim that civil sanctions will deter wrongdoing more
cost effectively, due to lower procedural hurdles and sanctioning costs. Jennifer Arlen, Corporate Crime and Its Control, in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the Law 492-497 (Peter Newman ed., 1998). Jennifer Arlen makes an even
stronger claim that criminal liability may increase rather than decrease corporate crime because it may lead corporations to relax their monitoring efforts in order to prevent information from coming to the attention of government prosecutors.
Arlen, The Potentially Perverse Effects of Corporate Criminal Liability, 23 J. Legal Stud. 833 (1994). Corporations deemed “too big to fail” may be particularly unresponsive to the supposed deterrent effects of corporate criminal liability because
they know that the government is unlikely to seriously disrupt or dismantle their operations. Nick Werle, Note, Prosecuting Corporate Crime When Firms Are Too Big to Jail: Investigation, Deterrence, and Judicial Review, 128 Yale Lv. 1366 (2019).

3. Collateral consequences. While the imposition of criminal liability in other contexts is debated along similar lines, some view corporate criminal liability as raising unique issues because the corporate entity itself, as well as its
shareholders, employees, customers, and suppliers, may be a victim of the criminal wrongdoing of corporate agents. Criminal prosecution and punishment of the corporation, which is designed to deter such wrongdoing, will also harm the corpo-
ration and these additional (and often wholly innocent) individuals and entities. The case of Arthur Andersen provides one of the most notable examples of these collateral consequences. The criminal conviction of Arthur Andersen, a limited liability
partnership that had been one of the largest global accounting firms, for its shredding of audit documents during the Enron scandal, destroyed that firm by ruining its reputation, even though the actual sentence that it received was relatively minor
and its conviction was ultimately reversed by the Supreme Court. See United States v. Arthur Andersen LLP, 544 U.S. 696 (2005).

Consider the following observations on collateral consequences in Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.07 at 335-339 (1985):

[Imposing] criminal penalties on corporate bodies results in a species of vicarious liability. . . . In most cases, the shareholders have not participated in the criminal conduct and lack the practical means of supervision of

corporate management to prevent misconduct by corporate agents. [T]he fact that the direct impact of corporate fines is felt by a group ordinarily innocent of criminal conduct underscores the point that such fines ought not

to be authorized except where they clearly may be expected to accomplish desirable social purposes.

Are the problems with corporate criminal liability unique, or are they endemic to criminal law? For an argument that the collateral impact of corporate criminal liability on innocent third parties is no different from the rest of criminal law in
terms of the issues it raises, see Sara Sun Beale, Is Corporate Criminal Liability Unique?, 44 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1503 (2007). Steven B. Dow and Nan S. Ellis

p. 768

p. 769
(ANew Look at Criminal Liability for Selling Dangerous Vehicles: Lessons from General Motors and Toyota, 15 Hastings Bus. L.J. 1, 37 (2019)) go further and argue that the collateral consequences from individual prosecutions are worse than those
from corporate prosecutions. They point out that the children of defendants often endure a loss of financial support when an individual is convicted of a crime, and unlike shareholders, those children played no role in assuming that risk.

4, The respondeat superior approach. The use of the tort doctrine of respondeat superior to define the prerequisites of corporate criminal liability, as developed in the New York Central and Hilton Hotels cases, is one of the two main
approaches to corporate liability in the United States. (The other is the more restrictive doctrine of the MPC, which is discussed p. 780 infra.) The requirements of liability under the respondeat superior approach are summarized in Note, Develop-
ments in the Law — Corporate Crime: Regulating Corporate Behavior Through Criminal Sanctions, 92 Harv. L. Rev. 1227, 1247-1251 (1979):

Under the doctrine of respondeat superior, a corporation may be held criminally liable for the acts of any of its agents if an agent (1) commits a crime (2) within the scope of employment (3) with the intent to benefit the

corporation.

First, it must be proved that an illegal act was committed by an agent of the corporation, and that the agent acted with the specific intent required by the governing statute. [I]t is not necessary to prove that a spe-
cific person acted illegally, only that some agent of the corporation committed the crime. Thus, proving that a corporate defendant committed the illegal act is in practice substantially easier than an individual prosecution. . ..
Second, to establish corporate liability under the doctrine of respondeat superior, the prosecution must show that the illegal act was committed within the agent's scope of employment. The traditional agency

definition limits scope of employment to conduct that is authorized, explicitly or implicitly, by the principal or that is similar or incidental to authorized conduct. However, courts generally find conduct to fall within the scope

of employment even if it was specifically forbidden by a superior and occurred despite good faith efforts on the part of the corporation to prevent the crime. Thus, scope of employment in practice means little more than that

the act occurred while the offending employee was carrying out a job-related activity. . . .

Third, it must be proved that the agent committed the crime with the intent to benefit the corporation. The corporation may be held criminally liable even if it received no actual benefit from the offense, although
the existence or absence of benefit is relevant as evidence of an intent to benefit.
The requirements of scope of employment and intent to benefit the corporation can also be met through ratification. When an employee commits a crime with no intent to benefit the corporation, or while acting

outside the scope of his employment, subsequent approval of the act by his supervisor will be sufficient to hold the corporation liable for the employee's criminal act. In a sense, under the doctrine of ratification, a corpora-

tion is culpable for approving the criminal act, rather than committing it.

p. 769
p.770

5. Intent to benefit the corporation. The reach of the respondeat superior doctrine is exhibited in United States v. Sun-Diamond Growers of California, 138 F.3d 961 (D.C. Cir. 1997). Defendant Sun-Diamond (an agricultural coop-
erative entity) was charged with wire fraud and illegal campaign contributions. Douglas, an officer of the defendant with some responsibility for lobbying, devised a fraudulent scheme to conceal his misappropriation of the defendant's funds to
support the congressional campaign of the brother of the secretary of agriculture, Mike Espy. The court upheld a conviction of Douglas's employer, stating (at 970):

Sun-Diamond says Douglas's scheme was designed to — and did in fact — defraud his employer, not benefit it. In this circumstance, it strenuously argues, there can be no imputation: “[T]o establish precedent holding a

principal criminally liable for the acts of an agent who defrauds and deceives the principal while pursuing matters within his self-interest merely because the agent's conduct may provide some incidental benefit to the princi-

pal serves to punish innocent principals with no countervailing policy justifications.”

This argument has considerable intuitive appeal — Sun-Diamond does look more like a victim than a perpetrator, at least on the fraud charges. The facts in the record, however — that Douglas hid the illegal

contribution scheme from others at the company and used company funds to accomplish it — do not preclude a valid finding that he undertook the scheme to benefit Sun-Diamond. Part of Douglas's job was to cultivate

his, and Sun-Diamond’s, relationship with Secretary Espy. By responding to the Secretary's request to help his brother, Douglas may have been acting out of pure friendship, but the jury was entitled to conclude that he was

instead, or also, with an intent (however befuddled) to further the interests of his employer. The scheme came at some cost to Sun-Diamond but it also promised some benefit. . . . Where there is adequate evidence for impu-

tation (as here), the only thing that keeps deceived corporations from being indicted for the acts of their employee-deceivers is not some fixed rule of law or logic but simply the sound exercise of prosecutorial discretion.

And the answer to Sun-Diamond’s claim of the absence of any “countervailing policy justification” is simply the justification usually offered in support of holding corporate principals liable for the illegal acts of their

agents: to increase incentives for corporations to monitor and prevent illegal employee conduct.

6. The exercise of prosecutorial discretion. Despite the potential breadth of the doctrine of respondeat superior, prosecutors can and do use their charging discretion to forgo corporate prosecution in some cases. For example,
prosecutors may choose not to prosecute the company when they believe the corporation itself is the primary victim of the offense, as was clear in the stunning collapse of Enron Corporation in the wake of massive fraud committed by several of
its chief officers. In the prosecution of Andrew Fastow, Enron's chief financial officer, the indictment listed Enron as the first “victim” of the offense. Though several of Fastow’s alleged actions could be viewed as benefiting the company by de-
frauding investors,

p.770

p77
many of them also defrauded Enron itself. As a result, the government declined to prosecute Enron. See Alan C. Michaels, Fastow and Arthur Andersen: Some Reflections on Corporate Criminality, Victim Status, and Retribution, 1 Ohio St. J. Crim.
L. 551 (2004). Reconsider pp. 698-699 supra, the decision of the MPC and many jurisdictions to adopt a formal rule of law exempting victims of crime from criminal liability as accomplices, regardless of their technical eligibility under ordinary ac-
complice liability principles. Should the same rule apply in the context of corporate criminal liability?

The status of the corporation as “victim” is not the only consideration relevant to the exercise of prosecutorial discretion. Because the doctrine of respondeat superior is so broad that it allows criminal prosecution of corporations in
vastly more cases than the government could possibly wish to pursue, prosecutors consider other factors as well. A Justice Department memo authored by then-Deputy Attorney General Eric H. Holder, Jr., offering line prosecutors guidance on
“Bringing Charges Against Corporations,” stated that among the factors to be considered are the “pervasiveness of wrongdoing within the corporation, including the complicity in, or condonation of, the wrongdoing by corporate management” and
any “collateral consequences, including disproportionate harm to shareholders and employees not proven personally culpable,” as well as the “adequacy of non-criminal remedies, such as civil or regulatory enforcement actions.”!2

In the wake of the Enron scandal and other large-scale corporate wrongdoing, the Justice Department in 2002 created the Corporate Fraud Task Force with a mission to strengthen the efforts to investigate and prosecute corporate
crime. The Department also released a follow-up memo to the Holder Memo on corporate charging considerations. Authored by then-Deputy Attorney General Larry D. Thompson, the Thompson Memo reaffirmed factors from the Holder Memo
and also asked prosecutors to consider “whether the corporation, while purporting to cooperate, has engaged in conduct that impedes the investigation (whether or not rising to the level of criminal obstruction).”"4 The Thompson Memo thus fo-
cused on the corporation's cooperation as a key factor in deciding whether or not to prosecute. See generally Harry First, Branch Office of the Prosecutor: The New Role of the Corporation in Business Crime Prosecutions, 89 N.C. L. Rev. 23 (2010);
Lisa Kern Griffin, Compelled Cooperation and the New Corporate Criminal Procedure, 82 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 311, 332 (2007).

How should corporate cooperation be assessed? The Thompson Memo allowed prosecutors to consider the corporation's “willingness to cooperate in the investigation of its agents, including, if necessary, the waiver of corporate
attorney-client and work product protection.” Corporations responded by waiving attorney-client privilege and limiting payments for employees’ legal fees. The Justice Department, in turn, used such corporate assistance to secure more than
1,000 indictments and convictions against individuals since the creation of the Corporate

p77

p.772
Fraud Task Force. But subsequent developments established that there are lines federal prosecutors cannot cross in these negotiations. In 2005, the accounting firm KPMG entered into an agreement with the federal government in which it admit-
ted to using fraudulent tax shelters and resolved to “clean house” by refusing to pay its employees’ legal fees and by threatening to fire them unless they cooperated with the government's investigation. The Second Circuit held that the company's
refusal to pay legal fees deprived the employees of their right to counsel under the Sixth Amendment. United States v. Stein, 541 F.3d 130, 137, 151 (2d Cir. 2008). In 2006, Senator Arlen Specter proposed legislation that would prohibit the Depart-
ment of Justice from insisting on the waiver of attorney-client privilege.15

To ward off the legislation and answer its critics, the Department of Justice updated its corporate charging policy to discourage prosecutors from requesting that corporations withhold employee legal fees or from seeking waivers of
attorney-client privilege. The Department now emphasizes that the question of corporate cooperation should turn on the “disclosure of relevant facts,” regardless of whether the corporation waived attorney-client privilege.1® In a 2015 memo, is-
sued by Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates, the Department further clarified that, for corporations to receive cooperation credit, they must “provide to the Department all relevant facts relating to the individuals responsible for the misconduct.”17
The Yates Memo emphasized that federal prosecutors needed to “fully leverage [their] resources to identify culpable individuals at all levels in corporate cases” because the prosecution of individuals is critical for deterrence and accountability.12
The Yates Memo thus clarified that a corporation's fate rests in significant part on whether it provides the facts prosecutors need to prosecute responsible individuals. The Trump Administration modified the memo to clarify that companies need
only identify those individuals who were “substantially involved in or responsible for the misconduct at issue.” Justice Manual §9-28.700.

QUESTIONS: Are these changes likely to limit the identification of responsible individuals because of disagreement over what counts as being “substantially” involved? Or is this qualification necessary because companies (especially large ones)
cannot be expected to identify everyone who may have played a role in misconduct?

7. DPAs and NPAs. Prosecutorial discretion with respect to corporations is not limited to the binary decision of either charging or not charging the company with a crime. In the past two decades, the Department of Justice has fre-
quently pursued

p.772
p77

a third option. It has reached deferred prosecution agreements (DPAs) or non-prosecution agreements (NPAs) with corporations.12 Pursuant to these agreements, the government agrees not to prosecute the company in exchange for corporate
concessions and cooperation. With NPAs, the government does not file charges in court but retains the right to prosecute later if the company does not meet the terms of the agreement. With DPAs, charges are filed, but once the company fulfills
the terms of the agreement, the government dismisses the charges. The Yates Memo seemingly made it harder for corporations to obtain DPAs or NPAs without individual charges also being brought, but critics argued that practices were unlikely
to change because company-run investigations would be unlikely to turn over high-level executives. Katrice Bridges Copeland, The Yates Memo: Looking for “Individual Accountability” in All the Wrong Places, 102 lowa L. Rev. 1897, 1910-1917
(2017). Thus far, very few individual prosecutions have been brought in the wake of the Yates Memo, but it is hard to assess how much of that is due to the change in administration, as white-collar prosecutions across the board — against both in-
dividuals and corporations — plummeted during the Trump Administration. Brandon L. Garrett, Declining Corporate Prosecutions, 57 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 109 (2020).

Some applaud the use of DPAs and NPAs as a third option aside from either charging or not charging a company because they allow for quicker resolution of disputes, while still extracting meaningful concessions from companies
without inflicting many of the collateral consequences that harm third parties such as employees or shareholders. The Department of Justice explains their value as follows (Justice Manual §9-28.1100):

Such agreements are a third option, besides a criminal indictment, on the one hand, and a declination, on the other. Declining prosecution may allow a corporate criminal to escape without consequences. Obtaining a con-

viction may produce a result that seriously harms innocent third parties who played no role in the criminal conduct. Under appropriate circumstances, a deferred prosecution or non-prosecution agreement can help restore

the integrity of a company’s operations and preserve the financial viability of a corporation that engaged in criminal conduct, while preserving the government's ability to prosecute a recalcitrant corporation that materially

breaches the agreement.
Some critics of DPAs and NPAs think the demands made on companies are too great, while others, such as Senator Elizabeth Warren, view DPAs and NPAs as “get-out-of-jail-free cards for the biggest corporations in the world.”22 Those in the
latter camp point to cases such as the one against the bank HSBC, which laundered money for drug traffickers and banks linked to terrorist organizations. Despite ample evidence of the bank's culpability, prosecutors instead opted for a DPA

p73
p.774

because of a worry that criminal charges could destabilize the global financial system.2" In a similar vein, Professor Julie O'Sullivan argues that these agreements

have the sole advantage of permitting the government to avoid blame for whatever collateral consequences may flow from a corporate guilty plea — be it debarment from government contracting, the de-licensing of the firm,

or losses in revenue, jobs, or shareholder value. This singular focus on collateral consequences, while understandable and even compassionate, undermines both the policies underlying the collateral penalties and the fair

and even-handed administration of criminal justice.

O'Sullivan, How Prosecutors Apply the “Federal Prosecutions of Corporations” Charging Policy in the Era of Deferred Prosecutions, and What That Means for the Purposes of the Federal Criminal Sanction, 51 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 29, 77
(2014). See also Peter R. Reilly, Sweetheart Deals, Deferred Prosecution, and Making a Mockery of the Criminal Justice System: U.S. Corporate DPAs Rejected on Many Fronts, 50 Ariz. St. LJ. 1113, 1120 (2018).
QUESTION: Are DPAs and NPAs a sound compromise for obtaining justice in cases that might otherwise escape liability or are they allowing companies to avoid meaningful consequences for misconduct? What information would you need to
determine which of these competing views is correct? Does it matter what evidence the government has against the companies, which might affect the odds of winning at trial? Is it relevant what conditions are required by the DPAs and NPAs as
compared to the punishment that would likely be imposed after a conviction? To the extent the critics are correct that prosecutors have too much leverage when negotiating DPAs and NPAs, such that the terms are likely to be excessively harsh
or disruptive, is that phenomenon unique to corporate prosecutions? See Chapter 2 for a general discussion of prosecutorial discretion. For analysis of the use of prosecutorial discretion to obtain DPAs and NPAs and proposed reforms to the
practice, see Prosecutors in the Boardroom, supra; Brandon L. Garrett, Too Big to Jail: How Prosecutors Compromise with Corporations (2014). For an examination of how the current practice of using NPAs and DPAs comports with optimal de-
terrence, see Jennifer Arlen & Marcel Kahan, Corporate Governance Regulation Through Nonprosecution, 84 U. Chi. L. Rev. 323 (2017).

8. Collective knowledge. Although the preceding Notes indicate that the respondeat superior test for liability often is arguably overinclusive, that test sometimes can present the opposite problem. In Functional Corporate Knowledge,
61 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 319, 343-345 (2019), Mikhalis E. Diamantis explains how respondeat superior can be underinclusive in some circumstances:
Respondeat superior . . . fails to provide a retributively satisfying account of corporate knowledge. By diffusing information across multiple employees, corporations can escape justice despite the palpable sense that they
knowingly did something wrong. For example, suppose a natural gas
p77
p.776
pipeline explodes, killing several people, because corporate employees did not operate the pipeline following minimum safety standards. Federal law criminalizes knowing violations of these standards. But if the knowledge
relevant to the violation was spread across different employees — those in the back offices who knew about the standards and those in the field who knew how the pipeline was being operated — the corporation may escape
prosecution. Under respondeat superior, the corporation would not have committed a crime since no one person within the corporation would have known the standards were being shirked. . . . To plug the obvious gap that
respondeat superior leaves in corporate criminal liability for knowledge-based crimes, some jurisdictions have adopted the collective knowledge doctrine. Under the collective knowledge doctrine, prosecutors do not need
to find a single employee with all the relevant knowledge; they can attribute to a corporation anything known by any and all of its employees. Continuing the exploding pipeline example from the last Section, if one employee
knows about applicable pipeline safety standards and another knows how the pipeline is being operated, under the collective knowledge doctrine, the corporation knows both. So corporations can be guilty of knowledge-
based crimes in jurisdictions that accept the collective knowledge doctrine even when there is no single employee with all the guilty knowledge.
QUESTION: Is aggregating the knowledge of individuals within an entity, to establish the culpability (knowledge) of the entity itself, consistent with the derivative nature of entity liability?
PROBLEM
Anursing home patient, McCauley, suffered from dementia and had attempted to leave through the facility's front doors on numerous occasions. A doctor concluded that McCauley was at risk of leaving the nursing home again if left
unattended, so he ordered that she wear a security bracelet at all times that would have set off an alarm and locked the front doors when she approached them. An employee of the nursing home mistakenly removed the physician's order from Mc-
Cauley’s treatment sheet, and the omission of the order was not discovered during the monthly editing process of the patients’ charts. One spring evening, a nurse from a unit other than McCauley's was on duty and did not realize McCauley was
supposed to be wearing a bracelet because it was not in her chart. When McCauley was placed in her wheelchair near the front doors, no nurse stood guard. McCauley went through the front doors, fell down the stairs, and died from the injuries
she sustained. Could the nursing home, as a corporation, be charged under the theory of involuntary manslaughter discussed in Welansky, p. 506 supra, based upon a theory of collective knowledge, even in the absence of a specific employee
with the requisite mens rea under Welansky? The court in Commonwealth v. Life Care Centers of America, 926 N.E.2d 206, 212 (Mass. 2010), rejected the collective knowledge theory, holding that “a corporation acts with a given mental state in a
criminal context only if at least one employee who acts (or fails to act) possesses
p76
p.776
the requisite mental state at the time of the act (or failure to act).” The breadth of respondeat superior liability is premised on the idea that the entity generally bears responsibility for the acts of its agents. If no individual agent is responsible, how
can the entity be responsible?
Commonwealth v. Beneficial Finance Co.

Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts
275 N.E.2d 33 (Mass. 1971)

SPIEGEL, J. [Individual and corporate defendants, including Beneficial Finance Co., were convicted of bribing, and conspiring to bribe, state banking officials in order to obtain favorable treatment from the state Small Loans Regulatory
Board. The corporate convictions were based on acts committed by employees who were neither officers nor directors of the corporation. One of the employees, Farrell, was an officer and director of Beneficial Management Co., a wholly owned
subsidiary of BFC. Another, Glynn, reported to Farrell but was on the payroll of Industrial Bankers, another wholly owned BFC subsidiary. Glynn had direct contact with the state officials who were bribed. Farrell supervised Glynn’s activities and
also chaired an inter-corporate meeting at which the bribery plan was adopted.]

The defendants and the Commonwealth have proposed differing standards upon which the criminal responsibility of a corporation should be predicated. The defendants argue that a corporation should not be held criminally liable for
the conduct of its servants or agents unless such conduct was performed, authorized, ratified, adopted or tolerated by the corporations’ directors, officers or other “high managerial agents” who are sufficiently high in the corporate hierarchy to
warrant the assumption that their acts in some substantial sense reflect corporate policy. This standard is that adopted by [the MPC]. . . . Section 2.07 of the Code provides that, except in the case of regulatory offences and offences consisting of
the omission of a duty imposed on corporations by law, a corporation may be convicted of a crime if “the commission of the offence was authorized, requested, commanded, performed or recklessly tolerated by the board of directors or by a high
managerial agent acting in behalf of the corporation within the scope of his office or employment.” The section proceeds to define “high managerial agent” as “an officer of a corporation . . . or any other agent . . . having duties of such responsibil-
ity that his conduct may fairly be assumed to represent the policy of the corporation.”

The Commonwealth, on the other hand, argues that the standard applied by the judge in his instructions to the jury was correct. These instructions, which prescribe a somewhat more flexible standard than that delineated in the Model
Penal Code, state in part, as follows:

[T]he Commonwealth does not have to prove that the individual who acted criminally was expressly requested or authorized in advance by the corporation to do so, nor must the Commonwealth prove that the corporation

expressly ratified or adopted that criminal conduct on the part of that individual or those individuals. [Nor must the Commonwealth prove] that the individual who acted criminally was a member of the corporation's board of

directors, or that he was a high officer in the corporation,

p.776
p77

or that he held any office at all. [Rather, the jury] should consider what the authority of that person was as such officer in relation to the corporation. The mere fact that he has a title is not enough to make the corporation liable

for his criminal conduct. The Commonwealth must prove that the individual for whose conduct it seeks to charge the corporation criminally was placed in a position by the corporation where he had enough power, duty,

responsibility and authority to act for and in behalf of the corporation to handle the particular business . .. of the corporation in which he was engaged at the time that he committed the criminal act, with power of decision as

to what he would or would not do while acting for the corporation, and that he was acting for and in behalf of the corporation in the accomplishment of that particular business. . . .

The difference between the judge's instructions to the jury and the Model Penal Code lies largely in the latter's reference to a “high managerial agent” and in the Code requirement that to impose corporate criminal liability, it at least
must appear that its directors or high managerial agent “authorized . . . or recklessly tolerated” the allegedly criminal acts. The judge's instructions focus on the authority of the corporate agent in relation to the particular corporate business in
which the agent was engaged. The Code seems to require that there be authorization or reckless inaction by a corporate representative having some relation to framing corporate policy, or one “having duties of such responsibility that his conduct
may fairly be assumed to represent the policy of the corporation.” Close examination of the judge's instructions reveals that they preserve the underlying “corporate policy” rationale of the Code by allowing the jury to infer “corporate policy” from
the position in which the corporation placed the agent in commissioning him to handle the particular corporate affairs in which he was engaged at the time of the criminal act.

[The court then analyzed prior Massachusetts cases concerning vicarious criminal liability and found “a long line of decisions in this Commonwealth holding that before criminal responsibility can be imposed on the master, based on a
master-servant relationship under the doctrine of respondeat superior, actual participation in, or approval of, the servant's criminal act must be shown.”]

[The court then addressed one defendant's objection that applying a rule of corporate responsibility for the acts of low-level employees imposes criminal liability based upon a civil law standard.

It may be that the theoretical principles underlying this standard are, in general, the same as embodied in the rule of respondeat superior. Nevertheless, as we observed at the outset, the judge's instructions, as a whole and in context,
required a greater quantum of proof in the practical application of this standard than is required in a civil case. In focusing on the “kinship” between the authority of an individual and the act he committed, the judge emphasized that the jury must be
satisfied “beyond a reasonable doubt” that the act of the individual “constituted” the act of the corporation. Juxtaposition of the traditional criminal law requirement of ascertaining guilt beyond a reasonable doubt (as opposed to the civil law stan-
dard of the preponderance of the evidence), with the rule of respondeat superior, fully justifies application of the standard enunciated by the judge to a criminal prosecution against a corporation for a crime requiring specific intent.

p77
p.77e

The foregoing is especially true in view of the particular circumstances of this case. In order to commit the crimes charged in these indictments, the defendant corporations either had to offer to pay money to a public official or conspire
to do so. The disbursal of funds is an act peculiarly within the ambit of corporate activity. These corporations by the very nature of their business are constantly dealing with the expenditure and collection of moneys. It could hardly be expected that
any of the individual defendants would conspire to pay, or would pay, the substantial amount of money here involved, namely $25,000, out of his own pocket. The jury would be warranted in finding that the disbursal of such an amount of money
would come from the corporate treasury. A reasonable inference could therefore be drawn that the payment of such money by the corporations was done as a matter of corporate policy and as a reflection of corporate intent, thus comporting with
the underlying rationale of the Model Penal Code, and probably with its specific requirements.

Moreover, we do not think that the Model Penal Code standard really purports to deal with the evidentiary problems which are inherent in establishing the quantum of proof necessary to show that the directors or officers of a corpo-
ration authorize, ratify, tolerate, or participate in the criminal acts of an agent when such acts are apparently performed on behalf of the corporation. Evidence of such authorization or ratification is too easily susceptible of concealment. As is so
trenchantly stated by the judge: “Criminal acts are not usually made the subject of votes of authorization or ratification by corporate Boards of Directors; and the lack of such votes does not prevent the act from being the act of the corporation.”. . .

Additional factors of importance are the size and complexity of many large modern corporations which necessitate the delegation of more authority to lesser corporate agents and employees. As the judge pointed out: “There are not
enough seats on the Board of Directors, nor enough offices in a corporation, to permit the corporation engaged in widespread operations to give such a title or office to every person in whom it places the power, authority, and responsibility for
decision and action.” This latter consideration lends credence to the view that the title or position of an individual in a corporation should not be conclusively determinative in ascribing criminal responsibility. In a large corporation, with many nu-
merous and distinct departments, a high ranking corporate officer or agent may have no authority or involvement in a particular sphere of corporate activity, whereas a lower ranking corporate executive might have much broader power in dealing
with a matter peculiarly within the scope of his authority. Employees who are in the lower echelon of the corporate hierarchy often exercise more responsibility in the everyday operations of the corporation than the directors or officers. Assuredly,
the title or office that the person holds may be considered, but it should not be the decisive criterion upon which to predicate corporate responsibility. . ..

[Wie are of opinion that the quantum of proof necessary to sustain the conviction of a corporation for the acts of its agents is sufficiently met if it is shown that the corporation has placed the agent in a position where he has enough
authority and responsibility to act for and in behalf of the corporation in handling the particular corporate business, operation or project in which he was engaged at the time he committed the criminal act. The judge properly instructed the jury to
this effect and correctly stated that this standard does not depend upon the responsibility or

p77
p79
authority which the agent has with respect to the entire corporate business, but only to his position with relation to the particular business in which he was serving the corporation.

[The court then held there was sufficient evidence to support a finding of a liability based on the conduct of Farrell and Glynn]

QUESTION: Is the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court right that even a low-level employee's criminal acts may reflect “corporate policy”? Consider how this approach compares with the “high managerial agent” standard as discussed in the
opinions in the case that follows.

STATE v. COMMUNITY ALTERNATIVES MISSOURI, INC., 267 S.W.3d 735 (MO. CT. APP. 2008): [The court upheld the conviction of a corporation that operated a group home facility for resident neglect after a resident of the home died as a result of
medical complications from untreated bed sores. Resident neglect is a crime in Missouri defined in relevant part as knowingly failing to provide reasonable and necessary medical care. The defendant corporation operated more than 30 group
homes, which were divided among three major divisions in the company (North, Central, and South). Turtle Creek, the group home facility where the resident died, was in the South division, which was run by an executive director and an associate
director who oversaw the 13 different homes in that division. Mary Collura was the lead staff person at Turtle Creek, and her responsibilities included managing residents’ medical care and supervising the staff at both Turtle Creek and a second
group home. The issue in the case was whether the corporation's criminal liability could be based on the fact that Collura knowingly tolerated the lack of medical treatment for the resident. In order to uphold liability against the corporation under
state law, Collura had to be a “high managerial agent,” which was defined as “an officer of a corporation or any other agent in a position of comparable authority with respect to . . . the supervision in a managerial capacity of subordinate employees.”
The corporation argued that Collura was not a high managerial agent because she was a low-level employee in the overall structure of the sprawling company. The court rejected this argument] In this case, defendant operated many facilities, or
business units, under a single corporate ownership. Each business unit had personnel responsible for the care of the residents at its facility. This court does not perceive the legislative intent . .. to have been to treat large corporations with
numerous operating units different from those that operate a single or a few business units. . . . Mary Collura managed and supervised the employees responsible for providing patient care. She determined what medical care would be afforded
[the victim] pursuant to the business structure prescribed by the defendant. She was defendant's “lead staff person” at Turtle Creek. . . . [She] gave job evaluations, disciplined support staff through written reprimands, and made recommendations
regarding hiring and firing of support staff. .. . Collura was the only manager who was regularly present at Turtle Creek.

[Judge Scott wrote a concurring opinion explaining his difficulty defining “high managerial agent”:] Research has not settled my difficulties interpreting our “high managerial agent” (HMA) definition or applying it to this case, in which the
State focuses on definitional language about supervising subordinate employees, while Defendant emphasizes the clause about authority comparable to a corporate officer. [Judge Scott then explained his research, which included looking at

p79
p. 760

the MPC provision defining a HMA as one whose “conduct may fairly be assumed to represent the policy of the corporation.” Judge Scott noted that Missouri, like other states, has opted for a broader definition of HMA that includes “persons
who manage and supervise employees.” [Clorporations range from one-man shows to multinational enterprises with thousands of branch locations. Even in the latter scenario, the flexibility of moder corporate laws and structures could enable
“branch managers” to exercise authority comparable to that of a corporate officer, at least within their sphere of influence and with respect to their subordinate employees. To the extent a corporation authorized or permitted branch managers to so
act, it would seem appropriate to impute corporate criminal responsibility arising from or relating to those actions.
NOTES

1. The Model Penal Code approach. The MPC provisions, like the Missouri approach, represent an attempt to cut back on the traditional scope of corporate liability based on respondeat superior. Their influence may be seen in a
number of state revisions. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.07 at 340, n.18 (1985). Professor Brickey summarizes the Model Penal Code proposals as follows (Kathleen F. Brickey, Rethinking Corporate Liability Under the
Model Penal Code, 19 Rutgers L.J. 598, 596-598 (1988):

The Code adopts a trifurcated scheme of corporate liability that draws intersecting lines between acts and omissions, between true crimes and regulatory offenses, and between the operatives who are the “hands” of the

corporation and the policy makers who constitute its “mind.”

Among the most expansive of the three rules is section 2.07(1)(a), which adopts a broad respondeat superior theory of liability. Under this rule, a corporation may incur liability for minor infractions and for non-
Code penal offenses when a legislative purpose to impose liability on corporations “plainly appears,” provided that the conduct constituting the offense is performed by a corporate agent acting within the scope of his em-
ployment and on behalf of the corporation.
The potential reach of the (1)(a) liability rule is limited, however, by the availability of a due diligence defense. Proof that “the high managerial agent having supervisory responsibility over the subject matter of the
offense employed due diligence to prevent its commission” exonerates the corporation from criminal liability.

The second rule of corporate liability pertains to omissions as opposed to acts. Subsection (1)(b) provides that a corporation is accountable for failure to discharge specific duties imposed on corporations by law.

Neither the text of this provision nor the comments address the question of whose omission may lead to liability.

p. 760
p.761
The third rule of liability is by far the most restrictive. Under subsection (1)(c), a corporation will incur liability for true crimes — that is, for an offense defined in the Penal Code — only if the conduct constituting the

offense is authorized, commanded, solicited, performed, or recklessly tolerated by the board of directors or a “high managerial agent” whose acquiescence to the wrongdoing — by virtue of his position of authority — may

fairly be regarded as reflecting corporate policy.

The MPC proposals have been criticized for providing both too much and too little criminal liability for corporations. As for providing too much liability: Some argue that the broad respondeat superior liability proposed for certain minor
offenses under §2.07(1)(a) inappropriately extends corporate liability for acts of those outside the “inner circle” of management who make up the “mens” or mind of the corporation. Gerhard O.W. Mueller, Mens Rea and the Corporation: A Study of
the Model Penal Code Position on Corporate Criminal Liability, 19 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 21, 41 (1957). As for providing too little liability: Some contend that, because of insurmountable difficulties of proof, “a liability rule requiring proof that a high manage-
rial agent ratified a subordinate’s misconduct is apt to be, in practice, a rule of no liability at all.” Brickey, supra, at 626.

QUESTIONS: (a) Reconsider the Hilton Hotels case, supra. Would criminal liability be imposed on the corporation under the MPC approach?

(b) Assuming that corporate liability should be limited to those acts by high-level officials, what is the best way to define those officials? Is the MPC approach too restrictive? Does the broadening to individuals with supervisory authority
make sense, or does defining a high managerial agent as anyone with supervisory responsibility sweep too far?

2. Other alternatives. Missouri, along with other states, relies on the high managerial agent approach of the MPC, but defines those agents more expansively. Commentators have floated a number of other alternatives to the MPC
and respondeat superior approaches for dealing with corporate criminality. Some favor looking at the practices and procedures companies follow for preventing crime as well as how the company responds to misconduct when it is discovered.
Erin L. Sheley, Tort Answers to the Problems of Corporate Criminal Mens Rea, 97 N.C. L. Rev. 773 (2019); Andrew Weissmann & David Newman, Rethinking Criminal Corporate Liability, 82 Ind. L.J. 411 (2007).

The recognition that the internal functioning of a corporation plays a significant role in promoting or preventing the criminal behavior of individual corporate agents has led some theorists to generate yet another model of corporate
criminal liability that is not derivative of an agent's individual liability, but rather based on a conception of the corporation itself as the culpable entity, as “a true, independent player in the system, with powers and identity of its own . . . a living cell,
possessing an identity that is separate from the molecules forming it.” Eli Lederman, Models for Imposing Corporate Criminal Liability: From Adaptation and Imitation Toward Aggregation and the Search for Self-Identity, 4 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 641,
646 (2000). Consider the following proposal to base corporate liability on systemic conditions of corporate operation:

[Elach corporate entity has a distinct and identifiable personality or “ethos.” The government can convict a corporation under this standard only if it proves that the corporate ethos encouraged agents of the corporation to

commit the criminal act. Central to this approach is the

p.761
p. 762
assumption that organizations possess an identity that is independent of specific individuals who control or work for the organization.
[In determining] whether there existed a corporate ethos that encouraged the criminal conduct . . . factfinders should examine the corporation's internal structure. . . . Beginning with the corporate hierarchy, the
factfinders should determine whether the directors’ supervision of officers, or management's supervision of employees was dilatory. Next, factfinders should examine the corporate goals, as communicated to the employees,

to determine whether these goals could be achieved only by disregarding the law. The third and fourth factors focus on the corporation’s affirmative steps to educate and monitor employees and are more relevant in some
fields than others. . . . The factfinders should [also] assess . . . how the corporation has reacted to past violations, to further evaluate whether the corporation encourages or discourages illegal behavior. . . .
The . . . corporate ethos standard . . . rewards those corporations that make efforts to educate and motivate their employees to follow the letter and spirit of the law. This encourages responsible corporate behav-
ior. This advantage is in sharp contrast to the Model Penal Code’s standard of liability that discourages higher echelon employees from properly supervising lower echelon employees. This advantage also contrasts with the
minimal deterrence achieved by imposing criminal liability on individuals within the corporation. Convicting individual agents and employees of a corporation does not stop other corporate employees from committing future
criminal acts if sufficient internal corporate pressure to violate the law continues to exist. In such an environment, the agents are cogs in a wheel. Those convicted are simply replaced by others whose original propensity to
‘obey the law is similarly overcome by a corporate ethos that encourages illegal acts. Unless inside or outside forces change the lawless ethos, it will corrupt each generation of corporate agents. The proposed standard of li-
ability addresses this problem by punishing any corporation that establishes a lawless ethos which overcomes its employees’ propensity to obey the law.
Pamela H. Bucy, Corporate Ethos: A Standard for Imposing Corporate Criminal Liability, 75 Minn. L. Rev. 1095, 1099-1101, 1145 (1991). A related approach is to require as a prerequisite to criminal liability that the corporation encourage or actively
abet criminal conduct by an employee, thus imposing for entity criminal liability the same actus reus standard of accomplice liability that applies to individuals. Corporations would thus be liable, for example, when “[oJfficers of the firm instigated
and finalized the unlawful course of conduct, and corporate policies rewarded employees for engaging in it.” Geraldine Scott Moohr, Of Bad Apples and Bad Trees: Considering Fault-Based Liability for the Complicit Corporation, 44 Am. Crim. L.
Rev. 1343, 1353 (2007).
QUESTIONS: Are any of these alternatives preferable to the current approach? What criteria should we use to assess their strengths and weaknesses? Should the focus be on what does the best job of preventing corporate misconduct, or is it
p. 782
p.783
‘equally important to make sure that oversight of companies does not do more harm than good by penalizing shareholders or other innocent third parties?
2. Punishing the Corporate Entity: The Problem of Sanctions
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
Baron Thurlow, a Lord Chancellor of England, observed that a corporation has “no soul to damn, no body to kick.” John C. Coffee, “No Soul to Damn, No Body to Kick”: An Unscandalized Inquiry into the Problem of Corporate Punish-
ment, 79 Mich. L. Rev. 386, 386 (1981). Thus, one of the traditional means of criminal punishment — incarceration — is not an option. What sanctions are available?
United States v. Guidant LLC
United States District Court, District of Minnesota
708 F. Supp. 2d 903 (2010)
Frank, J. On April 5, 2010, Guidant, LLC (“Guidant”) entered pleas of guilty on two misdemeanor counts charged by the Government in the Information. [Flor the reasons set forth below, the Court declines to accept the Plea Agreement
as currently drafted.

[Guidant developed, manufactured, and sold implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs), which are medical devices implanted in a patient to treat abnormally fast heart rhythms that could result in sudden cardiac death. Two of
Guidant’s ICD models had a defect that could cause short-circuiting, rendering the device nonfunctional. Guidant discovered and later fixed the defects, but did not notify the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the time and manner required by
law. Guidant agreed to a plea agreement with the government whereby it would plead guilty to two misdemeanor counts: (1) making materially false and misleading statements on reports required to be filed with the FDA, and (2) failing to promptly
notify the FDA of a medical device correction]

[In addition to the guilty pleas, the] Plea Agreement further provides that the parties “recommend jointly that the Court impose a sentence requiring Guidant to pay the United States a criminal fine of $253,962,251 pursuant to 18 U.S.C.
§3571(d).” The Plea Agreement also provides that Guidant will agree to a “criminal forfeiture to the United States in the amount of $42,079,675” and a special assessment of $250 pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §3013. In the Plea Agreement, the parties
jointly agreed not to include a provision that ordered restitution or probation. . ..

In addition to the alleged victims, Drs. Hauser and Maron urge the Court to reject any plea agreement that does not contain a probation provision:

Also at issue in this case is the safety of future generations of patients who receive medical devices. Manufacturers control the quality of their products. Manufacturers are the first to know when a medical device is

p. 763
p. 764

dangerous or underperforming. Thus, it is in the best interest of patients, and society in general, for manufacturers to be liable for the safety and effectiveness of their products. To allow a repeat offender, like Guidant, to

escape with a fine (that is entirely borne by the shareholders of Boston Scientific [which acquired Guidant]) does not hold the guilty parties fully accountable and inevitably undermines patient safety.

There is no dispute concerning the validity, in general, of placing a corporation on probation. The Court respectfully disagrees with the Government's view that probation would be a waste of the taxpayers’ money, especially given that
Guidant could be required, as a condition of probation, to reimburse the Government for any costs associated with its probation. The Court also disagrees with the Government's position that Guidant’s current corporate structure renders any
probation meaningless. . . . The interests of justice are not served by allowing a company to avoid probation simply by changing their corporate form. At a minimum, the public’s interest in accountability would be served by Guidant and Boston
Scientific being placed on probation, regardless of the fact that Boston Scientific acquired Guidant after the events in question. And, the Court believes that a period of probation would likely benefit, rather than harm, Guidant's and Boston Scien-
tific’s public image. . .

The Court believes that a term of probation would be appropriate in this case and could be fashioned in a manner to serve the public’s interest and address the accountability concerns raised by Drs. Hauser and Maron and likely shared
by many others. For instance, as a condition of probation, Guidant, through Boston Scientific, could be ordered to perform community service designed to repair the harm caused by its offenses, namely to help build the public's confidence in the
FDA regulation process, the medical device manufacturers’ quality control efforts, and the cardiac healthcare industry in general. Indeed, Boston Scientific could be ordered, as a condition of probation and in addition to a criminal fine, to dedicate
certain amount of its resources to some of its already-established charitable programs. .. .

Guidant, through Boston Scientific, could also be required to establish a compliance and ethics program, or if one is already established, to dedicate additional resources to that program to address the specific crimes in this case. Such
a program could be overseen by a compliance officer skilled in the regulatory area and who perhaps could work in coordination with either the FDA or the Heart Rhythm Society, or both. . ..

As Guidant alluded to at the plea hearing, sophisticated medical devices, such as the ones at issue in this case, generally have a very high rate of reliability and provide life-saving benefits to many people. Advances in medical technol-
ogy have, unfortunately, inflated the public's expectations so much so that when any device fails, many assume that there must have been a crime committed or that someone is at fault. This is not necessarily always the case. . ..

It Is Ordered that . .. [t]he Court declines to accept the Plea Agreement.

NOTES
1. Fines. The most obvious possible sanction for a corporation, and one at issue in Guidant, is a criminal fine. Fines, however, present the dilemma of their

p. 764

p. 785
spillover effects on innocent shareholders, creditors, employees, and consumers, which can lead sentencing judges to refuse to impose substantial fines even in cases of serious corporate wrongdoing. Coffee, supra, at 400-402, 405-407. Weak
fines, however, do not provide sufficient deterrence; when the anticipated fine is less than the expected benefit to the corporation from criminal wrongdoing, it will be cheaper to pay the fine than to refrain from crime. Insufficient criminal fines
effectively function as “licenses retroactively permitting the corporation’s misconduct.” W. Robert Thomas, The Ability and Responsibility of Corporate Law to Improve Criminal Fines, 78 Ohio St. L.J. 601, 614-617 (2017). Moreover, even when
substantial fines are in fact imposed, they will not sufficiently deter employees whose personal interests do not align with the organization's interests. Thus, such individuals may commit crimes even though the crimes will prove extremely costly to
the organization. See Richard Gruner, To Let the Punishment Fit the Organization: Sanctioning Corporate Offenders Through Corporate Probation, 16 Am. J. Crim. L. 1, 5 (1988). Are prosecutors well positioned to determine what fine will serve as.
a deterrent? If not, does that suggest this form of punishment is likely to be ineffective?

2. Compliance programs. Because of the shortcomings of fines, the government has sought to change corporation behavior through other means. A central approach has been the creation of carrots and sticks for corporations to
adopt compliance and ethics programs, another option discussed in Guidant.

The Federal Sentencing Guidelines take the carrot approach, offering sentencing reductions for companies that have such programs. The commentary to Chapter Eight of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines (“Sentencing of Organiza-
tions”) explains:

These guidelines offer incentives to organizations to reduce and ultimately eliminate criminal conduct by providing a structural foundation from which an organization may self-police its own conduct through an effective

compliance and ethics program. The prevention and detection of criminal conduct, as facilitated by an effective compliance and ethics program, will assist an organization in encouraging ethical conduct and in complying

fully with all applicable laws.

More specifically, under the Guidelines, a convicted corporation is entitled to a significant deduction from its culpability score, “‘f the offense occurred even though the organization had in place at the time of the offense an effective
compliance and ethics program,” provided that the organization reported all detected violations within a reasonable time after becoming aware of them. U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual §8.C2.5(f) (2005). Moreover, the Guidelines provide for
“probation” for corporations in certain cases, and one condition of probation may be that the organization “develop and submit to the court an effective compliance and ethics program.” Id. §8.D1.4(c). The Guidelines explain that an effective
program should demonstrate “the exercise of due diligence to prevent and detect criminal conduct” and “promote an organizational culture that encourages ethical conduct and commitment to compliance with the law.” Id. §8.B2.1. The Guidelines
further specify that these general exhortations entail establishing standards and procedures to prevent and detect crime; educating the board of directors, employees, and agents about the compliance and ethics program; assigning specific high-
level individuals responsibility for the programs; evaluating the program periodically;

p. 785
p. 786
and creating a well-publicized, confidential mechanism for internal reporting of potential criminal conduct. If criminal conduct is detected, the organization should respond appropriately and take steps to prevent further criminal conduct.

The Department of Justice seeks to encourage compliance programs by using the stick of a threatened indictment. The Department takes into account whether an organization has a compliance program in deciding whether to file
criminal charges. Justice Manual §9-28.300(A). Moreover, the Department looks beyond the mere existence of a compliance program to whether it is well designed, whether it is being applied earnestly and in good faith, and whether it works in
practice. Id. §9-28.800. Thus, although the “corporate ethos” model of corporate criminal liability has not been formally adopted as a matter of substantive law, it has made substantial inroads in sentencing law and prosecutorial practice through
the importance of compliance programs.

The increasing reliance on corporate compliance programs in federal sentencing has received mixed reviews. For a theoretical defense of “composite liability regimes” such as the Federal Sentencing Guidelines (which base liability on
the doctrine of respondeat superior, but allow mitigation of punishment for compliance efforts), see Jennifer Arlen & Reinier Kraakman, Controlling Corporate Misconduct: An Analysis of Corporate Liability Regimes, 72 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 687 (1997).
Jennifer Arlen nevertheless criticizes the Federal Sentencing Guidelines as they currently operate for failing to provide sufficient mitigation to entice companies to adopt compliance programs, to self-report, and to cooperate. Arlen, The Failure of

the Organizational Sentencing Guidelines, 66 U. Miami L. Rev. 321 (2012). For an argument that more attention should be placed on recidivism and systemic problems in companies, see Veronica Root, Coordinating Compliance Incentives, 102
Cornell L. Rev. 1003 (2017). For a defense of these Sentencing Guidelines provisions, see Diana E. Murphy, The Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations: A Decade of Promoting Compliance and Ethics, 87 lowa L. Rev. 697 (2002). If com-
panies use compliance programs, will prosecutors be able to determine whether they are actually effective and not just window dressing to avoid prosecution? How could prosecutors make such a determination?
3. Regulation through DPAs and NPAs. As noted above (see p. 772 supra), prosecutors are increasingly opting not to charge corporations criminally and instead to negotiate agreements to change company practices. Although
the precise terms of these agreements vary, prosecutors often demand that companies adopt compliance programs policed by independent monitors, pay fines and restitution, cooperate with investigations against employees, make personnel
changes, and alter business practices. See Gregory M. Gilchrist, Regulation by Prosecutor, 56 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 315, 323-337 (2019). Many NPAs and DPAs go quite far into the operation of companies, requiring companies to eliminate lawful
lines of business, fire corporate officers, or make other dramatic shifts in operation, including changing fee structures or imposing disclosure obligations where none exist under law. Prosecutors in the Boardroom: Using Criminal Law to Regulate
Corporate Conduct 3 (Anthony S. Barkow & Rachel E. Barkow eds., 2011). Are prosecutors well positioned to regulate business practices and decide which officers should stay or go? Is it appropriate for prosecutors to use the threat of criminal li-
ability to get corporations to change the way they operate, even when the operation of the business itself is not a crime?
4, The role of judicial review. Some judges have sought to play a greater role in overseeing the agreements that prosecutors reach with corporations. Some have
p. 786
p. 767
followed Judge Frank's approach in Guidant and have refused to accept the plea agreement. See, e.g., United States v. Orthofix, Inc., 956 F. Supp. 2d 316, 337 (D. Mass. 2013) (“{T]he court will not place the imprimatur of the judiciary on bargain-
basement justice” or “accept pleas that mandate the imposition of paltry sentences lest they turn the normative edifice of criminal justice into a Bergsonian theater of the absurd.”). Other judges have pursued different avenues for greater judicial
oversight. For example, when the government and the corporation agree to a DPA, they often need the court to approve their joint motion for exclusion of time under the Speedy Trial Act because the period of the agreement would otherwise
extend past the point when the government could proceed. Thus, to allow the government to assess the defendant's compliance with the agreement over its entire period and not lose its ability to bring charges, the parties request an exception
from the Speedy Trial Act. When a district judge in Washington, D.C. rejected such a motion because of his view that the DPA itself was too “anemic[]” in addressing what he believed to be “egregious conduct,” the parties appealed. United States
v. Fokker Services, B.V., 79 F. Supp. 3d 160, 167 (D.D.C. 2015). The D.C. Circuit reversed, observing:
While the exclusion of time is subject to “the approval of the court,” there is no ground for reading that provision to confer free-ranging authority in district courts to scrutinize the prosecution's discretionary charging deci-
sions. Rather, we read the statute against the background of settled constitutional understandings under which authority over criminal charging decisions resides fundamentally with the Executive, without the involvement of
— and without oversight power in — the Judiciary.
United States v. Fokker Services, B.V., 818 F.3d 733, 741 (D.C. Cir. 2016). The D.C. Circuit did not decide, however, whether a court would have authority to reject a DPA because it contained illegal or unethical provisions, because the district court
did not make such a determination in Fokker. Id. at 747. Other courts have suggested that district courts should have such authority and have scrutinized the terms of a DPA before approving it. See, e.g., United States v. HSBC Bank USA, N.A.,
2013 WL 3306161, at 6 (E.D.N.Y. July 1, 2013) (‘[lIt is easy to imagine circumstances in which a deferred prosecution agreement, or the implementation of such an agreement, so transgresses the bounds of lawfulness or propriety as to warrant
judicial intervention to protect the integrity of the Court.”). Some judges have called upon Congress to pass legislation affirmatively enabling greater judicial review of DPAs. See, e.g., United States v. HSBC Bank USA, N.A., 863 F.3d 125, 128 (2d
Cir. 2017) (Pooler, J., concurring) Should there be a greater role for judicial oversight? Is judicial involvement consistent with a prosecutor's traditional charging authority?
5. The corporate death penalty. In the wake of Arthur Andersen’s collapse after indictment and conviction, the prospect of criminal charges “killing” a company has loomed large in the debate over corporate criminal liability. The data
show that the overwhelming majority of companies survive criminal charges. Gabriel Markoff, Arthur Andersen and the Myth of the Corporate Death Penalty: Corporate Criminal Convictions in the Twenty-First Century, 15 U. Pa. J. Bus. L. 797, 836
(2013). But some companies will not survive, because they rely on government contracts and their conviction means disqualification, or because they lose a necessary license or permit, or because the adverse publicity is just too much of a
p.767
p. 768

reputational hit. See Beale, A Response to the Critics, supra, at 1501-1503; W. Robert Thomas, Incapacitating Criminal Corporations, 72 Vand. L. Rev 905 (2019). One of the reasons that HSBC was not indicted and instead received a DPA is a
concern that formal charges would have been a “death sentence” for the bank.22 Assuming that some companies are at risk for failure after a conviction, should that fact drive prosecutorial charging decisions? In the case of individual liability,
collateral consequences (such as to family members) are not ordinarily considered. For an argument that individual charging decisions should be treated more like corporate charging decisions because the corporate framework does a better job
weighing both the costs and benefits of prosecution, see Rachel E. Barkow, Using the Corporate Prosecution and Sentencing Model for Individuals: The Case for a Unified Federal Approach, 83 Law & Contemp. Probs. 159 (2021).

3. Liability of Corporate Agents
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

When people commit a crime, they can face criminal charges. That is true whether they are acting solely out self-interest or partially out of a desire to benefit the company for which they work. The argument that corporate agents should
not be criminally liable for their actions when they acted for the corporation in a representative capacity has never drawn much support in the case law. See 3A W. Fletcher, Encyclopedia of the Law of Private Corporations §1348, at 630 (1975). In-
stead, the prevailing view is reflected in §2.07(6) of the MPC:

() A person is legally accountable for any conduct he performs or causes to be performed in the name of the corporation or an unincorporated association or in its behalf to the same extent as if it were performed

in his own name or behalf.

(b) Whenever a duty to act is imposed by law upon a corporation or an unincorporated association, any agent of the corporation or association having primary responsibility for the discharge of the duty is legally
accountable for reckless omission to perform the required act to the same extent as if the duty were imposed by law directly upon himself.

Things get more complicated because of the bureaucratic arrangement of corporate activities, with lower employees responsible to higher-level employees in a hierarchy leading up to the highest officers. This arrangement often makes
it difficult to fasten liability upon the upper-echelon employees and officers under the prevailing standards of accomplice liability requiring intentional aiding or encouraging criminal conduct of another, for these doctrines are designed for personal
rather than bureaucratic relationships. The doctrine of vicarious liability would be one solution, but its use entails potential unfairness and injustice. The materials that follow explore these problems.

p.788
p. 789
Gordon v. United States
United States Court of Appeals, Tenth Circuit
203 F.2d 248 (1953), rev'd, 347 U.S. 909 (1954)

[Defendant partners in a sewing-machine and appliance business were convicted of violating the Defense Production Act by selling sewing machines on credit terms prohibited by that Act and regulations issued thereunder. Section 601
provided that any person who “willfully” violated its provisions or any regulation or order issued thereunder should upon conviction be punished as therein specified. The case was not submitted to the jury on the question whether the partners had
actual notice of the transactions. Instead, it was tried and submitted on the theory that knowledge of one partner regarding the transactions was “imputable, attributable and chargeable” to the other and that the knowledge and acts of the sales-
people who made the sales and kept the records while acting in the course of their employment were imputable and chargeable to the employing partners. On the “very perplexing question whether the partners can be held criminally responsible

for the knowledge and acts of their agents and employees, who the evidence shows, while acting in the course of their employment, actually made the sales without having collected the required down payment,” the court, per Murrah, J., answered
in the affirmative, stating:]

Deeply rooted in our criminal jurisprudence is the notion that criminal guilt is personal to the accused; that wilfulness or a guilty mind is an essential ingredient of a punishable offense, and that one cannot intend an act in which he did
not consciously participate, acquiesce, or have guilty knowledge. Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246.

Amenable to this notion, the courts have been reluctant to hold the master or the employer criminally responsible for the acts of his agent or employee which he did not authorize, counsel, advise, approve or ratify.

It is only in the so-called public welfare offenses usually involving police regulation of food, drink and drugs that the courts have relaxed the necessity for proof of a wilful intent.

In our case wilfulness is specifically made a prerequisite to guilt. Indeed it is the gist of the offenses charged in all of the counts in the information. And the trial court instructed the jury that in every crime or public offense there must be
a “union or joint operation of act and intent” but “that the intent or intention is manifest by the circumstances connected with the offense as well as by direct testimony.”

What the court did in effect was to make wilfulness an essential element of the offenses charged in the information, and to charge the employers with the guilty knowledge and acts of the employees in determining the question of
willfulness. . ..

The effect of this is not to dispense with wilfulness or guilty knowledge as an element of the offense. It is to charge the employer with knowledge of records he is required to keep and acts he is required or forbidden to do, and which he
necessarily keeps, does or omits to do by and through his agents and employees. To be sure, the knowledge with which he is charged is not direct; it is constructive. If it be called vicarious responsibility, it is nevertheless a responsibility of him on
whom the law places the duty. It is permissible proof of a wilfulness which in its proper context denotes more than mere negligence but less than bad purpose or evil motive. It connotes a course of conduct which may be construed by the triers of
facts as

p. 769

p.790
deliberate and voluntary, hence intentional; or it may be construed as negligent, inadvertent and excusable. The act or omission itself is not inexorably penalized. The ultimate question of guilt is left to the ameliorating influence of those who sit in
judgment. Considered in this light, we do not think the instructions of the court fall short of the traditional standards for guilt.

Huxman, J. dissenting: . . . The partners denied intent to violate the law or any knowledge that their employees were violating it. They were entitled to have their testimony weighed and evaluated under proper instructions by the court
together with all other relevant evidence. They were entitled to have the jury told that they were not criminally liable for the acts of their employees, although committed within the scope of their employment, unless they directed such activities or
had guilty knowledge thereof. It is a principle embedded in the English law from time immemorial that the sins of the father shall not be visited upon the son merely because the father is the agent of the son and his unlawful acts were committed
within the scope of his employment, under a criminal statute making wilfulness an element of the offense when the son had no knowledge of or part in such violations.

Strong reliance is placed upon Inland Freight Lines v. United States, 191 F.2d 313, by this court. But that case is clearly distinguishable. There the sole defendant was the corporation charged with keeping false records and it was held
that the knowledge of its agents was the knowledge of the corporation. That is the well-established principle of criminal law as applied in the case of a corporation. It is, as the law recognizes, the only way a corporation can be held criminally
responsible for violations of penal statutes. While a corporation is recognized as a separate legal entity, such separate entity is a pure fiction of the law. As a separate entity and aside from its agents and employees a corporation can do nothing. It
has no conscience, will, or power of thought. It acts only through its agents. Their acts are the only acts it can commit and their knowledge of necessity is the only knowledge it can have.

The only cases in which a principal without actual intent or knowledge of criminal acts of wrong-doing by his employees has been held criminally responsible for such acts arose under welfare statutes such as the Pure Food and Drug
Laws, Liquor Laws and Weight and Measure Acts. But under all of these acts where a principal was held guilty because of the acts of his agents without knowledge or intent on his part wilfulness was not an element of the offense and the statute
made the doing of the act the offense.

NOTE

The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari and reversed the Tenth Circuit's decision in Gordon in the following per curiam opinion (347 U.S. 909, 909 (1954)):

Petitioners are business partners in the sale of appliances. They were convicted under Section 603 of the Defense Production Act of 1950 . . . which provides that “Any person who willfully violates” regulations promulgated

under the Act shall be guilty of crime. The jury was instructed that the knowledge of petitioners’ employees was chargeable to petitioners in determining petitioners’ willfulness. Because of the instruction, the government has

confessed error. We agree, and accordingly reverse the judgment and remand the case to the district court for retrial.

p.790
p.791

Four years later, the Supreme Court held a partnership liable for the “knowing and willful” violation of the Motor Carrier Act, 18 U.S.C. §835, 49 U.S.C. §332{a), based on the conduct of an employee, and distinguished Gordon by explain
ing that “here the government does not seek to hold the individual partners, but only the partnership as an entity.” United States v. A & P Trucking Co., 358 U.S. 121, 126 (1958).

United States v. Park
Supreme Court of the United States
421 U.S. 658 (1975)

Cher Justice BURGER delivered the opinion of the Court. ..

Acme Markets, Inc., is a national retail food chain with approximately 36,000 employees, 874 retail outlets, 12 general warehouses, and four special warehouses. Its headquarters, including the office of the president, respondent Park,
who is chief executive officer of the corporation, are located in Philadelphia, Pa. [T]he Government charged Acme and respondent with violations of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. [T]he information alleged that the defendants had
received food that had been shipped in interstate commerce and that, while the food was being held for sale in Acme’s Baltimore warehouse following shipment in interstate commerce, they caused it to be held in a building accessible to rodents
and to be exposed to contamination by rodents. These acts were alleged to have resulted in the food’s being adulterated within the meaning of [the statute].

Acme pleaded guilty. ... Respondent pleaded not guilty. The evidence at trial demonstrated that in April 1970 the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) advised respondent by letter of insanitary conditions in Acme’s Philadelphia
warehouse. In 1971 the FDA found that similar conditions existed in the firm’s Baltimore warehouse. An FDA consumer safety officer testified concerning evidence of rodent infestation and other insanitary conditions discovered during a 12-day
inspection of the Baltimore warehouse in November and December 1971. He also related that a second inspection of the warehouse had been conducted in March 1972. On that occasion the inspectors found that there had been improvement in
the sanitary conditions, but that “there was still evidence of rodent activity in the building and in the warehouses and we found some rodent-contaminated lots of food items.”

The Government also presented testimony by the Chief of Compliance of the FDA’s Baltimore office, who informed respondent by letter of the conditions at the Baltimore warehouse after the first inspection.© There was testimony by
Acme's

p.791

p. 792
Baltimore division vice president, who had responded to the letter on behalf of Acme and respondent and who described the steps taken to remedy the insanitary conditions discovered by both inspections. The Government's final witness, Acme’s
vice president for legal affairs and assistant secretary, identified respondent as the president and chief executive officer of the company and read a bylaw prescribing the duties of the chief executive officer.” He testified that respondent functioned
by delegating “normal operating duties,” including sanitation, but that he retained “certain things, which are the big, broad, principles of the operation of the company,” and had “the responsibility of seeing that they all work together.”. ..

Respondent was the only defense witness. He testified that, although all of Acme’s employees were in a sense under his general direction, the company had an “organizational structure for responsibilities for certain functions” accord-
ing to which different phases of its operation were “assigned to individuals who, in turn, have staff and departments under them.” He identified those individuals responsible for sanitation, and related that upon receipt of the January 1972 FDA

letter, he had conferred with the vice president for legal affairs, who informed him that the Baltimore division vice president “was investigating the situation immediately and would be taking corrective action and would be preparing a summary of
the corrective action to reply to the letter.” Respondent stated that he did not “believe there was anything [he] could have done more constructively than what [he] found was being done.”
On cross-examination, respondent conceded that providing sanitary conditions for food offered for sale to the public was something that he was “responsible for in the entire operation of the company.” . .
The relevant portion of the trial judge’s instructions to the jury challenged by respondent is set out in the margin.2 Respondent's counsel objected to the instructions on the ground that they failed fairly to reflect our decision in United
States v.
p.792
p. 798
Dotterweich, [320 U.S. 277 (1943)], and to define “ ‘responsible relationship.’ ” The trial judge overruled the objection. The jury found respondent guilty on all counts of the information, and he was subsequently sentenced to pay a fine of $50 on
each count.12
The Court of Appeals reversed the conviction and remanded for a new trial. That court viewed the Government as arguing “that the conviction may be predicated solely upon a showing that [respondent] was the President of the
offending corporation,” and it stated that as “a general proposition, some act of commission or omission is an essential element of every crime.” It reasoned that, although our decision in United States v. Dotterweich had construed the statutory
provisions under which respondent was tried to dispense with the traditional element of “ ‘awareness of some wrongdoing,’ ” the Court had not construed them as dispensing with the element of “wrongful action.” The Court of Appeals concluded
that the trial judge's instructions “might well have left the jury with the erroneous impression that Park could be found guilty in the absence of ‘wrongful action’ on his part,” and that proof of this element was required by due process. It... . directed
that on retrial the jury be instructed as to “wrongful action,” which might be “gross negligence and inattention in discharging . . . corporate duties and obligations or any of a host of other acts of commission or omission which would ‘cause’ the
contamination of food.”. . .
The question presented by the Government's petition for certiorari in United States v. Dotterweich [p. 330 supra this book] . . . was whether “the manager of a corporation, as well as the corporation itself, may be prosecuted under the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938 for the introduction of misbranded and adulterated articles into interstate commerce.” ..
In. . . reinstating Dotterweich’s conviction, this Court looked to the purposes of the Act and noted that they “touch phases of the lives and health of people which, in the circumstances of modern industrialism, are largely beyond self-
protection.”
Central to the Court’s conclusion that individuals other than proprietors are subject to the criminal provisions of the Act was the reality that “the only way in which a corporation can act is through the individuals who act on its behalf.”. ..
At the same time, however, the Court was aware of the concern which was the motivating factor in the Court of Appeals’ decision, that literal enforcement “might operate too harshly by sweeping within its condemnation any person
however remotely entangled in the proscribed shipment.” A limiting principle, in the form of “settled doctrines of criminal law” defining those who “are responsible for the commission of a misdemeanor,” was available. In this context, the Court
concluded, those doctrines dictated that the offense was committed “by all who . . . have . .. a responsible share in the furtherance of the transaction which the statute outlaws.”
The Court recognized that, because the Act dispenses with the need to prove “consciousness of wrongdoing,” it may result in hardship even as applied to those who share “responsibility in the business process resulting in” a violation.
It regarded as “too treacherous” an attempt “to define or even to indicate by way
p. 799
p. 708
of illustration the class of employees which stands in such a responsible relation.” The question of responsibility, the Court said, depends “on the evidence produced at the trial and its submission — assuming the evidence warrants it — to the jury
under appropriate guidance.” The Court added: “In such matters the good sense of prosecutors, the wise guidance of trial judges, and the ultimate judgment must be trusted.” . .
Dotterweich and the cases which have followed reveal that in providing sanctions which reach and touch the individuals who execute the corporate mission — and this is by no means necessarily confined to a single corporate agent
or employee — the Act imposes not only a positive duty to seek out and remedy violations when they occur but also, and primarily, a duty to implement measures that will insure that violations will not occur. The requirements of foresight and

vigilance imposed on responsible corporate agents are beyond question demanding, and pethaps onerous, but they are no more stringent than the public has a right to expect of those who voluntarily assume positions of authority in business en-
terprises whose services and products affect the health and well-being of the public that supports them. . .

The Act does not, as we observed in Dotterweich, make criminal liability turn on “awareness of some wrongdoing” or “conscious fraud.” The duty imposed by Congress on responsible corporate agents is, we emphasize, one that
requires the highest standard of foresight and vigilance, but the Act, in its criminal aspect, does not require that which is objectively impossible. The theory upon which responsible corporate agents are held criminally accountable for “causing”
violations of the Act permits a claim that a defendant was “powerless” to prevent or correct the violation to “be raised defensively at a trial on the merits.” United States v. Wiesenfeld Warehouse Co., 376 U.S. 86, 91 (1964). If such a claim is made,
the defendant has the burden of coming forward with evidence, but this does not alter the Government's ultimate burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt the defendant's guilt, including his power, in light of the duty imposed by the Act, to
prevent or correct the prohibited condition. . ..

We cannot agree [that it was necessary to] instruct the jury that the Government had the burden of establishing “wrongful action” in the sense in which the Court of Appeals used that phrase. The concept of a “reasonable relationship”
to, or a “reasonable share” in, a violation of the Act indeed imports some measure of blameworthiness; but it is equally clear that the Government establishes a prima facie case when it introduces evidence sufficient to warrant a finding by the trier
of the facts that the defendant had, by reason of his position in the corporation, responsibility and authority either to prevent in the first instance, or promptly to correct, the violation complained of, and that he failed to do so. ...

Reading the entire charge satisfies us that the jury's attention was adequately focused on the issue of respondent's authority with respect to the conditions that formed the basis of the alleged violations. Viewed as a whole, the charge
did not permit the jury to find guilt solely on the basis of respondent's position in the corporation. . . .

Reversed.

Justice STEWART, with whom Justice MARSHALL and Justice PoweLL join, dissenting.

p. 794
p. 795

Although agreeing with much of what is said in the Court’s opinion, | dissent from the opinion and judgment, because the jury instructions in this case were not consistent with the law as the Court today expounds it.

As | understand the Court's opinion, it holds that in order to sustain a conviction under §301\(k) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act the prosecution must at least show that by reason of an individual's corporate position and
responsibilities, he had a duty to use care to maintain the physical integrity of the corporation's food products. A jury may then draw the inference that when the food is found to be in such condition as to violate the statute's prohibitions, that con-
dition was “caused” by a breach of the standard of care imposed upon the responsible official. This is the language of negligence, and | agree with it.

To affirm this conviction, however, the Court must approve the instructions given to the members of the jury who were entrusted with determining whether the respondent was innocent or guilty. Those instructions did not conform to the
standards that the Court itself sets out today.

The trial judge instructed the jury to find Park guilty if it found beyond a reasonable doubt that Park “had a responsible relation to the situation. . . . The issue is . . . whether the Defendant, John R. Park, by virtue of his position in the
company, had a position of authority and responsibility in the situation out of which these charges arose.” Requiring, as it did, a verdict of guilty upon a finding of “responsibility,” this instruction standing alone could have been construed as a
direction to convict if the jury found Park “responsible” for the condition in the sense that his position as chief executive officer gave him formal responsibility within the structure of the corporation. But the trial judge went on specifically to caution
the jury not to attach such a meaning to his instruction, saying that “the fact that the Defendant is presfidjent and is a chief executive officer of the Acme Markets does not require a finding of guilt.” “Responsibility” as used by the trial judge there-
fore had whatever meaning the jury in its unguided discretion chose to give it.

The instructions, therefore, expressed nothing more than a tautology. They told the jury: “You must find the defendant guilty if you find that he is to be held accountable for this adulterated food.” In other words: “You must find the
defendant guilty if you conclude that he is guilty.”. ..

[Blefore a person can be convicted of a criminal violation of this Act, a jury must find — and must be clearly instructed that it must find — evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that he engaged in wrongful conduct amounting at least to
common-law negligence. There were no such instructions, and clearly, therefore, no such finding in this case. . . .

NOTES

1. Vicarious liability? Reconsider the Guminga case, p. 339 supra. Guminga’s objection was to the kind of vicarious liability exemplified in the tort doctrine of respondeat superior; namely, where the liability of A for the acts of Bis
based solely on some relationship between them rather than on any culpable conduct of A. Are Park and Dotterweich being held liable for their own misconduct, or are they being held liable for the misconduct of others? Consider Friedman v. Se-
belius, 755 F. Supp. 2d 98, 110-111 (D.D.C. 2010):

p. 795
p.796

Under the “responsible corporate officer” doctrine as described in [Dotterweich and Park], a corporate official can be convicted of a misdemeanor under the FDCA if he or she had a “responsible share in the furtherance

of the transaction which the statute outlaws, namely, to put into the stream of interstate commerce adulterated or misbranded drugs.” Dotterweich, 320 U.S. at 284. Although the doctrine “dispenses with the conventional

requirement for criminal conduct — awareness of some wrongdoing,” id. at 281, liability under the FDCA remains subject to a “limiting principle,” namely that the defendant had the “power . . . to prevent or correct the pro-

hibited condition” but failed to do so. Park, 421 U.S. at 669. Corporate officials are thus subject to prosecution under the doctrine only if they stand in some “responsible relationship” to a specific violation of the Act, mean-

ing that their “failure to exercise the authority and supervisory responsibility reposed in them by the business organization resulted in the violation complained of.” Id. at 671... .

‘As made clear by the Supreme Court, it is simply not the case that a defendant can be convicted of a misdemeanor under the responsible corporate officer doctrine based solely on his position within the cor-

porate hierarchy. Rather, to establish a prima facie case, the government must introduce evidence demonstrating that “the defendant had, by reason of his position in the corporation, responsibility and authority either to

prevent in the first instance, or promptly to correct, the violation complained of, and that he failed to do so.” Park, 421 U.S. at 673-74. A defendant's position within a company is certainly relevant, but it is no more than one

link in the causal chain to establish liability. Indeed, the Court went to great lengths in Park to clarify that the trial court's instructions (which the Court affirmed) did not permit the jury to convict the defendant based solely on

his position as President and CEO of the company, as such instructions would have been legally erroneous.

Officers may also be held responsible under laws that require them to report the crimes of employees. For example, a Roman Catholic bishop was indicted for failing to report child abuse by one of the priests in his diocese. A.G.
Sulzberger & Laurie Goodstein, Bishop Indicted; Charge Is Failing to Report Abuse, N.Y. Times, Oct. 15, 2011, at A1.

2. The responsible corporate officer doctrine and the powerless defendant. Although a defendant can raise as a defense that the “defendant was ‘powerless’ to prevent or correct the violation,” federal courts have been slow to
recognize situations in which it was “objectively impossible” to avoid the harm. See United States v. Gel Spice Co., 773 F.2d 427 (2d Cir. 1985). The court in United States v. New England Grocers Supply Co., 488 F. Supp. 230 (D. Mass. 1980), ad-
dressed the difficulty in “ascertain{ing] from [Park] the exact nature and scope of the impossibility defense”:

One interpretation . . . is that it relates only to the power of the corporate officer, by virtue of his position in the corporation, to correct or prevent violations of the Act. Under this interpretation, the evidence introduced by the

defendant at trial to sustain his impossibility defense would serve only to rebut the evidence introduced by the government in

p.796
p.797
establishing its prima facie case. [T]he impossibility defense would not serve as an affirmative defense, but would merely provide corporate officers a defense open to all who are criminally accused, that is, rebuttal of the
government's proof.
An alternative interpretation of the impossibility defense is that it is satisfied by evidence that the corporate officer exercised “extraordinary care” and was still unable to prevent violations. Under this interpreta-
tion, the impossibility defense would serve as an affirmative defense, incorporating an objective element — use of extraordinary care — into a strict liability offense.

In light of the severe penalties which may be imposed for a second violation under the Act, | am inclined to adopt [the latter] more lenient position of the impossibility defense.
Id. at 235-236. New England Grocers makes clear that the impossibility defense is available only to individuals and not to corporations. Should it be extended to corporations?

3. Severity of penalties. In Park, the responsible corporate officer doctrine led to the defendant's conviction, but only a relatively minor penalty (several fines of $50) was imposed. Most public welfare offenses are misdemeanor of-
fenses that carry neither serious stigma nor substantial punishment. Should the responsible corporate officer doctrine be applied equally to crimes that impose a more significant punishment, such as imprisonment? A district court in lowa rejected
a due process challenge to a sentence of up to one year of imprisonment under the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act for the owner and chief operating officer of a company that shipped and sold eggs contaminated with salmonella, after they had
been convicted under a strict liability theory. United States v. Quality Egg, LLC, 99 F. Supp. 3d 920, 958 (N.D. lowa 2015).

Could even longer sentences be permissible if the statute also requires mens rea? Consider the case that follows, which involves an environmental statute requiring a mens rea of knowledge whose violation constitutes a felony carrying
possible imprisonment for five years, and, for a second offense, ten years.

United States v. MacDonald & Watson Waste Oil Co.
United States Court of Appeals, First Circuit
933 F.2d 35 (1991)

CamPBeLL, C.J. [MacDonald & Watson Waste Oil Co., a corporation engaged in the business of transporting and disposing of contaminated wastes, operated a disposal facility at the Poe Street Lot, a facility leased from the Narra-
gansett Improvement Company (NIC). Neither MacDonald nor NIC held a permit authorizing them to dispose of solid hazardous wastes in that site, although NIC did have a permit to dispose of liquid wastes there.

[MacDonald was hired to remove solid waste (toluene-contaminated soil) from the grounds of the Master Chemical Company. An employee of MacDonald supervised the transportation of the contaminated soil from Master Chemical to
the Poe Street Lot. Subsequently, Eugene K. D’Allesandro, president of MacDonald, was

p.797

p. 798
convicted of knowingly transporting and causing the transportation of hazardous waste to a facility that did not have a permit, in violation of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), §3008(d)(1). The company was also convicted, but
discussion of its liability is omitted]

D’Allesandro .. . contends that his conviction . . . must be vacated because the district court incorrectly charged the jury regarding the element of knowledge in the case of a corporate officer. Section 3008(d)(1) penalizes “Any person
who . . . (1) knowingly transports or causes to be transported any hazardous waste identified or listed under this subchapter . . . to a facility which does not have a permit. . . .” In his closing, the prosecutor conceded that the government had “no
direct evidence that Eugene D’Allesandro actually knew that the Master Chemical shipments were coming in,” i.e., were being transported to the Poe Street Lot under contract with his company. The prosecution did present evidence, however,
that D’Allesandro was not only the President and owner of MacDonald & Watson but was a “hands-on” manager of that relatively small firm. There was also proof that . .. D’Allesandro’s subordinates had contracted for and transported the Master
Chemical waste for disposal at [the Poe Street] site. The government argued that D’Allesandro was guilty of violating §3008(d)(1) because, as the responsible corporate officer, he was in a position to ensure compliance with RCRA and had failed to
do so even after being warned by a consultant on two earlier occasions that other shipments of toluene-contaminated soil had been received from other customers, and that such material violated NIC's permit. In the government's view, any failure
to prove D’Allesandro’s actual knowledge of the Master Chemical contract and shipments was irrelevant to his criminal responsibility under §3008(d)(1) for those shipments.

The court apparently accepted the government's theory. It instructed the jury as follows:

When an individual Defendant is also a corporate officer, the Government may prove that individual's knowledge in either of two ways. The first way is to demonstrate that the defendant had actual knowledge of the act in

question. The second way is to establish that the defendant was what is called a responsible officer of the corporation committing the act. In order to prove that a person is a responsible corporate officer three things must

be shown.

First, it must be shown that the person is an officer of the corporation, not merely an employee.

Second, it must be shown that the officer had direct responsibility for the activities that are alleged to be illegal. Simply being an officer or even the president of a corporation is not enough. The Government must
prove that the person had a responsibility to supervise the activities in question.

And the third requirement is that the officer must have known or believed that the illegal activity of the type alleged occurred. . . .

We agree with D'Allesandro that the jury instructions improperly allowed the jury to find him guilty without finding he had actual knowledge of the alleged transportation of hazardous waste on July 30 and 31, 1986, from Master

Chemical
p. 798
p. 799
Company, Boston, Massachusetts, to NIC’s site, knowledge being an element the statute requires. We must, therefore, reverse his conviction.

The seminal cases regarding the responsible corporate officer doctrine are United States v. Dotterweich, 320 U.S. 277 (1943), and United States v. Park, 421 U.S. 658 (1975). These cases concerned misdemeanor charges . . . [that]
dispensed with a scienter requirement. . . . But while Dotterweich and Park thus reflect what is now . . . well-established law in respect to public welfare statutes and regulations lacking an express knowledge or other scienter requirement, we know
of no precedent for failing to give effect to a knowledge requirement that Congress has expressly included in a criminal statute. Especially is that so where, as here, the crime is a felony carrying possible imprisonment of five years and, for a sec-
ond offense, ten. ...

[M)he district court charged, in effect, that proof that D’Allesandro was a responsible corporate officer would conclusively prove the element of his knowledge of the Master Chemical shipments. . . . In a crime having knowledge as an
express element, a mere showing of official responsibility under Dotterweich and Park is not an adequate substitute for direct or circumstantial proof of knowledge. . . .

We vacate the conviction of Eugene D’Allesandro . .. and remand for anew trial... .

NOTES

1. RCRA, mens rea, and the responsible corporate officer doctrine. RCRA imposes liability on any person who “knowingly transports . . . any hazardous waste . . . to a facility which does not have a permit.” Why were the jury
instructions insufficient to satisfy the requirements of RCRA? Note that the judge explicitly told the jury it must find that the “officer must have known or believed that the illegal activity of the type alleged occurred.” Why was this instruction not
equivalent to proof of knowledge? Is the problem that the instruction allowed the jury to find activity “of the type” as opposed to the specific activity at issue?

The knowledge requirements in various environmental statutes have divided the courts in terms of what they require of responsible corporate officers. David St. John et al., Environmental Crimes, 57 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 657, 664-665
(2020). For a general discussion of the issues raised by knowledge requirements in regulatory areas such as this, see pp. 362-365 supra.

2. Should officers be liable? A critical view of the practice of seeking convictions of corporate officers for the crimes of their corporations is taken in Margaret Graham Tebo, Guilty by Reason of Title, 86 A.B.A. J. 44, 45 (May 2000):

A] number of former U.S. attorneys say [the] Justice [Department] subscribes to the view that holding high-level executives criminally liable will often bring changes in the behavior of their companies. Prosecutors and regu-

lators at the state and local levels seem to agree. Apparently, so do legislators, who have incorporated criminal penalties into an increasing number of regulatory statutes, such as the federal clean air and water acts, aimed

at carrying out public policy priorities. Typically, those provisions make the highest-ranking official involved in a particular company activity

p. 799
. 800
the ultimately responsible party, even where that person's direct participation in the violation cannot be shown.

Many federal environmental, antitrust and health care statutes have been interpreted by courts to be public welfare legislation, meaning that no showing of direct personal involvement is necessary to convict a
manager for company violations. Courts have consistently held that these public welfare statutes do not require findings of intent, or even negligence, to support convictions. The courts have repeatedly denied attempts to
challenge such laws as unconstitutional due process violations.

Such was the case with Edward Hanousek, a project manager for the White Pass & Yukon Railroad in Alaska. One day in 1994, an employee of a subcontractor on the project struck an oil pipeline with his back-
hoe, spilling several thousand gallons of oil into the Skagway River. Hanousek, who was off duty and at home when the spill occurred, was convicted under the Clean Water Act of negligently discharging oil into a navigable
waterway. He was sentenced consecutively to six months in jail, six months in a halfway house and six months of supervised release, plus a $5,000 fine.

The U.S. Supreme Court rejected Hanousek’s petition for certiorari [letting] stand a decision that Hanousek suffered no due process violation.

The decision the author is referring to is United States v. Hanousek, 176 F.3d 1116 (9th Cir. 1999), in which the court held that, because the criminal provisions of the Clean Water Act constitute public welfare legislation, they did not
violate due process in imposing liability for ordinary as opposed to gross negligence. The court rejected the defendant's argument that he was being held vicariously liable for the negligence of the backhoe operators, pointing out that the trial court
did in fact instruct the jury that the discharge must have been “caused by the negligence of the particular defendant,” presumably Hanousek’s negligence in failing to protect the pipeline adequately.

QUESTIONS: Given that the jury was instructed that a finding of negligence on the part of Hanousek himself was required for liability, is the author's criticism of the decision well grounded? On the other hand, is the author right to be concerned
about imposing criminal liability in the absence of direct personal involvement? Is liability for a negligent failure to act significantly more troubling than liability for negligent action? For defenses of the responsible corporate officer doctrine, see Amy
J. Sepinwall, Responsible Shares and Shared Responsibility: In Defense of Responsible Corporate Officer Liability, 2014 Colum. Bus. L. Rev. 371; Kimberly Kessler Ferzan, Probing the Depths of the Responsible Corporate Officer's Duty, 12 Crim.
L. & Phil. 455 (2018). For additional critiques of the responsible corporate officer doctrine, see John Hasnas, The Real Danger of the Responsibility Surplus, 17 Geo. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 935 (2019) (arguing the doctrine encourages “swashbucklers” to
assume high-level positions in companies instead of those inclined to exercise due care, thus leading to more wrongdoing overall); Samuel W. Buell, The

p. 800

peor
Responsibility Gap in Corporate Crime, 12 Crim. L. & Phil. 471 (2018) (arguing that expanding the responsible corporate officer doctrine to more serious crimes is at odds with traditional notions of culpability).

3. Expanding the responsibilities of corporate officers after Enron. What environmental crime was to the 1990s, the Enron scandal became to the first decade of the twenty-first century. The massive fraud allegedly perpetrated
by Enron's corporate officers and the catastrophic collapse of Enron Corporation (and other corporate scandals) generated widespread concern about whether criminal law offered adequate tools to prosecute and thus deter financial fraud. In
response to these concerns, Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, H.R. 3763, 107th Congress, 116 Stat. 745, 807 (2002). The Act did not alter the fundamental structure of criminal liability for either corporate officers or corporations.
Rather, the Act's changes were more in the nature of gap-filling: It created several new obstruction-of-justice offenses; increased maximum penalties for existing crimes; and imposed new obligations on chief executive officers and chief financial
officers to personally certify the accuracy of their companies’ financial statements, subject to severe criminal penalties for false certifications. These certification provisions make it more difficult for CEOs and CFOs responsible for their firms’ ac-
counting practices to later try to claim that they were unaware of the relevant accounting facts when they are charged with issuing misleading financial reports.

Some commentators were optimistic that these changes would be effective in deterring corporate fraud, Kathleen F. Brickey, From Enron to WorldCom and Beyond: Life and Crime After Sarbanes-Oxley, 81 Wash. U. L.Q. 357 (2003),
whereas others expressed doubt in light of the fact that many criminal laws addressing financial fraud were already on the books when these companies engaged in their frauds, Geraldine Scott Moohr, An Enron Lesson: The Modest Role of Crim-
inal Law in Preventing Corporate Crime, 55 Fla. L. Rev. 937 (2003).

The financial meltdown of 2008 brought these issues to the fore once again. There is uncertainty about what, if any, crimes were committed, and few criminal cases were brought. In response to arguments that more cases were not
brought because it would have been too difficult to prove fraudulent intent, Judge Jed Rakoff has argued that a theory of willful blindness should have been pursued. Jed S. Rakoff, The Financial Crisis: Why Have No High-Level Executives Been
Prosecuted?, N.Y. Rev. Books, Jan. 9, 2014. Judge Rakoff also criticized the trend over the past few decades to focus on prosecuting companies without indicting individuals: “I suggest that the future deterrent value of successfully prosecuting
individuals far outweighs the prophylactic benefits of imposing internal compliance measures that are often little more than window-dressing.” Does Judge Rakoff take adequately into account the difficulties of bringing actions against individuals
even under a willful blindness theory? Even if Judge Rakoff believes those actions could have been brought, does the fact that prosecutors themselves thought the cases too difficult to prove suggest that laws should be modified to make those
prosecutions easier? Or would such an approach pose too great a threat that individuals could face criminal charges without sufficient moral culpability?

4, Pursuing other theories of criminal liability against officers. Statutes like the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act facilitate bringing charges against corporate officers because no mens rea is required, but they raise concerns about

peor
p.602

imposing liability in the absence of fault. In contrast, statutes like the one at issue in MacDonald & Watson Waste Oil may make it too difficult to bring charges. Prosecutors turned to conspiracy law as another option in the wake of a 2010 mining
explosion at the Upper Big Branch Mine in West Virginia that left 29 coal miners dead. After getting the company to pay more than $200 million in fines that included investments in safety improvements, the Department of Justice also pursued
criminal charges against the CEO of the coal company, Donald L. Blankenship. Their theory was that he was part of a conspiracy to ignore safety standards that threatened the company’s profits. Although jurors acquitted him of more serious
charges related to the theory, he was convicted of a misdemeanor and sentenced to a year in prison. Prosecutors lauded the result for being the first time a high-level executive faced prison time for workplace safety violations. Alan Blinder, Mine
Chief Is Sentenced in Conspiracy over Safety, N.Y. Times, Apr. 7, 2016, at A12. Is the use of conspiracy laws likely to be a fruitful avenue in other cases, or will the need to show an agreement to violate the law likely be a difficult task in most cases?
Similarly, even if an agreement could be established, would it be hard for prosecutors in most cases to show that corporate officers had the intent to violate the law because they had a stake in the venture? Assuming this is a viable threat in other
cases, is the one-year sentence likely to act as a sufficient deterrent? Or should a greater emphasis instead be placed on improving the underlying regulatory framework for industries? For a view that more robust regulatory efforts should be the
focus, see Chase Madar, The Real Crime Is What's Not Done, N.Y. Times, Aug. 24, 2016, at A19. For an argument that criminal law will remain important even with more robust civil regulations, see Robert H. Tillman & Henry N. Pontell, Corporate
Fraud, Criminal Time, N.Y. Times, June 29, 2016, at A25.

1 See the material on Causation in Chapter 6, pp. 567-601 supra. — EDS.

'5, We did not deal in these cases, nor do we here, with defendants who incidentally facilitate a criminal venture rather than actively participate int. A hypothetical case is the owner of a gun store who sells a firearm to a criminal, knowing but net caring how the gun will be used. We express no view
about what sort of facts, if any, would suttice to show that such a third party has the intent necessary to be convicted of alding and abetting.

1, Several jurisdictions have followed New York's lead. Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. tt. 13, §13-1004 (2020); Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. §506,080 (2020); N.D. Cent. Code §12.1-06-02 (2019).

2, Section 115.08 makes such conduct first-degree criminal faciltation when the ald is rendered to someone under 16 years of age and subjects It to punishment as a class B felony (maximum 25 years’ imprisonment).

3, See htts:/www justice qov/opa/prvirginia-man-sentenced-more-1 1-years-providing-material-supporiil

4,1n addition, §1957 applies to a slightly different category of transactions (those involving banks and other financial institutions rather than, as in the case of §1956, transactions by cash or check), and §1957 carries a lower maximum sentence, ten years rather than the 20-year maximum available
under §1956.

2, Henceforth | refer to this principle as the “foreseeable consequence” doctrine because that isthe terminology used in Croy. | am concerned, however, about how a principle which was originally phrased in terms of “probable and natural consequences” was slightly modified to become the
“natural and reasonable consequences” and has now been saddled with a moniker traditionally associated with theories of expanding tor liability. If we were to retum to strict interpretation of the “natural and probable” standard, | would argue that liability could not be imposed here on Luparello because in
no sense can it be said that Mark Martin's death was the “probable” result of a conspiracy to assault him in order to obtain information.

5, See, e.g. Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann, ch. 500, §502.020(1)(b) (2020); Nu. Stat. Ann. §2C:2-6(c)()(b) (2020); 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. Ann. §306(6)(1)(l) (2020); Tex. Penal Code Ann. §7.02 (2019)

‘The justification referred to is that of law enforcement representatives who sometimes may break the law (not involving personal violence) in the course of enforcing It against others; for example, according to the New York Penal Law §35.05 (2020), when the conduct “is performed by a public
servant in the reasonable exercise of his official powers, duties or functions.” — EDs.

5. Notably, this was not a case in which the court found that the owner's consent to Harrington's taking vitiated the unlawfulness of his acts. Like the majority today, the court in Neely concluded that Harrington had exceeded his rightful authority in taking and butchering the cattle. 300 P. at 565.
Nonetheless, the court concluded that Harrington's acts, as a feigned accomplice, could net be imputed to Neely.

6, Criminal Law: The General Part 391 (2d ed. 1961).

7. Textbook on Criminal Law 374 (2d ed. 1983).

8, Sanford H. Kadish, Blame and Punishment 1834 (1987).

{9 Stephen J. Schulhofer, Rethinking Mandatory Minimums, 28 Wake Forest L. Rev. 199 (1993); Charles Doyle, Cong. Research Serv., RL32040, Federal Mandatory Minimums Sentencing Statutes 9 (2013), https://www fas.ora/sqp/crs/miso/FL32040,pdf. See also p. 124 supra, p. 1127 infra.

6... . Daniel was not indicted as an alder or abetter (see Criminal Code, §332, 18 U.S.C.A. 550), nor was his case submitted to the jury on that theory.

a, NJ. Stat. §2C:2-6() provides:

». A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another person when:

(8) He is an accomplice of such other person in the commission of an offense; or
(4) He is engaged in a conspiracy with such other person. — EDs.

110, National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, Criminal Conspiracy: Position Paper and Proposals for Reform (Apr. 19, 2018).

25. The imposition of Pinkerton liability for such crimes is not wholly unprecedented. See, e.g., Government of Virgin Islands v. Dowling, 633 F.2d 660, 666 (Sd Cir.) (1980) (conspiracy to commit bank robbery; substantive crime of assault with deadly weapons against police officers, committed
during escape attempt); Park v. Hutt, 506 F.2d 849, 859 (Sth Cir.) (1976) (liquor conspiracy; substantive crime of frst degree murder of local district attomey, committed in attempt to stop investigation of illegal iquor sales). In each of the aforementioned cases, however, vicarious liabilty was Imposed only on
“major” participants in the conspiracy.

At trial in the instant case, the government's attorney argued that Pinkerton liability for Agent Rios’s murder properly could be imposed on all of the conspirators, and expressed the view that prosecutorial discretion would protect truly
“minor” participants, such as appellants Rios and Raymond, from liability for the far more serious crimes committed by their coconspirators. We do not find this argument persuasive. In our view, the liability of such “minor” participants must rest
on a more substantial foundation than the mere whim of the prosecutor.

27. Although our decision today extends the Pinkerton doctrine to cases involving reasonably foreseeable but originally unintended substantive crimes, we emphasize that we do so only within narrow confines. Our holding is limited to conspirators who played more than a “minor” role in the
conspiracy, or who had actual knowledge of at least some of the circumstances and events culminating in the reasonably foreseeable but originally unintended substantive crime.

‘a, Under the Sherman Act, a conspiracy to fix prices carries both civil and criminal penatties. Although this was a civil suit in which the government sought injunctive relief, the alleged agreement, if proved beyond a reasonable doubt in a criminal prosecution, would subject the conspirators to
heavy fines and imprisonment for up to ten years. The potential fines can be up to $100 million for a corporate defendant and up to $1 million for an individual defendant. — EDs.

1. In the companion case the court upheld lablity. The facts were similar, but the answering service operator actively participated in the business of prostitution by making arrangements for the sharing of customers between two supposed prostitutes who used the service. — EDs.

b. In Falcone, Judge Learned Hand wrote the opinion and stated: “[l]n prosecutions for conspiracy or abetting, [ijt is not enough that [a defendant] does not [forgo] a normally lawful activity, of the fruits of which he knows that others will make an unlawful use; he must in some sense promote their
venture himself, make it his own, have a stake in its outcome.” — EDs.

c. The court in Direct Sales also emphasized the quantity discounts the defendant offered to the physician. — Eps.

2. Thus, in the oft-cited Bruno case, although its clear enough that “quoad the smugglers, there was but one conspiracy . ..,"it is not so clear why the New York and Texas groups of retailers were notin a “spoke” relation with the smugglers and the middleman, so that there would be two con-
spiracies unless the evidence permitted the inference that each group of retailers must have known the operation to be so large as to require the other as an outlet.

4, A purpose to benefit the corporation is necessary to bring the agent's acts within the scope of his employment. Standard Oil Co. v. United States, 307 F.2d 120, 128-129 (Sth Cir. 1962).

111, Press Release, Department of Justice, 8P Exploration and Production Inc. Agrees to Plead Guilty to Felony Manslaughter, Environmental Crimes and Obstruction of Congress Surrounding Deepwater Horizon Incident, Nov. 15, 2072, htts://cfpub.epa,qov/compliance/eriminal_prosecution/
index.ctm?action=S&prosecution summary id=2468,

112, Department of Justice, U.S. and Five Gulf States Reach Historic Settlement with BP to Resolve Civil Lawsuit over Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill, Oct. 5, 2016, https://www justice gov/opa/pr/us-and-tive-qulf-states-reach-historic-settlement-bp-resolve-clvi-lawsult-over-deepwater

113, Justice Department Guidance on Prosecutions of Corporations, 66 Crim. L. Rep. 189, 190 (Dec. 6, 1996).

“14, Memorandum from Larry D. Thompson, Deputy Attomey General, to Heads of Department Components on Principles of Federal Prosecution of Business Organizations 9 (Jan. 20, 2003)

115, Attomey-Client Privilege Protection Act of 2006, S. 30, 109th Cong. (2006). The bill was reintroduced in subsequent sessions but did net become law.

16. US. Dept. of Justice, Memorandum from Mark Fillp, Deputy Attomey General, to Heads of Department Components and United States Attomeys, Principles of Federal Prosecution of Business Organizations, Aug. 28, 2008, hitp://wwnw,justice.qov/dag/readingroom/dag-memo-05262008,paf.

17. US Department of Justice, Memorandum from Sally Quilian Yates, Deputy Attorney General, o Heads of Department Components and United States Attomeys 2, Sept. 9, 2075, hitps://www justice, qov/dag/fle/769036/download,

18. Id. at 1-2.

19. During the period from 2000 to July 2018, the federal government entered into 495 DPAs or NPAs with corporations. Gustavo A. Jimenez, Note, Corporate Criminal Liability: Toward a Compliance-Oriented Approach, 26 Ind. J. Global Legal Stud. 353, 366 (2019).

20. Zach Carter, Elizabeth Warren Hammers the Endless Failures of Wall Street Regulators, The Huffington Post, Apr. 15, 2015, http://www. huffingtonpost.com/2015/04/15/elizabeth-warren-wall-street_n_7073040.ntmi,

21, Ben Protess & Jessica Silver-Greenberg, HSBC to Pay $1.92 Billion to Settle Charges of Money Laundering, N.Y. Times, Dec. 10, 2012.

‘3. That sald, | reject the State's arguments to the extent they suggest that any manager who supervises subordinate employees could be deemed a HMA. | believe this interpretation could extend corporate criminal liability far beyond our legislature's intent.

22. Lynn Paramore, HSBC: Too Big to Jail, Salon, Dec. 13, 2012, http://www.salon.com/2012/12/13/sbe too_big to jail’.

6. The letter, dated January 27, 1972, included the following:

‘We note with much concer that the old and new warehouse areas used for food storage were actively and extensively inhabited by live rodents. Of even more concern was the observation that such reprehensible conditions obviously existed for a prolonged period of time without any
detection, or were completely ignored. ...

We trust this letter will serve to direct your attention to the seriousness of the problem and formally advise you of the urgent need to initiate whatever measures are necessaty to prevent recurrence and ensure compliance with the law.

7. The bylaw provided in pertinent part:
‘The Chairman of the board of directors or the president shall be the chief executive officer of the company as the board of directors may from time to time determine. He shall, subject to the board of directors, have general and active supervision of the affairs, business, offices and
employees of the company...

He shall, rom time to time, in his discretion or at the order of the board, report the operations and affairs of the company. He shall also perform such other duties and have such other powers as may be assigned to him from time to time by the board of directors.

9. [The jury instructions stated as follows:
-- “The main issue for your determination is ... whether the Defendant held a position of authority and responsibility in the business of Acme Markets. ..

“The statute makes individuals, as well as corporations, liable for violations. An individual is lable if itis clear, beyond a reasonable doubt, that . .. the individual had a responsible relation to the situation, even though he may not have participated personally.

“The individual is or could be liable under the statute, even if he did not consciously do wrong. However, the fact that the Defendant is [president] and is a chief executive officer of the Acme Markets does not require a finding of guilt. Though, he need not have personally
participated in the situation, he must have had a responsible relationship to the issue. The issue Is, in this case, whether the Defendant, John R. Park, by virtue of his position in the company, had a posttion of authority and responsibility in the situation out of which these charges arose.”]
10. Sections 303(a) and (b) of the Act, 21 U.S.C. §§333(a) and (b), provide:

(@) Any person who violates a provision of section 331 of this title shall be imprisoned for not more than one year or fined not more than $1,000, or both. ...
1a. For a discussion of these issues, see pp. 329-349 supra. — EDS.
p. 802
