p. 1095
CHAPTER 10
IMPOSING PUNISHMENT

Our focus thus far has been on criminal liability: what constitutes a crime and what defenses are available. But crucial questions remain after a finding of guilt. This chapter takes up the questions that dominate the sentencing phase. We
begin by considering what constitutes punishment. We then tum to the dominant models of sentencing in non-capital cases and the constitutional limits on non-capital punishment. Finally, we consider the death penalty.
A. WHAT IS PUNISHMENT?

The current principal forms of criminal punishment in America consist of fines, probation, imprisonment, and, in especially serious cases, the death penalty. Less obviously, the conviction itself is a form of punishment, carrying with it a
social stigma and a host of collateral consequences, including an impediment to future employment, a risk of enhanced punishment in the event of a future offense, as well as possible loss of voting rights, public housing access, and deportation.
See Michael Pinard, Freedom in Decline: Reflections and Perspectives on Reentry and Collateral Consequences, 100 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1213 (2010). A state-by-state listing of collateral consequences of conviction can be found at the Col-
lateral Consequences Resource Center website, http://ccresourcecenter.org/resources-2/state-specific-resources/.

Courts have also developed “intermediate sanctions” that are less harsh than imprisonment but more severe than probation. These include weeks or months of home detention, mandated community service, or “intensive-supervision”
probation (which often includes mandatory counseling or drug treatment).

Imprisonment, however, remains the quintessential criminal punishment in America, which leads the world in incarceration rates. We thus begin our consideration of punishment with a closer look at imprisonment in America. We then
consider other kinds of punishment.

1. Imprisonment

Though not inflicted in every case, imprisonment is almost always an option that the judge has discretion to impose. And even when not imposed, imprisonment remains in the background as a possible consequence of any failure to
meet

p. 1095
p. 1096

conditions of a fine, probation, or intermediate sanction. Those calling for prison abolition point to the deplorable conditions in these facilities to buttress their claims that these institutions have no place in society. See, e.g., Mariame Kaba, Take No
Prisoners, Vice (Oct. 5, 2015). The material that follows takes a close look at what imprisonment entails in America today.
Ruth Delaney, Sam Subramanian, Alison Shames & Nicholas Turner
Reimagining Prison
Vera Institute of Justice (2018)

Life in America’s prisons is dismal, and the brunt of these dismal conditions falls overwhelmingly on people of color and those who are socially and economically disadvantaged, the result of their systematic and historic economic and
social exclusion from mainstream — predominantly white — American society. . . .

The prison experience in America today is harsh, restrictive, and dehumanizing. No matter what the underlying purpose for imprisonment — retribution, incapacitation, and/or deterrence . . . prison by its very nature is intended to
remove people from society and subject them to state control. That control is all-encompassing — the prison dictates the size, look, and feel of a person’s space; the necessities a person can obtain (such as food, clothing, and medical care); and
the activities a person can participate in, be they social, work, or educational. In reinforcing state control, prison policies and practices are designed to diminish the self and weaken the individual. . . .

By their very design and aesthetics, the physical buildings and layout of American prisons cultivate feelings of institutionalization, immobilization, and lack of control among the people who live there. A typical cell is a small cement and
brick box — the size of a typical parking space — with a metal or cement bed (sometimes a bunk bed) covered with a thin mattress, an open metal sink and toilet, perhaps a fixed metal desk, and a small window that is often sealed shut. . .. Be-
cause the spaces are designed to maximize control of people’s movement, they are configured in highly segmented and rigid ways — with clearly delineated boundaries that are reinforced through gates, locks, bars, and Plexiglas or Lexan. . .

As prison life has become more restricted and punitive, it has simultaneously become more monotonous. Higher levels of security are generally the most restrictive, with more closely supervised movement, less time outside of cells,
fewer options for leisure or programming, and more rigorously controlled rules regarding personal property. However, no matter where someone is placed — whether a minimum-, medium-, or maximum-security facility — opportunities for paid
work, as well as rehabilitative, vocational, and postsecondary programming, have declined across the board — although opportunities for postsecondary education have been increasing in certain jurisdictions. . . .

Another reality of the prison experience is loneliness. . . . Siting prisons in rural areas — especially when coupled with restrictive visitation and furlough policies — has made it all the more difficult for people in prison to sustain personal
relationships with their families and friends. . . .

p. 1096
p. 1097

The prison experience in America not only crushes one’s individual identity and robs one of dignity; it also produces long-term effects — including social and psychological adaptations to prison conditions and the lasting effects of

trauma resulting from incarceration.

Richard A. Wright

Prisons: Prisoners, Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice
1182 (J. Dressler ed., 2d ed. 2002)"

Average citizens stereotype prisons as either hell-holes filled with every imaginable evil, or country clubs (complete with swimming pools and golf courses) where inmates are sent to work on their tans. Neither of these stereotypes
captures the central realities of incarceration for inmates: crushing routine and relentless boredom. . . .

The federal and most state correctional systems include an impressive array of institutions with different security level designations. . . . While life in maximum security prisons is usually monotonous and boring, the tedium is sometimes
broken by outbursts of violence. Threats, assaults, and killings are fairly commonplace in these institutions. . . . The threat of violence is real enough in maximum security prisons to produce a constant undercurrent of tension, fear, and wariness
among inmates and staff; smarter prisoners in these institutions make a habit of looking over their shoulders or standing with their backs to walls whenever they venture outside their cells. A more relaxed atmosphere prevails in most medium and
minimum security prisons. Violence is much less common. .. .

A] number of factors since the 1970s have combined to increase the pains of imprisonment experienced by most inmates. . . . The deteriorating conditions of confinement, longer prison sentences, and overcrowding together have
increased the suffering that inmates experience in prison. Levels of violence, fear, and hopelessness rise in crowded cellblocks that are saturated with drugs and overrun by gang bangers. This has led to the emergence of new, indigenous prison
gangs organized for self-defense and for buying and sharing drugs. [A] study of men’s prisons in California found that for every gang imported into prison from the streets, another gang forms inside for protection. Some of these new prison gangs
will be exported into the free world once their members are paroled. . ..

Some commentators already sense the growing unrest and despair in the cellblocks: Victor Hassine compares the modem prison to a “runaway train” filled with prisoners only concerned about “how they are going to survive this
madness.”

NOTES ON PRISON CONDITIONS
1. General violence and abuse. Reliable, up-to-date information about violence in jails and prisons is scarce. A 2003 report by the Bureau of Justice Statistics! revealed that as of midyear 2000, out of some 1.3 million people in
correctional
p. 1097
p. 1098
facilities (excluding jails and other local and regional facilities) there were about 34,000 assaults between incarcerated people and 18,000 assaults on staff. Though the number of assaults in both categories increased by about 30 percent from five
years earlier, the rate per thousand remained roughly stable because the total incarcerated population had increased by a comparable amount. Data on excessive violence by correctional officers are not provided by the Bureau, but a study from
2005 found that approximately 20 percent of incarcerated men reported being physically assaulted either by another incarcerated person or by corrections staff.2 As for homicide victimization rates, they dipped sharply from 1960 (54 per 100,000)
to 2008 (3 per 100,000), but rose to 8 per 100,000 in 2016, a rate significantly higher than homicide victimization rates for the population at large.°

However, there is widespread belief that the official statistics vastly underestimate the amount of prison violence. An overview of national conditions in the 2006 report of a blue-ribbon commission notes:

The majority of prisons and many jails hold more people than they can deal with safely and effectively, creating a degree of disorder and tension almost certain to erupt into violence. . . . In-depth studies suggest that actual

levels of violence among prisoners are at least five times higher than what even the best administrative records capture. . .. Equally troubling, we have no national measures of non-lethal violence perpetrated by staff against

prisoners, despite widespread agreement that excessive use of force happens.

This first-person account, Angel E. Sanchez, In Spite of Prison, 132 Harv. L. Rev. 1650, 1664-1665 (2019), highlights that violence and abuse at the hands of correctional officers can take both physical and non-physical form:

Each of the nine prisons that | went to over twelve years was filled with physical and psychological violence. Within my first few weeks in prison I was assaulted, not by a prisoner, but by a guard for talking back to him... .

Nonetheless, some of my most painful moments in prison — which | am still too ashamed to recount — came from psychological humiliation at the hands of the guards, particularly early in my sentence when | was not coura-

geous enough to stand up to them or late in my sentence when | was too afraid of compromising my release date.

2. Sexual violence. Accurate estimates of the incidence of sexual assault in prisons are similarly difficult to obtain, though the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA), 42 U.S.C.A. §15601, sought to improve our knowledge by
requiring
p. 1098
p. 1099
the Department of Justice to collect data on sexual victimization in the country's prisons and jails. In 2014, the Department released data finding that, in 2011-2012, an estimated 4.0 percent of people incarcerated in state and federal prisons and
3.2 percent of people incarcerated in jail reported experiencing one or more incidents of sexual victimization by facility staff or by another incarcerated person in the past 12 months or since admission to the facility. Additional data released by the
Bureau of Justice Statistics in 2018 indicated that there were more than 24,000 allegations of sexual victimization in prisons, jails, and other correctional facilities during the year 2015, nearly triple the number recorded in 2011.5 Only 8 percent of
these allegations were substantiated through completed investigations (1,473), but this represented a 63 percent increase from the 902 substantiated allegations in 2011.

Victimization rates are significantly higher for females than males, with 8.5 percent of women experiencing sexual abuse while incarcerated.” Victimization rates are much higher for transgender people who are incarcerated, with 35
percent of those in prisons and 34 percent held in jails experiencing at least one incident of sexual victimization in 2013.° Of the total number of substantiated incidents of sexual victimization, 52 percent involved incarcerated people as perpetra-
tors and 48 percent involved staff.2

3. Crowding. One characteristic of American prisons that is important, both as a cause of prison violence and as a serious problem in its own right, is pervasive overcrowding. While experts believe that efficient prison management
requires prisons to operate significantly below their full capacity levels, 25 states had prisons at or above capacity in 2018, and the federal prison system was operating at 112 percent of its design capacity.12

The consequences of overcrowding include poor health care, interference with rehabilitative and educational services (which are often minimal in any event), increased idleness, constant noise, and oppressive living arrangements, all
of which magnify interpersonal conflict among prisoners and create even greater impetus for violence. See Sharon Dolovich, Cruelty, Prison Conditions, and the Eighth Amendment, 84 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 881, 886-889 (2009). The mental health conse-
quences, in turn, also aggravate the likelihood of recidivism when prisoners are released. See Alan Elsner, Gates of Injustice: The Crisis in America’s Prisons (2d ed. 2006). One prison psychiatrist, quoted in Dolovich, supra, at 887 n.20, observes:

p. 1099
p. 1100

In crowded, noisy, unhygienic environments, human beings tend to treat each other terribly. . . . There are constant lines to use the toilets and phones, and altercations erupt when one irritable prisoner thinks another has

been on the phone too long. There are rows of bunks blocking the view, so beatings and rapes can go on in one part of the dorm while officers sit at their desks in another area. The noise level is so loud that muffled screams

cannot be heard. [I]s it any wonder that research clearly links prison crowding with increased rates of violence, psychiatric breakdowns, rapes, and suicides?

Courts have found overcrowded prison conditions in some states to constitute cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment.1! The California prison system, one of the nation’s largest and most egregiously
overcrowded, operated for over a decade at more than double its design capacity. In Brown v. Plata, 563 U.S. 493 (2011), the Supreme Court upheld a district court order requiring the state, in the absence of new prison construction or out-of-state
transfers, to release up to 46,000 people, in order to reduce its prison population to 137.5 percent of design capacity. The Court noted (id. at 502-503):

Prisoners are crammed into spaces neither designed nor intended to house inmates. As many as 200 prisoners may live in a gymnasium, monitored by as few as two or three correctional officers. As many as 54 prisoners

may share a single toilet... . The consequences of overcrowding [include] a suicide rate approaching an average of one per week. . . . Because of a shortage of treatment beds, suicidal inmates may be held for prolonged pe-

riods [of up to 24 hours or more] in telephone-booth sized cages without toilets.

California met the Court's mandated reductions largely by transferring people in state prisons to county jails, a strategy that seems to have overburdened and ultimately increased violence in county jails.12

More recently, in 2019, the U.S. Department of Justice determined there was reasonable cause to believe that prison conditions in Alabama violated the Eighth Amendment by failing to protect incarcerated people from violence and
sexual abuse.|° The Justice Department submitted a disturbing report to the governor, noting that violence in the state's prisons was exacerbated by staffing deficiencies and overcrowding:

p. 1100
p.1101

Prisoner-on-prisoner homicide and sexual abuse is common. Prisoners who are seriously injured or stabbed must find their way to security staff elsewhere in the facility or bang on the door of the dormitory to gain the

attention of correctional officers. Prisoners have been tied up for days by other prisoners while unnoticed by security staff. Prisoners are often found in unauthorized areas. Some prisoners sleep in dormitories to which they

are not assigned in order to escape violence. Prisoners are being extorted by other prisoners without appropriate intervention of management. Contraband is rampant. The totality of these conditions pose a substantial risk

of serious harm both to prisoners and correctional officers.

4, Suicide. Incarceration in the United States is also linked with higher than average suicide rates. From 2006 to 2016, suicide was the leading cause of death in local jails each year, accounting for 31 percent of all jail deaths in 2016, at
arate of 46 suicides per 100,000.15 Corrections officers also have high suicide rates — twice the rate of police officers and the general population.1°

5. The physical location and environment. Many prisons are located in remote areas far away from population centers. This makes visitation difficult, which in turn undermines the ability of people incarcerated to maintain connec-
tions with loved ones. The interior design of the prison also makes it more difficult for incarcerated people to forge connections with others and prepare for their reentry to free society.

Shon Hopwood explains:

Prisons create social isolation by taking people from their communities and placing them behind razor wire, in locked cages. Through strict authoritarianism, rules, and control, prisons lessen personal autonomy and increase

institutional dependence. This ensures that people learn to rely upon the free room and board only a prison can offer, thus rendering them less able to cope with economic demands upon release.17

6. Imprisonment and the purposes of punishment. Given the reality of incarceration in America, does it serve the purposes of punishment? Incarceration most obviously serves the utilitarian function of incapacitation, but does it
further public safety overall? More than 95 percent of the people incarcerated are released, and some studies show that, after a certain point, longer prison sentences make people more likely to commit crimes than if they had been given a shorter
term. The deplorable conditions inside help explain that, as the longer someone stays in such an environment, the harder it is to adjust upon reentry. Little effort is made toward rehabilitation, with only a small fraction of the prison population re-
ceiving needed

p.1101
p. 1102
mental health and substance abuse treatment or vocational training for employment after prison.

What about retributive goals? Consider whether incarceration is proportionate to moral fault given the reality of prison conditions. Should judges consider conditions of confinement as well as sentence length in determining someone's
punishment? For affirmative arguments, see Lindsey Webb, Slave Narratives and the Sentencing Court, 42 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 125 (2018); Lisa Kerr, How the Prison Is a Black Box in Punishment Theory, 69 U. Toronto L.J. 85 (2019).
What are some reasons judges might not consider prison conditions in deciding on a sentence?

7. Incarceration without imprisonment. Incarceration that occurs as a criminal punishment cannot be imposed until certain due process safeguards are satisfied. Other forms of liberty curtailment that look like incarceration but are
not considered criminal “punishment” are subject to much less stringent constitutional safeguards. This important territory just outside the boundaries of criminal law is examined in the Note that follows.

NOTE ON CIVIL SANCTIONS

Some forms of involuntary confinement are classified as “civil” measures rather than criminal punishments. Civil commitment of the mentally ill is a prominent example. The distinction between civil and criminal measures (or between

“regulation” and “punishment”) has enormous practical importance. Before imposing “punishment,” the government must comply with stringent safeguards, including the requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt. And the duration of crimi-

nal punishment is limited by the perceived imperative (moral, statutory, and constitutional) of proportionality to an offender's fault. In a civil proceeding, in contrast, the burden of proof is typically lower, many other safeguards of criminal procedure
do not apply, and the defendant may face loss of liberty for an indefinite period, potentially for life.

What features make a proceeding civil rather than criminal? Government cannot escape the usual criminal law restrictions simply by attaching the “civil” label to a sanction that is punitive in its purpose or effect. To determine whether a
nominally civil measure is legally deemed to be punishment (and thus whether criminal law safeguards apply), courts must consider!®

[whether the sanction involves an affirmative disability or restraint, whether it has historically been regarded as a punishment, whether it comes into play only on a finding of scienter, whether its operation will promote the

traditional aims of punishment — retribution and deterrence, whether the behavior to which it applies is already a crime, whether an alternative purpose to which it may rationally be connected is assignable for it, and whether

it appears excessive in relation to the alternative purpose assigned.

Involuntary commitment of the mentally ill, for the protection of themselves or others, is universally considered a civil proceeding. People committed have a right to treatment, and they must be released when they are no longer mentally
ill

p. 1102
p. 1103
or dangerous. Nonetheless, such a person may, if not cured, be confined for life. See p. 946 supra.

Other restrictions on liberty are more difficult to classify. In the early 1990s, many states enacted laws that carry an especially stigmatizing label — sexually violent predator (SVP) laws — in order to permit long-term confinement of
people convicted of a sexual offense who finish serving their criminal sentences.12 The typical SVP law permits indefinite commitment on the basis of a finding that a person has a “mental abnormality” or “personality disorder” and is “likely to
engage in predatory acts of sexual violence.” However, some empirical evidence suggests that people labeled as SVPs may have a relatively low rate of sex-crime recidivism, with one study finding that only 6.5 percent of people labeled as SVPs
were arrested for a new sex crime within 4.8 years of release.2° Is this kind of empirical evidence likely to change legislative practices in this area, or are laws like these based on political forces that might not be influenced by data on recidivism
rates? If SVP laws are not tied to public safety risk, does that suggest they are actually punitive and therefore cannot operate with the reduced safeguards applicable in “civil” proceedings?

Can perpetrators of crimes be committed under such a law, after they have served their sentences, without violating the rule against double jeopardy? Can such a law be applied retroactively to a person whose sex offense was commit-
ted before the law was enacted? Can a person be adjudicated an SVP and committed indefinitely, without proof beyond a reasonable doubt that future sexual misconduct is “likely”? If the SVP proceeding is properly classified as civil, the answer
to all these questions is yes. In Kansas v. Hendricks, 521 U.S. 346 (1997), the Supreme Court upheld the civil classification of one such law. The Court emphasized that under the Kansas regime, people subject to the law are not subject to punitive
conditions of confinement and are entitled to immediate release whenever it is determined that they are no longer dangerous. Four dissenting justices argued that the Kansas regime should nonetheless be considered criminal because treatable
people locked up pursuant to the law had been afforded little or no treatment and because the committing authorities were not required to consider using less restrictive means of social protection, short of incarceration. Following the lead of the
Hendricks majority, many state courts have upheld schemes for indefinite confinement of persons designated as SVPs, even when the procedures fall short of those required in criminal prosecutions and do not require proof beyond a reasonable
doubt. See, e.g., In re Detention of Belcher, 189 Wash. 2d 280 (2017). Critics contend that courts are “comfortable with pretextually characterizing what are clearly criminal penalties and conditions of confinement as civil so as to save them from
constitutional challenge.” Michael L. Perlin et al., “On Desolation Row”: The Blurring of the Borders

p. 1103

p. 1104
Between Civil and Criminal Mental Disability Law, and What It Means to Alll of Us, 24 Tex. J. C.L. & C.R. 59 (2018). Why might courts accept the government's characterization of these laws as civil given the constitutional rights at stake? If courts
were to strike down these laws, would states respond by increasing the punishments for the underlying sex offenses to achieve the same ends?

Similar issues arise under laws that require individuals convicted of a sexual offense to register with local police upon their release from prison. Such laws, modeled on the “Megan’s Law” first enacted in New Jersey, typically require
the police to make the registration lists publicly available, and many of these regimes also require police to proactively notify schools, day care centers, and local residents of the individual’s presence in the community. If such laws are deemed to
be “civil” measures, criminal law safeguards do not apply. In Smith v. Doe, 538 U.S. 84, 92 (2003), the Supreme Court held that sex-offense registration regimes are not necessarily punitive and that the Alaska registration law was not punitive as a
matter of federal constitutional law. But soon thereafter, the Alaska Supreme Court held that Alaska’s registration scheme was punitive under the state constitution. Doe v. State, 189 P.3d 999 (Alaska 2008). In New Jersey, Megan’s Law was upheld
as a civil measure only after the state supreme court required modifications to restrict the degree of public disclosure depending on whether the ex-offender was found to pose a low, medium, or high risk of re-offending. See E.B. v. Verniero, 119
F.3d 107 (3d Cir. 1997). As of 2021, courts in at least ten states had similarly held that the registration/notification regimes of their particular states are punitive, under either federal or state constitutional standards, and therefore cannot be applied
retroactively.2! The issues are explored in depth in Wayne A. Logan, Challenging the Punitiveness of “New Generation” SORN Laws, 21 New Crim. L. Rev. 426 (2018). Are these recent decisions finding these laws to constitute punishment more re-
alistic appraisals of these laws’ effects, or do they unduly interfere with legislative judgments about how to keep track of individuals who have committed offenses that are of particular concern to the public?

2. Kinds of Punishment
The dominant punishment in America is incarceration, along with probation, and monetary penalties in the form of fines and restitution. But there are other options, as explored in the next case.
United States v. Gementera
United States Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit
379 F.3d 596 (2004)
O’ScANNLAIN, Circuit Judge: . . . Shawn Gementera pilfered letters from several mailboxes along San Francisco’s Fulton Street on May 21, 2001. . . . After
p. 1104
p. 1105
indictment, Gementera entered a plea agreement pursuant to which he pled guilty to mail theft.

The offense was not Gementera’s first encounter with the law. Though only twenty-four years old at the time, Gementera’s criminal history was lengthy for a man of his relative youth, and it was growing steadily more serious. At age
nineteen, he was convicted of misdemeanor criminal mischief. He was twice convicted at age twenty of driving with a suspended license. At age twenty-two, a domestic dispute led to convictions for driving with a suspended license and for failing
to provide proof of financial responsibility. By twenty-four, the conviction was misdemeanor battery. Other arrests and citations listed in the Presentence Investigation Report included possession of drug paraphernalia, additional driving offenses
(most of which involved driving on a license suspended for his failure to take chemical tests), and, soon after his twenty-fifth birthday, taking a vehicle without the owner's consent.

... The U.S. Sentencing Guidelines range was two to eight months incarceration; Judge Walker sentenced Gementera to the lower bound of the range, imposing two months incarceration and three years supervised release. He also
imposed conditions of supervised release. One such condition required Gementera to “perform 100 hours of community service,” to consist of “standing in front of a postal facility in the city and county of San Francisco with a sandwich board
which in large letters declares: ‘I stole mail. This is my punishment.’” Gementera later filed a motion to correct the sentence by removing the sandwich board condition. Judge Walker modified the sentence after inviting both parties to present “an
alternative form or forms of public service that would better comport with the aims of the court.” In lieu of the 100-hour signboard requirement, the district court imposed a four-part special condition in its stead. Three new terms, proposed jointly
by counsel, mandated that the defendant observe postal patrons visiting the “lost or missing mail” window, write letters of apology to any identifiable victims of his crime, and deliver several lectures at a local school. It also included a scaled-down
version of the signboard requirement:

The defendant shall perform 1 day of 8 total hours of community service during which time he shall either () wear a two-sided sandwich board-style sign or (i) carry a large two-sided sign stating, “I stole mail; this is my
punishment,” in front of a San Francisco postal facility identified by the probation officer. For the safety of defendant and general public, the postal facility designated shall be one that employs one or more security guards.
Upon showing by defendant that this condition would likely impose upon defendant psychological harm or effect or result in unwarranted risk of harm to defendant, the public or postal employees, the probation officer may
withdraw or modify this condition or apply to the court to withdraw or modify this condition.
We first address Gementera’s argument that the eight-hour sandwich board condition violates the Sentencing Reform Act. See 18 U.S.C. §3583(d). The Sentencing Reform Act affords district courts broad discretion in fashioning appropriate
conditions of supervised release, while mandating that such conditions serve legitimate objectives. In addition to [specified conditions] the statute explicitly authorizes the court to impose “any other condition it considers to be appropriate.” Such
special conditions, however, [must be] “reasonably related” to “the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant.” See 18 U.S.C.
p. 1105
p. 1106
§3553(a)(1). Moreover, it must be both “reasonably related” to and “involve no greater deprivation of liberty than is reasonably necessary” to “afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct,” “protect the public from further crimes of the defen-
dant,” and “provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other correctional treatment in the most effective manner.” Accordingly, the three legitimate statutory purposes of deterrence, protection of the
public, and rehabilitation frame our analysis. . . .
Gementera first urges that the condition was imposed for an impermissible purpose of humiliation. See 18 U.S.C. §3553(a). He points to certain remarks of the district court at the first sentencing hearing. . . .
[HJe needs to understand the disapproval that society has for this kind of conduct, and that’s the idea behind the humiliation. And it should be humiliation of having to stand and be labeled in front of people coming and going
from a post office as somebody who has stolen the mail.
According to Gementera, these remarks, among others, indicate that the district court viewed humiliation as an end in itself and the condition’s purpose. Reading the record in context, however, we cannot but conclude that the district
court's stated rationale aligned with permissible statutory objectives. . ..
The court expressed particular concern that the defendant did not fully understand the gravity of his offense. Mail theft is an anonymous crime and, by “bring[ing] home to defendant that his conduct has palpable significance to real
people within his community,” the court aimed to break the defendant of the illusion that his theft was victimless or not serious. In short, it explained:
While humiliation may well be — indeed likely will be — a feature of defendant's experience in standing before a post office with such a sign, the humiliation or shame he experiences should serve the salutary purpose of
bringing defendant in close touch with the real significance of the crime he has acknowledged committing. Such an experience should have a specific rehabilitative effect on defendant that could not be accomplished by
other means, certainly not by a more extended term of imprisonment. Moreover, “[iIt will also have a deterrent effect on both this defendant and others who might not otherwise have been made aware of the real legal con-
sequences of engaging in mail theft.”
Read in its entirety, the record unambiguously establishes that the district court imposed the condition for the stated and legitimate statutory purpose of rehabilitation and, to a lesser extent, for general deterrence and for the protection
of the public. ...
Assuming the court articulated a legitimate purpose, Gementera asserts . . . that humiliation or so-called “shaming” conditions are not “reasonably related” to rehabilitation. . ..
Reflecting upon the defendant's criminal history, the court expressed concern that he did not fully understand the consequences of his continued criminality, and had not truly accepted responsibility. .. .
[M)he district court concluded that public acknowledgment of one’s offense — beyond the formal yet sterile plea in a cloistered courtroom — was necessary to his rehabilitation.
p. 1106

p.1107

Itis true, of course, that much uncertainty exists as to how rehabilitation is best accomplished. Were that picture clearer, our criminal justice system would be vastly different, and substantially improved. By one estimate, two-thirds of
the 640,000 state and federal inmates who will be released in 2004 will return to prison within a few years. See Bureau of Justice Statistics, Dep't of Justice, Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 1994 (2002) (finding 67.5% recidivism rate among
study population of 300,000 prisoners released in 1994). The cost to humanity of our ignorance in these matters is staggering.

Gementera and amicus contend that shaming conditions cannot be rehabilitative because such conditions necessarily cause the offender to withdraw from society or otherwise inflict psychological damage, and they would erect a
per se bar against such conditions. (“When it works, it redefines a person in a negative, often irreversible way” and the “psychological core” it affects cannot thereafter be rebuilt.) Though the district court had no scientific evidence before it, as
Gementera complains, we do not insist upon such evidence in our deferential review. Moreover, the fact is that a vigorous, multifaceted, scholarly debate on shaming sanctions’ efficacy, desirability, and underlying rationales continues within the
academy. By no means is this conversation one-sided.

Criminal offenses, and the penalties that accompany them, nearly always cause shame and embarrassment. The fact that a condition causes shame or embarrassment does not automatically render a condition objectionable; rather,
such feelings generally signal the defendant's acknowledgment of his wrongdoing. . . . While the district court's sandwich board condition was somewhat crude, and by itself could entail risk of social withdrawal and stigmatization, it was coupled
with more socially useful provisions, including lecturing at a high school and writing apologies, that might loosely be understood to promote the offender's social reintegration. See John Braithwaite, Crime, Shame and Reintegration 55 (1989)
("The crucial distinction is between shaming that is reintegrative and shaming that is disintegrative (stigmatization). Reintegrative shaming means that expressions of community disapproval, which may range from mild rebuke to degradation cer-
emonies, are followed by gestures of reacceptance into the community of law-abiding citizens.”). . .. In short, here we consider not a stand-alone condition intended solely to humiliate, but rather a comprehensive set of provisions that expose the
defendant to social disapprobation, but that also then provide an opportunity for Gementera to repair his relationship with society — first by seeking its forgiveness and then by making, as a member of the community, an independent contribution
to the moral formation of its youth.!° These provisions, tailored to the specific needs of the offender, counsel in favor of concluding that the condition passes the threshold of being reasonably related to rehabilitation. .. .

p.1107
p. 1108

Accordingly, we hold that the condition imposed upon Gementera reasonably related to the legitimate statutory objective of rehabilitation. In so holding, we are careful not to articulate a principle broader than that presented by the facts
of this case. With care and specificity, the district court outlined a sensible logic underlying its conclusion that a set of conditions, including the signboard provision, but also including reintegrative provisions, would better promote this defendant's
rehabilitation and amendment of life than would a lengthier term of incarceration. By contrast, a per se rule that the mandatory public airing of one’s offense can never assist an offender to reassume his duty of obedience to the law would impose
a narrow penological orthodoxy not contemplated by the Guidelines’ express approval of “any other condition [the district court] considers to be appropriate.” 18 U.S.C. §3583(d). .. .

Hawkins, Circuit Judge, dissenting: . . . Although | believe that the sandwich board condition violates the Sentencing Reform Act and we should reverse the district court for that reason, | also believe that this is simply bad policy. A fair measure of
a civilized society is how its institutions behave in the space between what it may have the power to do and what it should do. The shaming component of the sentence in this case fails that test. “When one shames another person, the goal is to.
degrade the object of shame, to place him lower in the chain of being, to dehumanize him.” Dan Markel, Are Shaming Punishments Beautifully Retributive? Retributivism and the Implications for the Alternative Sanctions Debate, 54 Vand. L. Rev.
2157, 2179 (2001).

To affirm the imposition of such punishments recalls a time in our history when pillories and stocks were the order of the day. . .. | would vacate the sentence and remand for re-sentencing, instructing the district court that public humil-
iation or shaming has no proper place in our system of justice.

NOTES
1. Other shaming conditions. The Gementera opinion mentions some examples and distinguishes them from the shaming penalty imposed in Gementera itself (379 F.3d at 602, fn. 9):

In People v. Hackler, 16 Cal. Rptr. 2d 681 (Cal. Ct. App. 1993), a California court vacated a condition requiring a defendant during his first year of probation to wear a t-shirt whenever he was outside his home. The t-shirt read,

“My record plus two-six packs equal four years,” and on the back, “I am on felony probation for theft.” [Defendant had been convicted of shoplifting beer from a supermarket,] Noting with disapproval the trial court's stated

intention of “going back to some extent to the era of stocks” and transforming the defendant into “a Hester Prim,” [sic] the court held that the t-shirt could not serve the rehabilitative purpose because it would render the

defendant unemployable. By contrast, Gementera’s condition was sharply limited temporally (eight hours) and spatially (one post office in a large city), eliminating any risk that its effects would similarly spill over into all as-

pects of the defendant's life. Indeed, the district court's imposition of the condition in lieu of lengthier incarceration enables Gementera to enter the private labor market.

p. 1108
p. 1109
People v. Johnson, 528 N.E.2d 1360 (Ill. 1988), involved a condition that a DWI offender publish a newspaper advertisement with apology and mug shot. Interpreting the state supervision law as intended “to aid

the defendant in rehabilitation and in avoiding future violations,” and for no other purpose, the court held that the publication requirement “possibly, adds public ridicule as a condition” of supervision and could inflict psycho-

logical harm that disserves the goal of rehabilitation (noting that the Illinois statute does not “refer to deterrent to others”). Relying on the fact that defendant was a young lady and a good student with no prior criminal record,

had injured no one, and otherwise had no alcohol or drug problem, it found the condition impermissible, given the perceived mental health risk. By contrast, we have specifically held that mandatory public apology may be

rehabilitative. Moreover, the condition specifically provided that the signboard requirement would be withdrawn if the defendant showed that the condition would inflict psychological harm.

The defendant's third case, People v. Letterlough, 655 N.E.2d 146 (N.Y. 1995), also involved a probation condition imposed upon a DWI offender. If he regained driving privileges, the offender was required to

affix a fluorescent sign to his license plate, stating “CONVICTED DWI.” The court imposed the condition under a catch-all provision of the New York law authorizing “any other conditions reasonably related to his [or her]

rehabilitation.” Under the New York statute, rehabilitation “in the sense of that word that distinguishes it from the societal goals of punishment or deterrence” was the “singular focus of the statute.” Because the condition’s

“true design was not to advance defendant's rehabilitation, but rather to ‘warn the public’ of the threat presented by his presence behind the wheel,” the court voided the condition. . . . In contrast to the New York scheme,

the district court [in Gementera] made plain the rehabilitative purpose of the condition. We also note that in the federal system, unlike the New York system, rehabilitation is not the sole legitimate objective. See 18 U.S.C.

§§3583(d), 3553(a).

Are these distinctions persuasive? Consider the following case: A Pennsylvania Supreme Court justice was convicted of corruption offenses committed during her election campaign. As part of her sentence, she was ordered to pose in
handcuffs for a photograph, write an apology for her criminal conduct on the face of the photograph, and then send a copy to every member of the Pennsylvania judiciary. See Commonwealth v. Melvin, 103 A.3d 1 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2014). Would the
Gementera court uphold that sentence?

Consider also the case of a defense attorney who lied to his client about a plea deal and made it appear more favorable than it was to get his client to plead guilty. The attorney also falsified e-mails and documents to support his lie. In
re Petersen, 904 N.W.2d 532, 535 (Wis. 2017). The referee considering the case suspended the attorney's license for one year and made him provide the following statement to prospective clients for one year after his license was reinstated:

lam a crook. | am a cheat. | am a thief. | am a liar. | was convicted of a crime on November 9th, 2015. My conviction resulted from my intentional choice to sell my own clients down the river and then trying to cover

p. 1109
p.1110
it up. You may not hire me or have me legally represent you in any fashion until you read the Criminal Complaint and Judgment of Conviction in my Outagamie County Wisconsin Case no. 15-CM878. This disclosure is re-
quired as one of the conditions of my probation.
Id. at 537. Are the facts in Petersen distinguishable from the facts in Gementera such that Judge Hawkins might uphold this condition? Does the language in the client statement need to be modified or can it stand as written?
2. Desirability of shaming conditions. Are shaming sanctions a good idea? Consider these comments:

DAN M. KAHAN, WHAT DO ALTERNATIVE SANCTIONS MEAN? 63 U. CHI. L. REV. 591, 638 (1996): What we know about deterrence should make us confident that shaming penalties will be reasonably effective by virtue of their character as degra-
dation ceremonies.

The consequences of shaming penalties are extremely unpleasant. Those who lose the respect of their peers often suffer a crippling diminishment of self-esteem. Moreover, criminal offenders are as likely to be shunned in the market-
place as they are in the public square, leading to serious financial hardship. . . . It stands to reason, then, that shaming penalties, which abstract disgrace from the afflictive dimension of formal sanctions, should compare favorably with imprison-
ment as a deterrent.

TONI M. MASSARO, SHAME, CULTURE, AND AMERICAN CRIMINAL LAW, 89 MICH. L. REV. 1880, 1919-1921 (1991): The anticipated effect of public shaming is a downward change in status, coupled with symbolic and actual shunning of the of-
fender by others. . . . The stigmatized offender thus may “drift” toward subcultures that are more accepting of her particular norm violations. [Then shaming not only may not promote specific deterrence or rehabilitative ends, it may defeat them.
JAMES GILLIGAN, VIOLENCE 110-111 (1996): | have yet to see a serious act of violence that was not provoked by the experience of feeling shamed and humiliated, disrespected and ridiculed, and that did not represent the attempt to prevent or
undo this “loss of face” — no matter how severe the punishment, even if it includes death. . . . [These men mean it literally when they say they would rather kill or mutilate others, be killed or mutilated themselves, than live without pride, dignity, and
self-respect. . .. The emotion of shame is the primary or ultimate cause of all violence.

JAMES Q. WHITMAN, WHAT IS WRONG WITH INFLICTING SHAME SANCTIONS?, 107 YALE L.J. 1055, 1087-1092 (1998): [T]here are two aspects to what is troubling about shame sanctions: their effect on the offender and their effect on the crowd.
[S]hame sanctions involve a dangerous willingness, on the part of the government, to delegate part of its enforcement power to a fickle and uncontrolled general populace. . ..

Shame sanctions, in this regard, are very different from prisons or fines. However much prisons may have declined into chaos, they are in principle controllable. However monstrous they may have become, we all agree that the state
has the duty to manage them: to establish rules, to call review boards, to answer complaints in court. None of that apparatus exists to control the enforcement of shame. . . . [A] system of shaming . . . means abandoning [courts’] duty to be the im-
posers of measured punishment. . .

p.1110
pnt

[Thus,] shame sanctions lend themselves to a politics of stirring up demons. . .. We have worked, over two liberal centuries, to build an ethic of businesslike politics that denies our officials the authority to pluck on the bass strings of
public psychology and that makes criminal law the province of trained and disciplined officers. Over many generations of ugly experience, we have worked to build a democratic government that acknowledges the importance of an ethic of re-
straint and sobriety. The new shame sanctions tend to undermine that ethic.

QUESTIONS: Even if one worried about the force of the objections to shaming conditions, are such penalties nonetheless worthwhile if they serve to reduce the length of prison sentences judges might otherwise impose?

3. Other controversial conditions. Conditions other than shaming can raise controversial issues. Consider Wisconsin v. Oakley, 629 N.W.2d 200 (Wis. 2001). The defendant was convicted of intentionally refusing to support his nine
children. The trial judge imposed a condition of probation that required the defendant to avoid having another child unless he could show that he could support that child and his current children. The Wisconsin Supreme Court upheld the condition
in a 4-3 decision. The majority stated:

We conclude that in light of Oakley's ongoing victimization of his nine children and extraordinarily troubling record manifesting his disregard for the law, this anomalous condition — imposed on a convicted felon facing the

far more restrictive and punitive sanction of prison — is not overly broad and is reasonably related to Oakley's rehabilitation. Simply put, because Oakley was convicted of intentionally refusing to pay child support — a felony

in Wisconsin — and could have been imprisoned for six years, which would have eliminated his right to procreate altogether during those six years, this probation condition, which infringes on his right to procreate during his

term of probation, is not invalid under these facts. Accordingly, we hold that the circuit court did not erroneously exercise its discretion.

The dissent concluded otherwise:

This condition of probation subjects Oakley to imprisonment if he fathers another child without advance permission from the State. Illegitimacy and child poverty, abuse, and neglect are among our society's most serious and

intractable problems. Conditioning the right to procreate upon proof of financial or other fitness may appear on the surface to be an appropriate solution in extreme cases such as this, but it is unprecedented in this country,

and for good reason. The State can order non-custodial parents to financially support their children, and can criminally prosecute those who intentionally do not. The State can remove a child from a parent's custody when

the child is in need of protection from parental abuse, neglect, or abandonment, and can criminally prosecute parents who mistreat their children. But | know of no authority for the proposition that the State can order that a

child not be conceived or born, even to an abysmally irresponsible parent, unless the State first grants its consent.

pnt
p.mni2

Another area of some controversy involves restrictions on supervised release that dictate where a defendant can or cannot live. In United States v. Woods, 547 F.3d 515 (th Cir. 2008), the Fifth Circuit rejected a trial judge's condition of
supervised release that the defendant not reside with anyone with whom she was not related or married. The trial court imposed the condition based on the view that the defendant's “lack of stability” in her home life contributed to her involvement
in crack cocaine distribution. Id. at 519. The appeals court rejected the provision and drew a distinction between restrictions on associating with individuals with whom a defendant has a relevant criminal history, which it thought were acceptable,
and the trial court’s restriction, which the court thought was too broad.

QUESTIONS: What is the purpose of restricting where a defendant can live? Does the restriction at issue in Woods serve that goal? Is the court right to distinguish between restricting association with previous partners in crime and restricting the
defendant's living arrangements more generally? Which is more burdensome? Which contributes more effectively to social protection? Contrast the Fifth Circuit's view with the Ninth Circuit's acceptance in United States v. Watson, 582 F.3d 974
(9th Cir. 2009), of a condition of supervised release that prohibited the defendant from entering San Francisco without approval of a probation officer. The court said the restriction gave it “some pause” but accepted it on the view that “the district
court was persuaded that the only way to prevent Watson from returning to a life of further misconduct was to force him to make a new life somewhere else.” Id. at 983. Should a court uphold a probation condition that requires a defendant to have
probation-officer approval before knowingly entering or staying in any dwelling where there is active consumption or abuse of alcohol? See United States v. Richter, 609 F. Appx. 503 (9th Cir. 2015).

4, Individuals convicted of a sexual offense. Individuals convicted of a sexual offense face many sanctions beyond their terms of incarceration. Laws in many states and municipalities impose residency restrictions (such as barring
them from living within a certain distance from schools). In addition, state and federal laws in all American jurisdictions create registries containing information about individuals convicted of sex offenses for use by law enforcement, and many of
these laws also require law enforcement to notify the public of the identities and addresses of registrants living, working, or studying in the area. If deemed to be punitive, such laws cannot be applied retroactively. See p. 1104 supra. But whether
considered punitive or not, they are constitutionally permissible direct or “collateral” consequences of a criminal conviction. See Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault, Tentative Draft No. 5, supra, at 481-492.

The stated idea behind these registration and notification requirements is that they will enable police and the public to monitor people convicted of these offenses, thus enabling self-protective measures, facilitating the identification of
persons who may have perpetrated unsolved crimes, and deterring future violations. Yet the restrictions on individuals convicted of sex offenses make their reentry much more difficult because such restrictions can hinder their ability to find hous-
ing, impede employment prospects, and even limit their ability to interact with their own children at their schools. The large body of research now available to assess these regimes has produced consistently disturbing conclusions:22

p.rni2
p13

[E]xtensive research demonstrates that [the expected] gains have not materialized. To the contrary, there is clear evidence, widely acknowledged by professionals in the field, that these laws are seriously counterproductive.

They are expensive for local police to administer, unduly hinder the rehabilitation of ex-offenders, and ultimately defeat their own central purposes by impeding law enforcement and increasing the incidence of sexual

offenses.

QUESTIONS: What do these results suggest about how registration and community notification laws should be formulated? Which individuals should be covered by the requirements? (Note that the term “sex offense” can include a variety of
crimes, from grave abuse of children to urinating in public to sexting between teenagers.) It seems plausible to assume that such laws are bound to afford at least some social protection benefits. Why would they aggravate dangers of recidivism?
(Reconsider Professor Massaro’s and Professor Gilligan's concerns about shaming penalties, p. 1110 supra.)

Does the desirability of a registry depend on the triggering offense? In 2016, Utah created a White Collar Crime Offender Registry that lists people who have committed various fraud offenses against their friends, employers, and
investors.2° The lawmakers who created the list say it will protect the public by providing a resource they can use to access information about potential fraudsters. Is the argument for public notification more or less persuasive in the context of
white collar crime than it is in the context of sex offenses?

With respect to sexual offenses, the MPC permits registration requirements only as applied to persons convicted of the most serious sexual offenses, and it sharply limits the function of these registries: They may be used only by law
enforcement personnel for legitimate law enforcement purposes, such as the investigation of unsolved crime, and disclosure of registry information to others is strictly prohibited. See MPC §§213.11A(1)(b), 213.11H, in the Appendix in the book.24
Does this approach appropriately assure the proportionality of punishment and prevent sanctions from increasing recidivism? Or does it unduly restrict legitimate citizen efforts to protect themselves and their children from the threat of sexual
crime?

5. Reintegrative shaming. The kind of shaming punishments discussed in Note 1 must be distinguished from reintegrative shaming that is at the core of restorative justice practices. As John Braithwaite explains, it is important for
individuals who commit crimes to feel shame at what they have done, but the key is to communicate that shame in non-stigmatizing ways. Shaming punishments like those in Note 1 are designed to make individuals feel ostracized, whereas rein-
tegrative shaming focuses on making sure that the perpetrator of a crime feels respected and knows that the shame attaches to the act, not to the person. So while restorative and reintegrative models rely on having the perpetrator publicly accept
responsibility and feel remorse for the harm caused by seeing the reaction of those

p13
pine
affected, the goal is to condemn the action but then to forgive and reintegrate the person back into the community. John Braithwaite, Restorative Justice and Responsive Regulation 74-78 (2002). In practice, is this distinction likely to hold up or is
there a risk that restorative justice models might be stigmatizing? Does this depend on the training of those who engage in these models? If so, does that suggest restorative justice might be too resource-intensive to be practical, or can commu-
nity members be trained to keep the focus on the acts? For a discussion of these issues, see Adriaan Lanni, Taking Restorative Justice Seriously, 69 Buff. L. Rev. 635 (2021).
B. SENTENCING IN NON-CAPITAL CASES

Typically judges determine the punishment a defendant will receive subject to statutory limitations. Until the 1970s, sentencing at the federal level and in almost all states took largely the same discretionary and indeterminate form. Trial
judges could select any sentence within wide statutory boundaries, subject to few if any constraints. After the defendant had served some proportion of a sentence behind bars, parole officials could determine the ultimate release date. Regimes
with these parole powers were deemed indeterminate sentencing schemes because defendants sentenced to prison did not leam their actual date of release until a parole board made its decision, usually many years later. Today, some form of
discretionary sentencing scheme — with or without indeterminate powers in a parole board — remains in effect in more than half the American states.25 But dissatisfaction from across the political spectrum with so much discretion triggered fun-
damental change in many places. Numerous jurisdictions have replaced their traditional systems with alternatives that limit — sometimes drastically — the discretion of the sentencing judge and parole officials.

We start our consideration of sentencing first by considering the major approaches in the United States. Section B.1 examines the traditional discretionary approach, and Section B.2 discusses the newer determinate systems, including
the federal sentencing guidelines. Section B.3 then considers the question of how to determine sentence length, which is the central inquiry in both contexts.

1. Discretionary Sentencing Systems
Williams v. New York
‘Supreme Court of the United States
337 U.S. 241 (1949)
Justice BLAck delivered the opinion of the Court.
Ajury ina New York state court found appellant guilty of murder in the first degree. The jury recommended life imprisonment, but the trial judge imposed sentence of death. In giving his reasons . . . the judge discussed in open court the
pitts
p.1115
evidence upon which the jury had convicted, stating that this evidence had been considered in the light of additional information obtained through the court’s “Probation Department, and through other sources.” . . .

The Court of Appeals of New York affirmed the conviction and sentence over the contention that . . . the controlling penal statutes are in violation of the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment . . . “in that the sentence of
death was based upon information supplied by witnesses with whom the accused had not been confronted and as to whom he had no opportunity for cross-examination or rebuttal.” . . .

The evidence [at trial] proved a wholly indefensible murder committed by a person engaged in a burglary. The judge instructed the jury that if it returned a verdict of guilty as charged, without recommendation for life sentence, “The
Court must impose the death penalty,” but if such recommendation was made, “the Court may impose a life sentence.” The judge went on to emphasize that “the Court is not bound to accept your recommendation.”

‘About five weeks after the verdict of guilty with recommendation of life imprisonment, and after a statutory pre-sentence investigation report to the judge, the defendant was brought to court to be sentenced. [T]he judge . . . narrated the
shocking details of the crime as shown by the trial evidence, [and] stated that the pre-sentence investigation revealed many material facts concerning appellant’s background which though relevant to the question of punishment could not properly
have been brought to the attention of the jury. . . . He referred to the experience appellant “had had on thirty other burglaries in and about the same vicinity” where the murder had been committed. The appellant had not been convicted of these
burglaries although the judge had information that he had confessed to some and had been identified as the perpetrator of some of the others. The judge also referred to certain activities of appellant as shown by the probation report that indicated
appellant possessed “a morbid sexuality” and classified him as a “menace to society.” The accuracy of the statements made by the judge as to appellant’s background and past practices were not challenged by appellant or his counsel, nor was.
the judge asked to disregard any of them or to afford appellant a chance to refute or discredit any of them by cross-examination or otherwise.

The case presents a serious and difficult question [concerning] the manner in which a judge may obtain information to guide him in the imposition of sentence upon an already convicted defendant. Within limits fixed by statutes, New
York judges are given a broad discretion to decide the type and extent of punishment for convicted defendants. . . . To aid a judge in exercising this discretion intelligently the New York procedural policy encourages him to consider information
about the convicted person’s past life, health, habits, conduct, and mental and moral propensities. The sentencing judge may consider such information even though obtained outside the courtroom from persons whom a defendant has not been
permitted to confront or cross-examine. . . .

Appellant urges that the New York statutory policy is in irreconcilable conflict with . . . the due process of law clause of the Fourteenth Amendment [and its requirement] that no person shall be tried and convicted of an offense unless he
is given reasonable notice of the charges against him and is afforded an opportunity to examine adverse witnesses. .. .

p.1115
p.1116

Tribunals passing on the guilt of a defendant always have been hedged in by strict evidentiary procedural limitations. But both before and since the American colonies became a nation, courts in this country and in England practiced a
policy under which a sentencing judge could exercise a wide discretion in the sources and types of evidence used to assist him in determining the kind and extent of punishment to be imposed within limits fixed by law. Out-of-court affidavits have
been used frequently, and of course in the smaller communities sentencing judges naturally have in mind their knowledge of the personalities and backgrounds of convicted offenders. . . .

In addition to the historical basis for different evidentiary rules governing trial and sentencing procedures there are sound practical reasons for the distinction. . . . Rules of evidence have been fashioned for criminal trials which narrowly
confine the trial contest to evidence that is strictly relevant to the particular offense charged. These rules rest in part on a necessity to prevent a time-consuming and confusing trial of collateral issues. They were also designed to prevent tribunals
concerned solely with the issue of guilt of a particular offense from being influenced . . . by evidence that the defendant had habitually engaged in other misconduct. A sentencing judge, however, is not confined to the narrow issue of guilt... .
Highly relevant — if not essential — to his selection of an appropriate sentence is the possession of the fullest information possible concerning the defendant's life and characteristics. And modern concepts individualizing punishment have made it
all the more necessary that a sentencing judge not be denied an opportunity to obtain pertinent information by a requirement of rigid adherence to restrictive rules of evidence properly applicable to the trial.

Undoubtedly the New York statutes emphasize a prevalent modern philosophy of penology that the punishment should fit the offender and not merely the crime. The belief no longer prevails that every offense in a like legal category
calls for an identical punishment without regard to the past life and habits of a particular offender. This whole country has traveled far from the period in which the death sentence was an automatic and commonplace result of convictions — even
for offenses today deemed trivial. Today's philosophy of individualizing sentences makes sharp distinctions for example between first and repeated offenders. Indeterminate sentences, the ultimate termination of which are sometimes decided
by non-judicial agencies have to a large extent taken the place of the old rigidly fixed punishments. The practice of probation which relies heavily on non-judicial implementation has been accepted as a wise policy. . . . Retribution is no longer the
dominant objective of the criminal law. Reformation and rehabilitation of offenders have become important goals of criminal jurisprudence.

Modern changes in the treatment of offenders make it more necessary now than a century ago for observance of the distinctions in the evidential procedure in the trial and sentencing processes. For indeterminate sentences and proba-
tion have resulted in an increase in the discretionary powers exercised in fixing punishments. [A] strong motivating force for the changes has been the belief that by careful study of the lives and personalities of convicted offenders many could be
less severely punished and restored sooner to complete freedom and useful citizenship. This belief to a large extent has been justified.

. .. Probation workers making reports of their investigations have not been trained to prosecute but to aid offenders. Their reports have been given a high value by conscientious judges who want to sentence persons on the best
available

p16

p.mi7
information rather than on guesswork. . .. We must recognize that most of the information now relied upon by judges to guide them in the intelligent imposition of sentences would be unavailable if information were restricted to that given in open
court by witnesses subject to cross-examination. And the modem probation report draws on information concerning every aspect of a defendant's life. The type and extent of this information make totally impractical if not impossible open court
testimony with cross-examination. Such a procedure could endlessly delay criminal administration in a retrial of collateral issues.

The considerations we have set out admonish us against treating the due process clause as a uniform command that courts throughout the Nation abandon their age-old practice of seeking information from out-of-court sources to
guide their judgment toward a more enlightened and just sentence. [We do not think the Federal Constitution restricts the view of the sentencing judge to the information received in open court. The due process clause should not be treated as a
device for freezing the evidential procedure of sentencing in the mold of trial procedure. So to treat the due process clause would hinder if not preclude all courts — state and federal — from making progressive efforts to improve the administration
of criminal justice. .. . We hold that appellant was not denied due process of law.

Justice MurPHy, dissenting. . . . Due process of law includes at least the idea that a person accused of crime shall be accorded a fair hearing through all the stages of the proceedings against him. | agree with the Court as to the value and humane-
ness of liberal use of probation reports as developed by modern penologists, but, in a capital case, against the unanimous recommendation of a jury, where the report would concededly not have been admissible at the trial, and was not subject to
examination by the defendant, | am forced to conclude that the high commands of due process were not obeyed.

NOTE, DUE PROCESS AND LEGISLATIVE STANDARDS IN SENTENCING, 101 U. PA. L. REV. 257, 276-277 (1952): The practical problem which is posed is not that of admissibility but the utilization of procedural devices to ensure accuracy and allow
argument on the relevancy of the disclosed information to the particular circumstances of the case. The presentence probation report in Williams v. New York illustrates this problem. The probation department there concluded that Williams was
a “psychopathic liar” whose ideas “revolve around a morbid sexuality,” that he was “a full time burglar,” “emotionally unstable,” “suffers no remorse,” and was deemed to be “a menace to society.” His criminal record, confined to a charge of theft
when he was 11 years old and a conviction as a wayward minor, did not support such generalizations. The conclusions of the probation department were apparently based upon (1) stolen goods found in his room, (2) identification of Williams by a
woman whose apartment he allegedly burglarized and a seven-year-old girl he had allegedly raped, (8) allegations that he had committed “about 30 burglaries,” and (4) “. . . information” that he had acted as a “pimp” and had been observed taking
indecent photographs of young children. Aside from the truth or falsity of these statements or their adequacy as a basis for a death sentence, in this case life or death turned upon conclusions drawn by probation officers from hearsay and from un-
proven allegations. Such information is highly relevant to the question of sentence, but its accuracy depends upon the ability and fairness of the probation officer, who must weigh evidence, judge the credibility of the informants and be
p.mi7
p18
zealous in closely examining them. [Alt best this method of ascertaining facts has serious deficiencies because it relies for cross-interrogation and cross-investigation upon one “who has neither the strong interest nor the full knowledge that are
required,” and which usually only the defendant can provide.
NOTES
1. Developments in sentencing law after Williams. There are two key aspects of Williams. First, it provides an example of a discretionary system of sentencing that allows judges wide latitude to determine the ultimate sentence
(even in a capital case). Second, it shows the thin process protections in sentencing proceedings, with hearsay and confidential information influencing sentencing. In capital cases, both of these doctrines have in effect been held unconstitutional.
In Gardner v. Florida, 430 U.S. 349 (1977), a jury recommended life imprisonment, but the judge, relying on a confidential presentence report, sentenced the murder defendant to death. The Court found the procedure constitutionally defective
and vacated the death sentence. A plurality emphasized that constitutional developments since Williams now mandate heightened care in death penalty sentencing and rejected the state's argument that confidentiality was necessary to “enable
investigators to obtain relevant but sensitive disclosures from persons unwilling to comment publicly.” The Court has also curtailed the role that judges alone can play in determining whether a defendant receives a death sentence. In Hurst v. Flor-
ida, 577 U.S. 92 (2016), the Court held that a jury, not a judge, must find the facts that are necessary to impose a sentence of death.
The Court has also made clear since Williams that sentencing hearings, even in non-capital cases, must comport with many due process requirements; the defendant must, for example, be afforded the effective assistance of counsel.
Mempa v. Rhay, 389 U.S. 128 (1967). But for non-capital cases, the central holding of Williams — that the federal Constitution does not bar reliance on confidential information at sentencing — remains undisturbed. Judges relying on such infor-
mation continue to make critical factual findings that dictate a defendant's sentence. Nonetheless, most states now allow felony defendants to review the presentence report, or at least most portions of it, prior to imposition of sentence. Federal
practice affords less disclosure. Fed. R. Crim. P. 32(d) guarantees the defense unrestricted access to a document called “the presentence report” (PSR), but it allows the judge to receive other information in a separate document that is not made
available to the defense. The report supplied to the defendant “must exclude” three types of information that the judge receives confidentially: a diagnostic opinion that, if disclosed, might disrupt a rehabilitation program; “information obtained
on a promise of confidentiality”; and “information that, if disclosed, might result in physical or other harm to the defendant or others.” The defendant receives only the trial judge's summary of information excluded from the report. Rule 32 gives
the defense an opportunity to comment on the report, and at the court’s discretion, to offer evidence to rebut alleged factual inaccuracies. But in cases of factual dispute, the prosecution needs to prove its version only by a preponderance of the
evidence.
p18
p.1119
Moreover, the defendant usually is afforded no opportunity to confront or cross-examine those who may have provided adverse information. See Alan Michaels, Trial Rights at Sentencing, 81 N.C. L. Rev. 1771 (2003). In practice, this
means that defendants often find their sentences increased dramatically based on the testimony of confidential informants who are not disclosed to them. See, e.g., United States v. Rogers, 1 F.3d 341 (Sth Cir. 1993). In recent years, the Supreme

Court has also held that the Sixth Amendment's guarantee of a speedy trial does not extend past a guilty verdict or guilty plea and thus does not apply to sentencing delays. The Court has, however, left open the question of whether the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment provides protection against undue delays in sentencing. Betterman v. Montana, 136 S. Ct. 1609 (2016). For an argument that Betterman is part of a larger trend of giving short shrift to defendants’
rights at the sentencing phase because the Court mistakenly thinks the stakes at sentencing are lower, see Carissa Bryne Hessick, Betterman v. Montana and the Underenforcement of Constitutional Rights at Sentencing, 14 Ohio St. J. Crim. L.
323 (2016).

Has the Court been too lax with respect to recognizing rights at sentencing, particularly given that in the vast majority of cases, there is no trial but instead a plea, so the sentencing proceeding is the only relevant judicial forum? Or do
the practical concems raised in Williams justify the lesser protections in order to keep sentencing reasonably administrable?

2. Discretion and the rationale of punishment. In non-capital cases, the discretionary sentencing model followed in Williams still exists in many jurisdictions. What purposes of punishment call for individualized sentencing and
wide discretion for the decision maker? In Williams, the Court defends individualization on the ground that “[rJetribution is no longer the dominant objective of the criminal law. Reformation and rehabilitation have become important goals.” Indeed,
the premise of indeterminate sentences, with broad discretion for judges and parole officials, rests on the aim of rehabilitation.

Indeterminate sentencing fell into disfavor in the 1970s both because of a concern with disparity and because of doubts that rehabilitation was effective and that parole officials could identify when a prisoner was, in fact, rehabilitated.
See Tapia v. United States, 564 U.S. 319, 324-325 (2011); Michelle S. Phelps, Rehabilitation in the Punitive Era: The Gap Between Rhetoric and Reality in U.S. Prison Programs, 45 Law & Soc’y Rev. 33, 36-38 (2011). When Congress overhauled
federal sentencing with the Sentencing Reform Act in 1984, it eliminated parole and cabined judicial discretion based on these concerns. Although judges are charged under 18 U.S.C. §3553(a)(2)(D) with considering what sentence will provide
the defendant with “needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other correctional treatment in the most effective manner,” the Sentencing Reform Act also made clear that judges must “recognize[e] that imprisonment is not an
appropriate means of promoting correction and rehabilitation.” 18 U.S.C. §3682(a). Thus, while rehabilitation may still be a goal of sentencing in the federal system, it cannot be used as a justification for imposing or extending a term of incarcera-
tion. Tapia, 564 U.S. at 327-328. Although the rhetoric around rehabilitation has changed over time, the amount of actual programming in prisons has stayed relatively modest and constant from the 1970s until today; its emphasis, however, has
changed from academic programs to reentry-related counseling. Phelps, supra,

p.1119

p.1120
at 56-59. Scholars argue that whatever benefit flows from the minimal rehabilitation programming that is offered in prison, it is outweighed by the harm to rehabilitation caused by the dehumanizing experience of incarceration itself. Sharon
Dolovich, Foreword: Incarceration American-Style, 3 Harv. L. & Pol'y Rev. 237, 245-254 (2009); lan Lambie & Isabel Randell, The Impact of Incarceration on Juvenile Offenders, 33 Clinical Psych. Rev. 448, 452-455 (2013). The balance might de-
pend on sentence length. There is some evidence that recidivism is decreased as prison lengths are increased, but only up to sentences of two years. Daniel P. Mears, Joshua C. Cochran, William D. Bales & Avinash S. Bhati, Recidivism and Time
Served in Prison, 106 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 83 (2016).

Is rehabilitation the only theory of punishment that requires individualized determinations? If we understand retribution to mean punishment tailored to the culpability of the offender, doesn’t retribution also require a highly individual-
ized, discretionary judgment? Even if we understand retribution and deterrence to mandate a punishment set solely as a function of the seriousness of the offense, don't these goals still require a highly individualized, discretionary judgment about
the nature of the offense in that particular case? Conversely, can a highly discretionary system undermine any goals of punishment? Consider the comments that follow:

FRANCIS ALLEN, THE BORDERLAND OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE 32-36 (1964): [The] rehabilitative ideal has been debased in practice and . . . the consequences . . . are serious and, at times, dangerous. [U]nder the dominance of the rehabilitative ideal,
the language of therapy is frequently employed, wittingly or unwittingly, to disguise [a] fixation on problems of custody. . . . Even more disturbing [is] the tendency of the staff to justify these custodial measures in therapeutic terms. . . . Surprisingly
enough, the therapeutic ideal has often led to increased severity of penal measures.

[A] study of criminal justice is fundamentally a study in the exercise of political power. No such study can properly avoid the problem of the abuse of power. The obligation of containing power within the limits suggested by a commu-
nity’s political values has been considerably complicated by the rise of the rehabilitative ideal. For the problem today is one of regulating the exercise of power by men of good will, whose motivations are to help, not to injure. . . . There is a ten-
dency for such persons to claim immunity from the usual forms of restraint and to insist that professionalism and a devotion to science provide sufficient protection against unwarranted invasion of individual rights. . . .

Measures which subject individuals to the substantial and involuntary deprivation of their liberty contain an inescapable punitive element. . .. As such, these measures must be closely scrutinized to insure that power is being applied
consistently with those values of the community that justify interference with liberty for only the most clear and compelling reasons.

MARVIN FRANKEL, CRIMINAL SENTENCING: LAW WITHOUT ORDER 5, 9-11, 17-23, 98-102 (1973): [T]he almost wholly unchecked and sweeping powers we give to judges in the fashioning of sentences are terrifying and intolerable for a society
that professes devotion to the rule of law. .. .
The ideal of individualized justice is by no means an unmitigated evil, but it must be an ideal of justice according to law. This means we must reject individual distinctions — discriminations, that is — unless they can be justified by rele-
vant tests
p.1120
p.1121
capable of formulation and application with sufficient objectivity to ensure that the results will be more than the idiosyncratic ukases of particular officials, judges or others.

[Sleeping penalty statutes allow sentences to be “individualized” not so much in terms of defendants but mainly in terms of the wide spectrums of character, bias, neurosis, and daily vagary encountered among occupants of the
trial bench. It is no wonder that wherever supposed professionals in the field — criminologists, penologists, probation officers, and, yes, lawyers and judges — discuss sentencing, the talk inevitably dwells upon the problem of “disparity.” ... The
‘evidence is conclusive that judges of widely varying attitudes on sentencing, administering statutes that confer huge measures of discretion, mete out widely divergent sentences where the divergences are explainable only by the variations among
the judges, not by material differences in the defendants or their crimes.

[Thhe tragic state of disorder in our sentencing practices is not attributable to any unique endowments of sadism or bestiality among judges as a species. [JJudges in general, if only because of occupational conditioning, may be some-
what calmer, more dispassionate, and more humane than the average of people across the board. But nobody has the experience of being sentenced by “judges in general.” The particular defendant on some existential day confronts a specific
judge. The occupant of the bench on that day may be punitive, patriotic, self-righteous, guilt-ridden, and more than customarily dyspeptic. The vice in our system is that all such qualities have free rein as well as potentially fatal impact upon the de-
fendant’s finite life.

Such individual, personal powers are not evil only, or mainly, because evil people may come to hold positions of authority. The more pervasive wrong is that a regime of substantially limitless discretion is by definition arbitrary, capri-
cious, and antithetical to the rule of law.

TWENTIETH CENTURY FUND, TASK FORCE ON CRIMINAL SENTENCING, FAIR AND CERTAIN PUNISHMENT 33 (1976): [T]he vagaries of sentencing — one convicted robber being sentenced to life and another placed on probation — have seriously
affected the deterrent value of criminal sanctions. For many convicted offenders, there is what amounts to amnesty. And for other offenders, often undistinguishable from the first group in terms of past record, current crime, or future dangerous-
ness, there is the injustice of the exemplary sentence. The judge, aware that most persons who commit the particular crime are not sentenced to prison, determines to make an example of this offender and thus sentences him to an unfairly long
term. Such haphazard sentencing does little to increase the deterrent impact of the criminal law, since the potential criminal is likely to calculate his potential sentence by reference to what most similarly situated offenders receive.
2. Sentencing Reform
INTRODUCTORY NOTES
In response to the concerns raised by a broad range of critics — with those on the left decrying discrimination in sentencing (particularly against the poor and people of color) and those on the right arguing that judges and parole
p.1121
p.1122

boards were using their discretion to undermine the deterrent and retributive purposes of criminal punishment by releasing incarcerated persons too early — many jurisdictions abandoned their traditional discretionary systems. Some states
addressed the perceived injustice of indeterminate sentencing systems either by requiring the parole-release date to be fixed early in the incarcerated person's term or by abolishing parole altogether. This system provides certainty for the person
sentenced to prison but does nothing to make the critical decisions more uniform or predictable; indeed complete abolition of parole actually aggravates the problem of broad judicial discretion by removing the countervailing power of the parole
board. More commonly, reform proposals have treated judicial discretion as the principal evil. Several distinct approaches to reform emerged.

1. Mandatory minimums. A solution initially popular with lawmakers was the enactment of mandatory minimum sentences for specified crimes. Congress introduced stiff mandatory minimums for drug offenses in 1956 but soon
concluded that they were a failure and in 1970 repealed virtually all the drug mandatories. Among those supporting the 1970 repeal was Congressman George H.W. Bush (R-TX), who argued that mandatories were ineffective and unjust. See
Stephen J. Schulhofer, Rethinking Mandatory Minimums, 28 Wake Forest L. Rev. 199, 200-201 (1993). Just as Congress was repealing its mandatories, New York turned to them, enacting long mandatory drug sentences (the so-called Rockefeller
drug laws) in 1973. In 1984, Congress once more enacted severe mandatory minimums for drug offenses (as well as for certain firearms offenses) and has continued to pass statutes with mandatory minimum sentences on a regular basis ever
since. Roughly one-quarter of defendants sentenced in federal court in fiscal year 2019 were convicted of an offense carrying a mandatory minimum penalty.2° Most of these mandatory minimum sentences — more than 72 percent — are for drug
offenses.27 Roughly 43 percent of those held in federal prison as of 2016 were subject to a mandatory minimum penalty at sentencing.2® The tide might be turning on mandatory minimums again, however, as 29 states since 2000 have rolled back
their mandatory sentencing laws.22

At the federal level, Congress has yet to take up comprehensive reforms for mandatory minimums, though it has started to chip around the edges. Congress

p.1122

p.1123
passed the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010%2 and the First Step Act of 2018.2! The Fair Sentencing Act targeted mandatory minimums for crack cocaine offenses, eliminating the five-year mandatory minimum for simple possession and raising the
amount of crack cocaine needed to trigger certain mandatory minimums for trafficking offenses. The First Step Act made the Fair Sentencing Act's changes retroactive, which allowed thousands of people serving mandatory minimum sentences
for crack offenses to obtain sentencing reductions. The First Step Act also expanded the so-called safety valve, which provides limited relief from mandatory minimums for individuals with minimal criminal history, and reduced some mandatory
minimum sentences but did not eliminate them.

The Department of Justice has oscillated on its charging policies with respect to mandatory minimums. In 2013, the Obama Department of Justice led by Attorney General Eric Holder aimed to cut back the number of mandatory mini-
mums sought by instructing prosecutors to reserve charging statutes that trigger mandatory minimum sentences for higher-level drug dealers or those with violence or ties to gangs.°2 This was a more specific follow-up to a 2010 Holder memo that
urged prosecutors to make an individualized assessment of each case instead of reflexively pursuing the most serious readily provable offense.°2 The Trump Administration's Department of Justice led by Attorney General Jeff Sessions overturned
the Holder Memos.®4 An empirical study comparing the two regimes found that “the imposition of mandatory minimums decreased after [the Holder Memo] . . . and they rose again after the 2017 Sessions memo.” Mona Lynch, Matt Barno & Marisa
Omori, Prosecutors, Court Communities, and Policy Change: The Impact of Internal DOJ Reforms on Prosecutorial Practices, 59 Criminology 480, 492 (2021). The Biden Administration shifted course again and reinstated the 2010 Holder Memo.25
QUESTIONS: Is it appropriate for prosecutors to set policies about charging offenses that carry mandatory minimums that limit their scope, or does such a practice undermine the legislative goal of having mandatory minimums in the first place?
Does your view depend on the length of the mandatory minimum?

Although a major stated goal of mandatory minimum sentences was to eliminate discrimination on the basis of race, racial disparities have increased with the

p.1123
p.1t24
proliferation of mandatory minimum laws. Although it is difficult to pin down a direct causal link between the racial disparities in the prison population and these mandatory minimum laws, there are signs of a connection. In a 2004 report, the United
States Sentencing Commission concluded that “[t]oday's sentencing policies, crystallized into sentencing guidelines and mandatory minimum statutes, have a greater adverse impact on Black offenders than did the factors taken into account by

judges in the [prior] discretionary system. . . "2° The Commission's 2017 report finds that Black offenders make up 35 percent of the offenders convicted of an offense carrying a mandatory minimum penalty, even though Black offenders represent
21 percent of the total offender population 27

One possible reason for this disparity is that mandatory minimum schemes are usually a misnomer, as the shift in practice between the Obama and Trump Administrations revealed. These schemes are truly mandatory only when they
require (as few of these regimes do) filing of the most serious charge and prohibit bargaining, or when they require judges to ignore the formal charge and base the sentence on the actual conduct, as revealed by a presentence investigation. Even if
some jurisdictions — such as the federal system — espouse this view, in practice they fail to achieve it. A comprehensive study of the federal mandatory minimums showed, for example, that about 40 percent of defendants were sentenced below
the mandatory level for which they appeared eligible, because they provided substantial assistance to the government or qualified for a statutory safety valve provision, or both.2° This made an enormous difference in a person's sentence: “The
average sentence length for offenders who remained subject to a mandatory minimum penalty at sentencing was more than twice as high at 138 months than offenders who ultimately received relief from such penalty at sentencing (67 months).”22
More disturbingly, the distribution of cases did not fall proportionately on all offenders. Black offenders convicted of an offense carrying a mandatory minimum penalty remained subject to it at the highest rate — 73 percent of the cases — of any
racial group.£2

Most jurisdictions do not even claim to insist on the mandatory filing of available charges that carry a mandatory minimum. Far more common are mandatories that require a given sentence only in the event of conviction on a given
charge. Such “discretionary mandatories” constrain judges but not prosecutors, who are sometimes perceived as less likely to be “soft on crime.” As a result, in most places, the greatest impact of mandatory minimums is to give prosecutors a
powerful bargaining chip for use in plea negotiation. Consider the following example:

UNITED STATES v. VASQUEZ, 2010 WL 1257359 (E.D.N.Y.), STATEMENT OF REASON FOR SENTENCE (GLEESON, J): [Roberto Vasquez had a troubled history that included sexual abuse by his older brother, drug addiction, and treatment for depres-
sion and bi-polar disorder. Aside from the drug trafficking at issue in this case, his only

p.1124

p.1125
criminal history involved his ex-wife, Ingrid Melendez, with whom he had three children. When that relationship ended, Melendez would not let him see their children, and he reacted by menacing her with a knife. Six months later, he violated an
order of protection by threatening to kill her. A year later, Vasquez once again showed up at Melendez’s home, and as a result was convicted of harassment. Since 2005, he had a stable relationship with another woman, Caraballo, with whom he
has a three-year-old daughter. But Melendez continued to deny Vasquez access to their three children, even though Vasquez was complying with his court-ordered child support obligations. Under the stress of this situation, he began using co-
caine again. That development established the groundwork for his involvement in his offense of conviction.]

To support his expensive cocaine habit, Vasquez . . . personally assisted in the distribution of 300 grams of heroin. He was aware of the distribution of 350 additional grams by others, so he was responsible under the sentencing guide-
lines for 650 grams. . .. After his arrest, Vasquez tried to cooperate with the government. He provided information about two individuals, but it could not be corroborated. . . .

The government had it within its power to charge Vasquez with a standard drug trafficking charge, which carries a maximum sentence of 20 years. Instead, it included him in a conspiracy charge with his brother and three others and
cited . . .a sentence-enhancing provision that carries a maximum of life in prison and a mandatory minimum of ten years upon conviction. During plea negotiations, the government refused to drop that charge unless Vasquez pled guilty to a lesser-
included sentencing enhancement that carried a maximum of 40 years and a mandatory minimum of five years.

. .. Most people, including me, agree that the kingpins, masterminds, and mid-level managers of drug trafficking enterprises deserve severe punishment. But right from the start Congress made a mistake: it made a drug defendant's
eligibility for the mandatory sentences depend not on his or her role in the offense, but on the quantity of drugs involved in the crime. Thus, if the crime involved one kilogram of heroin, five kilograms of cocaine, or only 50 grams of crack, every de-
fendant involved in that crime, irrespective of his or her actual role, is treated as a kingpin or mastermind and must get at least ten years in jail.

If they want to, prosecutors can decide that street-level defendants like Vasquez — the low-hanging fruit for law enforcement — must receive the harsh sentences that Congress intended for kingpins and managers, no matter how many
other factors weigh in favor of less severe sentences. The government concedes, as it must, that Vasquez played a minor role in his brother’s modest drug operation, not the mid-level managerial role the five-year mandatory sentence was enacted
to punish... . Yet, by the simple act of invoking the sentence-enhancing provision of the statute, the government has dictated the imposition of the severe sentence intended only for those with an aggravating role.

When the case was first called . . .| pointed out the obvious: the five-year mandatory sentence in this case would be unjust. The prosecutor agreed, and welcomed my direction that she go back to the United States Attorney with a
request from the Court that he withdraw the aspect of the charge that required the imposition of the five-year minimum... .
[When the prosecutor returned, s]he reported that the United States Attorney would not relent. She offered two reasons. The first was that | might have failed to focus on the fact that Vasquez . . . was allowed to plead to the five-year
mandatory
p.1125
p.1126
minimum rather than to the ten-year mandatory minimum that he, his brother, and three other co-defendants were originally charged with. | think this means that Vasquez should be grateful the government did not insist on a ten-year minimum
sentence based on additional quantities of cocaine it concedes he knew nothing about. . . .| suppose there is some consolation in the fact that the government did not pursue that absurd course. . .. But that hardly explains, let alone justifies, the
government's insistence on the injustice at hand.
Second, the prosecutor suggested that | had failed to “focus” on the seriousness of Vasquez's crimes against his ex-wife, Melendez. Implicit in that assertion is the contention that even if Vasquez does not deserve the five-year mini-
mum because he was not a mid-level manager of a drug enterprise, he deserves it because of his past crimes. This rings especially hollow. Those past crimes have been front and center at all times. . . .
I recognize that the United States Attorney is not required to explain to judges the reasons for decisions like this one, and for that reason | did not ask for them. But the ones that were volunteered do not withstand the slightest scrutiny.
As a result of the decision to insist on the five-year mandatory minimum, there was no judging going on at Vasquez’s sentencing. . . . The defendant's difficult childhood and lifelong struggle with mental illness were out of bounds, as
were the circumstances giving rise to his minor role in his brother's drug business, . . . the fact that he tried to cooperate but was not involved enough in the drug trade to be of assistance, the effect of his incarceration on his three-year-old daugh-
ter and the eight-year-old child of Caraballo he is raising as his own, the fact that he has been a good father to them for nearly five years, the fact that his prior convictions all arose out of his ex-wife's refusal to permit him to see their three children.
Sentencing is not a science, and | don't pretend to be better than anyone else at assimilating these and the numerous other factors, both aggravating and mitigating, that legitimately bear on an appropriate sentence. But | try my best . .. to do
justice for the individual before me and for our community. In this case, those efforts would have resulted in a prison term of 24 months, followed by a five-year period of supervision with conditions including both other forms of punishment (home
detention and community service) and efforts to assist Vasquez with the mental health, substance abuse, and anger management problems that have plagued him, in some respects for his entire life. If he had failed to avail himself of those efforts,
or if, for example, he intentionally had contact with Melendez without the prior authorization of his supervising probation officer, he would have gone back to jail on this case.
The mandatory minimum sentence . . . supplanted any effort to do justice, leaving in its place the heavy wooden club that was explicitly meant only for mid-level managers of drug operations. The absence of fit between the crude
method of punishment and the particular set of circumstances before me was conspicuous; when | imposed sentence on the weak and sobbing Vasquez on March 5, everyone present, including the prosecutor, could feel the injustice. . . .
QUESTIONS: How should we appraise the value and drawbacks of mandatory minimums?
(a) For “discretionary mandatories,” are the risks of unequal treatment and disproportionate punishment outweighed by potential deterrence gains? For that matter, are potential gains in deterrence dissipated by the uncertainty that
these
p.1126
p.1127
nominally mandatory sentences will actually be applied? A bipartisan congressional task force report took a careful look at the relationship between federal mandatory minimums and prison population growth and unanimously called for dramatic
limits on the reach of mandatory minimums because their costs outweigh their benefits.41
(b) Should a jurisdiction try to avoid these difficulties by making its mandatory minimums truly mandatory, for prosecutors as well as for judges? Is there a way to ensure that prosecutors will fully comply with the requirements of a
mandatory minimum? If they do comply, will the result be too much equality — equal treatment of offenders who committed their offenses under very different circumstances? Is Vasquez an example of too much equality, or were prosecutors

correct to charge the defendant as they did? If a mandatory minimum is truly mandatory, why would any defendant who commits one of the subject crimes ever be willing to plead guilty? What would truly mandatory mandatories mean for already
strained criminal justice budgets and overcrowded prisons?

(c) In addition to their power to withhold charges that carry a mandatory minimum sentence, prosecutors often can enable a defendant to avoid the mandatory minimum by filing a motion with the court attesting to the defendant's co-
operation. See, e.g., 18 U.S.C. §3553(e). In multi-defendant cases, will this just reward the defendant who gets to the prosecutor's office first? Is it appropriate to give someone a lesser sentence for cooperating than someone who is less culpable
but who fails for cooperate? For example, if a leader in a drug dealing operation cooperates against low-level participants in the conspiracy, is it appropriate for the high-level dealer to get a lower sentence than they do? In one case, the underlings
received sentences of roughly 20 years while the organizers, who cooperated, received probation or supervised release. United States v. Evans, 970 F.2d 663, 676-678 & n.19 (10th Cir. 1992), Under what theory of punishment does this outcome
make sense? For further discussion of the pros and cons of sentence reductions in return for cooperation, see p. 124 supra.

2. Presumptive and guideline sentencing. Given the drawbacks of mandatory minimums, no American legislature has attempted to extend that approach to all crimes; rather, legislatures have targeted selected crimes, such as drug
distribution, firearms offenses, and sex offenses against children. To address the problems of sentencing discretion more generally, reformers have turned to more flexible techniques. California, for example, adopted legislation specifying within
narrow limits the normal sentence for each offense and tightly restricted the trial judge's discretion to depart from the specified terms.22

Most states, unlike California, were not prepared to undertake the complex task of identifying appropriate sentences in detail and making the statutory revisions and refinements necessary to keep them current. Several jurisdictions
therefore

p.1127
nnn 8
opted to create an expert body — a sentencing commission — charged with drafting guidelines that judges would be required or encouraged to follow in making sentencing decisions. The commissions are administrative agencies accountable to
the legislature but insulated to some degree from immediate political pressures, and they are afforded the time and resources to deal with the complex array of sentencing problems. A 2017 study found 15 jurisdictions (including D.C.) with sen-
tencing guidelines (with another 5 having certain guidelines-like features). Of those 15, 8 use guidelines that are relatively mandatory.‘ In 2017, the American Law Institute formally endorsed the view that the best approach is to have a sentencing
commission adopt presumptive guidelines. Model Penal Code: Sentencing §6B.03(2) (Am. L. Inst., Proposed Final Draft, 2017).

Developments in the federal system have received the most attention and generated the most controversy because Congress enacted a guideline system that is far less flexible than any of the systems used to control judicial discretion
in the states. In 1984, in addition to abolishing parole, Congress created a United States Sentencing Commission charged with promulgating guidelines for judges to use in federal sentencing decisions. See 28 U.S.C. §§991-998. The Commission
was directed to establish sentencing categories based on specific combinations of offense and offender characteristics and to identify a narrow range of authorized sentences (with no more than a 25 percent spread between maximum and mini-
mum terms of imprisonment) for each category. See 28 U.S.C. §994(b). Except under restricted conditions, judges were required to impose a sentence within the authorized range. See 18 U.S.C. §3553:

(a) Factors To Be Considered in Imposing a Sentence. — The court shall impose a sentence sufficient, but not greater than necessary, to comply with the purposes set forth in paragraph (2) of this subsection. The court, in deter-
mining the particular sentence to be imposed, shall consider —
(1) the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics of the defendant;
(2) the need for the sentence imposed —
(A) to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for the law, and to provide just punishment for the offense;
(B) to afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct;
(C) to protect the public from further crimes of the defendant; and
(D) to provide the defendant with needed educational or vocational training, medical care, or other correctional treatment in the most effective manner. . . .
(4) the kinds of sentence and the sentencing range established for the applicable category of offense committed by the applicable category of defendant as set forth in the guidelines that are issued by the Sentenc-
ing Commission. . . .

(b) Application of Guidelines in Imposing a Sentence. — The court shall impose a sentence of the kind, and within the range, referred to in subsection (a)(4)
p.1128
p.1129
unless the court finds that there exists an aggravating or mitigating circumstance of a kind, or to a degree, not adequately taken into consideration by the Sentencing Commission in formulating the guidelines that should result in a sentence
different from that described. ...

The guidelines promulgated by the Commission took effect in 1987. This complex set of rules for calculating federal sentences runs more than 400 pages, and for years it was amended annually. For a useful introduction, see Stephen
Breyer, The Federal Sentencing Guidelines and the Key Compromises upon Which They Rest, 17 Hofstra L. Rev. 1 (1988). In the article that follows, Professor Frank Bowman outlines the background of the federal legislation and provides an over-
view of the system it put in place.

Frank O. Bowman, Ill
The Failure of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines: A Structural Analysis
105 Colum. L. Rev. 1315, 1322-1328 (2005)

The SRA . . . created [a] Sentencing Commission for three basic reasons. First, the substantive federal criminal law is sprawling and unorganized. [Legislators recognized that a body of experts was needed to draft reasonable sentenc-
ing rules. Second, Congress realized that the first set of rules would certainly be imperfect and would require monitoring, study, and modification over time. For this task, too, a body of experts was required. Third, creating sentencing rules requires
not only expertise, but some insulation from the distorting pressures of politics. Thus, the Sentencing Commission was situated outside both of the political branches of government and made independent even of the normal chain of command in
the judicial branch in which it formally resides.

The federal sentencing guidelines are, in a sense, simply a long set of instructions for one chart: the sentencing table[,] a two-dimensional grid which measures the seriousness of the current offense on its vertical axis and the de-
fendant's criminal history on its horizontal axis.2 The goal of guidelines calculations is to determine an offense level and a criminal history category, which together generate an intersection in the body of the grid. Each intersection designates a
sentencing range expressed in months. Most American sentencing guidelines systems use some form of sentencing grid [employing] measurements of offense seriousness and criminal history to place defendants within a sentencing range. The
federal system, however, is unique in the complexity of its sentencing table, which has 43 offense levels, 6 criminal history categories, and 258 sentencing range boxes.

The criminal history category reflected on the horizontal axis of the sentencing table attempts to quantify the defendant's disposition to criminality. The offense level reflected on the vertical axis of the sentencing table is a measurement
of the seriousness of the present crime. The offense level has three components: (1) the “base offense level,” which is a seriousness ranking based purely on the fact

p.1129

1130
of conviction of a particular statutory violation, (2) a set of “specific offense characteristics,” which are factors not included as elements of the offense that cause us to think of one crime as more or less serious than another,“7 and (3) additional
adjustments under chapter three of the guidelines.‘°

unique and controversial aspect of the guidelines is “relevant conduct.” The guidelines require that a judge calculating the applicable offense level and any chapter three adjustments must consider not only a defendant's conduct
directly related to the offense or offenses for which he was convicted, but also the foreseeable conduct of his criminal partners, as well as his own uncharged, dismissed, and sometimes even acquitted conduct®! undertaken as part of the same
transaction or common scheme or plan as the offense of conviction. The primary purpose of the relevant conduct provision is to prevent the parties (and to a lesser degree the court itself) from circumventing the guidelines through charge bargain-
ing or manipulation. . ..

Once a district court has determined a defendant’s sentencing range, the judge retains effectively unfettered discretion to sentence within that range. However, to sentence outside the range, the judge must justify the departure on
certain limited grounds. [Specifically, there must be “an aggravating or mitigating circumstance of a kind, or to a degree, not adequately taken into consideration by the Sentencing Commission in formulating the guidelines.” Critically, both the
rules determining the guideline range and those governing the judge’s departure authority are made enforceable by a right of appeal given to both parties. .. .

p.1130
p.1131
Sentencing Table? (in months of imprisonment)
Criminal History Category (Criminal History Points)
Offense | 1 in 1 Iv NE vl
Level_| @ort) Gor) 5. 8.9) 10,11,12) (13 oF more)
1 06 06 0-6 0-6 06 06
2 06 0-6 0-6 0-6 0-6 17
3 06 06 06 28 39
4 06 06 0-6 28 410 612
Zoned 5 06 17 4-10 612
6 06 7 28 612 9-15 1218
7 06 28 410 8-14 12-18 1521
410 612 10-16 15-21 18-24
9 #10 612 g 12-18 18-24 2127
Tams 10 612 5 10-16 15-21 21-27 2430
10-16 s 18-24 24-0 2733
4 imi 10-16 g 15-21 21-27 27-3 3037
rig | 15-21 18-24 24-30 30-37 3341
14 1521 18-28 21-27 27-B 33-41 3746
15 1824-21-27 24-30 30-37 37-46 4151
16 2127 24-30 20-33 33-41 41-51 4657
0 243000 27-8 30-37 37-46 46-57 51-63
18 2733 30-37 341 41st 51-8 sr
» 3037-33-41 37-46 46-57 S71 63-78
20 3341 37-46 41-51 51-8 63-78 1087
2 37-46 41-51 46-57 37-0 70-87 7796
2 4151 46-57 51-63 3-78 17-96 84-105
B 4657 S18 sre 70-87 84-105 92-115
m4 5163 37-71 8-78 77-96 RIS 100-125
2s S711 63-78 70-87 84-105 100-125 110-137
6 6378 70-87 78-97 92-115 110-137 120-150
27 7087 78-97 87-108 100-125 120-150 130-162
ImD 2 7897 87-108 7-121 110-137 130-162 140-175
2% | 87-108 97-121 108-135 121-151 140-175 151-188
30 | 97-121 108-135 121-151 135-168 151-188 168-210
BM | 108135 I-15 135-168 151-188 168-210 188.235
| ris) 135-168 51-188 168-210 188-235, 210-262
33 | 135168 151-188 168-210 188-235 210-262 235.293
34 | 151-188 168-210 188-235 210-262 25-293 262327
35 | 168210 188-235 210-28 = 35-293 262-327 292365
36 | 188-235 210-262 235-293 262-227 292-365 324-405
37 | 210262 35-293 202-327 92-365 324-405 360-1ife
38 | 235293 262-27 292-365 324-405 360-life 360-1ife
39 | 262327 92-365 324-405 360-ife 360-life 360-1ife
4 | 292365 324-405 360-life——360-life 360-life 360-1ife
41 | 324405 360-life —360-life —360-life 360-life 360-ife
2 | 36011 —360-life —360-life © 360-life 360-life 360ife
ry life life lite lite lie life

In many important respects, the federal sentencing system fulfilled the objectives of its framers. First, the SRA abandoned the rehabilitative or medical model of punishment. . .. Second, the SRA [achieved] “truth in sentencing” by
abolishing parole and requiring that federal defendants sentenced to incarceration serve at least eighty-five percent of the term imposed by the court. . . . Third, the SRA addressed the problem of unwarranted disparity. . . . The available evidence
suggests that the guidelines have succeeded in reducing judge-to-judge disparity within judicial districts. On the other hand, researchers have found significant disparities between sentences imposed on similarly situated defendants in different
districts

p.1131

p.1132
and different regions of the country, and interdistrict disparities appear to have grown larger in the guidelines era, particularly in drug cases. The question of whether the guidelines reduced or exacerbated racial disparities in federal sentencing
remains unresolved.

Finally, the SRA and the guidelines brought law and due process to federal sentencing by requiring that sentencing judges find facts and apply the guidelines’ rules to those findings, and by making the guidelines legally binding and
enforceable through a process of appellate review. Not all forms of guidelines accomplish this end. Some states have voluntary guidelines systems in which judges need not apply the rules at all. Other states have advisory guidelines systems in
which judges are required to perform guidelines calculations, but are not required to sentence in conformity with the result. In neither voluntary nor advisory guidelines systems is the judge's sentencing decision subject to meaningful appellate
review. In theory, bringing law to sentencing makes sentencing outcomes more predictable and gives the parties a fair opportunity to present and dispute evidence bearing on legally relevant sentencing factors. Relatedly, bringing law to sentenc-
ing promotes transparency, such that one can ascertain from the record many, if not all, of the factors which were dispositive in generating the final sentence.

NOTES ON THE SENTENCING GUIDELINE APPROACH

From one perspective, sentencing guidelines appear to offer an ideal solution to the problems of unguided judicial sentencing discretion. The sentence must fall within a predetermined range that varies according to the specific details
of the offense and the offender. At the same time, flexibility is preserved because the judge can depart from that range when unusual circumstances present themselves. Appellate review is available in most jurisdictions with guidelines, to ensure
that the judge stays within these boundaries, takes the required factors into account, and departs from them (if she does) only for legitimate reasons. The governing principles become visible and can be tested and progressively refined through the
time-honored common-law process. Is there any downside to this optimistic scenario? Is it too good to be true? The complicated dynamics of criminal law and criminal justice examined in previous chapters of this book should alert us to several
potential sources of trouble. Consider some of the possible dangers of the sentencing guidelines approach:

1. Is equity predictable? What, precisely, makes a sentence appropriate? Is it possible to identify all the relevant factors in advance, without squeezing out an essential but intangible human element? In capital sentencing, the
Supreme Court has held it unconstitutional to “treat[] all persons convicted of a designated offense not as uniquely individual human beings, but as members of a faceless, undifferentiated mass to be subjected to the blind imposition of the
penalty. . ..” Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280, 303-304 (1976), discussed at pp. 1178-1179 infra. The Court has not recognized this constitutional imperative outside the death penalty context. Does it make sense to treat capital and non-
capital cases differently on this measure, or is the line the Court has drawn an arbitrary one? If a guidelines system can indeed succeed in making sentencing wholly predictable, will the resulting process become so mechanical that the criminal law
will lose some of its ability

p.1132

p.1133
to communicate moral condemnation of the individual offender? Professor Erik Luna observes in Gridland: An Allegorical Critique of Federal Sentencing, 96 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 25, 28 (2005), that “the language and practice of formulaic
sentencing [now] reign in U.S. district courts[, resulting in] the purging of moral judgment in punishment.” Does a largely mechanical process forfeit its moral credibility, or does it gain credibility by providing assurance of evenhandedness and
consistency? A bipartisan congressional task force concluded that public safety requires consideration of “[tJhe unique circumstances and attributes of each case and each person” to formulate the right sentence, rehabilitative programs, and ser-
vices. Colson Report, supra, at p. x.

Although judges have long considered a defendant's future risk as part of their individualized sentencing decision, some states have sought to make that determination more objective through the use of risk algorithms. Indeed, the use
of such risk instruments is required at the sentencing phase in states like Arkansas, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, and Vermont. Aziz Z. Huq, Racial Equity in Algorithmic Criminal Justice, 68 Duke L.J. 1043 (2019). The goal of these instruments is
to improve public safety by incapacitating individuals who present a high risk of danger to others. Proponents argue the algorithms are less biased than individualized determinations of judges. But critics point out that the risk instruments them-
selves have biases built in because they are based on past policing practices that are themselves the product of biases. Id. at 1080. Should future dangerousness be part of the sentencing calculation? If so, it is better to leave that prediction to
individual judges who might have biases of their own, or to use algorithms that might themselves be tainted by bias but that will be applied more consistently among judges? Is it preferable to use criminal history as a surrogate for future risk, or
does the use of criminal history suffer from the same flaws as the algorithms?

2. Are soft factors less important? Under the federal guidelines system, the guideline ranges are particularly narrow and the system attempts to make especially detailed provision for the diverse circumstances that a well-conceived
sentencing system should take into account.# But can any system take into account all relevant factors? Because the variables that can legitimately influence the severity of a punishment are almost limitless, a sentencing commission inevitably
must choose which ones will enter into the guideline calculus and which ones will not. In making this decision, factors that are easily quantified, like dollar losses and drug quantities, are especially attractive because it is easy to assign “points”
to them on a continuous scale, and because it is relatively easy to ensure that different judges make the required computation in a consistent way. In contrast, factors that depend on subjective impression — like a defendant's motives or family
circumstances — are hard to integrate into a numerical calculation. And judges can easily manipulate these subjective considerations to reintroduce unwarranted disparities. To the extent that consistency is important, therefore, “soft” factors al-
most inevitably must be allowed less influence. Yet if such factors are excluded from consideration (or allowed little weight) in the interest of eliminating disparity, the guidelines would tend toward

p.1133

p.1194
a false uniformity, with offenders receiving identical sentences when their circumstances were not truly comparable. See Stephen J. Schulhofer, Assessing the Federal Sentencing Process: The Problem Is Uniformity, Not Disparity, 29 Am. Crim. L.
Rev. 833 (1992). In determining a defendant's sentence, is it more important to know the exact value of the car that was stden or the circumstances that prompted the theft? How can a guideline approach eliminate unwarranted disparity without
eliminating justified disparity as well? If we must choose, are we better off eliminating both forms of disparity or neither?

3. Can visibility be dangerous? Reconsider the federal sentencing grid at p. 1131 supra. A simple robbery case would normally be assigned an offense level of 20,5 so if this is the perpetrator’s first offense, the guideline range
would be 33-41 months — a maximum of less than 3 1/, years. Does that severity level seem about right? Once Congress or a state legislature gets a look at a grid like this, will the legislators be tempted to change the numbers — and if so, in what
direction? When punishment levels are made highly visible and easily understandable, the political process generates strong pressure to push the levels upward, subject only to the haphazard constraints of a state's budget. Franklin E. Zimring, A
Consumer's Guide to Sentencing Reform: Making the Punishment Fit the Crime, 6 Hastings Ctr. Rep. 13, 17 (1976). That process has been especially marked in connection with the federal guidelines. See Bowman, supra, at 1328-1350. Is this phe-
nomenon a good or a bad thing? Without “truth in sentencing,” where you know the punishment clearly in advance of its imposition, punishment policies are obscured, which could allow criminal justice insiders to implement their own preferences,
whether or not voters approve. Stephanos Bibas, Transparency and Participation in Criminal Procedure, 81 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 911 (2006). Should greater visibility and accountability be counted as improvements? Or will the emotions attached to crime
control politics and media coverage of criminal cases make highly visible sentencing policies worse than policies that remain somewhat obscure to the general public?

4, Can discretion increase in one part of the system when it is eliminated in another? Discretion so thoroughly pervades the administration of criminal law that eliminating it completely cannot be considered an option. The only
plausible goal of reform, therefore, is to tackle the extent of discretion and how itis allocated among different actors. Thus, sentencing reform typically seeks to control the discretion of sentencing judges and, perhaps, that of parole boards as well.
If prosecutors retain their discretion over charging and plea bargaining, while the discretion of judges is eliminated, is it accurate to say that there is less discretion in the system? Oris there more discretion, because judges and parole boards have
lost their ability to oversee and offset abuses of discretion by the prosecutor? For a discussion of this issue, see Stephen J. Schulhofer, Due Process of Sentencing, 128 U. Pa. L. Rev. 733 (1980).

Consider also the institutional environment in which discretionary decisions are made. If discretion moves from judges to prosecutors, should we expect the quality and consistency of the decisions to improve or deteriorate? If we have
to choose between having largely unregulated discretion in the hands of either prosecutors or judges, which arrangement is preferable? Why? Does it depend on whether the judges or prosecutors are elected, or are there other institutional differ-
ences that are relevant?

p.1194

p.1135

One hope of sentencing reformers was to control the discretion of both judges and prosecutors. As Professor Bowman explains, the U.S. Sentencing Commission instructed judges to base their guideline calculations on all “relevant
conduct,” that is, on what is sometimes called the “real offense” as opposed to the charged offense. The expectation was that federal probation officers would become a “truth squad,” providing judges with a complete picture of the crime, even
if prosecutors agreed, in order to induce a plea, that they would withhold or fudge crucial details. The prosecutors, of course, could try to counter that check by dismissing most of the counts and accepting a plea to an offense that carried a low
statutory maximum; whatever the guideline calculation might suggest, the judge could never impose a sentence greater than the statutory maximum for the offense of conviction. The Commission in turn attempted to neutralize that maneuver by
instructing judges to reject any guilty plea when the terms of the proposed charge dismissal or plea agreement did not “adequately reflect the seriousness of the underlying offense behavior.” U.S.S.G. §6B1.2. Note that this method of controlling
discretion pushes uniformity in the direction of severity by limiting prosecutorial discretion to dismiss charges that are otherwise supported by facts. Assuming this method works, is it worth greater uniformity if the price is greater severity? Does
the answer depend on how reasonable and thoughtful legislatures and sentencing commissions are in setting sentencing lengths?

Should judges reject a plea agreement if the inevitable effect of doing so would be to force compliance with a guideline sentencing calculation that all the parties consider too severe? Is it appropriate for judges to force the parties to go
to trial on charges more serious than the prosecutor considers warranted? For one view, suggesting that such an action violates the separation of powers (and principles of efficient government), see United States v. O'Neill, 437 F.3d 654, 658 (7th
Cir. 2006) (Posner, J., concurring). But if judges should not (or will not) reject plea agreements that are inconsistent with guideline calculations, does a guideline system really reduce discretion? Or, once again, does it simply transfer discretion from
judges to prosecutors? And in the latter event, do the guideline reforms improve the sentencing process or make it worse?

To date, no state sentencing guidelines scheme has attempted to follow the federal “real offense” system. One reason states have rejected this approach is that it leaves important determinations that can affect a sentence to be made
by a judge in the sentencing phase (by a preponderance of the evidence), rather than by a jury at trial (beyond a reasonable doubt). This worry is particularly pronounced when a jury acquits a defendant of a charge, but a judge nonetheless finds
the conduct to have occurred by a preponderance of the evidence and therefore uses that conduct as a basis to increase a defendant's sentence. The use of so-called acquitted conduct to increase a defendant's sentence has been widely criti-
cized, but it remains part of the federal “real offense” framework. See, e.g., United States v. Waltower, 643 F.3d 572, 577 (7th Cir. 2011); United States v. Brown, 892 F.3d 385, 408-409 (D.C. Cir. 2018) (Millett, J., concurring).45

p.1135
p.1136

5. Advisory versus mandatory guidelines. The Sentencing Reform Act specified that judges had to follow the federal guidelines whenever the case fell within the heartland of typical or ordinary cases on which the guidelines were
based. Koon v. United States, 518 U.S. 81, 92-94 (1996). That constraint was substantially relaxed in 2005 when the Supreme Court held that it ran afoul of the jury trial guarantee because the guidelines system allowed judges, as opposed to ju-
rors, to find facts that “the law makes essential” to a defendant's punishment by mandating that they must increase a sentence in a particular way. United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220, 232 (2005). The Court distinguished facts that are necessary
as a matter of law to authorize a new sentence from facts that have no predetermined legal significance. |d, at 233. The remedy adopted by the Court was to make the federal guidelines “advisory” and to allow an appellate court to set aside the
decision of the sentencing judge, whether within the guideline range or not, only when the sentence was “unreasonable.” For discussions of appellate review under the post-Booker federal regime, see Carissa Byrne Hessick & F. Andrew Hessick,
Appellate Review of Sentencing Decisions, 60 Ala. L. Rev. 1 (2008); Lindsay C. Harrison, Appellate Discretion and Sentencing After Booker, 62 U. Miami L. Rev. 1115 (2008). For discussions of what federal sentencing looks like on the ground after
Booker, see Mona Lynch, Booker Circumvention: Adjudication Strategies in the Advisory Sentencing Guidelines Era, 43 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 59 (2019).

Many states also have advisory or voluntary guidelines, some with less appellate review than the post-Booker federal guidelines or even no appellate review at all. Are such guidelines likely to be effective in reducing disparity, or will
judges ignore them? Empirical studies of voluntary and advisory guidelines show that judges follow these guidelines in roughly 75 percent of cases, a rate of within-guideline sentencing that is similar to the rate of within-guideline sentencing in
mandatory guideline jurisdictions that allow for departures.7 Why might judges sentence within the guidelines in advisory and voluntary regimes even if they do not face reversal for ignoring them? For a discussion, see Mark W. Bennett, Con-
fronting Cognitive “Anchoring Effect” and “Blind Spot” Biases in Federal Sentencing: A Modest Solution for Reforming a Fundamental Flaw, 104 J. Crim. & Criminology 489 (2014). Even if judges tend to sentence within guidelines under either pre-
sumptive or advisory schemes, there is evidence that presumptive regimes more

p.1136
p.1197

effectively reduce disparities. One study examined more than ten years of sentencing data from Alabama, which adopted a voluntary guidelines system in 2006 and then a presumptive guidelines scheme in 2013. Griffin Edwards, Stephen Rushin
& Joseph Colquitt, The Effects of Voluntary and Presumptive Sentencing Guidelines, 89 Tex. L. Rev. 1 (2019). The study found that Alabama's switch from no guidelines to voluntary guidelines reduced racial sentencing disparities “somewhat.” But
after Alabama then moved to a presumptive guidelines system, it “virtually eliminated any apparent evidence of racial disparities.” Id. at 40.

As for the federal guidelines, reports since Booker was decided suggest that most district judges continue to take the guidelines seriously, with judges sentencing pursuant to the Guidelines Manual 75 percent of the time.“® There is,
however, evidence of increased sentencing disparity based on region (i.e., the district in which the crime occurs) and based on the identity of the judge.*2 One study finds that inter-judge disparities have doubled post-Booker, but the differences
in absolute terms are relatively small, with defendants facing the “harsher” judges pre-Booker receiving sentences 2.8 months longer compared to defendants facing the “harsher” judges post-Booker receiving sentences 5.9 months longer. Crystal
S. Yang, Have Interjudge Sentencing Disparities Increased in an Advisory Guidelines Regime? Evidence from Booker, 89 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1268, 1275 (2014). This study is careful to note that prosecutors are accountable for some of this difference
through their charging practices. Id. at 1278-1279. Racial disparities have continued post-Booker, with Black male defendants receiving sentences that are on average 19 percent longer than similarly situated white defendants.22

At the same time that there is evidence of increasing disparities under advisory guidelines, there is also abundant evidence that, in the advisory regime, sentences overall are lower for almost everyone.°! This suggests there is a tradeoff
between uniformity and leniency. If one has to choose, which value is more important? Is there any way to create more uniformity without paying the price of longer sentences?

p.1197
p.1198

6. Adding it up. The foregoing Notes suggest some of the many risks that sentencing reform entails, but we should not lose sight of the possible benefits. How could the details of a guidelines system be fine-tuned to minimize the
dangers? Are the potential gains worth the uncertainties and potential costs?

7. Examples. In operation, any jurisdiction's guideline system is bound to raise dozens of distinct problems, all of them important to assessing the potential of the sentencing reform enterprise. The decisions that follow illustrate several
of the issues that can arise in the course of using guidelines to determine the appropriate sentence in the context of concrete cases.

United States v. Deegan
United States Court of Appeals, Eighth Circuit
605 F.3d 625 (2010)

CoLLToN, J. [Dana Deegan gave birth to a baby boy in her home on the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation. She fed, cleaned, and dressed the baby, and placed him in a basket. She then left the house, intentionally leaving the baby alone
without food or a caregiver. When she returned two weeks later, she found the baby dead, placed his remains in a suitcase, and put the suitcase in a ditch, where it was later discovered. Pursuant to a plea agreement, she pled guilty to second-de-
gree murder and was sentenced to ten years in prison, the bottom of the advisory guidelines range]

[Deegan] urged the court to vary from the advisory guidelines and sentence her to probation or to a very short period of incarceration [because of] what she described as her “psychological and emotional condition” at the time of the
offense, her history as a victim of abuse, and the fact that she acted impulsively. . . .

As support, she submitted a report prepared by Dr. Phillip Resnick, an expert in “neonaticide[.)” a term coined by Resnick to describe the killing of an infant within the first twenty-four hours following birth. The report addressed what
Resnick viewed as an “extraordinary number of mitigating circumstances,” and expressed the opinion that a prison sentence was not necessary to deter other women from committing neonaticide. The report concluded that Deegan suffered from
an extensive history of abuse . . . [and] major depression and dissociation at the time of the homicide, acted impulsively in leaving her baby alone, presented a very low risk of reoffending, and did not merit a lengthy prison sentence, especially be-
cause other women convicted in state court of committing similar offenses were usually sentenced to no more than three years in prison.

. On appeal, Deegan argues that the sentence is unreasonable, because the advisory guideline for second-degree murder is not based on empirical data and national experience, and because the sentence imposed is greater than
necessary to comply with the statutory purposes of sentencing set forth in 18 U.S.C. §3553(a)(2). ...

In explaining why it chose a sentence of 121 months’ imprisonment rather than a greater punishment, the court acknowledged that Deegan’s life had not been “easy,” and that it had been plagued with physical abuse and sexual
abuse. . . . The court said that it “underst[ood] why [Deegan] took the steps that she did...” and
p.1198
p.1139
that “under the circumstances,” a sentence under the 2007 guidelines in effect at the time of sentencing, i.e., 19.5 to 24.5 years’ imprisonment, would not have been fair. But the court also thought a lesser sentence would not be sufficient, explain-
ing that... it could not “ignore the fact that there was an innocent life that was lost.”

. .. Where, as here, a sentence imposed is within the advisory guideline range, we typically accord it a presumption of reasonableness. The presumption “simply recognizes . . . that when the judge's discretionary decision accords with
the Commission's view of the appropriate application of §3553(a) in the mine run of cases, it is probable that the sentence is reasonable.” But even if we do not apply such a presumption here, on the view that Deegan’s offense is not a “mine run”
second-degree murder, the district court did not abuse its considerable discretion. . . .

The record . . . includes evidence in aggravation and mitigation. [A] court reasonably could view Deegan’s offense as “unusually heinous, cruel, and brutal,” and deserving of harsh punishment. . . . Deegan also presented evidence of her
troubled personal history and family circumstances, and of course we share our dissenting colleague's condemnation of violence against American Indian women.

[Wie are firm in our view that the district court did not abuse its discretion by refusing to impose a more lenient sentence. Whatever the deterrent effect of this sentence, general or specific, and whatever Deegan’s personal history, the
court was entitled to consider the need for the sentence imposed to “reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for the law, and to provide just punishment for the offense.” 18 U.S.C. §3553(a)(2)(A). . .

. We disagree, moreover, with the dissent’s contention that the district court should have considered the “disparity” between Deegan’s sentence and the sentence that may have been imposed if Deegan . . . had been prosecuted in
state court. [It is well settled] that “the need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities . .. ,” 18 U.S.C. §3553(a)(6), refers only to disparities among federal defendants. It would have been ertor for the district court to consider potential federal/state
sentencing disparities under §3553(a)(6). . ..

Bric, J., dissenting. [This case] represents the most clear sentencing error that this dissenting judge has ever seen. . ..

Ms. Deegan’s life is marked by a history of extensive and cruel abuse. Her alcoholic father beat her on an almost daily basis. . .. Some of the beatings were so severe that her father kept her home from school to avoid reports to Child
Protective Services. She and her siblings were eventually removed from her parents’ house due to the abuse, placed in a variety of foster homes, and periodically returned to her parents’ house. While in foster care, Ms. Deegan was separated from
her siblings and experienced physical abuse from some of her foster family members. . . .

Ms. Deegan also suffered extensive and cruel sexual abuse. At five years of age, her father’s drinking buddies began sexually abusing her. . . . At age eleven, the sexual abuse ended when Ms. Deegan finally disclosed the abuse to her
mother. Her father responded by beating her for being a “slut and allowing it to happen.” Ms. Deegan spent much of her childhood caring for and protecting her six younger siblings. . . . As an adult the abuse continued [and] her father [once] at-
tacked her while she was pregnant with her second child. She jumped through a window to escape.

p.1139
p.1140

At age fifteen, Ms. Deegan began a relationship with Shannon Hale, the son of one of her foster parents. .. . She bore four children fathered by Mr. Hale, including the infant victim in this case.

After Ms. Deegan’s third child was born, she became depressed. . . . Hale was physically abusing her two to three times per week, forcing her to have sexual intercourse with him, and refusing to care for their children. . . .

Despite the abuse, Ms. Deegan did not leave Mr. Hale permanently because he repeatedly assured her that he would reduce his drinking and stop abusing her. Ms. Deegan reported that she sometimes went to live with her parents
when the abuse was most severe, but then her father would physically and verbally abuse her. Ms. Deegan also explained that she did not feel that she could leave Mr. Hale because [she] feared that if she left Mr. Hale, his mother, a prominent
member of the Indian community, would acquire custody of her children. . . . Ms. Deegan’s state of despair and depression was [aggravated by additional factors. She and Hale were unemployed, and she] lived in extreme poverty and isolation. . ..
When Ms. Deegan obtained any money, Mr. Hale took it and bought methamphetamine. . . .

Ms. Deegan's crime of neonaticide was . . . completely unlike the usual and ordinary killings that constitute second-degree murder under federal law. . . . Only because this neonaticide occurred on an Indian reservation does this case
become one of federal jurisdiction. . .

Congress recognized that the goals of certainty and uniformity must in some instances yield to unique circumstances. . . . Despite the seemingly obvious fact that neonaticide is an unusual crime in federal court, the presentence report
makes no mention that this is an “atypical” case. Even more distressing, the presentence report fails to indicate much in the way of the abusive circumstances Ms. Deegan faced during her childhood and at the time she gave birth to the infant
victim. ...

[In] Koon v. United States, 518 U.S. 81 (1996), the Court explained that the then-mandatory guidelines carve out a “heartland” of typical cases and the Court provided an approach for delineating which cases fall within that heart-
land. . .. Applying this rationale, whether Ms. Deegan’s conduct fell outside the heartland . . . depends on whether her conduct significantly differed from the norm. “The norm” is certainly not what we have here — an American Indian woman so
beset by the serious problems in her life she cannot cope with another child, cannot think with logic, and believes she has no alternative but to run away and abandon her newborn child. Tragic yes, typical no!

. .. To determine whether the Commission contemplated neonaticide . . . in its guidelines for second-degree murder, this writer inquired of the Sentencing Commission [and it responded that its records since 2006 contain no other case
involving neonaticide] Thus, a neonaticide case clearly falls outside the “heartland” for second-degree murder sentences. . . .

[The dissent then went through the §3553(a) factors. It relied on Dr. Resnick’s testimony that incarcerating Deegan would not likely deter others from committing neonaticide, in part because, after Deegan committed her crime, all 50
states enacted safe haven laws allowing women to drop off a baby at a hospital or police station with no questions asked. Resnick also explained that Deegan is a low recidivism risk because she had a tubal ligation, so she won't have more chil-
dren; she has no criminal record; no substance abuse history; and is remorseful. Moreover, a study of women who commit neonaticide found that most of them go on to be

p.1140
porta
good mothers, suggesting, Resnick said, that “this is a crime based upon circumstances as opposed to bad character in the perpetrator.” The dissent also considered Deegan's family ties’]

While the guidelines do not ordinarily consider matters such as family ties, such a consideration is permissible under §3553(a). .. . Deegan spoke of her children’s needs for her. . . . Instead of the prosecutor acknowledging that the
children’s needs [their ages were one, two, and five] can play a role in reducing a federal sentence, he justified the guideline sentence saying, “[T]he punishment that comes to those siblings as well comes at the hand of the defendant. Basically
her choice is what has caused all of this.” . . . But what blame should be placed on Mr. Hale who did not support the children he fathered and consistently abused Ms. Deegan? And what about the failures of society to assist Ms. Deegan in her
travail? ...

[The dissent then addressed the need to avoid disparity:] A district court should consider . . . the need to avoid unwarranted disparity among defendants who have been found guilty of similar conduct. 18 U.S.C. §3553(a)(2)(A) and (a)
(©). [The record revealed another neonaticide crime in North Dakota, but committed off the Indian reservation and, thus, subject only to state law. That defendant was sentenced to three years’ probation.] Dr. Resnick informed the court that women
who plead guilty to neonaticide are “infrequently sentenced to more than three years in prison.” These are all state sentences and, as observed by the majority, ordinarily state sentences are not germane to showing disparities in sentencing. But
here, we ought to consider the difference in sentence between (1) Ms. Deegan, a woman living in North Dakota [but subject to] federal law because of her residency on an Indian reservation, and (2) a North Dakota woman who committed a neonati-
cide crime off the reservation... .

[The judge quoted a letter from Deegan’s sister’] “The cultural deprivations and discriminations of our people merely because of our heritage has contributed to the psychological deficits that Dana, at that particular low time in her life,
was unable to overcome. I fear that these same cultural factors may also contribute to harsher penalties of an already oppressed woman.”

Reading this letter should give us all pause. How many of us can really comprehend the misery of Ms. Deegan’s situation as described in this record? None of these matters made any difference to the district court when sentencing
under the guidelines. | ask what respect should be given to this guideline sentence? . . .

Diana B. Henriques & Jack Healy
Madoff Goes to Jail After Guilty Pleas

N.Y. Times, Mar. 13, 2009

When Bernard L. Madoff entered a federal courtroom in Manhattan on Thursday to admit that he had run a vast Ponzi scheme that robbed thousands of investors of their life savings, he was as elegantly dressed as ever. ... He admitted

his guilt for the first time in public, and apologized to his victims, dozens of whom were squeezed into the courtroom benches behind him, before being handcuffed and led away to jail to await sentencing.
pore
p.1142

“| knew what | was doing was wrong, indeed criminal,” he said. “When | began the Ponzi scheme, | believed it would end shortly and | would be able to extricate myself and my clients.” But finding an exit “proved difficult, and ultimately
impossible,” he continued, stumbling slightly in his prepared remarks. “As the years went by | realized this day, and my arrest, would inevitably come.” Mr. Madoff acknowledged that he had “deeply hurt many, many people,” adding, “I cannot ad-
equately express how sorry | am for what I have done.”

. [T]he hearing made clear that Mr. Madoff is refusing to help the government build a case against anyone else. . . . The 11 counts of fraud, money laundering, perjury and theft to which Mr. Madoff, 70, pleaded guilty carry maximum
terms totaling 150 years. .. .

Mr. Madoff's fraud became a global scheme that ensnared hedge funds, charities and celebrities. He enticed thousands of investors, including figures like Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey, the Hall of Fame pitcher Sandy
Koufax and a charity run by Elie Wiesel, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate. The fraud’s collapse erased as much as $65 billion that his customers thought they had. It remains unclear how much victims will recover. A court-appointed trustee liquidat-
ing Mr. Madoff's business has so far been able to identify only about $1 billion in assets to satisfy claims.

United States v. Bernard L. Madoff
United States District Court, Southern District of New York (June 29, 2009)52

CHiN, J. . . . [H]ere the guideline range is not life imprisonment, but 150 years, the maximum sentences for each of the 11 counts added together. . . . While | must give the guideline range fair and respectful consideration, | am not bound
by it... Instead, | must make an individualized assessment based on all the facts and circumstances, including the factors set forth in the statute. In the end, | must impose a sentence that is reasonable.

[The court next heard from the victims, who recounted the devastation caused by their financial losses.]

[Madoff's lawyer then spoke’] “I think it's important to note . . . that Mr. Madoff stepped forward. He chose not to flee. He chose not to hide money. . . . Mr. Madoff is 71 years old, your Honor. Based upon his health . . . his family history,
his life expectancy, that is why we ask for a sentence of 12 years, just short, based upon the statistics we have, of a life sentence. . . . We also said, if your Honor is inclined, . . . 15 to 20 years. So that if Mr. Madoff ever sees the light of day, in his
90s, impoverished and alone, he will have paid a terrible price. . .. [T]here is no question that this case has taken an enormous toll, not only on Mr. Madoff and his family, but to the victims to be sure. . .. We ask only, your Honor, that Mr. Madoff be
given understanding and faimess, within the parameters of our legal system, and that the sentence that he be given be sufficient, but not greater than necessary.”

p.1142
p.1143

[Madoff himself addressed the court, briefly, to apologize. He was followed by the government lawyer, who requested that Madoff be sentenced to 150 years for “carry[ing] out a fraud of unprecedented proportion over the course of
more than a generation.” The government rejected the defendant's proposed sentence of 12 years as “profoundly unfair. Not only would it not reflect the seriousness and the scope of the defendant's crimes, but, also, it would not promote the
goals of general deterrence going forward.”]

[Judge Chin then offered his analysis and sentence’] | take into account what I have read in the presentence report, the parties’ sentencing submissions, and the e-mails and letters from victims. | take into account what I have heard
today. | also consider the statutory factors as well as all the facts and circumstances in the case. .. .

Objectively speaking, the fraud here was staggering. It spanned more than 20 years. . .. As for the amount of monetary loss, there appears to be some disagreement. Mr. Madoff disputes that the loss amount is $65 billion or even $13
billion. . . . [T]he fraud here is unprecedented. [The sentencing guidelines offense level] is calculated by using a chart for loss amount that only goes up to $400 million. By any of these measures, the loss figure here is many times that amount. It's
off the chart by many fold.

Moreover, as many of the victims have pointed out, this is not just a matter of money. The breach of trust was massive. Investors — individuals, charities, pension funds, institutional clients — were repeatedly lied to, as they were told
their moneys would be invested in stocks when they were not. . . . As the victims’ letters and e-mails demonstrate, as the statements today demonstrate, investors made important life decisions based on these fictitious account statements —
when to retire, how to care for elderly parents, whether to buy a car or sell a house, how to save for their children’s college tuition. Charitable organizations and pension funds made important decisions based on false information about fictitious
accounts... .

It is true that Mr. Madoff used much of the money to pay back investors who asked along the way to withdraw their accounts. But large sums were also taken by him, for his personal use and the use of his family, friends, and
colleagues... .

Mr. Madoff argues a number of mitigating factors but they are less than compelling. It is true that he essentially turned himself in and confessed to the FBI. But the fact is that with the turn in the economy, he was not able to keep up with
the requests of customers to withdraw their funds, and itis apparent that he knew that he was going to be caught soon. . . . Moreover, the [trustee of the funds recovered] has advised the Court Mr. Madoff has not been helpful, and | simply do not
get the sense that Mr. Madoff has done alll that he could or told all that he knows. . ..

Ihave taken into account the sentence imposed in other financial fraud cases in this district. But, frankly, none of these other cases is comparable to this case in terms of the scope, duration and enormity of the fraud, and the degree of
the betrayal.

In terms of mitigating factors in a white-collar fraud case such as this, | would expect to see letters from family and friends and colleagues. But not a single letter has been submitted attesting to Mr. Madoff's good deeds or good char-
acter of civic or charitable activities. The absence of such support is telling.

We have heard much about life expectancy analysis. Based on this analysis, Mr. Madoff has a life expectancy of 13 years, and therefore asks for a sentence of 12 years or alternatively 15 to 20 years. If [this] life expectancy analysis is
correct, any sentence above 20 or 25 years would be largely, if not entirely, symbolic.

p.1143
p.1tds

But the symbolism is important, for at least three reasons. First, retribution. One of the traditional notions of punishment is that an offender should be punished in proportion to his blameworthiness. Here, the message must be sent that
Mr. Madoff's crimes were extraordinarily evil, and that this kind of irresponsible manipulation of the system is not merely a bloodless financial crime that takes place just on paper, but that is instead, as we have heard, one that takes a staggering
human toil. The symbolism is important because the message must be sent that in a society governed by the rule of law, Mr. Madoff will get what he deserves, and that he will be punished according to his moral culpability.

Second, [another important goal of punishment is deterrence, and the symbolism is important here because the strongest possible message must be sent to those would engage in similar conduct that they will be caught and that they
will be punished to the fullest extent of the law.

Finally, symbolism is also important for the victims. . . . Mr. Madoff’s very personal betrayal struck at the rich and the not-so-rich, the elderly living on retirement funds and social security, middle class folks trying to put their kids through
college, and ordinary people who worked hard to save their money and who thought they were investing it safely, for themselves and their families.

I received letters, and we have heard from, for example, a retired forest worker, a corrections officer, an auto mechanic, a physical therapist, a retired New York City school secretary, who is now 66 years old and widowed, who must
deal with the loss of her retirement funds. . . .

| was particularly struck by one story that | read in the letters. A man invested his family's life savings with Mr. Madoff. Tragically, he died of a heart attack just two weeks later. The widow eventually went in to see Mr. Madoff. He put his
arm around her, as she describes it, and in a kindly manner told her not to worry, the money is safe with me. And so not only did the widow leave the money with him, she eventually deposited more funds with him, her 401(k), her pension funds.
Now, all the money is gone. She will have to sell her home, and she will not be able to keep her promise to help her granddaughter pay for college.

A substantial sentence will not give the victims back . . . their financial security or the freedom from financial worry. But more is at stake than money. .. . The victims put their trust in Mr. Madoff. That trust was broken in a way that has.
left many — victims as well as others — doubting our financial institutions, our financial system, our government's ability to regulate and protect, and sadly, even themselves. . .. A substantial sentence, the knowledge that Mr. Madoff has been
punished to the fullest extent of the law, may, in some small measure, help these victims in their healing process.

Mr. Madoff, please stand. It is the judgment of this Court that the defendant, Bernard L. Madoff, shall be and hereby is sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 150 years. . .

| will not impose a fine, as whatever assets Mr. Madoff has, as whatever assets may be found, they shall be applied to restitution for the victims. . . .

NOTES AND QUESTIONS
1. Postscript to Madoff. Bernie Madoff died in April 2021 at the age of 82, having served 12 years of his sentence.
p.1tds
p.1145

2. Guidelines and the purposes of punishment. Under the current federal scheme, judges first determine the appropriate guideline sentence and whether a departure is warranted because a case falls outside the heartland. Next,
judges are to determine whether the sentence is warranted under 18 U.S.C. §3553(a), p. 1128 supra, which requires judges to consider, among other things, whether the sentence serves the retributive and utilitarian goals of punishment.
QUESTIONS: (a) Will the consideration of these broad factors undercut the goals of the more specific and finely tuned guidelines? Is Judge Bright's approach to §3553(a) in Deegan an example of how that approach can undermine those goals,
or does his opinion illustrate the value of keeping the overall goals of sentencing in mind to determine which cases are, in fact, alike?

(b) Was Judge Chin's analysis of the purposes of punishment convincing? Madoff questioned his sentence on retributive grounds: “Explain to me who else has received a sentence like that. . .. mean, serial killers get a death sen-
tence, but that's virtually what he gave me.” Benjamin Weiser, Judge Explains 150-Year Sentence for Madoff, N.Y. Times, June 28, 2011. Is Madoff's sentence proportionate to the harms caused? Should Judge Chin have contemplated how the
sentence compares to sentences for other kinds of crimes, including violent crimes and homicides?

3. The defendant’s family circumstances. The Sentencing Commission, when it promulgated the guidelines, concluded that family and community ties are “not ordinarily relevant.” What justifies that conclusion? Is this factor ruled
‘out because it is not relevant to penal law objectives or only because it is likely to be applied inconsistently? If the latter, is consistency important enough to trump the substantive objectives of punishment? Judge Bright thought family circum-
stances (the three preschool children whose mother would be taken away if she is sentenced to prison) could be relevant under §3553(a), even though those circumstances are not ordinarily relevant under the guidelines. Which of the §3553(a)
factors is implicated by family circumstances? What theory of punishment justifies a reduced sentence when a defendant's incarceration will harm third parties such as the defendant's children?

In current sentencing practice, the effect of an offense on its victims is routinely taken into account, as it was in Madoff, through the formal vehicle of a Victim Impact Statement. See p. 41 supra. If the innocent victims are relevant
parties whose interests should be taken into account, does that mean the defendant's innocent family members should also have their interests factored into a sentence? One commentator argues that the children of incarcerated parents have
First Amendment freedom of association and due process liberty interests at stake in sentencing determinations and that those interests should be considered. Chesa Boudin, Children of Incarcerated Parents: The Child's Constitutional Right to
the Family Relationship, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 77, 92-97 (2011). For a general argument that family circumstances of the defendant are devalued in the sentencing calculation, see Nancy Gertner, Women and Sentencing, 57 Am. Crim. L.
Rev. 1401, 1408 (2020).

4, The defendant's other personal circumstances. Now that the federal guidelines are merely advisory, many judges have used their greater flexibility to sentence defendants below the applicable guideline range, in the manner
urged by Judge Bright in his dissent in Deegan. The Sentencing Commission followed some
p15
p.1146
of these cues and changed its course on certain defendant characteristics. Before 2010, a defendant's age, mental and emotional conditions, physical condition, and military service were deemed “not ordinarily relevant.” Now the Commission's
policy statement provides that these factors “may be relevant” in determining whether a departure is permitted — if these factors are “present to an unusual degree and distinguish the case from the typical cases.” The Commission did not, how-
ever, change its views on family circumstances and community service.
QUESTIONS: (a) Was the Commission correct to distinguish between these two groups of characteristics? What might justify its approach? Why should military service be a factor in a defendant's sentence? Should it count only when the military
service creates a condition — such as post-traumatic stress disorder — that is related to the criminal behavior? Or is service relevant even if it does not bear such a relationship, because it demonstrates prior good acts by the defendant? Every
sentencing regime takes into account a defendant's prior bad acts (i.e., past criminal conduct) at sentencing; is there a principled reason for not taking into account prior good acts as well? See Carissa Byrne Hessick, Why Are Only Bad Acts Good
Sentencing Factors?, 88 B.U. L. Rev. 1109 (2008).

(b) Should the absence of good acts count against a defendant? Judge Chin noted in his opinion that white collar offenders typically submit letters of support from people who know them, attesting to their good character and charita-
ble contributions. While the presence of these letters may not help a defendant get a lower sentence, Judge Chin suggested that these letters have become so commonplace in white collar cases as to become necessary to avoid a higher sentence.
Their absence, in Judge Chin's words, “is telling.” If individuals had submitted letters on Madoff's behalf describing his charitable works or good character, is it likely they would have made a difference in Madoft’s sentence? If the answer is no,
given the scope of the fraud, should Judge Chin have mentioned their absence at all?

5. Cultural and social context. Judge Bright included an appendix to his dissent entitled “Lifting the Curtain on Assaults Against Women and Children in Indian Country.” It quoted at length from Mark J. MacDougall & Katherine
Deming Brodie, Strange Justice in Indian Country, Nat'l LJ. (Sept. 28, 2009), which contains some sobering statistics, including the fact that one in three women living on reservations will be raped in her lifetime, a rate roughly double that found in
surveys of American adult women generally.53 Such statistics led Judge Bright to conclude: “The violence against women and children on Indian reservations is a national scandal. .. . If the violence against Ms. Deegan had been stopped . . . and
she had been given moral and societal assistance in raising the three children in her family, this crime of neonaticide might never have occurred.” Id. at 664. How, if at all, should the prevalence of violence in a community (and in Deegan's life in
particular) affect her sentence?

In Canada, judges must pay particular attention in sentencing to the circumstances of defendants from indigenous communities in an effort to ameliorate their overrepresentation in prison. R. v. Gladue, [1999] 1 S.C.R. 688 (Can.); see

p.1146

p17
Christopher Sewrattan, Apples, Oranges, and Steel: The Effect of Mandatory Minimum Sentences for Drug Offences on the Equality Rights of Aboriginal Peoples, 46 U.B.C. L. Rev. 121, 129-130 (2013), but there is little evidence that this mandate
has had much effect.5¢

Should the United States pay particular attention to the circumstances of its Native American population when sentencing? Should that same standard apply to African Americans, given their long history of discrimination in the United
States? Should judges consider more lenient treatment — whether through reduced sentences, treatment programs, or restorative justice — for anyone coming from economically disadvantaged circumstances? For the debate about the relevance
of environmental deprivation to just punishment, see pp. 1005-1012 supra. How would Justice Thomas (p. 1008 supra) assess the appropriate punishment for Deegan?

6. Should courts take into account individual differences in how punishment is experienced? In an interview with the New York Times given two years after sentencing Madoff, Judge Chin explained that one of the “struggles”
in sentencing Bernard Madotf was whether to give him any hope of being released in his lifetime because of his advanced age at the time of sentencing. “In the end, | just thought that he didn’t deserve it,” he said. Benjamin Weiser, Judge Explains
150-Year Sentence for Madoff, N.Y. Times, June 28, 2011. Should a defendant's age and life expectancy be part of a court's calculus? Would the same sentence have been appropriate if Madoff were 40 years old instead of 71?

In State v. Thompson, 735 N.W.2d 818 (Neb. 2007), the court considered the defendant's relatively small stature, and what it would mean during his term of incarceration. The defendant had sexually assaulted a child, and the trial court
imposed a sentence of probation. Thompson was 5 feet 2 inches tall and weighed between 125 to 130 pounds, and those facts led the trial court to observe: “lI look at your physical size . . . and, quite frankly, | shake to think of what might happen
to you in prison. . . .| am going to try to put together some kind of order that will keep you out of prison.” Assuming that Thompson's physical size would increase his risk of being the victim of physical or sexual abuse in prison, was that an appro-
priate consideration in granting him probation?

Should a defendant's subjective experience of punishment be relevant? For an argument that proportionality requires one to consider variations in how defendants experience the suffering associated with punishment, see Adam J.
Kolber, The Subjective Experience of Punishment, 109 Colum. L. Rev. 182 (2009); John Bronsteen, Christopher Buccafusco & Jonathan Masur, Happiness and Punishment, 76 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1037 (2009). What are the dangers of a subjectivist ap-
proach? For critiques, see Dan Markel & Chad Flanders, Bentham on Stilts: The Bare Relevance of Subjectivity to Retributive Justice, 98 Cal. L. Rev. 907 (2010); David Gray, Punishment as Suffering, 63 Vand. L. Rev. 1619 (2010). Even if judges do
not consider the subjective experience of punishment, should prison officials? For a probing, in-depth account of a special unit established in the Los Angeles County Jail to protect the personal security of gay men and trans women, see Sharon
Dolovich, Strategic Segregation in the Modern Prison, 48 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1 (2011).

p.147
p.1148
NOTES ON THE JURY'S ROLE IN SENTENCING

1. The constitutional right to jury factfinding. As noted, p. 146 supra, the defendant has a constitutional right to require the prosecution to prove every element of the offense to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. But as Williams
v. New York, p. 1114 supra, makes clear, judges can consider a wide range of factors, and reach judgments about what the facts were, when deciding how severe a sentence to impose. The line between offense elements and sentencing factors is
therefore important for delineating the respective province of the judge and the jury. In a series of cases, beginning with Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000), the Supreme Court has taken an active role in policing the line between the jury’s
province and that of the judge. The Court has held that “[o]ther than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reason-
able doubt.” Id. at 490. The Court then concluded in Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296, 303 (2004), that “the ‘statutory maximum’ for Apprendi purposes is the maximum sentence a judge may impose solely on the basis of the facts reflected in
the jury verdict or admitted by the defendant{,] . . . without any additional findings.” The Court in Blakely held that the defendant's sentence, which Washington state guidelines made mandatory on the basis of facts determined by the sentencing
judge, ran afoul of the Sixth Amendment. The Court required the trial judge either to sentence the defendant within the sentencing range supported by the jury's findings or to hold a separate sentencing hearing before a jury.

QUESTIONS: How significant is this line of cases if most cases result from pleas instead of trials? Are these cases only helpful in the few cases that go to trial, or does this line of authority affect the bargaining relationship between the prosecution
and defense? Does it depend on the kind of fact at issue and whether the prosecution is confident the jury will find it beyond a reasonable doubt, or does any additional factual burden on the prosecution strengthen the defendant's hand in plea
bargaining?

2. The implications for sentencing under guidelines. In light of Blakely, a number of state courts — after holding their sentencing guideline systems unconstitutional — have required jury findings, beyond a reasonable doubt, for
facts necessary to trigger a higher sentencing range. E.g., State v. Shattuck, 704 N.W.2d 131 (Minn. 2005); State v. Schofield, 876 A.2d 43 (Me. 2005).

A year after Blakely, the U.S. Supreme Court in Booker, as noted (p. 1136 supra), held the federal sentencing guidelines unconstitutional as well, but adopted a different remedy. The Court simply made the federal guidelines “advisory”
rather than mandatory and allowed federal appellate courts to set aside the sentencing decisions of lower courts, whether within the guideline range or not, only when the sentence was found “unreasonable.” The advisory guidelines remain an im-
portant factor in the sentencing process, with the Supreme Court acknowledging them as the “lodestar” and starting point for federal sentencing proceedings. Molina-Martinez v. United States, 136 S. Ct. 1338, 1346 (2016). On the heels of Booker,

several states likewise adopted this approach and made their guidelines advisory. E.g., State v. Foster, 845 N.E.2d 470 (Ohio 2006). Some commentators view Booker as a welcome restoration of some balance in a system that had previously tilted
too heavily
p.1148
p.1149
toward prosecutors. E.g., Paul J. Hofer, Has Booker Restored Balance? A Look at Data on Plea Bargaining and Sentencing, 23 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 326 (2011). Others have argued that, without stringent appellate review, trial judges will have too much
discretion under Booker. See Stephanos Bibas, Max M. Schanzenbach & Emerson H. Tiller, Policing Politics at Sentencing, 103 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1371 (2009).

Though Booker undoubtedly gave trial judges more discretion, and sentences for many decreased (see pp. 1136-1137, supra), that has not translated into reduced incarceration. In fact, incarceration rates were “unaffected” by Booker
and even “continued their decades-long climb.” Paul J. Hofer, Federal Sentencing After Booker, 48 Crime & Just. 137, 145 (2019). One commentator attributes this to the guidelines’ “gravitational pull.” Id. at 141. Even though district courts are
now free to deviate from the guidelines, judges must still calculate the guidelines range and expressly state their reasons for departing from that range. This often “anchor{s]” judges to the guidelines figure. And because the guidelines recommend
incarceration for “almost all defendants,” district court judges continue to send offenders to prison at high rates. Id. at 145. Is the preference for incarceration rooted in something more than the “gravitational pull” of the guidelines regime? Or would
judges be less likely to incarcerate defendants in the absence of any guidelines? And if the latter, would lower rates of incarceration be distributed equally across demographic groups?

3. The implications for mandatory minimums. Although the Supreme Court initially held that the right to a jury trial does not apply to facts that increase only the minimum term as opposed to the maximum term, McMillan v.
Pennsylvania, 477 U.S. 79 (1986), and Harris v. United States, 536 U.S. 545 (2002), it changed course in Alleyne v. United States, 570 U.S. 99 (2013), holding that any factual finding that increases a mandatory minimum sentence is an offense ele-
ment that must be proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt.

NOTE ON TAKING A SECOND LOOK AT A DEFENDANT'S SENTENCE

If the system inevitably leads to mistakes by prosecutors, judges, and juries, what kind of second look is appropriate? In jurisdictions with parole, a board can reevaluate a defendant's sentence (after a certain minimum of time is
served). If parole is not an option, typically the only available second look mechanism would come in the form of executive clemency, which is rarely given. The American Law Institute's final draft proposal of new sentencing provisions for the MPC.
proposes a third option: allowing judges to revisit long sentences after 15 years. Model Penal Code: Sentencing §305.6 (Am. L. Inst., Proposed Final Draft, 2017).

Are judges best positioned to take this second look, or would it be more desirable to have a system of parole and review by parole officers? Should there be a greater role for executive clemency in correcting excessively long sen-
tences? In 2014, President Obama announced a broad effort to use his commutation power to reduce long sentences for individuals convicted of nonviolent offenses. The Department of Justice is in charge of clemency at the federal level, so it
was responsible for reviewing the more than 33,000 applications submitted. Although President Obama commuted more than 1,700 sentences, many criticized the initiative for its arbitrary approach and failure to reach all the applicants who met

p.1149

p. 1180
the President's stated criteria.®° Is the Department of Justice in a good position to evaluate clemency petitions because of the expertise it has from prosecuting the cases in the first place? Or does that prosecution perspective create a conflict
of interest that helps explain why so few petitions were granted from among the pool that seemed to meet the stated criteria? For a critical account of the Department's role, see Rachel E. Barkow & Mark Osler, Designed to Fail: The President's
Deference to the Department of Justice in Advancing Criminal Justice Reform, 59 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 387 (2017). What other structural changes could improve the use of clemency to address flaws in initial sentences? For a discussion of different
models, see Rachel E. Barkow & Mark Osler, Restructuring Clemency: The Cost of Ignoring Clemency and a Plan for Renewal, 82 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1 (2015); Margaret Colgate Love, Reinvigorating the Federal Pardon Process: What the President Can
Learn from the States, 9 U. St. Thomas L.J. 730 (2012).

3. Constitutional Limits

Congress and state legislatures have broad authority to set sentencing length. The only ceiling is that the punishments cannot run afoul of the Eighth Amendment’s ban on cruel and unusual punishment and comparable provisions of
the state constitutions. In Chapter 3, in discussing the general criminal law principle requiring proportionality, we examined one aspect of this issue, using opinions by Supreme Court justices in Harmelin to highlight key aspects of the debate on
the appropriate role for a court in conducting such proportionality review. Here we focus instead on the specific doctrinal tests currently used by the Supreme Court to evaluate non-capital sentences to highlight how litigants can bring constitu-
tional challenges.

The Supreme Court has created two different tests for assessing whether punishments fail the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishment. For challenges to individual punishments, it applies the test in Justice
Kennedy's concurrence in Harmelin, supra p. 237. The Court must find as a threshold matter that the sentence is grossly disproportionate, and a sentence will pass that threshold inquiry so long as the state has a reasonable basis for believing
that it will serve a deterrent, retributive, rehabilitative, or incapacitative goal. Only if a punishment violates that prohibition on gross disproportionality will the Court then compare the sentence with sentences for similar crimes in other jurisdictions
or with the sentences for other crimes in the same jurisdiction. The next case provides an

p. 1150
p.1151
illustration of how the Court applies its Eighth Amendment test for challenges to individual punishments, followed by Graham v. Florida, a case in which the Court adopts a different test for so-called categorical challenges to punishment.
Ewing v. California
‘Supreme Court of the United States
538 U.S. 11 (2003)

Justice O'Connor announced the judgment of the Court and delivered an opinion in which THE CHIEF JusTICE and JusTICE KENNEDY join.

In this case, we decide whether the Eighth Amendment prohibits the State of California from sentencing a repeat felon to a prison term of 25 years to life under the State’s “Three Strikes and You're Out” law.

California's three strikes law reflects a shift in the State’s sentencing policies toward incapacitating and deterring repeat offenders who threaten the public safety. . .. On October 1, 1993, while [a referendum to enact such a law] was
circulating, 12-year-old Polly Klaas was kidnapped from her home. . . . Her admitted killer, Richard Allen Davis, had a long criminal history that included two prior kidnapping convictions. Davis had served only half of his most recent [16-year] sen-
tence. . . . Had Davis served his entire sentence, he would still have been in prison on the day that Polly Klaas was kidnapped.

Polly Klaas’ murder galvanized support for the three strikes initiative. . . . California thus became the second State to enact a three strikes law. . . . Between 1993 and 1995, 24 States and the Federal Government enacted three strikes
laws. Though the three strikes laws vary from State to State, they share a common goal of protecting the public safety by providing lengthy prison terms for habitual felons.

[Under] California’s current three strikes law . . . [i]f the defendant has one prior “serious” or “violent” felony conviction, he must be sentenced to “twice the term otherwise provided as punishment for the current felony conviction.” If
the defendant has two or more prior “serious” or “violent” felony convictions, he must receive “an indeterminate term of life imprisonment.” Defendants sentenced to life under the three strikes law become eligible for parole on a date calculated by
reference to a “minimum term” which is [never less than 25 years]. . . . [C]ertain offenses [known as “wobblers”] may be classified as either felonies or misdemeanors. . . . Some crimes that would otherwise be misdemeanors become “wobblers”
because of the defendant's prior record [and] prosecutors may exercise their discretion to charge a “wobbler” as either a felony or a misdemeanor. ... . California trial courts have discretion to . . . avoid imposing a three strikes sentence . . . by re-
ducing “wobblers” to misdemeanors [or] by vacating allegations of prior “serious” or “violent” felony convictions.

On parole from a 9-year prison term, petitioner Gary Ewing walked into the pro shop of the El Segundo Golf Course [and] walked out with three golf clubs, priced at $399 apiece, concealed in his pants leg. A shop employee, whose
suspicions were aroused when he observed Ewing limp out of the pro shop, telephoned the police [who] apprehended Ewing in the parking lot.

p.1161
p. 1182

Ewing is no stranger to the criminal justice system. In 1984, at the age of 22, he pleaded guilty to theft. [Between 1988 and September 1993, Ewing was convicted of four other theft offenses, one burglary, one battery, possession of
drug paraphernalia, and possession of a firearm. His sentences typically ranged from 10 to 60 days in jail, followed by probation, though he served a year in jail on one of the theft charges and six months in jail for the drug offense. Then in October
and November 1998, he committed three burglaries and one robbery over a five-week period. In one instance, when he encountered a victim, he produced a knife and absconded with the victim's money and credit cards. For these offenses, he
was convicted of robbery and three counts of burglary and sentenced to 116 months.]

Only 10 months [after his release on parole in 1999], Ewing stole the golf clubs at issue in this case [and was convicted of] felony grand theft. [The trial court found] that Ewing had been convicted previously of four serious or violent
felonies for the three burglaries and the robbery in [1993].

At the sentencing hearing, Ewing asked the court to reduce the conviction for grand theft . .. to a misdemeanor [and to dismiss some or all of his prior felony convictions] so as to avoid a three strikes sentence. [T]he trial judge [refused,
and] Ewing was sentenced under the three strikes law to 25 years to life. The California Court of Appeal affirmed. . .. The Supreme Court of California denied Ewing's petition for review, and we granted certiorari. We now affirm.

The Eighth Amendment, which forbids cruel and unusual punishments, contains a “narrow proportionality principle” that “applies to noncapital sentences.” Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U.S. 957, 996-997 (1991) (Kennedy, J., concur-
ring...).

[The Court then discussed prior Eighth Amendment cases. In Rummel v. Estelle, 445 U.S. 263 (1980), the Court upheld a life sentence with the possibility of parole for an offender who obtained $120.75 by false pretenses and whose two
prior offenses were felony convictions for “fraudulent use of a credit card to obtain $80 worth of goods or services” and for “passing a forged check in the amount of $28.36.” Three years later, in Solem v. Helm, 463 U.S. 277 (1983), the Court held
it unconstitutional to give a life sentence without possibility of parole to a defendant who uttered a bad check for $100, his seventh nonviolent felony. In Solem, the Court explained that “three factors may be relevant to a determination of whether
a sentence is so disproportionate that it violates the Eighth Amendment: (i) the gravity of the offense and the harshness of the penalty; (ji) the sentences imposed on other criminals in the same jurisdiction; and (ii) the sentences imposed for com-
mission of the same crime in other jurisdictions.”

[In Harmelin, the Court upheld a sentence of life without possibility of parole for a first offender convicted of possessing 672 grams of cocaine. The Court, however, could not agree on a rationale. Justice Scalia, joined by Chief Justice
Rehnquist, wrote that the proportionality requirement was “an aspect of our death penalty jurisprudence, rather than a generalizable aspect of Eighth Amendment law.” Justice Kennedy, joined by two other justices, accepted proportionality review
for non-capital sentences. He identified four principles of proportionality review — “the primacy of the legislature, the variety of legitimate penological schemes, the nature of our federal system, and the requirement that proportionality review be
guided by objective factors” — that “inform the final one: The Eighth Amendment does not require strict proportionality between crime and sentence. Rather, it forbids only extreme sentences that are ‘grossly disproportionate’ to the

p. 1182
p. 1183
crime.” By this standard, Justice Kennedy concluded that Harmelin's sentence was not “grossly disproportionate.”

[In her Ewing opinion, Justice O'Connor concluded that “[tJhe proportionality principles . . . distilled in Justice Kennedy's [Harmelin] concurrence guide our application of the Eighth Amendment.”]

For many years, most States have had laws providing for enhanced sentencing of repeat offenders. Yet between 1993 and 1995, three strikes laws effected a sea change in criminal sentencing throughout the Nation. These laws
responded to widespread public concerns about crime by targeting the class of offenders who pose the greatest threat to public safety: career criminals. . . . [Llegislatures enacting three strikes laws made a deliberate policy choice that individuals
who have repeatedly engaged in serious or violent criminal behavior, and whose conduct has not been deterred by more conventional approaches to punishment, must be isolated from society in order to protect the public safety. Though three
strikes laws may be relatively new, our tradition of deferring to state legislatures in making and implementing such important policy decisions is longstanding. .. .

Recidivism is a serious public safety concer in California and throughout the Nation. According to a recent report, . . . released property offenders like Ewing had higher recidivism rates than those released after committing violent,
drug, or public-order offenses. Approximately 73 percent of the property offenders released in 1994 were arrested again within three years, compared to approximately 61 percent of the violent offenders, 62 percent of the public-order offenders,
and 66 percent of the drug offenders.

[Deterrence] also lends some support to the three strikes law. . . . Four years after the passage of California's three strikes law, the recidivism rate of parolees returned to prison for the commission of a new crime dropped by nearly 25
percent [and] “an unintended but positive consequence of ‘Three Strikes’ has been [that more California parolees are now leaving the state than parolees from other jurisdictions entering California. . ..”

To be sure, California's three strikes law has sparked controversy. Critics have doubted the law's wisdom, cost-efficiency, and effectiveness in reaching its goals. See, e.g., Zimring, Hawkins, & Kamin, Punishment and Democracy:
Three Strikes and You're Out in California (2001); Vitiello, Three Strikes: Can We Retum to Rationality? 871 Crim. L. & Criminology 395, 423 (1997). [But w]e do not sit as a “superlegislature” to second-guess these policy choices. It is enough that
the State of California has a reasonable basis for believing that [its sentencing policy will further penological goals.]

Against this backdrop, we consider Ewing's claim that his three strikes sentence of 25 years to life is unconstitutionally disproportionate to his offense of “shoplifting three golf clubs.” . . . Even standing alone, Ewing's theft should not
be taken lightly. [And] the State's interest is not merely punishing the offense of conviction, or the “triggering” offense. [Ewing's sentence also] reflects a rational legislative judgment, entitled to deference, that offenders who have committed seri-
ous of violent felonies and who continue to commit felonies must be incapacitated. .. .

Justice ScALIA, concurring in the judgment. .. .
Proportionality — the notion that the punishment should fit the crime — is inherently a concept tied to the penological goal of retribution. “It becomes difficult even to speak intelligently of ‘proportionality,’ once deterrence and

p.1183
rehabilitation are given significant weight.” . .. In the present case, the game is up once the plurality has acknowledged that “the Constitution does not mandate adoption of any one penological theory.” . . . That acknowledgment having been
made, it no longer suffices merely to assess “the gravity of the offense compared to the harshness of the penalty”; that classic description of the proportionality principle (. .. in itself quite resistant to policy-free, legal analysis) now becomes
merely the “first” step of the inquiry. Having completed that step (by a discussion which, in all faimess, does not convincingly establish that 25-years-to-life is a “proportionate” punishment for stealing three golf clubs), the plurality must then add
an analysis to show that “Ewing's sentence is justified by the State’s public-safety interest in incapacitating and deterring recidivist felons.” [W]hy that has anything to do with the principle of proportionality is a mystery. [T]he plurality reads into the
Eighth Amendment . . . the unstated proposition that all punishment should reasonably pursue the multiple purposes of the criminal law. That formulation would make it clearer than ever, of course, that the plurality is not applying law but evaluat-
ing policy... 2
Justice Breyer, with whom Jusice STEVENS, Justice SouTEr, and Justice GiNsBURG join, dissenting. . . .

[Clourts faced with a “gross disproportionality” claim must first make “a threshold comparison of the crime committed and the sentence imposed.” If a claim crosses that threshold — itself a rare occurrence — then the court should
compare the sentence at issue to other sentences . . . in the same, or in other, jurisdictions. The comparative analysis will “validate” or invalidate “an initial judgment that a sentence is grossly disproportionate to a crime.” [The comparative analy-
sis looks at (a) the length of the prison term; (b) the sentence-triggering criminal conduct; and (c) the offender's criminal history.]

[Clonsider the present case. The [prior record] does not differ significantly here from that in Solem{, and it] would be difficult to say that the actual behavior itself here (shoplifting) differs significantly from that at issue in Solem (passing a
bad check) or in Rummel (obtaining money through false pretenses). [Ewing's sentence] is considerably shorter than [the] sentence in Solem, which amounted, in real terms, to life in prison [but] more than twice as long as the term at issue in Rum-
mel. [I]t means that Ewing himself, seriously ill when sentenced at age 38, will likely die in prison. . . . Overall, the comparison places Ewing's sentence well within the twilight zone between Solem and Rummel. . ..

I do not deny the seriousness of shoplifting, which an amicus curiae tells us costs retailers in the range of $30 billion annually. But [in terms of] “harm caused or threatened to the victim or society,” . . . the sentence-triggering behavior
here ranks well toward the bottom of the criminal conduct scale.

p.1154
p. 1185
[Wustice Breyer then found Ewing's sentence “extreme” under a comparative analysis:] California . . . reserves Ewing-type prison time, i.e., at least 25 real years in prison, for criminals convicted of crimes far worse than was Ewing's.
[Flor the years 1945 to 1981, for example, . . . typical (nonrecidivist) male first-degree murderers served between 10 and 15 real years in prison, with 90 percent of all such murderers serving less than 20 real years. [NJonrecidivists guilty of arson
causing great bodily injury [serve] a maximum sentence of nine years in prison. . ..
As to other jurisdictions, . . . the federal Sentencing Guidelines [which set the punishment for federal crimes] would impose upon a recidivist, such as Ewing, a sentence that, in any ordinary case, would not exceed 18 months in prison.
The Guidelines . . . reserve a Ewing-type sentence for Ewing-type recidivists who currently commit such crimes as murder; air piracy; robbery (involving the discharge of a firearm, serious bodily injury, and about $1 million); drug offenses involving
more than, for example, 20 pounds of heroin; aggravated theft of more than $100 million; and other similar offenses. [There are only nine states in which] the law might make it legally possible to impose a sentence of 25 years or more, though
that fact by itself, of course, does not mean that judges have actually done so. . . . California [and its supporting amici], despite every incentive to find [a sentence comparable to Ewing's], have come up with precisely three examples. [In one, an
Alabama case involving a “life” sentence for the theft of a tractor-trailer, the offender was eligible for parole after ten years, and in the second case, the South Dakota court did not consider the constitutionality of the sentence. Only one case, from
Nevada, is truly comparable] — a single instance of a similar sentence imposed outside the context of California's three strikes law, out of a prison population now approaching two million individuals. . . . Ewing’s recidivist sentence is virtually
unique in its harshness. . ..
One might argue that those who commit several property crimes should receive long terms of imprisonment in order to “incapacitate” them. . . . But that is not the object of this particular three strikes statute. Rather, as the plurality says,
California seeks “to reduce serious and violent crime.” The statute's definitions of both kinds of crime include crimes against the person, crimes that create danger of physical harm, and drug crimes. They do not include even serious crimes against
property, such as obtaining large amounts of money, say, through theft, embezzlement, or fraud... . Nor do the remaining criminal law objectives seem relevant. No one argues for Ewing's inclusion within the ambit of the three strikes statute on
grounds of “retribution.” [l]n terms of “deterrence,” Ewing's 25-year term amounts to overkill. And “rehabilitation” is obviously beside the point. . .
NOTES
1. Three strikes and you're out. Like California, several states have enacted or considered legislation providing that, upon conviction of a felony (or violent felony) after two prior felony convictions, a defendant must be sentenced to
life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. In determining whether a punishment is grossly disproportionate, the Court looks to see whether the state has a reasonable basis for believing that it will serve a deterrent, retributive, rehabilitative,
or incapacitative goal. What purpose is a three-strikes life sentence intended
p. 1185
p. 1186
to serve? In particular, is such a sentence explained by retribution or incapacitation? As to the former, are recidivists who have served their sentences for prior crimes more culpable than first-time offenders? For an argument that they deserve
greater punishment, see Youngjae Lee, Recidivism as Omission: A Relational Account, 87 Tex. L. Rev. 571 (2009). For a more critical view, arguing that recidivist enhancements fail to serve the purposes of punishment, see Sarah F. Russell, Re-
thinking Recidivist Enhancements: The Role of Prior Drug Convictions in Federal Sentencing, 43 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1135 (2010). In light of the empirical research discussed at pp. 18-20 supra, do the additional benefits of a life sentence in such
cases (compared, for example, to a 15-year or 20-year sentence) justify the additional costs? On what basis? Deterrence? Incapacitation? See Michael Vitiello, Three Strikes: Can We Return to Rationality?, 87 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 395 (1997).
2. Assessing individual sentences. Ewing applies the proportionality test that Justice Kennedy laid out in his concurrence in Harmelin, p. 237 supra, which is the test the Court currently uses for identifying individual punishments
that fail the Eighth Amendment's cruel and unusual punishment standard. The Court has not struck down an individual punishment as cruel and unusual using that test. (It had previously found some sentences to be unconstitutional, but not under
the framework Justice Kennedy set out in Harmelin.) Does the result in Ewing illustrate the flaws with that framework? Does the Court's current test fail to identify sentences that ought to be impermissibly disproportionate? Or does it strike the
right balance between deference to democratic judgments of the legislature and some check on extreme punishments?

Graham v. Florida
Supreme Court of the United States
560 U.S. 48 (2010)

Kennepy, J. delivered the opinion of the Court.

[Graham pleaded guilty to attempted robbery at the age of 16 and was sentenced to three years’ probation, with the first year to be served in the county jail. Less than six months after being released, he was arrested for a home-
invasion robbery with two accomplices, Bailey and Lawrence. They held two men at gunpoint and ransacked the home looking for cash. Later the same evening, the three attempted a second robbery, during which Bailey was shot. Graham drove
Bailey and Lawrence to the hospital and left them there. As he drove away, a police sergeant signaled him to stop. Graham continued driving at high speed but crashed into a telephone pole, tried to flee on foot, and was apprehended. Three
handguns were found in his car. The night of the robbery, he was 34 days short of his eighteenth birthday. The trial court found that Graham had violated his probation by committing the home-invasion robbery, by possessing a firearm, and by
associating with persons engaged in criminal activity. It sentenced him to the maximum sentence authorized by law: life imprisonment for the home-invasion robbery and 15 years for the attempted armed robbery. Florida abolished its parole sys-
tem, so the life sentence was without the possibility of parole.]

p.1186
p.1187

The Court’s cases addressing the proportionality of sentences fall within two general classifications. The first involves challenges to the length of term-of-years sentences given all the circumstances in a particular case. The second
comprises cases in which the Court implements the proportionality standard by certain categorical restrictions on the death penalty.

[The latter] cases halve] used categorical rules to define Eighth Amendment standards. The previous cases in this classification involved the death penalty. The classification in turn consists of two subsets, one considering the nature of
the offense, the other considering the characteristics of the offender. . . .

In the cases adopting categorical rules[, the] Court first considers “objective indicia of society's standards, as expressed in legislative enactments and state practice” to determine whether there is a national consensus against the
sentencing practice at issue... . Next, guided by “the standards elaborated by controlling precedents and by the Court's own understanding and interpretation of the Eighth Amendment's text, history, meaning, and purpose,” . . . the Court must
determine in the exercise of its own independent judgment whether the punishment in question violates the Constitution. . ..

The present case involves an issue the Court has not considered previously: a categorical challenge to a term-of-years sentence. This case implicates a particular type of sentence as it applies to an entire class of offenders who have
committed a range of crimes. [lIn addressing the question presented, the appropriate analysis is the one used in cases that involved the categorical approach. . . .

[The Court then found life without possibility of parole (LWOP) to be a disproportionate sentence for juveniles who do not commit homicide]

Roper [v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005), established that because juveniles have lessened culpability they are less deserving of the most severe punishments. . . . The Court has recognized that defendants who do not kill, intend to kill,
or foresee that life will be taken are categorically less deserving of the most serious forms of punishment than are murderers. . .. It follows that, when compared to an adult murderer, a juvenile offender who did not kill or intend to kill has a twice di-
minished moral culpability.

As for the punishment, [ijt is true that a death sentence is “unique in its severity and irrevocability,” Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 187 (1976) (oint opinion of Stewart, Powell, and Stevens, JJ.); yet life without parole sentences share
some characteristics with death sentences that are shared by no other sentences. [An LWOP] sentence alters the offender's life by a forfeiture that is irrevocable. It deprives the convict of the most basic liberties without giving hope of restoration,
except pethaps by executive clemency — the remote possibility of which does not mitigate the harshness of the sentence. . ..

[The Court next considered the penological justifications for an LWOP sentence and concluded that] none of the goals of penal sanctions that have been recognized as legitimate — retribution, deterrence, incapacitation, and rehabilita-
tion, see Ewing, 538 U.S. at 25 (plurality opinion) — provides an adequate justification.

[The Court rejected the sentence under the retributive rationale because of the lesser culpability of juveniles. Deterrence failed to support the sentence, in the Court's view, because juveniles make impetuous decisions and are less likely
to take a potential punishment into account. As for incapacitation, the Court stated that
p.1187
p.1158
“{t]o justify lite without parole on the assumption that the juvenile offender forever will be a danger to society requires the sentencer to make a judgment that the juvenile is incorrigible. The characteristics of juveniles make that judgment ques-
tionable.” And, in the Court's view, “[iJncapacitation cannot override all other considerations, lest the Eighth Amendment's rule against disproportionate sentences be a nullity.” Rehabilitation failed to justify the sentence, according to the Court,
because an LWOP sentence “forswears altogether the rehabilitative ideal.” The Court then faced the question of whether to categorically bar LWOP for all juveniles who commit nonhomicide offenses’]

Categorical rules tend to be imperfect, but one is necessary here. [E]ven if we were to assume that some juvenile nonhomicide offenders might have “sufficient psychological maturity, and at the same time demonstrat[e] sufficient
depravity,” Roper, 543 U.S. at 572, to merit a life without parole sentence, it does not follow that courts taking a case-by-case proportionality approach could with sufficient accuracy distinguish the few incorrigible juvenile offenders from the many
that have the capacity for change. . ..

Another problem with a case-by-case approach is that it does not take account of special difficulties encountered by counsel in juvenile representation. . . . Juveniles mistrust adults and have limited understandings of the criminal
justice system and the roles of the institutional actors within it. They are less likely than adults to work effectively with their lawyers to aid in their defense. . . . Difficulty in weighing long-term consequences; a corresponding impulsiveness; and
reluctance to trust defense counsel seen as part of the adult world a rebellious youth rejects, all can lead to poor decisions by one charged with a juvenile offense. . . . These factors are likely to impair the quality of a juvenile defendant's represen-
tation. ...

Finally, a categorical rule gives all juvenile nonhomicide offenders a chance to demonstrate maturity and reform. [LWOP] gives no chance for fulfillment outside prison walls, no chance for reconciliation with society, no hope. Maturity
can lead to that considered reflection which is the foundation for remorse, renewal, and rehabilitation. A young person who knows that he or she has no chance to leave prison before life's end has little incentive to become a responsible individ-
ual...

Roserts, C.J., concurring in the judgment.

| agree with the Court that Terrance Graham's sentence of life without parole violates the Eighth Amendment's prohibition on “cruel and unusual punishments.” Unlike the majority, however, | see no need to invent a new constitutional
rule of dubious provenance in reaching that conclusion. Instead, my analysis is based on an application of this Court's precedents, in particular (1) our cases requiring “narrow proportionality” review of noncapital sentences and (2) [Roper's conclu-
sion], that juvenile offenders are generally less culpable than adults who commit the same crimes. . .

[Although Chief Justice Roberts rejected Graham's sentence as disproportionate, he disagreed with a categorical ban in all juvenile nonhomicide cases, asking] [W]hat about Milagro Cunningham, a 17-year-old who beat and raped an
8-year-old girl before leaving her to die under 197 pounds of rock in a recycling bin in a remote landfill? . . . Or Nathan Walker and Jakaris Taylor, the Florida juveniles who together with their friends gang-raped a woman and forced her to perform
oral

p.1188

p. 1169
sex on her 12-year-old son? . . . The fact that Graham cannot be sentenced to life without parole . . . says nothing whatever about these offenders, or others like them who commit nonhomicide crimes far more reprehensible than the conduct at
issue here. The Court uses Graham's case as a vehicle to proclaim a new constitutional rule — applicable well beyond the particular facts of Graham's case — that a sentence of life without parole imposed on any juvenile for any nonhomicide of-
fense is unconstitutional. This categorical conclusion is as unnecessary as it is unwise.

... The Court . . . argues that a case-by-case approach to proportionality review is constitutionally insufficient because courts might not be able “with sufficient accuracy [to] distinguish the few incorrigible juvenile offenders from the
many that have the capacity for change.”

The Court is of course correct that judges will never have perfect foresight — or perfect wisdom — in making sentencing decisions. But this is true when they sentence adults no less than when they sentence juveniles. It is also true
when they sentence juveniles who commit murder no less than when they sentence juveniles who commit other crimes. Our system depends upon sentencing judges applying their reasoned judgment to each case that comes before them. . ..
Tuomas, J., [dissenting]®. ..

[Discussing the penological justifications for LWOP sentences, the dissent noted that such sentences deter and also incapacitate (by ensuring that juvenile offenders who commit crimes of violence no longer threaten their communi-
ties). Therefore, the dissent continued,] the Court’s “independent judgment” and the proportionality rule itself center on retribution — the notion that a criminal sentence should be proportioned to “the personal culpability of the criminal offender.”

. .. The ultimate question in this case is not whether a life-without-parole sentence “fits” the crime at issue here or the crimes of juvenile nonhomicide offenders more generally, but to whom the Constitution assigns that decision... .
The fact that the Court categorically prohibits life-without-parole sentences for juvenile nonhomicide offenders in the face of an overwhelming legislative majority in favor of leaving that sentencing option available under certain cases simply illus-
trates how far beyond any cognizable constitutional principle the Court has reached to ensure that its own sense of morality and retributive justice preempts that of the people and their representatives.

NOTES

1. Individual versus categorical challenges. Graham represented a new approach to challenging non-capital sentences under the Eighth Amendment. In contrast to the test from Justice Kennedy's Harmelin concurrence, which

applies to challenges to individual punishments, Graham sets out a different standard for making categorical challenges to punishment. Relying in part on an approach it has taken

p.1189

p. 1160
in categorical challenges to the use of the death penalty, pp. 1183-1192 infra, the Court adopts a test for categorical challenges to non-capital sentences that lacks the threshold requirement of gross disproportionality that Justice Kennedy's
Harmelin concurrence requires. Instead, the Court turns immediately to the questions of how other jurisdictions treat the crime at issue and how the same jurisdiction treats other crimes. The Court also uses its independent judgment as to.
whether the gravity of the crime and the culpability of the offender merit the sentence. Should the Graham approach also apply to challenges to individual sentences, or is the threshold question whether a sentence is grossly disproportionate
necessary to give legislatures and judges sufficient leeway to decide questions of punishment?5° Why would the Court use a test that would make it easier to challenge entire categories of sentences than the test it uses for individual sentences?
Is the Court assuming there are not many categories of punishment that litigants can identify, so it would be easier for courts to administer the Graham test in the context of categorical assessments than it would be in the context of challenges to
individual sentences?

2. The current constitutional status of LWOP for juveniles. In Miller v. Alabama, 567 U.S. 460 (2012), the Court held that mandatory LWOP sentences for juveniles are unconstitutional, even for those who commit homicide. Justice
Kagan, writing for a majority, combined “two strands of precedent” to inform the Court's proportionality review (id. at 470):

The first had adopted categorical bans on sentencing practices based on mismatches between the culpability of a class of offenders and the severity of a penalty. So, for example, we have held that imposing the death

penalty for nonhomicide crimes against individuals, or imposing it on mentally retarded defendants, violates the Eighth Amendment. Several of the cases in this group have specially focused on juvenile offenders, because

of their lesser culpability. Thus, Roper held that the Eighth Amendment bars capital punishment for children, and Graham concluded that the Amendment also prohibits a sentence of life without the possibility of parole for a

child who committed a nonhomicide offense. Graham further likened life without parole for juveniles to the death penalty itself, thereby evoking a second line of our precedents. In those cases, we have prohibited mandatory

imposition of capital punishment, requiring that sentencing authorities consider the characteristics of a defendant and the details of his offense before sentencing him to death. Here, the confluence of these two lines of

precedent leads to the conclusion that mandatory life-without-parole sentences for juveniles violate the Eighth Amendment.

The Court in Miller relied on both the special situation of juveniles and the mandatory nature of the challenged laws. In so doing, the Court explicitly declined to adopt an alternative argument that the Eighth Amendment requires a
categorical ban on LWOP for juveniles. Id. at 479. Does Miller lend support for the idea that all mandatory minimum sentences, and not just LWOP, are categorically
p.1160
p.1161
unconstitutional as applied to juveniles? See State v. Lyle, 854 N.W.2d 378 (Iowa 2014); Lindsey E. Krause, One Size Does Not Fit All: The Need for a Complete Abolition of Mandatory Minimum Sentences for Juveniles in Response to Roper, Gra-
ham, and Miller, 33 Law & Ineq. 481 (2015).

The Court applied its ruling in Miller retroactively, Montgomery v. Louisiana, 577 U.S. 190 (2016), so that individuals sentenced to mandatory LWOP before Miller receive a new sentencing hearing. But the Court has subsequently clar-
ified that judges are under no obligation to make a finding of “permanent incorrigibility” before resentencing a juvenile to LWOP. Jones v. Mississippi, 141 S. Ct. 1307, 1311 (2021). This could make a significant practical difference. In Pennsylvania,
which does require such a finding, fewer than 2 percent of the juveniles have been resentenced to LWOP. In contrast, in Louisiana, which does not require a “permanent incorrigibility” finding, 57 percent of the juveniles have been resentenced to
LWOP. Id. at 1334 and n.1 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). If judges need not make a finding that a juvenile is “permanantly incorrigibl[e]” before giving a sentence of LWOP, what is the reason for insisting on an individualized hearing before LWOP is
imposed? What other factors might play a role in such a proceeding?

The European Court of Human Rights has gone further than the U.S. Supreme Court, ruling that LWOP sentences violate Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment. That court concluded that jurisdictions must provide for review of a life sentence no later than 25 years after it was imposed, with periodic reviews thereafter, to determine whether there have been significant changes and
rehabilitative progress such that detention is no longer justified on legitimate penological grounds. Vinter and Others v. United Kingdom, 2013-IIl Eur. Ct. H.R. 317 §§119-122 (2013).

3. Is LWOP different from other non-capital sentences? Is LWOP unique, or should the Court be equally willing to scrutinize terms of years? For discussion of how the extinguishment of hope makes LWOP qualitatively different
from other punishments, see Alice Ristroph, Hope, Imprisonment, and the Constitution, 23 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 75 (2010). If the Court treats LWOP as unique, can a state avoid Graham-type scrutiny by imposing term-of-years sentences that exceed
anatural life span (say, a sentence of 100 years)? Can a state avoid scrutiny by authorizing parole but rarely granting it? What if there is less than a 1 percent chance that parole will be granted? Does Graham give guidance for drawing these lines?
If sentences short of LWOP or life are not treated categorically, do they have any realistic hope of being struck down under the Court’s test for challenging individual punishments? See p. 1150 supra.

4, Challenges under state constitutions. State constitutions also contain prohibitions on excessive punishment and can form the basis for challenging a sentence. For a discussion of these provisions, see Chapter 3, pp. 247-248
supra.

C. SENTENCING IN CAPITAL CASES
The preceding material considered sentencing issues in non-capital cases. While capital cases raise some of the same issues, the punishment of death also raises unique doctrinal and policy questions. In this section we explore the
case for and against the death penalty, in terms of principles applicable to criminal
p.1t61
p. 1162
punishments generally and in terms of the special requirements of constitutional law flowing from the Eighth Amendment prohibition of “cruel and unusual punishments.” Of course, the two perspectives are closely intertwined. We believe it prefer-
able to put constitutional problems to one side, for a moment, and to consider first the factors that might motivate a state legislator or a concerned citizen to support or oppose capital punishment as a policy matter.

1, The Current Context®2

In 1977, capital punishment resumed in the United States under the modern death penalty regime, and by January 2021, approximately 1,532 executions had taken place. In 1977, only one execution took place; in 1999, when the rate
of executions reached its peak, 98 people were executed, an average of two per week. This rate dropped off significantly in the following years: 17 people were executed in 2020. The rate of death sentencing has similarly declined. Beginning at a
rate of 137 sentences per year in 1977, capital sentences peaked at 317 in 1996. Rates declined unevenly thereafter, but have declined steadily since 2003; 34 people were sentenced to death in 2019 and 18 in 2020.

As of January 2020, approximately 2,620 people were on death row awaiting execution in 31 states and in the federal system.52 Approximately 42 percent of people on death row are white, 41 percent are Black, and 13 percent (includ-
ing all races) are of Hispanic origin. Native Americans, Asians, and other races comprise about 3 percent.22 Women are a small minority, comprising less than 1 percent.

Capital punishment is expensive, with the administration of the death penalty costing substantially more than non-capital prosecution, including the costs of incarceration.£° Kansas offers an example of how these costs accrue: A cap-
ital case in that state requires investigation costs that are three times greater than what is required in a comparable homicide case in which the death penalty is not sought. Trial costs are 16 times greater, and appeals costs are 21 times greater.S1
One study concluded that the death penalty costs the state of North Carolina $2.16 million per execution more than a system imposing a maximum sentence of life imprisonment.22

p. 1162
p. 1163,

Public support for the death penalty fell to 55 percent in 2020, the lowest point in half a century and down from its peak of 80 percent support in 1994.2 Opinion polls find little regional variation in public support for capital punishment,
but states differ widely in the extent to which that support is translated into criminal justice policy. Twenty-two states (and the District of Columbia) do not authorize the death penalty under any circumstances, with roughly one-third of those states
abolishing the death penalty in the past 20 years.® Just six states — Florida, Georgia, Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas, and Virginia — accounted for 70 percent of all executions during the modern era, and a single state, Texas, carried out 570 execu-
tions, more than one-third of the national total. The geographic concentration of the death penalty is even more stark than that because, within these states, only a few counties regularly pursue the death penalty. Fifteen counties account for more
than 30 percent of the executions in the United States since 1976, and less than 2 percent of counties in America are responsible for more than half of the nation’s death row population.£5 Perhaps more surprisingly, several states impose many
death sentences but carry out few executions: California has the largest death row population in the nation (approximately 724) but has performed only 13 executions since 1976.°° For a probing analysis of American death penalty practices in light
of America’s commitment to democracy and federalism, see David Garland, Peculiar Institution: America’s Death Penalty in an Age of Abolition (2010).

2. Theories of Punishment Applied to the Death Penalty

The central considerations in public debates about the death penalty are related to the animating principles of punishment more generally.

First, there is a question whether the death penalty can be justified on utilitarian grounds. In terms of incapacitation, life without parole protects the general public just as effectively as the death penalty, and the threat that an incar-
cerated person poses to guards and other incarcerated people has generally not figured in capital punishment debates. The principal utilitarian controversy therefore has centered on deterrence — whether the death penalty deters more effectively
than life imprisonment.

p. 1163,
p.1164

Considered at a theoretical level, the argument for a deterrent effect from capital punishment derives from both its severity and its salience. As long as most potential murderers believe that execution is a worse fate than life impris-

onment, the more severe sanction should — all else equal — decrease the homicide rate. Moreover, even infrequent application of an especially severe sanction should have this effect, given that people tend to overestimate the likelihood of

particularly feared or “salient” harms.£7 But from another perspective, theory undermines the case for a deterrent effect. The certainty and speed of imposing a sanction play key roles in generating deterrence,°8 and the death penalty is anything
but speedy and sure. There are approximately 15,000-20,000 murders each year in the United States. But the national execution rate in the modern era has been in the range of 50-100 each year, and about 15 years elapse between sentencing and
execution. Furthermore, many capital defendants have intellectual disabilities, and capital crimes are often impulsive — both factors that work against the assumption of rational calculation that deterrence theory largely requires. Deterrence theory
can even be used to predict that capital punishment will increase the murder rate, because state executions may have a “brutalization effect”®2 by encouraging the use of violence to deal with problems. Thus, deterrence theory points in different
directions.

Unfortunately, empirical analysis does not resolve which implication of deterrence theory predominates. For decades the consensus view was that plausible empirical evidence pointed in opposing directions.7° Recent studies using
more sophisticated methods have likewise failed to settle the matter. While some studies appear to find significant deterrent effects,7" critics have noted key problems with the methodologies.72

p.1164
p. 1165

These theoretical and empirical uncertainties raise the burden-of-proof question: How sure do we need to be of the death penalty's deterrent effect in order to justify capital punishment on that basis? Philosophy professor Louis Pojman
phrases the argument this way: “To bet against capital punishment is to bet against the innocent [those who might become homicide victims] and for the murderer.”73 Do you agree? If we cannot show conclusively that the death penalty deters
murders, should we nonetheless execute people convicted of murder given the possibility that it might?

More fundamentally, are utilitarian arguments like deterrence (or the lack thereof) the main source of support or opposition to the death penalty? Retributive concerns may be much more important for both proponents and opponents
of the death penalty. Many proponents consider the death penalty a morally appropriate or even a morally necessary response to certain crimes, whether or not it deters. Likewise, many of those opposed to the death penalty would reject it as.
immoral or unfair even if it were known to deter. See Dan M. Kahan, The Secret Ambition of Deterrence, 113 Harv. L. Rev. 413, 437-439 (1999). Is it justifiable to set aside the deterrence issue in this way? Would it be wrong to inflict capital punish-
ment without any prospect of a crime-control benefit? Put another way, can purely retributive arguments support the death penalty, even if the practice of capital punishment exacts a heavy social cost?

Conversely, if the death penalty really deters, would it be wrong to forgo the opportunity to save innocent lives by using this sanction? Professors Cass Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule argue:

The policy mix that does not include capital punishment is not an “omission” or a “failure to act” in any meaningful sense. If a government chooses that mix, it is allocating a certain set of rights to both murderers and their

victims. . .. [Assuming that capital punishment were known to deter, the] legal regime whose package of crime-control instruments happens not to include capital punishment [is] a policy that inevitably and predictably opts

for more murders rather than fewer.

One critic responds that this argument, by equating executions with inadequately deterred private murders, overlooks a fundamental moral difference: The government does not intend to kill the innocent murder victims and is not
purporting to punish them. All sorts of government policies can increase the number of innocent lives put at risk (for example, raising the speed limit or the level of pollutants tolerated in drinking water), but such policies, unlike criminal punishment,
require no showing that the citizens affected are culpable. See Carol S. Steiker, No, Capital Punishment Is Not Morally Required: Deterrence, Deontology, and the Death Penalty, 58 Stan. L. Rev. 751, 755 (2005). Consider also the implications of the
Sunstein-Vermeule argument. If a net savings in the lives of motorists could be achieved by executing drunk drivers, would such executions be morally required? What if it would save net lives to execute the drunk driver's children?

p.1165
p. 1166

Even if one focuses on retributive justice, can the imposition of lesser or different punishments than the death penalty adequately respect the equality of victims, express revulsion at the crime, and therefore maintain the criminal law's
legitimacy? Blackstone noted long ago that the lex talionis is often either impossible to apply or impossibly extreme: “[T]here are very many crimes, that will in no shape admit of [lex talionis] penalties, without manifest absurdity and wickedness.
Theft cannot be punished by theft, defamation by defamation, forgery by forgery, adultery by adultery, and the like.”25 Why should murder require mirror equivalence when these other offenses do not?

One retributivist argument against the death penalty emphasizes the requirement that punishment be fully deserved. Some situations negate the ability to make rational choices, and accordingly the criminal law provides full or partial
defenses in such circumstances. See Chapter 8, pp. 904-1012 supra. Should mental disabilities and social disadvantage that fall just short of a full or partial defense preclude the most severe punishment on the ground that it is disproportionate
to culpability? If people who commit murder who suffer from acute social deprivation or psychological impairment do not deserve the death penalty, what punishment do they deserve? For discussion of these arguments, see Carol S. Steiker, The
Death Penalty and Deontology, in The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Criminal Law 444-452 (John Deigh & David Dolinko eds., 2011).

The death penalty also serves powerful expressive and symbolic functions in American society. David Garland observes that “[t]o announce a capital sentence is to make a distinct and powerful statement, signaling the heinous nature
of the crime and the evil nature of the criminal. It is to mark the murderer as among the worst of the worst. . . .” Garland, supra, at 291.The expressive function can itself serve utilitarian goals. Paul Robinson and John Darley argue that “[t]he criminal
law’s power in nurturing and communicating societal norms and its power to have people defer to it . . . is directly proportional to criminal law's moral credibility.” Paul H. Robinson & John M. Darley, The Utility of Desert, 91 Nw. U. L. Rev. 453, 477
(1997). This argument suggests that, if a large majority of the population believes that justice requires the death penalty, the law needs to reflect that view in order to maintain its legitimacy, foster voluntary compliance, and avoid having people take
the law into their own hands. This is an empirical question, however, and the current evidence of public sentiment is equivocal, with much of it suggesting that almost half of the population opposes the death penalty when the alternative of life with-
‘out parole is available.7°

3. Error
While the risk of convicting someone who is innocent exists in all types of cases, the public is particularly concerned with the risk of error in capital cases. And the possibility of executing the innocent has become more than merely
hypothetical in recent years. A 2009 investigative report makes a powerful case that Texas
p. 1166
p.1167
executed an innocent man when it put to death Cameron Todd Willingham on the basis of faulty forensic evidence. David Grann, Trial by Fire: Did Texas Execute an Innocent Man?, New Yorker (Sept. 7, 2009). It is unclear exactly how often
innocent people have been to put to death, but DNA evidence has provided certainty in some cases. Of the 183 people on death row who have been released since 1973 as a result of evidence suggesting their innocence, 28 were unequivocally
exonerated through DNA evidence.22

Concerns about the risk of executing the innocent have no doubt played a role in the decline of public support for capital punishment beginning in the late 1990s. See p. 1163 supra. Such concerns also have led to a variety of govern-
mental and non-governmental responses, including sentencing commutations by governors, the creation of law reform commissions to correct deficiencies in the criminal justice process, federal “innocence protection” legislation, 7° and privately
funded “innocence projects,” which investigate convicted people’s claims of innocence and promote systemic reforms aimed at enhancing the reliability of forensic testimony and other identification evidence.

‘Will more widespread use of DNA testing substantially reduce the risk of error? Some observers are not optimistic; they suggest that forensic evidence is not available in most cases and that the outcome of these cases will still be
affected by the factors that led to false convictions before the availability of DNA testing — faulty eyewitness identifications, perjured testimony, planted evidence, jailhouse informants who falsely claim that the cellmate confessed to them, and so
on. Brandon Garrett, Convicting the Innocent: Where Criminal Prosecutions Go Wrong (2011), documents the pervasiveness of such practices. Garrett studied the trials of 250 people exonerated by DNA evidence and found non-DNA-related flaws
‘to be so common that he concluded that the 250 may be “just the tip of the iceberg.” Id. at 11. For instance, in many of the cases Garrett studied, police had fed details of the crime to defendants during extensive interrogations, often coupled with
abuse or threats. As a result, a high proportion of the exonerees confessed and included in their confession details of the crime that supposedly only the perpetrator could have known. Id. at 23-27, 38-39. To what extent do the DNA exonerations
represent only the tip of the iceberg? What rate of wrongful convictions would be acceptable?

Artisk of error is inherent in any human endeavor. Is this risk less acceptable in capital cases than in ordinary criminal cases? Many seem to think so, but why? Obviously, it is not possible to correct a wrongful execution after the fact,
but is it really possible to “correct” the injustice of life imprisonment served by an innocent person who was wrongfully convicted of a non-capital offense? Are mistakes more likely in capital cases than in ordinary cases? On the one hand, capital
cases receive more resources at trial and on appeal, which ought to promote greater accuracy. On the other hand, ineffective assistance of counsel in capital trials is far

p.1167

p. 1168
from uncommon, so the impact of trial resources should not be overstated. David R. Dow, The Autobiography of an Execution (2010). Moreover, the most aggravated murders generate intense pressure to “solve” the case quickly and produce a
conviction, which can lead to dubious police investigatory practices, such as reliance on coercive interrogations that generate false statements. The same pressures may lead prosecutors to offer unreliable evidence, such as testimony from jail-
house informants, and to suppress potentially exculpatory information. See Samuel R. Gross, The Risks of Death: Why Erroneous Convictions Are Common in Capital Cases, 44 Buff. L. Rev. 469 (1996).

For some supporters of capital punishment, the risk of error does not call the practice into question. Consider Ernest van den Haag, Punishing Criminals 219-220 (1975):

Many social policies have intended effects that are statistically certain, irrevocable, unjust, and deadly. Automobile traffic unintentionally kills innocent victims; so does surgery (and most medicines); so does the death

penalty. These activities are justified, nevertheless, because benefits (including justice) are felt to outweigh the statistical certainty of unintentionally killing innocents.

Are these analogies convincing? If the benefits of the death penalty are less certain than the benefits of these other activities, does that suggest that society should tolerate less error? Does the fact that the death penalty involves inten-
tional killing distinguish it from fatalities that occur unintentionally in traffic accidents and surgery?

It is not only the supporters of the death penalty who criticize what they see as an excessive focus on the risk of error; some abolitionists criticize this focus as well. They argue that execution of the innocent is a less significant difficulty
than the endemic problems of disproportionate punishment of the “guilty” and the arbitrary and discriminatory treatment of capital defendants. See Carol S. Steiker & Jordan M. Steiker, The Seduction of Innocence: The Attraction and Limitations
of the Focus on Innocence in Capital Punishment Law and Advocacy, 95 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 587 (2005). Steiker and Steiker argue that disproportionate punishment of the guilty is just as wrong (and much more frequent) than capital sen-
tences imposed on the innocent. Do you agree?

4. Bias

Racial bias has a long history in American law enforcement in general and in the administration of capital punishment in particular, with roots in the frequent use of harsh criminal sanctions to control slaves prior to the Civil War. See
Randall Kennedy, Race, Crime and the Law (1997); Stuart Banner, The Death Penalty: An American History (2003); David Garland, Peculiar Institution: America’s Death Penalty in an Age of Abolition (2010). Today, Black people remain substantially
‘over-represented on death row relative to their numbers in the population, see p. 1162 supra, but there is controversy over the causes of that disparity. Some of it can be explained by differences in rates of offending and the kinds of offenses com-
mitted. But evidence suggests that, even after those differences are accounted

p. 1168
p. 1169
for, the death penalty is more likely when the defendant is Black and the victim is white. We examine this evidence and its implications at pp. 1192-1204 infra, in connection with the constitutional limits on capital punishment.

Constitutional challenges aside, what bearing should evidence of racial bias have on the wisdom or morality of the death penalty? What about other kinds of inequality? Poor defendants clearly get much worse legal representation than
wealthy defendants, and this disparity — though not the product of intentional discrimination — leads to disproportionate numbers of poor people on death row. See Stephen B. Bright, Counsel for the Poor: The Death Sentence Not for the Worst
Crime But for the Worst Lawyer, 103 Yale L.J. 1835 (1994). One view, pungently expressed by Emest van den Haag, is that “unequal justice [punishing some guilty perpetrators according to desert, even if others get away] is the only justice we
have, and certainly better than equal injustice — giving no murderer the punishment his crimes deserves.”22

Do you agree? Or should racial bias and economic inequality make us question whether those who get the death penalty actually “deserve” it? Moreover, even if we could be sure of desert, some question whether unequal justice can
be called justice at all. Consider Stephen Nathanson, Does It Matter If the Death Penalty Is Arbitrarily Administered?, in Punishment and the Death Penalty, supra, at 161, 167-168:

[Suppose] | tell my class that anyone who plagiarizes will fail the course. Three students plagiarize papers, but only one receives a failing grade. The other two, in describing their motivation, win my sympathy, and I give them

passing grades. . . . Suppose further that | am regularly more lenient with attractive female students than with others. Or suppose that it is only redheads or wealthy students whom | fail. . .. In these instances, | think the pla-

giarizers who are punished have grounds for complaint, even though they were, by the announced standards, clearly guilty and deserving of punishment.

What are those “grounds for complaint” that the punished plagiarizers can legitimately have? And if they have a justified complaint, what remedy would be appropriate? Whether or not those who plagiarize are all punished equally, how
does Nathanson’s hypothetical shed light on death penalty cases? Does a history of racial bias demand special attention in the context of capital punishment? Or are the problems of racial bias in that context fundamentally no different from racial
inequalities throughout the administration of criminal law? More radically, could one plausibly argue that the issue of racial bias in capital punishment deserves less attention than the inequities that affect vastly larger numbers of defendants and or-
dinary citizens in other interactions with the law enforcement?

Gender presents a different sort of problem of potential bias. Although there are few well-controlled studies, there is highly suggestive evidence that decisions to impose the death penalty are biased in. favor of women® and that
women on death

p. 1169

p.1170
row are more successful than men in winning executive clemency.®! Should steps to ensure gender equality be pursued if they would put more women on death row? By way of comparison, the federal sentencing guidelines sought to achieve
gender-neutral sentencing, but that approach resulted in the incarceration of more women. M. Harvey Wallace & Shanda Wedlock, Federal Sentencing Guidelines and Gender Issues: Parental Responsibilities, Pregnancy and Domestic Violence, 2
San Diego Just. J. 395 (1994).

Reconsider these issues of bias as you consider the constitutional claims in McCleskey v. Kemp, p. 1192 infra.

5. Constitutional Limitations
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Until the middle of the twentieth century, opponents of the death penalty had largely devoted their efforts to legislative reform, as it was widely assumed that the Constitution left the question of capital punishment — like nearly all other
questions of criminal justice — to the states and the political branches of the federal government. During the 1950s and 1960s, however, when the Supreme Court shined a constitutional spotlight on issues of racial justice and the rights of criminal
defendants, abolitionists launched a concentrated assault on the constitutionality of capital punishment. Michael Meltsner, Cruel and Unusual: The Supreme Court and Capital Punishment (1973) (describing how the litigation strategy against the
death penalty developed). Recall that at common law all murder was punishable by death. Gradually, the scope of capital punishment was narrowed, first by the division of murder into two degrees, so that only the more serious was subject to
mandatory capital punishment, and then by the introduction of discretion in sentencing even for the highest category of criminal homicides. By the beginning of the twentieth century, 23 American jurisdictions made capital punishment discre-
tionary in first-degree murder cases, and by 1962, all the remaining jurisdictions had adopted this approach. Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §210.6 at 120-132 (1980).

Litigation challenging this punishment scheme focused on two issues:

1, Procedural due process. All the states committed the death penalty decision to the discretion of the judge or jury, but none provided any standards to guide the exercise of that discretion. The reliance on unguided discretion was
prevalent in sentencing decisions generally, as discussed pp. 1114-1121 supra, but many thought that when a choice between life and death was to be made, due process required some explicit criteria of decision. The Court rejected that view in
McGautha v. California, 402 U.S. 183, 207-208 (1971), holding that “committing to the untrammeled discretion of the jury the power to pronounce life or death is [not] offensive to anything in the Constitution.” The Court reasoned that

p.1170

piri
It]o identify before the fact those characteristics of criminal homicides and their perpetrators which call for the death penalty, and to express these characteristics in language which can be fairly understood and applied by
the sentencing authority, appear to be tasks which are beyond present human ability... . The States are entitled to assume that jurors confronted with the truly awesome responsibility of decreeing death for a fellow human
will act with due regard for the consequences of their decision and will consider a variety of factors. . .
McGautha proved to be less significant than it seemed, however, because the same concerns about unguided discretion soon surfaced again in attacks specifically grounded in the Eighth Amendment's Cruel and Unusual Punishment
Clause.
2. Cruel and unusual punishment. Only a year after McGautha, a 5-4 majority of the Court held in Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238 (1972), that capital punishment, as then administered, violated the Eighth Amendment's prohibition
of “cruel and unusual punishments.” The Court's holding was stated in a brief per curiam opinion that made no attempt to set forth the majority's reasoning. Each of the nine justices filed a separate concurring or dissenting opinion explaining
his own approach to the Eighth Amendment issue, with none of the five justices in the majority joining any of the others’ opinions. Only Justices Brennan and Marshall concluded that all capital punishment was unconstitutional. Justice Brennan
argued that capital punishment did not comport with human dignity, while Justice Marshall maintained that average citizens, if fully informed of the death penalty’s excessiveness in relation to its penological purposes, would reject it as morally un-
acceptable. The other three concurring justices rested their objections to capital punishment on narrower grounds. Justice Douglas stressed the potential for discriminatory administration of the death penalty. Justice White noted that the extreme
infrequency of imposition of the death penalty in the years preceding Furman rendered the penalty incapable of promoting its social or public purposes. In perhaps the most famous passage of the voluminous Furman opinions (jd. at 309-310),
Justice Stewart emphasized not only the infrequency, but also the randomness of the penalty's imposition:
These death sentences are cruel and unusual in the same way that being struck by lightning is cruel and unusual. [I]f any basis can be discerned for the selection of these few to be sentenced to die, it is the constitutionally
impermissible basis of race. But racial discrimination has not been proved, and | put it to one side. | simply conclude that the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments cannot tolerate the infliction of a sentence of death under
legal systems that permit this unique penalty to be so wantonly and so freakishly imposed.
Chief Justice Burger and Justices Blackmun, Powell, and Rehnquist dissented. The dissenters stressed the long tradition and continued acceptance of capital punishment and argued that the majority's position involved an unwarranted
intrusion into the legislative process.
Because a clear majority of the justices had neither rejected capital punishment outright nor indicated under what conditions it might be preserved, Furman created considerable confusion for states that desired to retain the death
penalty.
piri
p.1i72
Two alternatives appeared plausible to address the concems raised in Furman about the arbitrary or discriminatory application of the death penalty: (1) enacting legislation to make capital punishment mandatory in certain cases; or (2) establishing
guidelines to determine who would be subjected to capital punishment. Furman also created a backlash. Although the death penalty had been in decline by the time the Court decided Furman, the case itself may have energized states to recom-
mit to the death penalty. Steven F. Shatz, The American Death Penalty: Past, Present, and Future, 53 Tulsa L. Rev. 349 (2018). (The causal impact of Furman alone is difficult to disentangle because crime rates — an obvious factor driving support
for the death penalty — had been relatively low prior to Furman but began to rise dramatically around the time of the decision.) By 1976, at least 35 states and the U.S. Congress had enacted new capital punishment legislation; half of these ju-
risdictions had adopted provisions for a mandatory death penalty, while the remainder opted for schemes under which the sentencing authority would be required to consider specified aggravating and mitigating circumstances. The Court soon
confronted challenges to the new legislation, granting certiorari to hear challenges to new death penalty statutes from Georgia, Florida, Texas, North Carolina, and Louisiana.
Gregg v. Georgia

Supreme Court of the United States
428 U.S. 153 (1976)

[Gregg was convicted by a jury on two counts of armed robbery and two counts of murder. After the guilty verdicts, a penalty hearing was held before the same jury, under guidelines enacted in response to the Furman decision. The
jury imposed the death sentence on each count. The Georgia Supreme Court set aside the death sentences for armed robbery, on the ground that capital punishment had rarely been imposed for that crime, but the court affirmed the convictions
on alll counts and upheld the death sentences on the murder counts. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari.)

Justice STEWART, JUSTICE POWELL, and JUSTICE STEVENS announced the judgment of the Court and filed an opinion delivered by Justice STEWART... .

We address initially the basic contention that the punishment of death for the crime of murder is, under all circumstances, “cruel and unusual” in violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments of the Constitution. . .. We now hold
that the punishment of death does not invariably violate the Constitution... .

It is clear from the . . . precedents that the Eighth Amendment has not been regarded as a static concept. As Chief Justice Warren said, in an oft-quoted phrase, “[t]he Amendment must draw its meaning from the evolving standards
of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society.” Trop v. Dulles, 356 U.S. 86, 101 (1958). Thus, an assessment of contemporary values concerning the infliction of a challenged sanction is relevant to the application of the Eighth Amend-
ment. ...

But our cases also make clear that public perceptions of standards of decency with respect to criminal sanctions are not conclusive. A penalty also must accord with “the dignity of man,” which is the “basic concept underlying the
Eighth Amendment.”

p.1i72

p.1173
Trop v. Dulles, supra, 356 U.S., at 100. This means, at least, that the punishment not be “excessive.” [T]he inquiry into “excessiveness” has two aspects. First, the punishment must not involve the unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain. Second,
the punishment must not be grossly out of proportion to the severity of the crime.

Of course, the requirements of the Eighth Amendment must be applied with an awareness of the limited role to be played by the courts. [W]hile we have an obligation to insure that constitutional bounds are not overreached, we may not
act as judges as we might as legislators. . . .

Therefore, in assessing a punishment selected by a democratically elected legislature against the constitutional measure, we presume its validity. We may not require the legislature to select the least severe penalty possible so long as
the penalty selected is not cruelly inhumane or disproportionate to the crime involved.

. .. We now consider specifically whether the sentence of death for the crime of murder is a per se violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution. We note first that history and precedent strongly support a
negative answer to this question. It is apparent from the text of the Constitution itself that the existence of capital punishment was accepted by the Framers. . . . For nearly two centuries, this Court, repeatedly and often expressly, has recognized
that capital punishment is not invalid per se. . . .

Four years ago, the petitioners in Furman and its companion cases predicated their argument primarily upon the asserted proposition that standards of decency had evolved to the point where capital punishment no longer could be
tolerated. . . . The petitioners in the capital cases before the Court today renew the “standards of decency” argument, but developments during the four years since Furman have undercut substantially the assumptions upon which their argument
rested. Despite the continuing debate, dating back to the 19th century, over the morality and utility of capital punishment, it is now evident that a large proportion of American society continues to regard it as an appropriate and necessary criminal
sanction. . . . The legislatures of at least 35 States have enacted new statutes that provide for the death penalty for at least some crimes that result in the death of another person. [T]he relative infrequency of jury verdicts imposing the death sen-
tence does not indicate rejection of capital punishment per se. Rather, the reluctance of juries in many cases to impose the sentence may well reflect the humane feeling that this most irrevocable of sanctions should be reserved for a small number
of extreme cases. ...

‘As we have seen, however, the Eighth Amendment demands more than that a challenged punishment be acceptable to contemporary society. The Court also must ask whether it comports with the basic concept of human dignity at the
core of the Amendment. Although we cannot “invalidate a category of penalties because we deem less severe penalties adequate to serve the ends of penology,” the sanction imposed cannot be so totally without penological justification that it re-
sults in the gratuitous infliction of suffering.

The death penalty is said to serve two principal social purposes: retribution and deterrence of capital crimes by prospective offenders.

In part, capital punishment is an expression of society's moral outrage at particularly offensive conduct. . . . “The instinct for retribution is part of the nature of man, and channeling that instinct in the administration of criminal justice
serves

p.1173

p.1i7a
an important purpose in promoting the stability of a society governed by law. When people begin to believe that organized society is unwilling or unable to impose upon criminal offenders the punishment they ‘deserve,’ then there are sown the
seeds of anarchy — of self-help, vigilante justice, and lynch law.” Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S., at 308 (Stewart, J., concurring). . . .

Statistical attempts to evaluate the worth of the death penalty as a deterrent to crimes by potential offenders have occasioned a great deal of debate. The results simply have been inconclusive. . . . The value of capital punishment as a
deterrent of crime is a complex factual issue the resolution of which properly rests with the legislatures, which can evaluate the results of statistical studies in terms of their own local conditions and with a flexibility of approach that is not available
to the courts. ...

Finally, we must consider whether the punishment of death is disproportionate in relation to the crime for which it is imposed. There is no question that death as a punishment is unique in its severity and irrevocability. .. . But we are
concerned here only with the imposition of capital punishment for the crime of murder, and when a life has been taken deliberately by the offender, we cannot say that the punishment is invariably disproportionate to the crime. It is an extreme
sanction, suitable to the most extreme of crimes.

We hold that the death penalty is not a form of punishment that may never be imposed, . . . regardless of the procedure followed in reaching the decision to impose it. .. . Because of the uniqueness of the death penalty, Furman held
that it could not be imposed under sentencing procedures that created a substantial risk that it would be inflicted in an arbitrary and capricious manner. .. .

Jury sentencing has been considered desirable in capital cases in order “to maintain a link between contemporary community values and the penal system — a link without which the determination of punishment could hardly reflect
‘the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society.’ ” But it creates special problems. Much of the information that is relevant to the sentencing decision may have no relevance to the question of guilt, or may even be
extremely prejudicial to a fair determination of that question. This problem, however, is scarcely insurmountable. Those who have studied the question suggest that a bifurcated procedure — one in which the question of sentence is not considered
until the determination of guilt has been made — is . . . likely to ensure elimination of the constitutional deficiencies in Furman.

But the provision of relevant information under fair procedural rules is not alone sufficient to guarantee that the information will be properly used. . . . Since the members of a jury will have had little, if any, previous experience in sen-
tencing, they are unlikely to be skilled in dealing with the information they are given. . . . It seems clear, however, that the problem will be alleviated if the jury is given guidance regarding the factors about the crime and the defendant that the State,
representing organized society, deems particularly relevant to the sentencing decision. . . .

While some have suggested that standards to guide a capital jury's sentencing deliberations are impossible to formulate, the fact is that such standards have been developed. [The Court here referred to the MPC proposals.] While such
standards are by necessity somewhat general, they do provide guidance to the sentencing authority and thereby reduce the likelihood that it will impose a sentence that fairly can be called capricious or arbitrary... .

p.1i7a
p.1175

In summary, the concerns expressed in Furman that the penalty of death not be imposed in an arbitrary or capricious manner can be met by a carefully drafted statute that ensures that the sentencing authority is given adequate
information and guidance. As a general proposition these concerns are best met by a system that provides for a bifurcated proceeding at which the sentencing authority is apprised of the information relevant to the imposition of sentence and pro-
vided with standards to guide its use of the information. . . .

We now turn to consideration of the constitutionality of Georgia's capital-sentencing procedures. In the wake of Furman, Georgia amended its capital punishment statute, but chose not to narrow the scope of its murder provisions.
Thus, now as before Furman, in Georgia “[a] person commits murder when he unlawfully and with malice forethought, either express or implied, causes the death of another human being.” Ga. Code Ann. §26-1101(a) (1972). All persons convicted
of murder “shall be punished by death or by imprisonment for life.” §26-1101(c) (1972).

Georgia did act, however, to narrow the class of murderers subject to capital punishment by specifying 10 statutory aggravating circumstances, one of which must be found by the jury to exist beyond a reasonable doubt before a death
sentence can ever be imposed.®2 In addition, the jury is authorized to consider any other appropriate aggravating or mitigating circumstances. The jury is not required to find any mitigating circumstance in order to make a recommendation of
mercy that is binding on the trial court, but it must find a statutory aggravating circumstance before recommending a sentence of death. . ..

p.1175
p.1176

On their face these procedures seem to satisfy the concerns of Furman. No longer should there be “no meaningful basis for distinguishing the few cases in which [the death penalty] is imposed from the many cases in which it is not.”

The petitioner contends, however, that the changes in the Georgia sentencing procedures are only cosmetic, that the arbitrariness and capriciousness condemned by Furman continue to exist. . . . First, the petitioner focuses on the
opportunities for discretionary action that are inherent in the processing of any murder case under Georgia law. He notes that the state prosecutor has unfettered authority to select those persons whom he wishes to prosecute for a capital offense
and to plea bargain with them. Further, at the trial the jury may choose to convict a defendant of a lesser included offense rather than find him guilty of a crime punishable by death, even if the evidence would support a capital verdict. And finally,
a defendant who is convicted and sentenced to die may have his sentence commuted by the Governor of the State and the Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles.

The existence of these discretionary stages is not determinative of the issues before us. At each of these stages an actor in the criminal justice system makes a decision which may remove a defendant from consideration as a candidate
for the death penalty. Furman, in contrast, dealt with the decision to impose the death sentence on a specific individual who had been convicted of a capital offense. Nothing in any of our cases suggests that the decision to afford an individual
defendant mercy violates the Constitution. Furman held only that, in order to minimize the risk that the death penalty would be imposed on a capriciously selected group of offenders, the decision to impose it had to be guided by standards so that
the sentencing authority would focus on the particularized circumstances of the crime and the defendant. . . .

For the reasons expressed in this opinion, we hold that the statutory system under which Gregg was sentenced to death does not violate the Constitution. Accordingly, the judgment of the Georgia Supreme Court is affirmed... .

[The concurring opinion of Justice White, joined by The Chief Justice and Justice Rehnquist, the concurring opinion of Justice Blackmun, and the dissenting opinion of Justice Brennan are omitted.]

JUSTICE MARSHALL, dissenting. . ..

[lf the constitutionality of the death penalty turns, as | have urged, on the opinion of an informed citizenry, then even the enactment of new death statutes cannot be viewed as conclusive. In Furman, | observed that the American peo-
ple are largely unaware of the information critical to a judgment on the morality of the death penalty, and concluded that if they were better informed they would consider it shocking, unjust, and unacceptable. . . .

The two purposes that sustain the death penalty as nonexcessive in the Court's view are general deterrence and retribution. . . . The evidence | reviewed in Furman remains convincing, in my view, that “capital punishment is not neces-
sary as a deterrent to crime in our society.”

. .. The other principal purpose said to be served by the death penalty is retribution. . .. As my Brother Brennan stated in Furman, “[tJhere is no evidence whatever that utilization of imprisonment rather than death encourages private
blood feuds and other disorders.” It simply defies belief to suggest that the death penalty is necessary to prevent the American people from taking the law into their own hands. .. .

p.1176
p.1i77

The . . . contentions that society's expression of moral outrage through the imposition of the death penalty pre-empts the citizenry from taking the law into its own hands and reinforces moral values are not retributive in the purest sense.
They are essentially utilitarian in that they portray the death penalty as valuable because of its beneficial results. These justifications for the death penalty are inadequate because the penalty is . . . not necessary to the accomplishment of those
results.

There remains for consideration, however, . . . the purely retributive justification for the death penalty that . . . the taking of the murderer's life is itself morally good. . . . The mere fact that the community demands the murderer's life in
return for the evil he has done cannot sustain the death penalty, for as [the plurality] remind[s] us, “the Eighth Amendment demands more than that a challenged punishment be acceptable to contemporary society.” To be sustained under the
Eighth Amendment, the death penalty must “compor[t] with the basic concept of human dignity at the core of the Amendment.” . . . Under these standards, the taking of life “because the wrongdoer deserves it” surely must fall, for such a punish-
ment has as its very basis the total denial of the wrongdoer’s dignity and worth. . .

NOTES

1. The provisional nature of the 1976 decisions. The Supreme Court did not attempt to catalog the essential elements of a constitutional death penalty statute in Gregg or its quartet of accompanying cases. In Gregg, the Court
explained that “each distinct system must be examined on an individual basis.” In Proffitt v. Florida, 428 U.S. 242 (1976), the Court upheld Florida's new capital scheme, which (like Georgia's) required the weighing of aggravating and mitigating fac-
tors prior to the imposition of the death penalty, but placed ultimate responsibility for sentencing with the trial judge rather than the jury. In Jurek v. Texas, 428 U.S. 262 (1976), the Court upheld the Texas system, which limited capital punishment to
a subset of five categories of murders®® and required the jury to answer three yes-or-no questions during the sentencing phase.°* If the jury answered “yes” to all three questions, then the judge was required to impose a death sentence. The Court
reasoned that the five categories of murders were equivalent to aggravating circumstances and noted that Texas courts had read the second question put to the jury — the probability of the defendant's future dangerousness — as permitting the
defense to place before the jury whatever mitigating circumstances might exist. The three statutory

p.n77

p.1178
schemes from Georgia, Florida, and Texas that passed constitutional muster in 1976 came to be known as “guided discretion” statutes, in that they neither mandated the imposition of capital punishment upon conviction of a given offense nor left
the decision to the standardless discretion of the sentencer. In Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280 (1976), and Roberts v. Louisiana, 428 U.S. 325 (1976), the Court struck down statutes that mandated the automatic imposition of a capital
sentence upon conviction of certain categories of murders.

These five opinions, issued on the same day, marked a beginning rather than an end to the Supreme Court's constitutional regulation of capital punishment. Since then, the Court has continued to demarcate the constitutional contours
of capital trials, sometimes revising its holdings and reasoning in the 1976 cases.

2. Requiring individualized capital sentencing. In Woodson and Roberts, the Court rejected mandatory capital sentencing, despite its superficial appeal as a response to concerns about excessive sentencing discretion. (As noted
earlier, pp. 1122-1124 supra, prosecutorial charging decisions mean that any so-called mandatory sentence actually depends on the discretion of prosecutors and whether they choose to bring charges that trigger the mandatory penalty.) A plural-
ity of the justices held that mandatory death sentences were inconsistent with contemporary standards of decency. Moreover, the plurality expressed the concern that any mandatory capital sentencing scheme would fail to guide juries effectively,
because past experience with mandatory statutes suggested that juries would simply refuse to convict of capital murder when they felt that death was an inappropriate punishment. Thus, the plurality observed, the “mandatory statutes enacted in
response to Furman have simply papered over the problem of unguided and unchecked jury discretion.” Woodson, 428 U.S. at 302.

QUESTION: Can the same point be made about the statute upheld in Gregg?
Most importantly for future cases, the Woodson plurality (id. at 303-304) emphasized that the fundamental respect for individual dignity underlying the Eighth Amendment requires

the particularized consideration of relevant aspects of the character and record of each convicted defendant [and the circumstances of the offense] before the imposition upon him of a sentence of death. . . . A process that

[fails to provide such consideration] . . . treats all persons convicted of a designated offense not as uniquely individual human beings, but as members of a faceless, undifferentiated mass to be subjected to the blind infliction

of the penalty of death.

The Court later struck down an exceptionally narrow mandatory statute that required a death sentence only for murder committed by a defendant serving a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole. Sumner v. Shuman,
483 U.S. 66 (1987). The Court noted that prior conviction of an offense carrying a life sentence provided insufficient information about the seriousness of the present killing, the defendant's leadership role in its commission, or mitigating circum-
stances that might fall short of a complete defense. The Court also noted that a mandatory capital sentence was not essential for deterrence because prisoners serving life sentences who kill could still face the death penalty under a regime of
guided discretion.

p.1178
p.1179

The Court's reasons for rejecting wholly mandatory statutes led to challenges to capital statutes that limited the kinds of information that a sentencer could consider in mitigation. Sandra Lockett was a young woman who participated in
the robbery of a pawnshop. She had stayed in the car while her brother and two other men entered the shop and shot the pawnbroker after an unexpected struggle. Rejecting a plea offer to voluntary manslaughter and aggravated robbery, Lockett
went to trial for capital murder and was sentenced to death. The sentencing judge was not permitted to consider her youth, her minor role in the offense, her lack of serious criminal record, or her good prospects for rehabilitation. Ohio's capital
statute specified that once any of seven aggravating circumstances was found, the death penalty must be imposed unless the judge found that (1) the victim had induced or facilitated the offense; (2) it was unlikely that the defendant would have
committed the offense but for the fact that the defendant was under duress, coercion, or strong provocation; or (3) the offense was primarily the product of the defendant's psychosis or mental deficiency. The Court struck down this statute by a
7-1 vote but split in its reasoning. The four-member plurality, led by Chief Justice Burger, found the narrow range of permissible mitigating circumstances to be a fatal flaw. “[T]he sentencer, in all but the rarest kind of capital case, [must] not be
precluded from considering as a mitigating factor, any aspect of a defendant's character or record and any of the circumstances of the offense that the defendant proffers as a basis for a sentence less than death.” Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 586,
604 (1978).

Cases subsequent to Lockett extended this principle. In Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U.S. 104 (1982), the defense offered in mitigation the fact that the defendant, who was 16 years old at the time of the offense, had a history of beatings
by a harsh father and serious emotional disturbance. The Oklahoma statute permitted consideration of “any mitigating circumstances,” but the sentencing judge ruled that, while the defendant's youth was relevant in mitigation, the troubled family
background and emotional disturbance were not relevant as a matter of law. The Court held that the evidence of Eddings’s background could not be ruled irrelevant and that the sentencer must give some consideration to it. The Court said that
“a consistency produced by ignoring individual differences is a false consistency.” Id. at 112. In Skipper v. South Carolina, 476 U.S. 1 (1986), the Court held it impermissible to exclude evidence regarding the defendant's good behavior in jail while
awaiting trial, despite the dissent’s argument that such evidence had little probative value given the special incentives for good behavior under the circumstances.

The Woodson-Lockett line of cases eventually led to a partial invalidation of both the Florida and the Texas statutes that had been upheld in 1976 in Proffitt and Jurek, respectively. In Hitchcock v. Dugger, 481 U.S. 393 (1987), the Court
held that Florida's statute was deficient because it, ike the Ohio statute invalidated in Lockett, precluded the sentencer from considering mitigating factors not specified in the statute. In Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302 (1989), the Court held that
the Texas statute violated the requirement of individualized sentencing because it precluded adequate consideration of Penry’s particular mitigating evidence — which concerned his intellectual disability and abused childhood. The only place for
consideration of such evidence in the Texas scheme was in relation to the question whether “the defendant would pose a continuing threat to society through future criminal acts of violence.” See p. 1177, supra note 84. On that question, Penry’s
evidence was far more likely to

p.1179

p.1160
be considered aggravating than mitigating. The Court ruled that because the Texas scheme prevented the jury from considering Penry’s mental disability and abused background as mitigating factors, it precluded a “reasoned moral response to
the defendant's background, character, and crime.” Id. at 328.

At the same time that the Court requires broad allowance for mitigating evidence, it has also held that prosecutors are entitled to balance that evidence by introducing victim impact testimony. Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U.S. 808, 822
(1991), p. 41 supra. Some studies suggest (unsurprisingly) that the inclusion of victim impact evidence makes jurors more likely to return a sentence of death. See, e.g., Jerome Deise & Raymond Paternoster, More Than a “Quick Glimpse of the
Life”: The Relationship Between Victim Impact Evidence and Death Sentencing, 40 Hastings Const. L.Q. 611 (2013).

QUESTIONS: Can the Court's concerns about mandatory death sentences and the need to consider mitigating evidence be cabined to the capital context, or do the arguments apply to all mandatory sentences? Are there good reasons to treat
capital cases differently from non-capital cases as a constitutional matter? If not, which regime is preferable — the capital regime that disallows all mandatory sentencing or the non-capital regime that gives legislatures flexibility to use mandatory
punishments? For discussion, see Rachel E. Barkow, The Court of Life and Death: The Two Tracks of Constitutional Sentencing Law and the Case for Uniformity, 107 Mich. L. Rev. 1145 (2009); Carol S. Steiker & Jordan M. Steiker, Opening a Win-
dow or Building a Wall? The Effect of Death Penalty Law and Advocacy on Criminal Justice More Broadly, 11 U. Pa. J. Const. L. 155 (2008).

3. The central tension in the Supreme Court’s Eighth Amendment jurisprudence. The Court's approach to mitigating evidence seems to flow naturally from its 1976 decision in Woodson, but it is in obvious tension with the Fur-
man and Gregg goals of confining and structuring the sentencing decision. Can the two principles be harmonized? A majority of the Court has always assumed so, but two justices gave up, with markedly different results.

Justice Scalia, concurring in Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S. 639 (1990), lamented that Woodson and Lockett “completely exploded whatever coherence the notion of ‘guided discretion’ once had.” Id. at 661. He refused any attempt to
reconcile the commands of individualization and guided discretion: “To acknowledge that ‘there perhaps is an inherent tension’ between [the Woodson-Lockett] line of cases and the line stemming from Furman .... is rather like saying that there
was perhaps an inherent tension between the Alllies and the Axis Powers in World War Il” Id. at 664. He concluded that the only possible response was to jettison the requirement of individualized sentencing because it bore no relation to the text
of the Eighth Amendment. “Woodson and Lockett . . . have some claim to my adherence because of the doctrine of stare decisis. [But s]tare decisis cannot command the impossible. Since | cannot possibly be guided by what seem to me incom-
patible principles, | must reject the one that is plainly in error. . . . Accordingly, | will not, in this case or in the future, vote to uphold an Eighth Amendment claim that the sentencer's discretion has been unlawfully restricted.” Id. at 672-673.

Justice Blackmun, dissenting from the Court's denial of certiorari in Callins v. Collins, 510 U.S. 1141 (1994), agreed with Justice Scalia that the tension between the commands of individualized sentencing and guided sentencing was

p.1160
p.1161
constitutionally intolerable, but he reached a different conclusion about how to handle the conflict (id. at 1144-1153):
Experience has taught us that the constitutional goal of eliminating arbitrariness and discrimination from the administration of death can never be achieved without compromising an equally essential component of funda-
mental fairness — individualized sentencing.
Itis tempting, when faced with conflicting constitutional commands, to sacrifice one for the other or to assume that an acceptable balance between them already has been struck. In the context of the death
penalty, however, such jurisprudential maneuvers are wholly inappropriate. The death penalty must be imposed “fairly, and with reasonable consistency, or not at all.” Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U.S. 104, 112 (1982)...
From this day forward, I no longer shall tinker with the machinery of death. For more than 20 years | have endeavored — indeed, | have struggled — along with a majority of this Court, to develop procedural and
substantive rules that would lend more than the mere appearance of fairness to the death penalty endeavor. Rather than continue to coddle the Court’s delusion that the desired level of fairness has been achieved, .. . | feel
morally and intellectually obligated simply to concede that the death penalty experiment has failed. . .
The theory underlying . . . Lockett is that an appropriate balance can be struck between the Furman promise of consistency and the Lockett requirement of individualized sentencing. . . . While one might hope that
providing the sentencer with as much relevant mitigating evidence as possible will lead to more rational and consistent sentences, experience has taught otherwise. It seems that the decision whether a human being should
live or die is so inherently subjective — rife with all of life's understandings, experiences, prejudices, and passions — that it inevitably defies the rationality and consistency required by the Constitution.

Are Justices Scalia and Blackmun right that there is no possible reconciliation of Furman and Lockett? For one close consideration of the tension and an attempt to resolve it, see Scott E. Sunby, The Lockett Paradox: Reconciling
Guided Discretion and Unguided Mitigation in Capital Sentencing, 38 UCLA L. Rev. 1147 (1991). Professor Sunby argues (jd. at 1207) that death penalty administration does not pose an “all-or-nothing [choice] between discretion or no discretion,”
and that the Court can continue to seek a middle ground between the position of Justice Scalia (which entails overruling Lockett) and that of Justice Blackmun (which entails overruling Gregg).

Justice Breyer (in an opinion joined by Justice Ginsburg) highlighted a different tension he believes the Court's case law creates: Detailed procedural review is necessary to ensure reliability and fairness in administration of the death
penalty, but this process creates “excessively long periods of time that individuals typically spend on death row” in dehumanizing conditions and this delay undermines the penological goals of the death penalty by undermining deterrence and
“attenuat[ing] the community's interest in retribution.” Glossip v. Gross, 576 U.S. 863, 923, 933 (2015) (Breyer, J., dissenting). As a result, he believes it “highly likely” that the death penalty is now unconstitutional and has urged full briefing on that
question. Id. at 946. Is he right that this tension is also irreconcilable?

p.1161
p. 1162

In a separate opinion, Justice Scalia challenged this view, pointing out that the conditions of confinement could be modified to address the claim of dehumanization. As for the penological goals, Justice Scalia cited studies showing a
deterrent effect and questioned Justice Breyer’s claim that society's interest in retribution “can be served almost as well by a sentence of life in prison without parole” by arguing that “whether the death penalty and life imprisonment constitute
more-or-less equivalent retribution is a question far above the judiciary's pay grade.” Id. at 897 (Scalia, J., concurring).

Which justice has the more persuasive argument? Are the objections to the death penalty properly couched in constitutional terms under the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments, or are they better viewed as policy objections to capital
punishment that should be resolved through the democratic process?

4, Other concerns. Justice Stevens, a necessary fifth vote to reinstate the death penalty in Gregg and the companion cases, changed his views about the death penalty before leaving the bench, but he did not rely on the tension
between Gregg and Lockett. Instead, he pointed to his concerns that death-qualified juries are biased in favor of convictions, that the risk of error in capital cases is greater because of the disturbing facts, that application of the death penalty is
discriminatory, and that the sentence is irrevocable. These factors led him to conclude that the death penalty does not survive a cost-benefit analysis. Baze v. Rees, 553 U.S. 35, 84-86 (2008) (Stevens, J., concurring in the judgment). Justice Breyer
echoed these concems in greater detail in his 40-page dissenting opinion in Glossip. If they are correct that these factors exist, are they — either alone or in combination — sufficient to strike down the death penalty as unconstitutional? Justice
Scalia sharply disagreed with Justice Stevens in Baze and with Justice Breyer in Glossip. He argued that Justice Stevens had failed to prove why the death penalty in particular was problematic, because disturbing facts and discriminatory sen-
tencing are not limited to death penalty cases. Similarly, he argued, any analysis that found fault with death-qualifying juries must necessarily extend to the whole system of challenges for cause and peremptory strikes. Regardless, Justice Scalia
concluded, parsing the social benefits and costs of the death penalty is beyond the scope of the Court's authority and is best left to legislatures. Id. at 87-93 (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment). In response to Justice Breyer, he wrote that “[bly
arrogating to himself the power to overturn [the Framers’ decision to leave it to the people to decide whether or not to have capital punishment], Justice Breyer does not just reject the death penalty, he rejects the Enlightenment.” Glossip, 576 U.S.
at 899.

QUESTIONS: Are the problems outlined by Justices Stevens and Breyer unique to the death penalty? If not unique, do these flaws nonetheless require greater judicial involvement because they are present to a greater degree or because of what
is at stake in a capital case? Are they sufficiently demonstrated to justify overturning capital punishment as a categorical matter (as opposed to addressing the problems in a more targeted way), or would such a remedy overstep the judiciary’s role
in our constitutional system, as Justice Scalia suggests?

5. The method of execution. In the past, states used a variety of methods to execute individuals, including hanging, the firing squad, and the electric chair. Today, the dominant method of execution is lethal injection using a three-
drug protocol where the first drug used acts as a sedative to induce unconsciousness, the second drug acts as a paralytic agent to inhibit movement, and the third drug induces cardiac arrest. Until roughly 2009, states used sodium thiopental as
the

p. 1162
p.1163

first drug in the protocol, and the Supreme Court upheld the use of that drug against an Eighth Amendment challenge that it posed too great a risk of misuse, which in turn could result in significant pain for the defendant. Baze, supra.

Having failed in their constitutional challenge, anti-death penalty advocates successfully pressured the lone American manufacturer of sodium thiopental to stop making the drug. When states turned to pentobarbital as the replacement,
anti-death penalty advocates similarly pressured the manufacturer of that drug to stop selling it for use in executions. States next turned to midazolam. When Oklahoma used the drug in the execution of Clayton Lockett, he was writhing in pain, at-
tempting to lift his head, and clenching his teeth after the sedative was supposed to have taken effect, leading state officials to halt the execution. (Lockett died of a heart attack a short time later.25)

In the wake of Lockett’s botched execution, defendants brought an Eighth Amendment challenge alleging that the use of midazolam created too great a risk of severe pain. The Supreme Court rejected the argument in a 5~4 decision,
with the majority finding that the challengers had failed “to satisfy their burden of establishing that any risk of harm was substantial when compared to a known and available alternative method of execution.” Id. at 878. The majority reasoned that,
because “it is settled that capital punishment is constitutional, it necessarily follows that there must be a constitutional means of carrying it out.” Id. at 869. Justice Sotomayor's dissent criticized the majority for requiring petitioners to identify an al-
temative method of execution, arguing that a “barbarous” method of execution “does not become less so just because it is the only method currently available.” Id. at 974 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting).

Which is the better view? In a 2019 opinion, the Court further clarified that defendants challenging their means of execution must identify an alternative method even if they are making an as-applied challenge based on the fact that a
particular method could cause pain given their unique medical condition. Bucklew v. Precythe, 139 S. Ct. 1112 (2019). For a review of how lethal injection protocols have changed since Baze, see Deborah W. Denno, Lethal Injection Chaos Post-
Baze, 102 Geo. LJ. 1331 (2014). For a critique of the Glossip/Bucklew approach, see Guus Duindam, Judicial Incoherence, Capital Punishment, and the Legalization of Torture: A Response to Glossip v. Gross and Bucklew v. Precythe, 108 Geo.
LJ. Online 74 (2019).

Atkins v. Virginia
Supreme Court of the United States
536 U.S. 304 (2002)

[Atkins presents the issue whether the death penalty can be imposed on a person who has a severe mental disability. Throughout the opinion, the Court refers to such persons as “mentally retarded.” That term is now recognized to be

inappropriate for many reasons. Indeed, because of the negative connotations associated with the term “retarded,” Congress passed a federal law known as Rosa’s Law, 124 Stat.
p.1163
p.1184
2643 (2010), to amend federal laws that had used the term “retarded” to instead refer to “individuals with intellectual disability.” We follow that same practice except when quoting or excerpting cases that follow the old terminology, as Atkins
does]
Justice STEVENS delivered the opinion of the Court.

Those mentally retarded persons who meet the law's requirements for criminal responsibility should be tried and punished when they commit crimes. Because of their disabilities in areas of reasoning, judgment, and control of their
impulses, however, they do not act with the level of moral culpability that characterizes the most serious adult criminal conduct. Moreover, their impairments can jeopardize the reliability and fairness of capital proceedings [in their cases]. Presum-
ably for these reasons, in the 13 years since we decided Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302 (1989) [upholding the constitutionality of capital punishment for individuals with intellectual disabilities, provided juries are instructed to consider intellectual
disability as a potential mitigating factor], the American public, legislators, scholars, and judges have deliberated over the question whether the death penalty should ever be imposed on a mentally retarded criminal. The consensus reflected in
those deliberations informs our answer to the question presented by this case: whether such executions are “cruel and unusual punishments” prohibited by the Eighth Amendment to the Federal Constitution.

I
At approximately midnight on August 16, 1996, Atkins and William Jones, armed with a semiautomatic handgun, abducted Eric Nesbitt, robbed him of the money on his person, drove him to an automated teller machine in his pickup
truck where cameras recorded their withdrawal of additional cash, then took him to an isolated location where he was shot eight times and killed. . . . Atkins was convicted of abduction, armed robbery, and capital murder, and sentenced to death.
In the penalty phase, the defense relied on one witness, Dr. Evan Nelson, a forensic psychologist who had evaluated Atkins before trial and concluded that he was “mildly mentally retarded.” His conclusion was based on interviews with
people who knew Atkins, a review of school and court records, and the administration of a standard intelligence test which indicated that Atkins had a full scale IQ of 59. . ..5
I
The Eighth Amendment succinctly prohibits “[e]xcessive” sanctions. . ..
Acclaim that punishment is excessive is judged not by the standards that prevailed in 1685 when Lord Jeffreys presided over the “Bloody Assizes” or when the Bill of Rights was adopted, but rather by those that currently prevail.
Proportionality review under those evolving standards should be informed by “ ‘objective factors to the maximum possible extent.’” . . . We have pinpointed that the “clearest and most reliable objective evidence of contemporary values
is the
p.1184
p.1165
legislation enacted by the country’s legislatures.” Relying in part on such legislative evidence, we have held that death is an impermissibly excessive punishment for the rape of an adult woman, Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584, 593-596 (1977), or for
a defendant who neither took life, attempted to take life, nor intended to take life, Enmund v. Florida, 458 U.S. 782, 789-793 (1982). .. .
We also acknowledged in Coker that the objective evidence, though of great importance, did not “wholly determine” the controversy, “for the Constitution contemplates that in the end our own judgment will be brought to bear on the
question of the acceptability of the death penalty under the Eighth Amendment.”
pare
. . . In [1986], the public reaction to the execution of a mentally retarded murderer in Georgia apparently led to the enactment of the first state statute prohibiting such executions. In 1988, when Congress enacted legislation reinstating
the federal death penalty, it expressly provided that a “sentence of death shall not be carried out upon a person who is mentally retarded.” In 1989, Maryland enacted a similar prohibition. . . .
Much has changed since then. . . . In 1990, Kentucky and Tennessee enacted statutes similar to those in Georgia and Maryland, as did New Mexico in 1991, and Arkansas, Colorado, Washington, Indiana, and Kansas in 1993 and 1994.
In 1995, when New York reinstated its death penalty, it emulated the Federal Government by expressly exempting the mentally retarded. Nebraska followed suit in 1998. . .. [I]n 2000 and 2001 six more States — South Dakota, Arizona, Connecti-
cut, Florida, Missouri, and North Carolina — joined the procession. The Texas Legislature unanimously adopted a similar bill, and bills have passed at least one house in other States, including Virginia and Nevada.
Itis not so much the number of these States that is significant, but the consistency of the direction of change. . . . Moreover, even in those States that allow the execution of mentally retarded offenders, the practice is uncommon. .. .
Only five states have executed offenders possessing a known IQ less than 70 since we decided Penry. The practice, therefore, has become truly unusual, and it is fair to say that a national consensus has developed against it.2.
p.1165
1186

Iv

This consensus unquestionably reflects widespread judgment about the relative culpability of mentally retarded offenders. . . . Additionally, it suggests that some characteristics of mental retardation undermine the strength of the pro-
cedural protections that our capital jurisprudence steadfastly guards. . ..

Our death penalty jurisprudence provides two reasons consistent with the legislative consensus that the mentally retarded should be categorically excluded from execution. First, there is a serious question as to whether either justi-
fication that we have recognized as a basis for the death penalty applies to mentally retarded offenders. Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 183 (1976) identified “retribution and deterrence of capital crimes by prospective offenders” as the social
purposes served by the death penalty... .

With respect to retribution . . . the severity of the appropriate punishment necessarily depends on the culpability of the offender. Since Gregg, our jurisprudence has consistently confined the imposition of the death penalty to a narrow
category of the most serious crimes. . . . If the culpability of the average murderer is insufficient to justify the most extreme sanction available to the State, the lesser culpability of the mentally retarded offender surely does not merit that form of
retribution... .

With respect to deterrence . . . the same cognitive and behavioral impairments that make these defendants less morally culpable — for example, the diminished ability to understand and process information, to lean from experience, to
engage in logical reasoning, or to control impulses — .. . also make it less likely that they can process the information of the possibility of execution as a penalty and, as a result, control their conduct based upon that information. . ..

The reduced capacity of mentally retarded offenders provides a second justification for a categorical rule making such offenders ineligible for the death penalty. The risk “that the death penalty will be imposed in spite of factors which
may call for a less severe penalty,” Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 586, 605 (1978), is enhanced, not only by the possibility of false confessions, but also by the lesser ability of mentally retarded defendants to make a persuasive showing of mitigation. . ..
Mentally retarded defendants may be less able to give meaningful assistance to their counsel and are typically poor witnesses, and their demeanor may create an unwarranted impression of lack of remorse for their crimes. As Penry demonstrated,
moreover, reliance on mental retardation as a mitigating factor can be a two-edged sword that may enhance the likelihood that the aggravating factor of future dangerousness will be found by the jury. Mentally retarded defendants in the aggregate
face a special risk of wrongful execution.

Our independent evaluation of the issue reveals no reason to disagree with the judgment of “the legislatures that have recently addressed the matter” and concluded that death is not a suitable punishment for a mentally retarded crim-
inal. . . . [W]e therefore conclude that such punishment is excessive and that the Constitution “places a substantive restriction on the State's power to take the life” of a mentally retarded offender... .

p.1186
p.1167
Justice ScaLiA, with whom THE CHieF Justice and Justice THomas join, dissenting.

... The Court. .. miraculously extracts a “national consensus” forbidding execution of the mentally retarded, from the fact that 18 States — less than half (47%) of the 38 States that permit capital punishment (for whom the issue exists)
— have very recently enacted legislation barring execution of the mentally retarded. . . . Our prior cases have generally required a much higher degree of agreement before finding a punishment cruel and unusual on “evolving standards” grounds.
In Coker, we proscribed the death penalty for rape of an adult woman after finding that only one jurisdiction, Georgia, authorized such a punishment. In Enmund, we invalidated the death penalty for mere participation in a robbery in which an ac-
complice took a life, a punishment not permitted in 28 of the death penalty States (78%). .. .

The Court attempts to bolster its embarrassingly feeble evidence of “consensus” with the following: “It is not so much the number of these States that is significant, but the consistency of the direction of change.” (emphasis added). But
in what other direction could we possibly see change? Given that 14 years ago all the death penalty statutes included the mentally retarded, any change (except precipitate undoing of what had just been done) was bound to be in the one direction
the Court finds significant enough to overcome the lack of real consensus. . . .

Even less compelling (if possible) is the Court's argument that evidence of “national consensus” is to be found in the infrequency with which retarded persons are executed in States that do not bar their execution. . .. If execution of the
mentally retarded is “uncommon”; and if it is not a sufficient explanation of this that the retarded constitute a tiny fraction of society (1% to 3%); then surely the explanation is that mental retardation is a constitutionally mandated mitigating factor
at sentencing, Penry. For that reason, even if there were uniform national sentiment in favor of executing the retarded in appropriate cases, one would still expect execution of the mentally retarded to be “uncommon.” . ..

But the Prize for the Court's Most Feeble Effort to fabricate “national consensus” must go to its appeal (deservedly relegated to a footnote) to the views of assorted professional and religious organizations, members of the so-called
“world community,” and respondents to opinion polls. . . . [T]he views of professional and religious organizations and the results of opinion polls are irrelevant. Equally irrelevant are the practices of the “world community,” whose notions of justice
are (thankfully) not always those of our people. . . .

Beyond the empty talk of a “national consensus,” the Court gives us a brief glimpse of what really underlies today’s decision: . . . “ ‘{T]he Constitution,’ the Court says, ‘contemplates that in the end our own judgment will be brought to
bear on the question of the acceptability of the death penalty under the Eighth Amendment.’ ” . .. The arrogance of this assumption of power takes one’s breath away. And it explains, of course, why the Court can be so cavalier about the evidence
of consensus. . .

The Court gives two reasons why the death penalty is an excessive punishment for all mentally retarded offenders. First, the “diminished capacities” of the mentally retarded raise a “serious question” whether their execution contributes
to the “social purposes” of the death penalty, viz., retribution and deterrence. . . . Retribution is not advanced, the argument goes, because the mentally retarded are no more culpable than the average murderer, whom we have already held lacks
sufficient culpability to warrant the death penalty. . ..

p.1167
p.1168

[What scientific analysis can possibly show that a mildly retarded individual who commits an exquisite torture-killing is “no more culpable” than the “average” murderer in a holdup-gone-wrong or a domestic dispute? . . . Surely
culpability, and deservedness of the most severe retribution, depends not merely (if at all) upon the mental capacity of the criminal (above the level where he is able to distinguish right from wrong) but also upon the depravity of the crime — which
is precisely why this sort of question has traditionally been thought answerable not by a categorical rule of the sort the Court today imposes upon all trials, but rather by the sentencer’s weighing of the circumstances (both degree of retardation and
depravity of crime) in the particular case. . ..

As for the other social purpose of the death penalty that the Court discusses, deterrence: That is not advanced, the Court tells us, because the mentally retarded are “less likely” than their non-retarded counterparts to “process the
information of the possibility of execution as a penalty and . . . control their conduct based upon that information.” . . . [T]he Court does not say that all mentally retarded individuals cannot “process the information of the possibility of execution as
apenalty and .. . control their conduct based upon that information”; it merely asserts that they are “less likely” to be able to do so. But surely the deterrent effect of a penalty is adequately vindicated if it successfully deters many, but not all, of the
target class. ...

Today's opinion adds one more to the long list of substantive and procedural requirements impeding imposition of the death penalty imposed under this Court’s assumed power to invent a death-is-different jurisprudence. . . . There is,
something to be said for popular abolition of the death penalty; there is nothing to be said for its incremental abolition by this Court.

NOTES

1. Applying Atkins. The Atkins Court did not mandate procedures for determining whether a capital defendant is intellectually disabled. States have varied in their definitions of what qualifies as intellectually disabled for Eighth
Amendment purposes, their allocations of decision-making authority between judge and jury, and their burdens of proof. Pennsylvania, for example, requires capital defendants to prove their intellectual disability by a preponderance of the evi-
dence. See Commonwealth v. Sanchez, 36 A.3d 24 (Pa. 2011). In Georgia a capital defendant must prove intellectual disability beyond a reasonable doubt. See Stripling v. State, 711 S.E.2d 665 (Ga. 2011).

The Supreme Court has placed some limits on the states, however. In Hall v. Florida, 572 U.S. 701 (2014), the Court invalidated a state statute that foreclosed further exploration of intellectual disability if the defendant's IQ score was
higher than 70. How broadly does the logic of Hall extend?

2. Pre-Atkins proportionality cases. In proportionality decisions prior to Atkins, the Court had ruled the death penalty unconstitutional for the rape of an adult woman, Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584 (1977), and for a felony murder
attributed to a defendant “who does not himself kill, attempt to kill, or intend that a killing take place or that lethal force will be employed,” Enmund v. Florida, 458 U.S. 782, 797 (1982). The force of Enmund was limited, however, in Tison v.

p.1168

p.1169
Arizona, 481 U.S. 137 (1987). Tison concluded that a felony murder could sometimes be punished by death, even when defendants did not themselves kill or intend to kill, because “major participation in the felony committed, combined with reck-
less indifference to human life, is sufficient to satisfy the Enmund culpability requirement.” Id. at 158.

While the Court was willing to demarcate offenses to which the death penalty was constitutionally inapplicable, it was less sympathetic, prior to Atkins, to claims that certain kinds of individuals could not be executed. The same year
that the Court initially condoned execution for intellectually disabled defendants in Penry, it also allowed the execution of defendants older than 15 but younger than 18 at the time of their offenses. Stanford v. Kentucky, 492 U.S. 361 (1989). When
the Court overruled Penry in Atkins, many predicted — correctly, it turned out — that Stanford would no longer survive.

3. Post-Atkins proportionality cases. (a) Juveniles. Three years after Atkins, the Court overruled Stanford, holding that the death penalty is a disproportionate punishment for defendants who were juveniles at the time of their
offenses. Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005). The Court relied on the methodology of Atkins to find a new societal consensus against the execution of juveniles. The Court found objective indicia of a national consensus in the rejection of the
juvenile death penalty in a substantial number of states, the infrequency of its use where it remained on the books, and the consistency in the trend toward abolition of the practice.

The Court also relied upon common knowledge (what “any parent knows”) and “scientific and sociological studies” to establish that “juvenile offenders cannot, with reliability, be classified among the worst offenders.” Id. at 569. The
Court noted “the comparative immaturity and irresponsibility of juveniles,” that juveniles “are more vulnerable or susceptible to negative influences and outside pressures,” and that the personality traits of juveniles are “more transitory, less fixed.”
Id. at 569-570. The Court concluded that “[o]nce the diminished culpability of juveniles is recognized, it is evident that the penological justifications for the death penalty [retribution and deterrence] apply to them with lesser force than to adults.” Id.
at 571.

Finally, the Court discussed, in detail, international law and practice, a factor its Atkins opinion had mentioned only briefly. The Court stressed that “the United States is the only country in the world that continues to give official sanction
to the juvenile death penalty” (id. at 575), that international human rights covenants had repudiated the juvenile death penalty, and that the United Kingdom in particular had long rejected it. The Court concluded, “It does not lessen our fidelity to
the Constitution or our pride in its origins to acknowledge that the express affirmation of certain fundamental rights by other nations and peoples simply underscores the centrality of those same rights within our own heritage of freedom.” Id. at
578.

Three dissenters, in an opinion by Justice Scalia, rejected both the outcome and the methodology of the Simmons majority: “The Court reaches this implausible result by purporting to advert, not to the original meaning of the Eighth
Amendment, but to ‘the evolving standards of decency’ of our national society . . . (which it determines by reference to] the subjective views of five Members of this Court and like-minded foreigners.” Id. at 608. Justice O'Connor dissented on a
narrower ground. She accepted the Court’s “evolving standards” methodology but argued that no new societal consensus had emerged on the propriety of the juvenile death penalty.

p.1169

p.1190
QUESTIONS: Is the proportionality analysis performed by the Court in Simmons and Atkins persuasive? Could a defendant's age be adequately taken into account as a mitigating factor, without adopting a categorical rule, or is the risk that juries
may just as easily perceive age as an aggravating factor because younger defendants are more likely than older defendants to commit additional crimes?

(b) Child rape. In Kennedy v. Louisiana, 554 U.S. 407 (2008), the Court overturned a statute authorizing the death penalty for the rape of a child under the age of 12. The Court followed the blueprint of Simmons and Atkins in determin-
ing whether a societal consensus had emerged with respect to using the death penalty in such contexts. The Court also found it significant that child rape occurs more often than first-degree murder; thus to allow the death penalty for child rape
could not “be reconciled with our evolving standards of decency and the necessity to constrain the use of the death penalty.” Id. at 439.

QUESTIONS: Why is the high incidence of child sex offenses an argument against the death penalty? Why shouldn't states be permitted to use aggravating factors to reduce the number of child rape cases that would qualify for death? The
Court's view was that jurors could not be trusted to balance aggravating factors against mitigating factors in this context because the crime “in many cases will overwhelm a decent person's judgment.” Id. at 439. Is that prediction realistic? If so,
does it cast doubt on the jury's ability to balance these factors in any capital murder case?

4, Methodological questions. (a) Societal consensus? In both Atkins and Simmons, the justices disagreed on how to evaluate the indicia of an emerging societal consensus. In considering whether legislative change has led to a
new consensus narrowing the permissible scope for the death penalty, how should the Court count states that have abolished the death penalty entirely? How should the Court count states that have called for a moratorium on executions? Should
we count the federal government as one jurisdiction out of 51? Justice Thomas has argued that a federal law permitting a punishment in a given circumstance should automatically refute any claim that there is a national consensus against that
punishment, no matter the tally in the states. Graham v. Florida, 560 U.S. 48, 107 (2010) (Thomas, J., dissenting). For a critique of this argument, see Rachel E. Barkow, Categorizing Graham, 23 Fed. Sent'g Rep. 49, 52 (2010).

Should the Court consider indicia of societal consensus other than domestic legislation? Does statistical evidence of decreasing executions indicate societal rejection of the death penalty? See Kennedy v. Louisiana, 554 U.S. 407,
433-434 (2008). Is the Court justified in considering foreign law and international human rights conventions? See Youngjae Lee, International Consensus as Persuasive Authority in the Eighth Amendment, 156 U. Pa. L. Rev. 63 (2007).

(b) The role of expert opinion. How should the Court assess the judgment of experts? In Hall, the majority relied on the fact that, contrary to the Florida law at issue, medical experts do not take IQ scores as conclusive evidence of
intellectual capacity. Justice Alito, writing for himself and three others, criticized the majority because “what counts are our society's standards — which is to say, the standards of the American people — not the standards of professional associa-
tions, which at best represent the views of a small professional elite.” Id. at 731. Is Justice Alito correct or should the Court's decisions reflect the current state of expert knowledge in a field, even if uninformed popular views may be otherwise?

p. 1190
p.1191

(c) The Court’s independent judgment. In Atkins and Simmons, the Court portrayed proportionality analysis as a two-step process: first, determination of the national consensus, and second, the Court’s own assessment of penolog-
ical justifications. If society has not reached a consensus against the death penalty in a given category of cases, but the Court nonetheless concludes that sound penological justifications are lacking, why should the Court's own analysis control?
Conversely, if there is an overwhelming societal consensus against executing juveniles or someone who is intellectually disabled, should the Court's own judgment that there are good penological reasons for that practice suffice to render it per-
missible in the one state that dissents from the otherwise uniform national and international view?

5. Future applications. Are there other categories of defendants who should be exempt from the death penalty? Recall that the Court has held that the Eighth Amendment prohibits execution of those who have a mental illness that
makes them unable to rationally understand why the state is seeking the death penalty. See Panetti v. Quarterman, 551 U.S. 930, 595 (2007), p. 943 supra. The Court clarified in Madison v. Alabama, 139 S. Ct. 718, 722 (2019), that this prohibition
could apply to someone who lacks the requisite rational understanding because of dementia. But the Court rejected an argument that it would be sufficient to show a defendant is unable to remember the crime because that defendant “may still be
able to form a rational understanding of the reasons for [the] death sentence.” What about those with serious mental illness who do not fail the “rational understanding” standard from Panetti? See Bruce J. Winick, The Supreme Court's Evolving
Death Penalty Jurisprudence: Severe Mental Iliness as the Next Frontier, 50 B.C. L. Rev. 785 (2009); Christopher Slobogin, What Atkins Could Mean for People with Mental IlIness, 33 N.M. L. Rev. 293 (2003). Note that serious mental illness can be
considered an aggravating factor from the perspective of a person's future dangerousness. From the perspective of retribution (or deterrence), how would you analyze the argument for creating a categorical exemption for people who have serious
mental illness? The Court's prohibition on the death penalty for juveniles draws that line at age 18. Should the age be raised based on neuroscience that suggests brain development continues to age 25? Is age 21 a better threshold based on the
fact that the law draws distinctions for other legal purposes at age 21? See Andrew Michaels, A Decent Proposal: Exempting Eighteen- to Twenty-Year-Olds from the Death Penalty, 40 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 139 (2016).

Are there crimes other than murder for which death can be a proportionate punishment? In Kennedy, the Court reserved judgment on whether “offenses against the State” —a list that included, according to the Court, “treason, espi-
onage, terrorism and drug kingpin activity” — would merit the death penalty even when they did not involve the taking of life. 554 U.S. at 437.

How should questions of “consensus” and penological justification be assessed for each of these crime and perpetrator categories? Instead of adopting categorical exclusions, does it make more sense to place a cap on the number of
capital cases prosecutors can bring, thereby forcing them to choose the worst cases? See Adam M. Gershowitz, Imposing a Cap on Capital Punishment, 72 Mo. L. Rev. 73 (2007).

6. The relevance of the risk of wrongful conviction. The spate of DNA and other exonerations of those on death row has led to a heightened concern about wrongful convictions in capital cases, see pp. 1166-1168 supra. Can such
concerns

p.1191
p. 1192

render capital punishment unconstitutional in particular categories of cases? The Court in Atkins supported its case for exempting intellectually disabled defendants from the death penalty on the ground that they face a higher likelihood of wrong-
ful conviction. Could a similar rationale help justify eliminating the death penalty for mentally ill defendants, because they also may have trouble providing meaningful assistance to counsel?
Should concerns about wrongful convictions render the death penalty unconstitutional in all cases? Justice Breyer has suggested the answer may be yes. He cites studies showing that approximately 4 percent of those sentenced
to death are innocent. He posits that capital cases might be more prone to errors than non-capital cases because they involve particularly heinous facts, intense pressure for convictions, and death-qualified jurors (in capital cases, jurors can
be struck for cause if they oppose capital punishment in all cases). Glossip, supra, at 909-915. In response, Justice Scalia argued that heinous facts and intense pressure for convictions would still exist if the punishment were life without parole
instead of the death penalty. Justice Scalia claimed that, if anything, capital defendants are better off because they have “endless legal assistance from the abolition lobby (and legal favoritism from abolitionist judges), while the lifer languishes
unnoticed behind bars.” Justice Scalia also argued that the death penalty cannot be unconstitutional because the text of the Fifth Amendment explicitly contemplates it, providing that “[nJo person shall be held to answer for a capital . . . crime, un-
less on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury,” and that “no person shall be deprived of life. . . without due process of law.” Id. at 894.
QUESTIONS: Who has the better argument on these issues? With respect to Justice Scalia’s textual argument, recall that the Court’s majority has consistently rejected his texualist approach to capital punishment questions, holding that the
Eighth Amendment requires (and from the outset was intended to require) respect for “evolving standards of decency.” See, e.g., Gregg, p. 1172 supra, and Atkins, p. 1183 supra. But even on its own textualist terms, is Justice Scalia’s argument
persuasive? Note that the language of the Fifth Amendment refers not only to capital punishment, but also (in its Double Jeopardy Clause) to severe corporal punishment (“nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in
jeopardy of life or limb”). Is it obvious that these references establish the constitutionality of amputation, flogging, or other severe bodily injury as forms of punishment? If not, then why is it implausible to read the Constitution's Due Process, Equal
Protection, and Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clauses as limiting the circumstances in which government can subject people to loss of life?
McCleskey v. Kemp
Supreme Court of the United States
481 U.S. 279 (1987)
Justice PoweLt delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case presents the question whether a complex statistical study that indicates a risk that racial considerations enter into capital sentencing determinations
p. 1192
p.1193
proves that petitioner McCleskey's capital sentence is unconstitutional under the Eighth or Fourteenth Amendment.
I
McCleskey, a black man, was convicted of two counts of armed robbery and one count of murder in the Superior Court of Fulton County, Georgia, on October 12, 1978. McCleskey’s convictions arose out of the robbery of a furniture
store and the killing of a white police officer during the course of the robbery. The evidence at trial indicated that McCleskey and three accomplices planned and carried out the robbery. Alll four were armed. . . . During the course of the robbery, a
police officer, answering a silent alarm, entered the store through the front door. [Two shots] struck the officer. One hit him in the face and killed him. At trial, the State introduced evidence that at least one of the bullets that struck the officer was
fired [by McCleskey].
The jury convicted McCleskey of murder [and] found two aggravating circumstances to exist beyond a reasonable doubt: the murder was committed during the course of an armed robbery, and the murder was committed upon a peace
officer engaged in the performance of his duties. . .. McCleskey offered no mitigating evidence. The jury recommended that he be sentenced to death. . . . The court followed the jury’s recommendation and sentenced McCleskey to death. [T]he
Supreme Court of Georgia affirmed. . . .

[After state court challenges, McCleskey filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus|] His petition raised 18 claims, one of which was that the Georgia capital sentencing process is administered in a racially discriminatory manner in
violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. In support of his claim, McCleskey proffered a statistical study performed by Professors David C. Baldus, George Woodworth, and Charles Pulaski (the Baldus
study) that purports to show a disparity in the imposition of the death sentence in Georgia based on the race of the murder victim and, to a lesser extent, the race of the defendant. The Baldus study is actually two sophisticated statistical studies
that examine over 2,000 murder cases that occurred in Georgia during the 1970s. The raw numbers collected by Professor Baldus indicate that defendants charged with killing white persons received the death penalty in 11% of the cases, but
defendants charged with killing blacks received the death penalty in only 1% of the cases. The raw numbers also indicate a reverse racial disparity according to the race of the defendant: 4% of the black defendants received the death penalty, as
opposed to 7% of the white defendants.

Baldus also divided the cases according to the combination of the race of the defendant and the race of the victim. He found that the death penalty was assessed in 22% of the cases involving black defendants and white victims; 8%
of the cases involving white defendants and white victims; 1% of the cases involving black defendants and black victims; and 3% of the cases involving white defendants and black victims. . . .

Baldus subjected his data to an extensive analysis, taking account of 230 variables that could have explained the disparities on nonracial grounds. One of his models concludes that, even after taking account of 39 nonracial variables,
defendants charged with killing white victims were 4.3 times as likely to receive a death

p.1198
p. 1194
sentence as defendants charged with killing blacks. [T]he Baldus study indicates that black defendants, such as McCleskey, who kill white victims have the greatest likelihood of receiving the death penalty.5

The District Court. . . found that the methodology of the Baldus study was flawed in several respects. . .. Accordingly, the Court dismissed the petition. The Court of Appeals affirmed. . . .

I

McCleskey’s first claim is that the Georgia capital punishment statute violates the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.7 . . . As a black defendant who killed a white victim, McCleskey claims that the Baldus study
demonstrates that he was discriminated against because of his race and because of the race of his victim. . . .

Our analysis begins with the basic principle that a defendant who alleges an equal protection violation has the burden of proving “the existence of purposeful discrimination.” [T]o prevail under the Equal Protection Clause, McCleskey
must prove that the decision-makers in his case acted with discriminatory purpose. He offers no evidence specific to his own case that would support an inference that racial considerations played a part in his sentence. Instead, he relies solely on
the Baldus study. ... McCleskey’s claim that these statistics are sufficient proof of discrimination, without regard to the facts of a particular case, would extend to all capital cases in Georgia, at least where the victim was white and the defendant
is black.

. .. McCleskey challenges decisions at the heart of the State's criminal justice system. . . . Because discretion is essential to the criminal justice process, we would demand exceptionally clear proof before we would infer that the discre-
tion had been abused. . . . Accordingly, we hold that the Baldus study is clearly insufficient to support an inference that any of the decisionmakers in McCleskey’s case acted with discriminatory purpose.

McCleskey also suggests that the Baldus study proves that the State as a whole has acted with a discriminatory purpose. He appears to argue that the State has violated the Equal Protection Clause by adopting the capital punishment
statute and allowing it to remain in force despite its allegedly discriminatory application.

p. 1194

p. 1195
But “‘[d]iscriminatory purpose’ . . . implies more than intent as volition or intent as awareness of consequences. It implies that the decisionmaker, in this case a state legislature, selected or reaffirmed a particular course of action at least in part
‘because of,’ not merely ‘in spite of,’ its adverse effects upon an identifiable group.” For this claim to prevail, McCleskey would have to prove that the Georgia Legislature enacted or maintained the death penalty statute because of an anticipated

racially discriminatory effect. In Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153 (1976), this Court found that the Georgia capital sentencing system could operate in a fair and neutral manner. There was no evidence then, and there is none now, that the Georgia
Legislature enacted the capital punishment statute to further a racially discriminatory purpose. . . .
Iv

. .. McCleskey also argues that the Baldus study demonstrates that the Georgia capital sentencing system violates the Eighth Amendment. .. .

To evaluate McCleskey's challenge, we must examine exactly what the Baldus study may show. Even Professor Baldus does not contend that his statistics prove that race enters into any capital sentencing decisions or that race was a
factor in McCleskey’s particular case.22 . . . There is, of course, some risk of racial prejudice influencing a jury's decision in a criminal case. . . . The question “is at what point that risk becomes constitutionally unacceptable.”

McCleskey’s argument that the Constitution condemns the discretion allowed decisionmakers in the Georgia capital sentencing system is antithetical to the fundamental role of discretion in our criminal justice system. Discretion in the
criminal justice system offers substantial benefits to the criminal defendant. Not only can a jury decline to impose the death sentence, it can decline to convict, or choose to convict of a lesser offense. . . . Similarly, ... a prosecutor can decline to
charge, offer a plea bargain, or decline to seek a death sentence in any particular case. Of course, “the power to be lenient [also] is the power to discriminate,” K. Davis, Discretionary Justice 170 (1973), but a capital-punishment system that did not
allow for discretionary acts of leniency “would be totally alien to our notions of criminal justice.” Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S., at 200, n.50.

. .. The discrepancy indicated by the Baldus study is “a far cry from the major systemic defects identified in Furman.”3° Where the discretion that is fundamental to our criminal process is involved, we decline to assume that what is
unexplained is

p. 1195
p.1196
invidious. In light of the safeguards designed to minimize racial bias in the process, the fundamental value of jury trial in our criminal justice system, and the benefits that discretion provides to criminal defendants, we hold that the Baldus study
does not demonstrate a constitutionally significant risk of racial bias affecting the Georgia capital-sentencing process.°
Vv

Two additional concerns inform our decision in this case. First, McCleskey’s claim, taken to its logical conclusion, throws into serious question the principles that underlie our entire criminal justice system. The Eighth Amendment is not
limited in application to capital punishment, but applies to all penalties. Thus, if we accepted McCleskey’s claim that racial bias has impermissibly tainted the capital sentencing decision, we could soon be faced with similar claims as to other types
of penalty. Moreover, the claim that his sentence rests on the irrelevant factor of race easily could be extended to apply to claims based on unexplained discrepancies that correlate to membership in other minority groups, and even to gender. . . .
Also, there is no logical reason that such a claim need be limited to racial or sexual bias. If arbitrary and capricious punishment is the touchstone under the Eighth Amendment, such a claim could — at least in theory — be based upon any arbitrary
variable, such as the defendant's facial characteristics, or the physical attractiveness of the defendant or the victim,“4 that some statistical study indicates may be influential in jury decisionmaking. As these examples illustrate, there is no limiting
principle to the type of challenge brought by McCleskey. . . .

Second, McCleskey’s arguments are best presented to the legislative bodies. . . . Legislatures also are better qualified to weigh and “evaluate the results of statistical studies in terms of their own local conditions and with a flexibility of
approach that is not available to the courts,” Gregg v. Georgia, supra. . . . Despite McCleskey’s wide ranging arguments that basically challenge the validity of capital punishment in our multi-racial society, the only question before us is whether in
his case the law of Georgia was properly applied. We agree with the District Court and the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit that this was carefully and correctly done in this case.

Accordingly, we affirm. . . .

Justice BRENNAN, [with whom JusTices MARSHALL, BLACKMUN, and STEVENS join], dissenting. .. .

Itis important to emphasize at the outset that the Court's observation that McCleskey cannot prove the influence of race on any particular sentencing decision is irrelevant in evaluating his Eighth Amendment claim. Since Furman v.
Georgia,

p.1196

p.1197
408 U.S. 238 (1972), the Court has been concerned with the risk of the imposition of an arbitrary sentence, rather than the proven fact of one. . .. As Justice O'Connor observed in Caldwell v. Mississippi, 472 U.S. 320, 343 (1986), a death sentence
must be struck down when the circumstances under which it has been imposed “creat[e] an unacceptable risk that ‘the death penalty [may have been] meted out arbitrarily or capriciously’ or through ‘whim or mistake’ ” (emphasis added). This em-
phasis on risk . . . reflects the fact that concern for arbitrariness focuses on the rationality of the system as a whole, and that a system that features a significant probability that sentencing decisions are influenced by impermissible considerations
cannot be regarded as rational. . .. McCleskey's claim does differ, however, in one respect from these earlier cases: itis the first to base a challenge not on speculation about how a system might operate, but on empirical documentation on how
it does operate... .

The Baldus study . . . distinguishes between those cases in which (1) the jury exercises virtually no discretion because the strength or weakness of aggravating factors usually suggests that only one outcome is appropriate; and (2)
cases reflecting an “intermediate” level of aggravation, in which the jury has considerable discretion in choosing a sentence. McCleskey's case falls into the intermediate range. In such cases, . . . just under 59 percent — almost 6 in 10 — defen-
dants comparable to McCleskey would not have received the death penalty if their victims had been black. . ..

The statistical evidence in this case . . . relentlessly documents the risk that McCleskey's sentence was influenced by racial considerations. This evidence shows that there is a better than even chance in Georgia that race will influence
the decision to impose the death penalty: a majority of defendants in white-victim crimes would not have been sentenced to die if their victims had been black. . . . In determining the guilt of a defendant, a state must prove its case beyond a rea-
sonable doubt. . . . Surely, we should not be willing to take a person's life if the chance that his death sentence was irrationally imposed is more likely than not. . .

McCleskey’s claim is not a fanciful product of mere statistical artifice. For many years, Georgia operated openly and formally precisely the type of dual system the evidence shows is still effectively in place. . . . By the time of the Civil
War, a dual system of crime and punishment was well established in Georgia. The state criminal code contained separate sections for “Slaves and Free Persons of Color” and for all other persons. [Justice Brennan here cited numerous instances
in which the Georgia Penal Code had provided more severe punishments for crimes committed by blacks and for crimes (especially rape) committed against white victims.]

. . . Citation of past practices does not justify the automatic condemnation of current ones. But it would be unrealistic to ignore the influence of history in assessing the plausible implications of McCleskey’s evidence.

... The Court . . . declines to find McCleskey’s evidence sufficient in view of “the safeguards designed to minimize racial bias in the [capital sentencing] process.” In Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S., at 226, the Court rejected a facial chal-
lenge to the Georgia capital sentencing statute, describing such a challenge as based on “simply an assertion of lack of faith” that the system could operate in a fair manner. Justice White observed that the claim that prosecutors might act in an ar-
bitrary fashion was “unsupported by any facts.” . . . Gregg bestowed no permanent approval on the Georgia system. It simply held that the State’s statutory safeguards were assumed sufficient to channel discretion without evidence otherwise. . ..

p.1197
p.1198

The Court next states [its] fear that recognition of McCleskey’s claim would open the door to widespread challenges to all aspects of criminal sentencing. [T]o reject McCleskey’s powerful evidence on this basis is to ignore both the
qualitatively different character of the death penalty and the particular repugnance of racial discrimination. . .

Finally, the Court justifies its rejection of McCleskey’s claim by cautioning against usurpation of the legislatures’ role in devising and monitoring criminal punishment. . .. Those whom we would banish from society or from the human
community itself often speak in too faint a voice to be heard above society's demand for punishment. It is the particular role of courts to hear these voices, for the Constitution declares that the majoritarian chorus may not alone dictate the condi-
tions of social life.

[llt has been scarcely a generation since this Court’s first decision striking down racial segregation, and barely two decades since the legislative prohibition of racial discrimination in major domains of national life. These have been
honorable steps, but we cannot pretend that in three decades we have completely escaped the grip of an historical legacy spanning centuries. Warren McCleskey’s evidence confronts us with the subtle and persistent influence of the past. His

message is a disturbing one to a society that has formally repudiated racism, and a frustrating one to a Nation accustomed to regarding its destiny as the product of its own will. Nonetheless, we ignore him at our peril, for we remain imprisoned by
the past as long as we deny its influence in the present. . ..
Justice BLACKMUN, [with whom JusTIcEs MARSHALL, BRENNAN, and STEVENS join], dissenting. .. .

The Court today seems to give a new meaning to our recognition that death is different. Rather than requiring “a correspondingly greater degree of scrutiny of the capital sentencing determination,” California v. Ramos, 463 U.S. 992,
998-999 (1983), the Court relies on the very fact that this is a case involving capital punishment to apply a lesser standard of scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause. . . .

Acctiminal defendant alleging an equal protection violation must prove the existence of purposeful discrimination. He may establish a prima facie case of purposeful discrimination “by showing that the totality of the relevant facts gives
rise to an inference of discriminatory purpose.” Batson v. Kentucky, 106 S. Ct., at 1721. Once the defendant establishes a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the prosecution to rebut that case. “The State cannot meet his burden on mere gen-
eral assertions that its officials did not discriminate or that they properly performed their official duties.” Ibid. The State must demonstrate that the challenged effect was due to “ ‘permissible racially neutral selection criteria.’ ” Ibid. . . .

McCleskey . . . demonstrated that it was more likely than not that the fact that the victim he was charged with killing was white determined that he received a sentence of death — 20 out of every 34 defendants in McCleskey’s midrange
category would not have been sentenced to be executed if their victims had been black. [T]he race of the victim is more important in explaining the imposition of a death sentence than is the factor whether the defendant was a prime mover in the
homicide. Similarly, the race-of-victim factor is nearly as crucial as the statutory

p.1198

p. 1199
aggravating circumstance whether the defendant had a prior record of a conviction for a capital crime.12. . . In sum, McCleskey has demonstrated a clear pattern of differential treatment according to race that is “unexplainable on grounds other
than race.”

The Court's explanations for its failure to apply this well-established equal protection analysis to this case are not persuasive. . . . | do not believe acceptance of McCleskey's claim would eliminate capital punishment in Georgia. [l]n
extremely aggravated murders the risk of discriminatory enforcement of the death penalty is minimized. . . . Moreover, the establishment of guidelines for Assistant District Attorneys as to the appropriate basis for exercising their discretion at the
various steps in the prosecution of a case would provide at least a measure of consistency. The Court's emphasis on the procedural safeguards in the system ignores the fact that there are none whatsoever during the crucial process leading up to
trial. As Justice White stated for the plurality in Turner v. Murray, | find “the risk that racial prejudice may have infected petitioner's capital sentencing unacceptable in light of the ease with which that risk could have been minimized.” 106 S. Ct., at
1688. | dissent.

Justice STEveNs, with whom Justice BLACKMUN joins, dissenting.

. .. This sort of disparity is constitutionally intolerable. It flagrantly violates the Court's prior “insistence that capital punishment be imposed fairly, and with reasonable consistency, or not at all.” Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U.S. 104, 112
(1982).

The Court's decision appears to be based on a fear that the acceptance of McCleskey's claim would sound the death knell for capital punishment in Georgia. If society were indeed forced to choose between a racially discriminatory
death penalty (one that provides heightened protection against murder “for whites only”) and no death penalty at all, the choice mandated by the Constitution would be plain. But the Court's fear is unfounded. One of the lessons of the Baldus
study is that there exist certain categories of extremely serious crimes for which prosecutors consistently seek, and juries consistently impose, the death penalty without regard to the race of the victim or the race of the offender. If Georgia were to
narrow the class of death-eligible defendants to those categories, the danger of arbitrary and discriminatory imposition of the death penalty would be significantly decreased, if not eradicated. . . . [SJuch a restructuring of the sentencing scheme is
surely not too high a price to pay... .

NOTES

1. Scholarly treatment of McCleskey. For helpful discussions of the issues posed by McCleskey, see David C. Baldus et al., Equal Justice and the Death Penalty (1990); Welsh S. White, The Death Penalty in the Eighties, 113-139
(1987); Randall Kennedy, McCleskey v. Kemp: Race, Capital Punishment, and the Supreme Court, 101 Harv. L. Rev. 1388 (1988); Samuel R. Gross, Race and Death: The Judicial Evaluation of Evidence of Discrimination in Capital Sentencing, 18
ULC. Davis L.

p.1199

p. 1200
Rev. 1275 (1985). For an exploration of the way McCleskey fits within a larger body of discrimination jurisprudence, see Reva B. Siegel, Blind Justice: Why the Court Refused to Accept Statistical Evidence of Discriminatory Purpose in McCleskey v.
Kemp — and Some Pathways for Change, 112 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1269 (2018).

2. The nature of the racial discrimination. (a) The race of defendants and victims. In the period before Furman and the Court's regulation of the death penalty, there was widespread evidence that Black defendants were dispro-
portionately targeted for capital punishment. Between 1930 and 1967, 54 percent of those executed were Black, and of the 455 men executed for rape in that period, 90 percent were Black. In the post-Furman, post-Gregg period, in contrast, 56
percent of those executed were white. Charles Lane, The Death Penalty and Racism, The American Interest, Nov.-Dec. 2010.

Anoteworthy feature of the Baldus study and subsequent research is that the race of the defendant, standing alone, does not appear to be a driving force in whether prosecutors seek a capital sentence. See, e.g, Isaac Unah, Choosing
Those Who Will Die: The Effect of Race, Gender, and Law in Prosecutorial Decision to Seek the Death Penalty in Durham County, North Carolina, 15 Mich. J. Race & L. 135 (2009). Empirical studies find large effects based on the race of the victim,
as cases involving white victims are far more likely to lead to capital charges. But within the category of cases with white victims, the Baldus study found that, after controlling for relevant variables, Black defendants were 10 percent more likely
to receive a death sentence than white defendants. Scott Phillips and Justin Marceau (Whom the State Kills, 55 Harv. C.R.-C.L. L. Rev. 585 (2020)) extend the Baldus study findings about capital sentencing to actual executions, finding that, after
controlling for other variables, the execution rate is roughly two to five times greater in white-victim cases than Black-victim cases. They therefore conclude that McCleskey’s discussion of racial disparities underestimated the death penalty’s arbi-
trariness. Why might disparities increase for actual executions? Are they tied to resource disparities that track racial lines? Do disparate execution rates reflect implicit or other biases among prosecutors or among judges addressing arguments on
appeal and in habeas proceedings?

Alexis Hoag argues that the death penalty should be abolished on equal protection grounds based on the growing body of statistical evidence showing the undervaluation of Black victims and the fact that one of the animating forces
behind the passage of the Fourteenth Amendment was the desire to extend the equal protection of the laws to Black victims of crime. Hoag, Valuing Black Lives: A Case for Ending the Death Penalty, 51 Colum. Hum. Rts. L. Rev. 983 (2020). How
does an argument resting on the undervaluation of Black victims in the capital context overcome the line-drawing problem that worried the Court in McCleskey? If there is similar statistical evidence demonstrating an undervaluation of Black victims
in other criminal contexts, what would be the remedy in non-capital cases? Is this a broader argument for prison abolition, or will that fail to protect too many victims, including Black victims?

(b) Local demographics. One possible explanation for the racial disparity is that local prosecutors might not seek the death penalty as often in Black-victim homicides because those crimes typically take place in localities with large
Black populations. Survey data show that Black people are the demographic group in the United States that most strongly opposes the death penalty. Lane, supra. Thus, in jurisdictions

p. 1200
p. 1201
with large Black populations, prosecutors’ charging decisions may reflect what they believe to be the community sentiment about capital punishment. Theodore Eisenberg’s study of county-level data in five states found that capital sentences for
Black-victim homicides decreased as the percentage of Black people in a county's population increased. Eisenberg thus concluded that “community skepticism about the justness of the death penalty is a contributing factor to low death sentence
rates” when murder victims are Black. Theodore Eisenberg, Death Sentence Rates and County Demographics: An Empirical Study, 90 Cornell L. Rev. 347, 370 (2005).
QUESTIONS: If imposition of the death penalty varies based on community support, does that negate claims that it is “infected” with racial bias? As elected officials, do prosecutors in communities strongly supportive of the death penalty have a
responsibility to respond to their electorates’ preferences even when those preferences don’t align with optimal law enforcement policy?

(c) Predicting the jury's attitude. Prosecutors also may be anticipating how the victim-perpetrator racial configuration may affect what a prospective jury is likely to do, taking into account the likely racial composition of that jury. For
example, one study found that the death penalty is three times more likely in a Black defendant/white victim case that has five or more white male jurors than in one that has fewer such jurors. See William J. Bowers et al., Death Sentencing in Black
and White, 3 U. Pa. J. Const. L. 171 (2001). The study also found a life sentence to be “twice as likely for a defendant who draws a [Bllack male juror than for the one who fails to do so.” Id.

Another source of disparity comes from the process of “death qualifying” juries. See p. 1192, Note 6, supra. Death-qualified juries are more likely to be male, white, and politically conservative. Brooke Butler, The Role of Death Qualifi-
cation in Capital Trials Involving Juvenile Defendants, 37 J. Applied Soc. Psychol. 549 (2007). An empirical study of death-qualified jurors in six of the most active death penalty states found that these jurors hold stronger implicit racial biases than
all jury-eligible citizens do. Justin D. Levinson et al., Devaluing Death: An Empirical Study of Implicit Racial Bias on Jury-Eligible Citizens in Six Death Penalty States, 89 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 513, 573 (2014). Some jurisdictions previously sought to control
jury variation by allowing the judge (typically elected) to override jury recommendations of life imprisonment instead of death. It was by no means obvious that this override power served to neutralize racial variation, rather than simply to generate
more death sentences.®° In any case, after the Supreme Court found Florida's override law unconstitutional in Hurst v. Florida, 577 U.S. 92 (2016), the two remaining override states (Alabama and Delaware) eliminated their versions. For a history of
judicial overrides, see Michael L. Radelet & G. Ben Cohen, TheDecline of the Judicial Override, 15 Ann. Rev. L. & Soc. Sci. 539 (2019).

QUESTIONS: Should the process of death qualification be eliminated? What other mechanisms can ensure that juries are free from racial bias without eliminating death qualification? Imagine you are a defense attorney questioning
p. 1201
p. 1202
prospective jurors during voir dire. What types of questions would you ask if you were seeking to uncover implicit racial bias? How effective are the questions likely to be in rooting out bias?

(d) Other local influences. A key actor in the pursuit of the death penalty is, of course, the prosecutor. As noted, p. 1163 supra, a small number of counties are responsible for most capital cases, so a change in leadership in just a
few district attorney offices could mean a big shift in how many capital cases are brought. Several prosecutors have recently been elected on platforms calling for an end to the death penalty or a reduction in its use, including some prosecutors in
counties with relatively high rates of capital cases.°7

Itis notable that the counties with high rates of capital cases are not the ones with the highest homicide rates. For example, one report found that prosecutors in Georgia counties with the fewest murder cases sought death about twice
as often as prosecutors in counties with the highest volume of murder cases. Bill Rankin et al., A Matter of Life or Death, Atlanta J. Const., Sept. 22, 2007.

QUESTIONS: If one justification for the death penalty is deterrence, wouldn't we expect to see the opposite pattern? Why would communities with fewer murder cases be more likely to support the death penalty? Is it because those communities
are likely to be more rural, more conservative, more predominantly white? If the various factors discussed above explain the disparities, does that lessen the cause for concern or heighten it? The Washington Supreme Court ruled the death penalty
unconstitutional under its state constitution, concluding that capital punishment was arbitrarily applied. While the court focused on racial disparities, it also noted that there were arbitrary disparities based on “where the crime took place, or the
county of residence, or the available budgetary resources at any given point in time.” State v. Gregory, 427 P.3d 621, 627 (Wash. 2018). Is it arbitrary for differences in capital punishment to be based on the location of the crime or on budget re-
strictions? Is that any different than the dynamics in non-capital cases? If not, does that suggest capital punishment must survive, or does it call into question the entire administration of criminal law? If the latter, what is the appropriate remedy?

The fate of capital punishment at the federal level is unclear. Donald Trump's Department of Justice under Attorney General William Barr sought executions in long dormant cases, resulting in Trump overseeing more executions than
any President in the last 120 years, with 13 people executed in the last 6 months of his presidency.°8 President Biden is the first President to publicly oppose the death penalty, and more than 70 members of Congress have proposed a bill to abol-
ish the federal death penalty, the Federal Death Penalty Prohibition Act of 2021.52 But as of this writing, President Biden has not commuted any federal death sentences.

p. 1202
p. 1203

3. Post-McCleskey legislative initiatives. Critics of the result in McCleskey have sought to overturn the decision by enacting national legislation requiring states to demonstrate that their enforcement of the death penalty is racially

neutral. A provision to this effect was passed by the U.S. House of Representatives as part of the Crime Control Act of 1994, but the House-Senate conference committee deleted it from the bill. See N.Y. Times, July 29, 1994, at A1, A9.

In 1998, Kentucky became the first state to allow capital defendants to challenge their prosecutions using statistical evidence of racial discrimination. The Kentucky Racial Justice Act (KRJA), Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§532.300-.309, requires
capital defendants to raise challenges to the prosecutor's charging decision prior to trial. The Act allows for the consideration of statistical evidence of discrimination in capital charging practices, but also requires a defendant to “state with partic-
ularity how the evidence supports a claim that racial considerations played a significant part in the decision to seek a death sentence in his or her case.” The defendant bears the burden of establishing by “clear and convincing evidence” that race
was “the basis” of the prosecutor's decision to seek the death penalty. Because the burden is so great, a study of the application of the law in Kentucky concluded that the law is largely “unknown and symbolic,” having minimal impact on cases
there because there are so few challenges. Ellen A. Donnelly, Can Legislatures Redress Racial Discrimination in Capital Punishment? Evaluating Racial Justice Acts in Response to McCleskey, 82 J. Crim. L. 388, 397 (2018).

North Carolina's Racial Justice Act, N.C. Gen. Stat. §§15A-2010 to -2012, was passed in 2009, and allowed defendants to use statistical evidence of racial discrimination to challenge not only charging decisions, but also the use of
race in jury selection and the jury's decision to impose the death penalty. See Seth Kotch & Robert P. Mosteller, The Racial Justice Act and the Long Struggle with Race and the Death Penalty in North Carolina, 88 N.C. L. Rev. 2031, 2117 n.381
(2010). Once a defendant produced statistically significant evidence of a pattem of racial discrimination, the burden shifted to the government to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that there was a nonracial explanation for the defendant's
sentence. If a defendant prevailed with statistical evidence, the death sentence was vacated and the defendant resentenced to life without parole. Because every defendant on death row in North Carolina filed an appeal under the law, it threatened
the viability of the death penalty there, ultimately leading the legislature to repeal the law. Donnelly, supra, at 389. Do the experiences in North Carolina and Kentucky suggest that only anemic versions of racial impact laws will survive and that any-
thing stronger will ultimately cast too much doubt on capital punishment itself? Or are there other models that are viable?

4, The Model Penal Code. In October 2009, the American Law Institute (ALI) withdrew §210.6, the death penalty provision of the MPC, “in light of the current intractable institutional and structural obstacles to ensuring a minimally
adequate system for administering capital punishment.”2° While the ALI refused to formally endorse or oppose the continued use of the death penalty, Carol Steiker and Jordan Steiker have noted the significance of the ALI action:

p. 1208
p. 1204

The ALI's decision to withdraw the MPC capital provisions — and to decline to investigate further reform — reflects skepticism about the capacity of sentencing instructions to ensure accurate, evenhanded capital decision

making. The past ten years have seen similar expressions of skepticism from lawmakers and judges confronted with concrete evidence about the administration of the American death penalty. But even though the skepti-

cism is not new, it likely carries distinctive weight when voiced by the very body that invested its labor and prestige in the effort to craft such instructions.21

5. Assessing the constitutional doctrines. Consider Carol S. Steiker & Jordan M. Steiker, Sober Second Thoughts: Reflections on Two Decades of Constitutional Regulation of Capital Punishment, 109 Harv. L. Rev. 355, 357-360,
433-436 (1995):

Virtually no one thinks that the constitutional regulation of capital punishment has been a success. [S]ome critics claim that the Court’s work has burdened the administration of capital punishment with an overly complex... .

body of constitutional law that . . . “obstructs, delays, and defeats” the administration of capital punishment. [A] different set of critics claims that the Supreme Court has in fact turned its back on regulating the death penalty

and no longer even attempts to meet the concerns about the arbitrary and discriminatory imposition of death that animated . . . Furman.

[Wie conclude that both sets of criticisms of the Court's work are substantially correct: the death penalty is, perversely, both over- and under-regulated.
[There is] a substantial hidden cost of the Court's chosen path . . ., which creates an impression of enormous regulatory effort but achieves negligible regulatory effects. [Plowerful evidence suggests that death

penalty law makes actors within the criminal justice system more comfortable with their roles by inducing an exaggerated belief in the essential rationality and fairness of the system. [T]he Court's focus on controlling the

discretion of capital sentencers creates a false aura of rationality, even science, around the necessarily moral task of deciding life or death [and] has diluted judges’ and jurors’ sense of ultimate responsibility for imposing the

death penalty.

[)he public's impression [is] that any death sentences that are imposed and finally upheld are the product of a rigorous — indeed, too rigorous — system of constraints. ... The Supreme Court's death penalty
law, by creating an impression of enormous regulatory effort while achieving negligible regulatory effects, effectively obscures the true nature of our capital sentencing system, in which the pre-Furman world of unreviewable
sentencer discretion lives on, with much the same consequences in terms of arbitrary and discriminatory sentencing patterns.

p. 1204
p. 1205
Some are more optimistic about the efficacy of the Supreme Court's death penalty jurisprudence. Consider David McCord, Judging the Effectiveness of the Supreme Court's Death Penalty Jurisprudence According to the Court's Own
Goals: Mild Success or Major Disaster?, 24 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 545, 593 (1997):
The best available evidence shows that the Court's regulatory death penalty jurisprudence has been successful in decreasing overinclusion, which is the primary vice that the Court has seen in death penalty systems for
the last quarter of a century. One can argue that the Court was wrong to focus (or focus so exclusively) on minimizing overinclusion. . . . [But] the populations of death rows since 1972 very likely comprise a more carefully
selected and “worse” collection of malefactors than before 1972. This is not an insignificant achievement. So, while death penalty opponents rue the Court's failure to regulate death more severely, | doubt that there is one
experienced capital defense lawyer in this country who would rather return to the pre-Furman era. Pethaps not even many prosecutors would want to return to the days before Furman, when such an unguided power of life
and death rested in their hands.
For a probing analysis of the political and cultural factors that have helped shape the constitutional framework for the death penalty in America, see David Garland, Peculiar Institution: America’s Death Penalty in an Age of Abolition
(2012).
11, Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilites, 2000.
2, Nancy Wolf & Jing Shi, Contextualization of Physical and Sexual Assault in Male Prisons: Incidents and Their Aftermath, 15 J. Corr. Health Care 58 (2009).
5, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report, Suicide and Homicide in State Prisons and Local Jalls (Aug. 2005) (providing historical data); Bureau of Justice Statistics, Mortality in State and Federal Prisons, 2001-2016 — Statistical Tables, tb. 4 (Feb. 2020) (data for 2008 and 2016); FBI, Crime in
the United States 2018, tbl. 16 (reporting overall homicide rate for population at large in 2016 as 5 per 100,000).
4, National Commission on Safety and Abuse in America’s Prisons (2006), www prisoncommission.ora.
5, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Dept. of Justice, Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011-2012 Update, htip://www.bjs.qov/index.ctm?ty=pbdetallald=4654,
6, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Dept. of Justice, Sexual Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional Authorities, 2012-2015, https://wwnw.bjs.qov/content/pub/pat/svaca215,pat.
7. Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Perspectives on Incarceration and the Justice System 48 (Apr. 2016).
5, Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails, supra note 5.
9. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Dept. of Justice, PREA Data Collection Activites, 2075, http://www. bis.gov/index.cim2ty=pbdetalllid=5520.
110, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Dept. of Justice, Prisoners in 2018 (Apr. 2020), httos/ivww1.bjs.qov/content/pub/pat/p18.pd.
111, See Susanna Y. Chung, Prison Overcrowaing: Standards in Determining Eighth Amendment Violations, 68 Fordham L. Rev. 2351 (2000)
+12, Jason Pohl & Ryan Gabrielson, There Has Been an Explosion of Homicides in Califomia's County Jails. Here's Why, ProPublica (June 13, 2016), https://wwwwpropublica,org/artcle/explosion-of-homicides-n-califomas-county-alls-heres-why.
13, US. Dept. of Justice Civil Rights Division & U.S. Attomey's Offices for the Norther, Middle, and Southern Districts of Alabama, Investigation of Alabama's State Prisons for Men 1 (2079), httos/ww. justice qov/opa/press-release/file/1150276/download.
114. Id. at 5. For a vivid account of prison conditions in Alabama, see Shalla Dewan, Inside America’s Black Box: A Rare Look at the Violence of Incarceration, N.Y. Times, Mar. 30, 2019.
115, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Mortality in Local Jails, 2000-2016 — Statistical Tables (Feb. 2020). This is much higher than the general suicide rate in the population (14.2 per 100,000 in 2018). U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Mortality in the United States, 2018.
16, US. Dept. of Justice, Office of Justice Programs Diagnostic Center, Correctional Officer Wellness and Safety Literature Review 11 (2013).
117, How Atrocious Prison Conditions Make Us All Less Safe, Brennan Center, Aug. 9, 2021, https:/vww brennancenter.orq/our-work/analysis-opinior/how-atrocious-prisons-condltions-make-us-all-less-safe,
118, Kennedy v. Mendoza-Martinez, 372 U.S. 144, 168-169 (1963).
119, See Stephen J. Schulhoter, Two Systems of Social Protection: Comments on the CivilCriminal Distinction, 7 J. Contemp. Legal Issues 69 (1996).

20. See Tamara Rice Lave & Franklin E. Zimring, Assessing the Real Risk of Sexually Violent Predators: Doctor Padilla's Dangerous Data, 55 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 705 (2018). A note of caution about sex-crime recidivism rates is in order, however: The low rates of reporting for sexual offenses lead
many who support laws of this kind to worry that actual recidivism is much higher than that indicated by re-arrest rates. See Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses, Tentative Draft No. 5, at 524-525 (May 4, 2021).

21, Eg,, Doe v. Snyder, 834 F.3d 696 (6th Cir. 2016) (holding Michigan SORA to be punitive); Commonwealth v. Muniz, 164 A.3d 1189 (Pa. 2018); Doe v. State, 111 A.3d 1077, 1100 (N.H. 2015). See Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault, Tentative Draft No. 5, supra note 20, at 483 & n.7.

1S. The dissent faults our analysis for looking beyond the signboard clause to other provisions of the four-part condition. Our purpose is not, as the dissent characterizes it, to suggest that an improper condition may be cured merely by setting it alongside proper conditions. Rather, our obligation
is to assess whether an individual provision reasonably relates to the purpose of rehabilitation. Where that provision is part of an integrated rehabilitative scheme, we see no bar to looking at other aspects of the scheme in evaluating the purpose and reasonableness of the individual provision at issue,

22, Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault, Tentative Draft No. 5, supra, at 485-486.

23. Bourree Lam, Why Is Utah the First State to Have a White Collar Crime Registry?, The Atlantic (Mar. 29, 2016).

24, For the limited list of offenses that trigger a duty to register under the MPC, see Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault, Tentative Draft No. 5, supra, at 541.

25. Rachel E. Barkow, Administering Crime, 52 UCLA L. Rev. 715, 741 n.74 (2005).

26. United States Sentencing Commission, Report to the Congress: Mandatory Minimum Penalties in the Federal Criminal Justice System 49 (July 2017), https://www.ussc. qov/sites/defaultfiles/pdt/research-and-publications/research-publications/2017/20170711_Mand-Min.paf (hereafter cited
as 2017 Report)

27.1

28. United States Sentencing Commission, Quick Facts: Mandatory Minimum Penalties 1 (2020), https://www.ussc.qov/sites/default/files/pdt/research-and-publications/quick-facts/Quick Facts Mand Mins FY19.paf.

29. Ram Subramanian & Ruth Delaney, Playbook for Change? States Reconsider Mandatory Sentences 6 (2014), http://www. vera.org/sites/default/files/resources/downloads/mandatory-sentences-policy-report-v2b.patt. Stil, many mandatory minimum laws remain on the books in the states.

‘30, Pub. L. No. 111-220, 124 Stat. 2372.

31, Pub. L. No. 115-391, 132 Stat. 5194

‘32, Memorandum from Eric H. Holder, ur., Attorney Gen. of the United States, on Department Policy on Charging and Sentencing (May 19, 2010), https://www.[ustice. qov/sites/default/iles/oip /leqacy/201.4/07/25/holder-memo-charging-sentencing.pat.

‘33. Memorandum from Jeff Sessions, Attomey Gen. of the United States, on Department Charging and Sentencing Policy (May 10, 2017), https://www. |ustice. qov/opa/press-release/ile/965896/download,

‘34, Memorandum from Robert M. “Monty” Wilkinson, Acting Attorney Gen. of the United States, on Interim Guidance on Prosecutorial Discretion, Charging, and Sentencing, Jan. 19, 2021, https://www.troutman. com/images/content/2/7/275418/1350000-1350212-actingagmemo.paf.

‘35, United States Sentencing Commission, Fifteen Years of Guidelines Sentencing 135 (2004).

‘36. 2017 Report, supra note 28, at 37 tbl. 2.

37, See Schulhoter, Rethinking Mandatory Minimums, supra, discussing the difference between “discretionary mandatories” and “mandatory mandatories.”

38, 2017 Report, supra note 28, at 30.

39. Id. at 44.

40. Id. at 7 (white offenders followed at 70 percent).

41. Charles Colson Task Force on Federal Corrections, Transforming Prisons, Restoring Lives (Jan. 2016), htto://colsontaskforce.org/final-recommendations/Colson-Task-Force-Final-Recommendations-January-2016.pa. Comedian John Oliver offers a humorous but probing take on mandatory
minimums at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pDvmldTurgk.

42, See People v. Black, 161 P.3d 1180 (Cal. 2007).

43. Kelly Lyn Mitchell, State Sentencing Guidelines: A Garden Full of Variety, Fed. Probation, Sept. 2017, at 36 tbl. 5

a. The table, as it currently stands, is reproduced on p.1131. — EDs.

47. For example, the guidelines differentiate between a mail fraud in which the victim loses $1,000 and a fraud with a loss of $1,000,001. A loss of $1,000 would produce no increase in the base offense level for fraud of seven, while a loss of $1,000,001 would add sixteen levels and thus increase
the offense level from seven to twenty-three. [Other “specific offense characteristics” for which the guidelines mandate upward adjustments of the offense level include the extent of a victim's physical injury, the quantity of drugs sold, and use of a firearm to commit the offense. — EDS]

48. Chapter three adjustments include the defendant's role in the offense; whether the defendant engaged in obstruction of Justice; commission of an offense against a particularly vulnerable victim; and the existence of multiple counts of conviction. A defendant's offense level may be reduced
based on factors such as his “mitigating role” in the offense, or on “acceptance of responsibility.”

51, See United States v, Watts, 519 U.S. 148, 155, 157 (1997) (finding that sentencing court was not barred from considering acquitted conduct because burden of proof at sentencing is preponderance of evidence, rather than trial standard of beyond a reasonable doubt).

1 For sentencing ranges in Zone A, the judge is authorized to grant probation without imposing any term of confinement. For sentences in Zone B, the judge is permitted to substitute for the minimum term of confinement an equivalent term of home detention or intermittent confinement. In Zone
C, the judge may substitute home detention or intermittent confinement, but must impose incarceration for at least half of the minimum term. In Zone D, neither probation nor substitute sanctions are permitted; the judge must impose a prison sentence for at least the term at the low end of the guideline range,
‘The zone applicable to each case is the one in which the case falls after taking into account any decision to depart upward or downward from the presumptively applicable guideline range. — EDS.

44, All of the state guideline systems adopted to date are considerably more flexible. See Rachel E. Barkow, Federalism and the Politics of Sentencing, 105 Colum. L. Rev. 1276 (2008).

45. US.S.G. §2B3.1

46, At the time of this writing, a bipartisan bill has been placed on the Senate Legislative Calendar that would prohibit courts from using acquitted conduct to increase the defendant's sentence. Prohibiting Punishment of Acquitted Conduct Act of 2021, S.601, 117th Cong. (Ist Sess. 2021) (re-
ported to Senate from the Committee on the Judiciary on July 12, 2021).

47. Ronald F. Wright, Statement Before the United States Sentencing Commission, Regional Hearing, at 6-7 (Feb. 11, 2009); Pennsylvania Commission on Sentencing, 2019 Annual Report 16 (2020), http://ocs.la, psu. edu/publications-and-research/annual-reports/2019/view; Min-
nesota Sentencing Guidelines Commission, 2021 Report to the LegislatureSs (2021), https://mn.qov/sentencing-quidelines/assets/2021 MinnSentencingGuidelinesCommReportLegislature_tom30-463260,pdt; Virginia Criminal Sentencing Commission, 2020 Annual Report 12 (2020), http://
www. vese.virginia,gov/2020VCSCAnnualReport.pdt. In fact, in the state with the most mandatory system according to a classification by the National Center for State Courts, North Carolina, only 66 percent of felony sentences in 2019 were within the presumptive guidelines. North Carolina Sentencing and
Policy Advisory Commission, Structured Sentencing Statistical Report for Felonies and Misdemeanors for FY 2019, at ii (2020), https./www.nccourts.gov/assets/documents/publications/FY-2019-Statistical-Report-Web_Combined.pdf?H5EeéhJhBdhzh_BVFmV4L9tebiaxnmaB.

48. United States Sentencing Commission Final Quarterly Data Report 11 tbl. 6 (2020), https:/www.ussc.qov/sites/default/files/pdt/research-and-publications/federal-sentencing-statistics/quarterly-sentencing-updates/USSC-2019 Quarterly Report Final,pat.

49. United States Sentencing Commission, Inter-District Differences in Federal Sentencing Practices: Sentencing Practices Across Districts from 2005-2017 (Jan. 2020); United States Sentencing Commission, Intra-City Differences in Federal Sentencing Practices: Federal District Judges in 30
Cities, 2005-2017 (Jan. 2019).

‘50. United States Sentencing Commission, Demographic Differences in Sentencing: An Update to the 2012 Booker Report 2 (2017), https://mww.ussc. gov/sites/cefault/iles/pdt/research-and-publications/tesearch-publications/2017/20171114 Demographics.pdf, Starr and Rehavi argue that
lingering disparities are largely driven by prosecutors’ charging decisions around mandatory minimums. Sonja B. Starr & M. Marit Rehavi, Mandatory Sentencing and Racial Disparity: Assessing the Role of Prosecutors and the Effects of Booker, 123 Yale Lu. 2 (2013). For a critique of the Starr and Rehavi
methodology, see Glenn R. Schmitt et al., Why Judges Matter at Sentencing: A Reply to Starr and Rehavi, 123 Yale LJ. Online 251 (2013).

51, United States Sentencing Commission, Report on the Continuing Impact of United States v. Booker on Federal Sentencing 58-59, 110 (2012), http:// ww.usso.gov/sites/ciefault/files/pat/news/congressional-testimony-and-reports/booker-reports/2012-booker/Part_ A.pdf.

‘52. Available at http://www_justice.qov/usao/nys/madott/20090629sentencingtranscript-corrected.pdt.

‘5S. Justice Department surveys find that roughly 15 percent of American adult women have experienced one or more completed rapes in their lifetimes, and another 3 percent have been victims of attempted rape. See p. 382 supra.

‘54, Graeme Hamilton, Twenty Years After Federal Government Changed Sentencing, Aboriginals Still Disproportionately Fill Our Prisons, Nat'l Post, June 22, 2016,

‘55, Office of the Inspector General, United States Department of Justice, Review of the Department's Clemency Initiative (Aug. 2018), https://oig,justice.qov/reports/2018/e1604.pat; Center on the Administration of Criminal Law, NYU School of Law, The Mercy Lottery: A Review of the Obama
‘Administration's Clemency initiative (2018), https://www.law.nyu.edu/sites/defaultfiles/upload_documents/The%20Meroy20Lottery.Report%200n200bama%20Clemency%20iInitiative.2018.paf; United States Sentencing Commission, An Analysis of the Implementation of the 2014 Clemency Initiative
(Sept. 2017), https://www.ussc.gov/sites/default/iles/pdt/research-and-publications/research-publications/2017/20170901_clemency.pdt.

1. Justice Thomas concurred to note that he agreed with Justice Scalia's opinion in Harmelin that the Eighth Amendment was adopted to outlaw certain modes of punishment (e.g., drawing and quartering) but was not intended to guarantee proportionality. In Harmelin, Justice Scalia noted,
“While there are relatively clear historical guidelines and accepted practices that enable judges to determine which modes of punishment are ‘cruel and unusual,’ proportionality does not lend itself to such an analysis.” — EDS.

‘a. Justices Scalia and Alito joined in the portions of Justice Thomas's dissent excerpted below. — EDS.

‘56. For further discussion of the contrast, see Rachel E. Barkow, The Court of Life and Death: The Two Tracks of Constitutional Sentencing Law and the Case for Uniformity, 107 Mich. L. Rev. 1145, 1155-1157 (2009).

57. Except as otherwise noted, all statistics in this section are drawn from U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Capital Punishment Statistics, http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.qov/index.cfm; Death Penalty Information Center, Facts About the Death Penalty, June 11, 2020, https://
documents.deathpenaltyinfo.org/pat/FactSheet.pdf; and NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund, Criminal Justice Project, Death Row U.S.A. Winter 2016, http://www.naacplaff.org/death-row-usa,

58. NAACP Legal Defense Fund, Criminal Justice Project, Death Row U.S.A,, https://www.naaoplaf.orq/wp-content/uploads/DRUSAWinter2020.pa

59. Id

60. Richard Dieter, Testimony Before the Judiciary Committee Colorado House of Representatives, “Costs of the Death Penalty and Related Issues” (Feb. 7, 2007).

61. Summary of the Kansas Death Penalty Cost Report by DPIC, http://www. deathpenaltyinfo.org/noce/1080.

62. P. Cook, The Costs of Processing Murder Cases in North Carolina, Duke University (May 1993).

683. https://deathpenaltyinfo.org/news/gallup-poll-public-support-for-the-death-penalty-lowest-In-a-half-century.

64. This count includes Delaware, where the state supreme court held its death penalty unconstitutional (Rauf v. State, 2016 WL 4224252 (Del. Aug. 2, 2016), and New Mexico, which no longer authorizes new death sentences but still has people on death row awaiting execution under death sen-
tences imposed in earlier years.

165, The Death Penalty Information Center, The 2% Death Penalty: The Geographic Arbitrariness of Capital Punishment in the United States, htips://deathpenaltyinfo.org/stories/the-clustering-of-the-death-penalty

166, See Carol S. Steiker & Jordan M. Steiker, A Tale of Two Nations: Implementation of the Death Penalty in “Executing” versus “Symbolic” States in the United States, 64 Tex. L. Rev. 1869 (2006)

67. See Cass R. Sunstein & Adrian Vermeule, Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? Acts, Omissions, and Life-Life Tradeoffs, 58 Stan. L. Rev. 703, 714 (2005).

168, See Hugo Bedau, The Courts, the Constitution, and Capital Punishment 56 (1977) (noting that deterrent efficacy is determined not only by the severity of a punishment, but also by “the facility, celerity, and reliability with which the punishment can be inflicted”),

68, See Wiliam Bowers & Glenn Pierce, Deterrence or Brutalization: What Is the Effect of Executions?, 26 Crime & Deling. 453 (1980).

70. See Thorsten Sellin, Homicides in Retentionist and Aboltionist States, in Capital Punishment 198 (Thorsten Sellin ed., 1967) (analyzing homicide rates over time in contiguous states with different capital punishment policies and finding no deterrent effect); Isaac Ehrlich, The Deterrent Effect of
Capital Punishment: A Question of Life and Death, 65 Am. Econ. Rev. 397 (1975) (employing regression analysis and finding a substantial deterrent effect); Lawrence R. Klein et al., The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment, in Deterrence and Incapacitation: Estimating the Effects of Criminal Sanctions on
Crime Rates 336-360 (Alired Blumstein et al. eds., 1976) (ejecting Ehrich's results)

1, See Robert Weisberg, The Death Penalty Meets Social Science: Deterrence and Jury Behavior Under New Scrutiny, 1 Ann. Rev. L. & Soc. Sci. 151, 187 (2008).

172, See, eg,, Richard Berk, New Claims About Executions and General Deterrence: Déja Vu All over Again?, 2 J. Empirical Legal Stud, 303, 327 (2005) (highlighting the problem of aggregation and the overwhelming influence of one or two outlier states (particularly Texas) or outlier years); Ethan
Cohen-Cole et al., Mode! Uncertainty and the Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment, 11 Am. L. & Econ. Rev. 335 (2009) (pointing out the lack of robustness in recent studies because small changes in design can produce enormous changes in the conclusions); Jeffrey Fagan, Death and Deterrence Redux:
‘Science, Alchemy and Causal Reasoning on Capital Punishment, 4 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 255 (2006) (same)

73, Louis P. Pojman, Why the Death Penalty Is Morally Permissible, in Debating the Death Penalty 66 (Hugo Bedau & Paul Cassell eds., 2004).

74, Sunstein & Vermeule, supra note 67, at 722-723,

75, 4 Willam Blackstone, Commentaries “15 (1769).

76, See p. 1168 supra.

‘77, Death Penalty Information Center, Innocence and the Death Penalty, htip://www.deathpenallyinfo,org/innocence-and-ceath-penaltysinn-yr-rc (last visited Aug. 21, 2021,

‘78, For example, the Innocence Protection Act of 2004, Title IV of the Justice for All Act, Pub. L. No. 108-405, created a DNA testing program for federal prisoners, a grant program to help states pay for DNA testing for state prisoners, and a grant program to improve the quality of prosecution and
defense representation in state capital cases,

‘79. Emest van den Haag, Refuting Reiman and Nathanson, in Punishment and the Death Penalty: The Current Debate 207, 214 (Robert M. Baird & Stuart E. Rosenbaum eds., 1996),

£80, See Lorraine Schmall, Women on Death Row, 38 Ohio N.U. L. Rev. 441, 448 (2012).

81, See Elizabeth Rapaport, Staying Alive: Executive Clemency, Equal Protection, and the Politics of Gender in Women’s Capital Cases, 4 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 967, 968 (2001).

£82, The text of the statute enumerating the various aggravating circumstances is [as follows}:

(1) The offense of murder, rape, armed robbery, or kidnapping was committed by a person with a prior record of conviction for a capital felony, or the offense of murder was committed by a person who has a substantial history of serious assaultive criminal convictions.

(2) The offense of murder, rape, armed robbery, or kidnapping was committed while the offender was engaged in the commission of another capital felony, or aggravated battery, or the offense of murder was committed while the offender was engaged in the commission of
burglary or arson in the frst degree.

(6) The offender by his act of murder, armed robbery, or kidnapping knowingly created a great risk of death to more than one person in a public place by means of a weapon or device which would normally be hazardous to the lives of more than one person.

(4) The offender commited the offense of murder for himself or another, for the purpose of receiving money or any other thing of monetary value.

(6) The murder of a judicial officer, former judicial officer, district attomey or solicitor or former district attorney or solicitor during or because of the exercise of his official duty.

(6) The offender caused or directed another to commit murder or committed murder as an agent or employee of another person.

(7) The offense of murder, rape, armed robbery, or kidnapping was outrageously or wantonly vile, horrible or inhuman in that it involved torture, depravity of mind, or an aggravated battery to the victim.

{6) The offense of murder was committed against any peace officer, corrections employee or fireman while engaged in the performance of his official duties.

(9) The offense of murder was committed by a person in, or who has escaped from, the lawful custody of a peace officer or place of lawful confinement.

(10) The murder was committed for the purpose of avoiding, interfering with, or preventing a lawful arrest or custody in a place of lawful confinement, of himself or another.

£83, The categories were murder of a peace officer or firefighter, intentional murder in the course of specified felonies, murder committed for remuneration, murder committed while escaping from prison, or murder of a prison employee by an incarcerated person.

£84, The three questions were (1) whether the conduct was done deliberately and with a reasonable expectation of causing death; (2) whether there was a probability that the defendant would pose a continuing threat to society through future criminal acts of violence; and (8) if raised by the
evidence, whether the defendant's conduct was an unreasonable response to provocation by the deceased. For an argument that the second factor's emphasis on future dangerousness leads to arbitrary results because jurors are ill-equipped to make such assessments, see Carla Edmondson, Nothing Is.
Certain But Death: Why Future Dangerousness Mandates Abolition of the Death Penalty, 20 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 857 (2016)

85, Bailey Elise McBride & Sean Murphy, Oklahoma Inmate Dies After Execution Is Botched, Associated Press, Apr. 29, 2074, http://www.abgjournal.com/391946/news/crime/oklahoma-inmate-dies-after-execution-is-botched. htm

5... The mean score of the test is 100, which means that a person receiving a score of 100 is considered to have an average level of cognitive functioning. It is estimated that between 1 and 3 percent of the population has an IQ between 70 and 75 or lower, which is typically considered the cutoft
1Q score for the intellectual function prong of the mental retardation definition.

21, [T}his legislative judgment reflects a much broader social and professional consensus. For example, several organizations with germane expertise have adopted official positions opposing the imposition of the death penalty upon a mentally retarded offender, [citing amicus briefs for the
‘American Psychological Association and the American Association of Mental Retardation]. In addition, representatives of widely diverse religious communities in the United States, reflecting Christian, Jewish, Muslim, and Buddhist traditions, have filed an amicus curiae brief explaining that even though their
views about the death penalty differ, they all “share a conviction that the execution of persons with mental retardation cannot be morally justified.” Moreover, within the world community, the imposition of the death penalty for crimes committed by mentally retarded offenders is overwhelmingly disapproved,
[citing amicus brief for the European Union]. Finally, polling data shows a widespread consensus among Americans, even those who support the death penalty, that executing the mentally retarded is wrong. Although these factors are by no means dispositive, their consistency with the legislative evidence
lends further support to our conclusion that there is a consensus among those who have addressed the issue.

5, Baldus's 230-year variable model divided cases into eight different ranges, according to the estimated aggravation level of the offense. Baldus argued in his testimony to the District Court that the effects of racial bias were more striking in the mid-range cases. “[W]hen the cases become
tremendously aggravated so that everybody would agree that i we're going to have a death sentence, these are the cases that should get it, the race effects go away. It's only in the mid-range of cases where the decision makers have a real choice as to what to do. If there’s room for the exercise of discre-
ton, then the [racial] factors begin to play a role.” Under this model, Baldus found that 14.4% of the black-victim mid-range cases received the death penalty, and 34.4% of the white-victim cases received the death penalty. According to Baldus, the facts of McCleskey's case placed it within the mid-range.

Although the District Court rejected the findings of the Baldus study as flawed, the Court of Appeals assumed that the study is valid and reached the constitutional issues. Accordingly, those issues are before us. As did the Court of Appeals, we assume the study is valid statistically without
reviewing the factual findings of the District Court... .

29. According to Professor Baldus: “McCleskey's case falls in [a] grey area where . . . you would find the greatest likelinood that some inappropriate consideration may have come to bear on the decision. In an analysis of this type, obviously one cannot say that we can say to a moral certainty what
it was that influenced the decision. We can't do that.”

[Questions: Is the Court saying that in order to “prove” a proposition for purposes of constitutional litigation, a party must establish that proposition “to a moral certainty"? Is this the proper burden of persuasion? — EDS.]

‘36. The Baldus study in fact confirms that the Georgia system results in a reasonable level of proportionality among the class of murderers eligible for the death penalty. As Professor Baldus confirmed, the system sorts out cases where the sentence of death is highly likely and highly unlikely,
leaving a mid-range of cases where the imposition of the death penalty in any particular case is less predictable.

7... .. The dissent repeatedly emphasizes the need for “a uniquely high degree of rationality in imposing the death penalty.” [Yet,] no suggestion is made as to how greater “rationality” could be achieved under any type of statute that authorizes capital punishment. [T]he dissent's call for greater
rationality is no less than a claim that a capital-punishment system cannot be administered in accord with the Constitution. ...

44, Some studies indicate that physically attractive defendants receive greater leniency in sentencing than unattractive defendants, and that offenders whose victims are physically attractive receive harsher sentences than defendants with less attractive victims.

9. A defendant's chances of receiving a death sentence increase by a factor of 4.3 If the victim is white, but only by 2.3 if the defendant was the prime mover behind the homicide.

10. A prior record of a conviction for murder, armed robbery, rape, or kidnapping with bodily injury increases the chances of a defendant's receiving a death sentence by a factor of 4.9.

86, See, e.g., Equal Justice Initiative, The Death Penalty in Alabama 4 (2011), finding that in Alabama, 92 percent of judicial overrides consisted of judges overruling jury verdicts of life to impose the death penalty.

87. Death Penalty Information Center, New Generation of Prosecutors May Signal Shift in Death Penalty Policies, hittps://deathpenaityinfo.org/news/new-generation-of-prosecutors-may-signal-shift-in-death-penalty-policies.

88. Michael Tarm & Michael Kunzelman, Trump Administration Carries Out 13th and Final Execution, Jan. 15, 2021, https//apnews. comvarticle/donald-trump-wildlfe-coronavirus-pandemic-crime-terre-haute-26e44cc5c026de16472751bbde0ead50,

‘89, Juana Summers, NPR, Democrats Unveil Legislation to Abolish the Federal Death Penalty, Jan. 11, 2021, httos:/www.npr.org/2021/01/11/955693696/democrats-unveil-legislation-to-abolish-the-federal-death-penalty.

‘90. Message from Lance Liebman, Dir., Am. L. Inst. (Oct. 23, 2009), http://www.all.org/_news/10232009.htm,

91. Carol S. Stelker & Jordan M. Steiker, No More Tinkering: The American Law Institute and the Death Penalty Provisions of the Model Penal Code, 89 Tex. L. Rev. 353 (2010).

p. 1205
