Restat 2d of Contracts, § 251
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 3- Effect of Prospective Non-Performance        
§ 251 When a Failure to Give Assurance May Be Treated as a Repudiation
(1)  Where reasonable grounds arise to believe that the obligor will commit a breach by non-
performance that would of itself give the obligee a claim for damages for total breach under § 243, the 
obligee may demand adequate assurance of due performance and may, if reasonable, suspend any 
performance for which he has not already received the agreed exchange until he receives such 
assurance.
(2)  The obligee may treat as a repudiation the obligor's failure to provide within a reasonable time such 
assurance of due performance as is adequate in the circumstances of the particular case.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  Ordinarily an obligee has no right to demand reassurance by the obligor that the latter will 
perform when his performance is due.  However, a contract "imposes an obligation on each party that the 
other's expectation of receiving due performance will not be impaired." Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609(1).  
When, therefore, an obligee reasonably believes that the obligor will commit a breach by non-performance that 
would of itself give him a claim for damages for total breach (§ 243), he may, under the rule stated in this 
Section, be entitled to demand assurance of performance.  The rule is a generalization, applicable without 
regard to the subject matter of the contract, from that of Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.  The latter applies 
only to contracts for the sale of goods and gives a party a right to adequate assurance of performance where 
"reasonable grounds for insecurity arise with respect to the performance" of the other party.  Both rules rest on 
the principle that the parties to a contract look to actual performance "and that a continuing sense of reliance 
and security that the promised performance will be forthcoming when due, is an important feature of the 
bargain." Comment 1 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.  This principle is closely related to the duty of good 
faith and fair dealing in the performance of the contract (§ 205).  See also Comment b to § 141.  The rule stated 
in this Section may be modified by agreement of the parties, and where they have done so their rights depend 
on the application of the rules on interpretation stated in Chapter 9, The Scope of Contractual Obligations.
b.  Relation to other rules.  An obligee who believes, for whatever reason, that the obligor will not or cannot 
perform without a breach, is always free to act on that belief.  If he is not himself under a duty to perform before 
the obligor, he may simply await the obligor's performance and, if his belief is confirmed, he will have a claim for 
damages for breach by non-performance.  If he can prove that his belief would have been confirmed, he is at 
least shielded from liability even if he has failed to give a performance that is due before that of the obligor or 
has, by making alternative arrangements, done an act that amounts to a repudiation.  For example, under § 
254, the obligee's duty to pay damages for total breach by repudiation is discharged if the obligor himself would 
not or could not have performed when his performance was due.  If, however, the obligee's belief is incorrect, 
his own failure to perform or his making of alternate arrangements may subject him to a claim for damages for 
total breach.  This Section affords him an opportunity, in appropriate cases, to demand assurance of due 
performance and thereby avoid the uncertainties that would otherwise inhere in acting on his belief.  If it is then 
reasonable for the obligee to suspend his own performance while he awaits assurance by the obligor, he may 
do so under Subsection (1).  Under the special rule stated in § 252, the obligee may always suspend his own 
performance where his belief that the obligor will commit a breach is based on the obligor's insolvency.  If the 
obligee does not, within a reasonable time, obtain adequate assurance of due performance, he may under 
Subsection (2) treat the obligor's failure to provide such an assurance as a repudiation.  His right to do so is, 
however, subject to the rule stated in § 256 under which the manifestation of doubt or the apparent inability, on 

§ 251 When a Failure to Give Assurance May Be Treated as a Repudiation
which the obligee bases his belief that the obligor will commit a breach, may be nullified.  In contrast to the 
situation where the obligor has actually repudiated under § 250, the obligee may choose not to treat the failure 
to provide assurances as a repudiation and may continue to perform without affecting his right to recover 
damages for subsequent loss that he could have avoided by so treating it.  See Comment a to § 257 and § 350.  
If he chooses to treat the obligor's failure as a repudiation, it may have any of the three effects that any other 
repudiation may have: it may give him a claim for damages for total breach (§ 253(1)), it may discharge his own 
remaining duties of performance (§ 253(2)), and it may excuse the non-occurrence of a condition of the other 
party's duty (§ 255).  The effect on the obligee's remaining duties of performance of prospective non-
performance by the obligor that would not be a breach because it would be justified on the ground of 
impracticability of performance is dealt with in § 268.
Illustrations:
1.  A contracts to let B use his concert hall on the evening of May 7 for a performance by B's string quartet, in 
return for B's promise to perform and to pay A a percentage of the receipts.  The contract provides that B is not 
discharged even if he is unable to transport his quartet to A's hall.  On May 6, because of an unexpected airline 
strike, A reasonably believes that B's quartet will be unable to come the 3,000 miles necessary to perform in his 
hall as scheduled.  Without demanding adequate assurance of due performance under the rule stated in this 
Section, A then contracts with C to let C hold a meeting in the hall on the evening of May 7.  A's contract with C 
is a repudiation of his contract with B (§ 250), which gives rise to a claim by B against A for damages for total 
breach (§ 253).  If, however, B is in fact unable to bring his quartet to A's hall on May 7, B's claim against A is 
discharged (§ 254).
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, B succeeds in chartering a plane and flies the 3,000 
miles with his quartet in his private plane.  He arrives in time to perform, but is unable to do so because C is 
using the hall.  B has a claim against A for damages for total breach (§ 243).
c.  Reasonable grounds for belief.  Whether "reasonable grounds" have arisen for an obligee's belief that there 
will be a breach must be determined in the light of all the circumstances of the particular case.  The grounds for 
his belief must have arisen after the time when the contract was made and cannot be based on facts known to 
him at that time.  Nor, since the grounds must be reasonable, can they be based on events that occurred after 
that time but as to which he took the risk when he made the contract.  But minor breaches may give reasonable 
grounds for a belief that there will be more serious breaches, and the mere failure of the obligee to press a 
claim for damages for those minor breaches will not preclude him from basing a demand for assurances on 
them.  Compare § 241(d), Comment e to that section, and Comment b to § 242.  Even circumstances that do 
not relate to the particular contract, such as defaults under other contracts, may give reasonable grounds for 
such a belief.  See Comment a to § 252.  Conduct by a party that indicates his doubt as to his willingness or 
ability to perform but that is not sufficiently positive to amount to a repudiation (see Comment b to § 250), may 
give reasonable grounds for such a belief.  And events that indicate a party's apparent inability, but do not 
amount to a repudiation because they are not voluntary acts, may also give reasonable grounds for such a 
belief.  One important application of the rule stated in this Section occurs when a party who has contracted to 
buy specific property, land or goods, discovers that the seller has neither present ownership of the property nor 
a right to become or at least a reasonable expectation of becoming the owner in time to perform.  Another 
important application of the rule occurs when an obligor who is allowed a period of time within which to perform 
makes an offer of defective performance.  It may still be possible for him, if the offer is refused, to make an offer 
of conforming performance within the period allowed.  Nevertheless, the offer of defective performance may 
give the obligee reasonable grounds to believe that the obligor will commit a breach under this Section.  A third 
important application of the rule occurs when a party becomes insolvent.  The effect of insolvency will vary 
according to the nature of the obligor's duty.  If, for example, it is merely to perform personal services, the fact 
of insolvency alone may not give reasonable grounds to believe that the obligor will commit a breach, but if it is 
to pay for goods on credit it will.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-702(1).  A special rule on insolvency is 
stated in § 252.  In any case, in order for this Section to apply, the breach that the obligee believes the obligor 
will commit must be a breach by non-performance that would so substantially impair the value of the contract to 
the obligee that it would of itself, unaccompanied by a repudiation, give him a claim for damages for total 
breach under § 243.
Illustrations:

§ 251 When a Failure to Give Assurance May Be Treated as a Repudiation
3.  On May 1, A contracts to sell and B to buy a parcel of land for $ 50,000, delivery of the deed and payment of 
the price to be on July 30.  Unknown to both A and B, C has a dower interest in the land.  On May 15, B 
discovers this and demands that A give him adequate assurance of due performance.  A fails to do so, and B 
commences an action against A on July 1.  B had reasonable grounds to believe that A would commit a breach 
by non-performance that would of itself have given B a claim for damages for total breach.  If the court 
concludes that a reasonable time for A to give assurances had passed on July 1, B properly treated A's failure 
to give assurances as a repudiation.  B then has a claim for damages against A for total breach.
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3, C's interest in the land is that of mortgagee under a 
mortgage that A can discharge at any time by payment of the mortgage debt.  B had no reasonable grounds to 
believe that A would commit a breach, B could not treat A's failure to give assurances as a repudiation, and B 
has no claim for damages against A.  Compare Illustration 6 to § 250.
5.  A contracts to sell and B to buy A's house, delivery of the deed and payment of the price to be made during 
September.  On September 1, A offers to deliver a deed to B which is defective in that a fence projects beyond 
the front line of the house and the swimming pool lacks a certificate of occupancy.  Both defects can be cured 
by A within the month, but A fails to reply to a demand by B that A assure B that A will cure them within that 
time.  On September 20, B notifies A that he cancels the contract.  On September 30, A, having cured the 
defects, offers to deliver a conforming deed to B.  A court may conclude that, as a result of A's apparent inability 
to perform, B had reasonable grounds to believe that A would commit a breach by non-performance that would 
of itself have given B a claim for damages for total breach, that A failed upon demand by B to give adequate 
assurance of due performance within a reasonable time, and therefore that B properly treated A's failure as a 
repudiation.  B then has a claim against A for damages for total breach.
d.  Nature of demand.  A party who demands assurances must do so in accordance with his duty of good faith 
and fair dealing in the enforcement of the contract (§ 205).  Whether a particular demand for assurance 
conforms to that duty will depend on the circumstances.  The demand need not be in writing.  Although a 
written demand is usually preferable to an oral one, if time is of particular importance the additional time 
required for a written demand might necessitate an oral one.  Compare Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609(1), 
which controls in the case of a sale of goods and which requires a demand "in writing." Harrassment by means 
of frequent unjustified demands may amount to a violation of the duty of good faith and fair dealing.
Illustration:
6.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, before contracting with C, A telephones B on May 6 and 
asks B to assure him that he will be there on May 7.  B says only "We will do our best to get there." B succeeds 
in chartering a plane and flies the 3,000 miles with his quartet.  He arrives in time to perform, but is unable to do 
so because C is using the hall.  In the absence of countervailing circumstances, a court should conclude that, 
as a result of B's apparent inability to perform, A had reasonable grounds to believe that B would commit a 
breach by non-performance that would of itself have given A a claim for damages for total breach, that because 
of the shortness of time a demand by telephone conformed to the duty of good faith and fair dealing (§ 205), 
that B failed upon such a demand to give adequate assurance of due performance, and therefore that A 
properly treated B's failure as a repudiation.  A then has a claim against B for damages for total breach.
e.  Nature and time of assurance.  Whether an assurance of due performance is "adequate" depends on what it 
is reasonable to require in a particular case taking account of the circumstances of that case.  The relationship 
between the parties, any prior dealings that they have had, the reputation of the party whose performance has 
been called into question, the nature of the grounds for insecurity, and the time within which the assurance 
must be furnished are all relevant factors.  (If the obligor's insolvency constitutes the grounds for the obligee's 
insecurity, the special rule stated in § 252 empowers him to suspend performance until he receives assurance 
in the form of actual performance, an offer of performance, or reasonable security.) What is a "reasonable time" 
within which to give assurance under Subsection (2) will also depend on the particular circumstances.  Like the 
demand, the assurance is subject to the general requirement of good faith and fair dealing in the enforcement 
of the contract (§ 205; see Comment d).
Illustrations:
7.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, before contracting with C, A telephones B on May 6 and 
asks B to assure him that he will be there on May 7.  B explains over the telephone that he has been able to 
charter a plane and expects to come as planned.  B then flies the 3,000 miles with his quartet.  He arrives in 

§ 251 When a Failure to Give Assurance May Be Treated as a Repudiation
time to perform, but is unable to do so because C is using the hall.  The assurance given by B was adequate in 
view of what it was reasonable to require, and therefore A could not treat B's failure to do more as a 
repudiation.  B then has a claim against A for damages for total breach.
8.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, before contracting with C, A telephones B on May 6 and 
asks B to assure him that he will be there on May 7.  B replies that he hopes to be able to charter a plane and 
that he will telephone A to let him know.  A tells B that he must know by noon on May 7 in order to make 
alternative arrangements with C.  B succeeds in chartering a plane and flies the 3,000 miles with his quartet.  
After he has arrived on the afternoon of May 7, he telephones A to assure him that he will perform.  A court may 
conclude that, as a result of B's apparent inability to perform, A had reasonable grounds to believe that B would 
commit a breach by non-performance that would of itself have given A a claim for damages for total breach, 
that the assurances given by B were not within a reasonable time, and therefore that B properly treated B's 
delay in giving them as a repudiation.  A then has a claim against B for damages for total breach.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.  It replaces former §§ 280, 283 and 323 and 
rejects, as founded on insufficient authority and as inferior to the Code rule in practice, the notion that, if an 
obligor manifests doubt or is apparently unable to perform, the obligee can, by mere change of position, deprive 
that obligor of his rights under the contract and subject him to a claim for its breach even if that obligor is 
prepared, in fact, to perform.  See Wardrop, Prospective Inability in the Law of Contracts, 20 Minn. L. Rev. 380, 
392-400 (1936); Patterson, Constructive Conditions in Contracts, 42 Colum. L. Rev. 903, 923 (1942); 6 Corbin, 
Contracts §§ 1259, 1260 (1962 & Supp. 1980); 6 Williston, Contracts §§ 875-79 (3d ed. 1962).  See also 
Hillman, Keeping the Deal Together After Material Breach -- Common Law Mitigation Rules, the UCC, and the 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts, 47 U. Colo. L. Rev. 553 (1976); Rosett, Contract Performance: Promises, 
Conditions and the Obligation to Communicate, 22 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 1083 (1975).
In Ranger Constr. Co. v. Dixie Floor Co., 433 F. Supp. 442 (D.S.C. 1977), the court reviewed the authorities on 
the applicability of Article 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code to contracts involving both goods and services and 
found Article 2, and thus § 2-609, inapplicable to the transaction before the court.  Nonetheless the court found 
it a question of fact for the jury whether one party's refusal to pay under an unrelated contract between the 
parties was a manifestation that it could not or would not substantially perform the present contract sufficient to 
constitute an anticipatory repudiation of the latter.  See also Schenectady Steel Co. v. Bruno Trimpoli Gen. 
Constr. Co., 34 N.Y.2d 939, 359 N.Y.S.2d 560, 316 N.E.2d 875 (1974), in which the court declined to consider 
whether § 2-609 applied to a contract to furnish and erect structural steel.
Comment a.  See Comment 1 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.
Comment b.  On the advantages of the demand for assurances, and the dangers of not using it, see National 
Farmers Organization v. Bartlett and Co., 560 F.2d 1350, 1355 (8th Cir. 1977) (dictum).  The facts in 
Illustrations 1 and 2 are suggested by Hathaway v. Sabin, 63 Vt. 527, 22 A. 633 (1891). As to Illustration 1, see 
Illustrations 1 and 2 to former § 277.
Comment c.  See L.E. Spitzer Co. v. Barron, 581 P.2d 213 (Alaska 1978), applying the Tentative Draft of this 
Section and citing the Tentative Draft of this Comment; see also Comment 3 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
609.  For discussions of inadequate grounds under § 2-609, see National Ropes, Inc. v. National Diving Serv., 
513 F.2d 53 (5th Cir. 1975); Westinghouse Elec. Corp. v. Garrett Corp., 437 F. Supp. 1301, 1338-39 (D. Md. 
1977). For a case finding adequate grounds for insecurity, relying on the common law and former § 280, see 
Ranger Constr. Co. v. Dixie Floor Co., 433 F. Supp. 442 (D.S.C. 1977). Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to 
former § 283.  Illustration 4 is supported by Clark v. Ingle, 58 N.M. 136, 266 P.2d 672 (1954). The facts in 
Illustration 5 are suggested by those in Cohen v. Kranz, 12 N.Y.2d 242, 238 N.Y.S.2d 928, 189 N.E.2d 473 
(1963).
Comment d.  In L.E. Spitzer Co. v. Barron, 581 P.2d 213 (Alaska 1978), a case not involving the sale of goods, 
a demand by telephone was held adequate, while in Kunian v. Development Corp. of America, 165 Conn. 300, 
334 A.2d 427 (1973), a sale of goods case, an oral demand at a meeting was held the equivalent of the written 
demand referred to in Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.
Comment e.  See Comment 4 to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-609.

§ 251 When a Failure to Give Assurance May Be Treated as a Repudiation
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 313(2)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document