Restat 2d of Contracts, § 277
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 12- Discharge by 
Assent or Alteration          >            Topic 1- The Requirement of Consideration        
§ 277 Renunciation
(1)  A written renunciation signed and delivered by the obligee discharges without consideration a duty 
arising out of a breach of contract.
(2)  A renunciation by the obligee on his acceptance from the obligor of some performance under a 
contract discharges without consideration a duty to pay damages for a breach that gives rise only to a 
claim for damages for partial breach of contract.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope.  Under the rules stated in this Section, a party injured by a breach of contract can renounce his claim 
for damages for that breach and thereby discharge without consideration the other party's duty.  He can do so 
in whole or in part.  The concept of renunciation presupposes that the injured party is aware of his claim at the 
time he renounces it.  Furthermore, because these rules apply only to duties arising under a contract, the 
obligor is held to a duty of good faith and fair dealing with respect to the obligee (§ 205).  Discharge by 
renunciation of a negotiable instrument is beyond the scope of this Restatement.  See Uniform Commercial 
Code § 3-605.
b.  Written renunciation.  Under the rule stated in Subsection (1), the obligee can renounce a claim arising out 
of a breach of contract, including a claim for damages for either partial or total breach (§ 236), and may do so 
even though the obligor renders no further performance under the contract.  Although no consideration is 
required, the obligee must deliver a signed writing to the obligor.
Illustrations:
1.  A and B make a contract under which A promises to employ B and B promises to work for A for six months 
beginning on June 1.  After B has begun work, A wrongfully discharges B.  B writes A, "I am glad to leave you 
and I give up any right to sue you." A's duty to pay B damages for total breach is discharged.  A's duty to pay B 
wages earned during the time B has worked is not discharged.
2.  A contracts to sell and B to buy wheat to be delivered on June 1.  A fails to deliver the wheat on that day.  
After sufficient delay to discharge B's remaining duties of performance, B writes A, "Since you are so late in 
delivery, I cancel our deal and waive all my rights against you." A's duty to pay B damages for total breach is 
discharged.
3.  A and B make a contract under which A promises to build a house on B's land and B promises to pay A $ 
50,000.  A fails to follow the plans in some particulars, giving B a claim against A for damages for partial 
breach.  After B takes possession of the house, he gives a signed writing to A stating, "I do not care about 
these specified defects in your performance; you have done pretty well on the whole, and I am satisfied with the 
house." A's duty to pay B damages for partial breach is discharged.  As to B's right to restitution, see § 253.
c.  Oral renunciation.  Under the rule stated in Subsection (2), the obligee can renounce his right to damages 
for a breach that is sufficient to give rise to a claim for damages for partial breach but not serious enough to 
give rise to a claim for damages for total breach (§ 236).  However, he can do so only on his acceptance from 
the obligor of some performance under the contract.  A renunciation may occur before performance as long as 
it continues to the time of performance.  No consideration is required and the renunciation may be oral.  Mere 
silent acceptance, however, is not a renunciation.  A claim for the unpaid balance of a debt is not one for 
damages for partial breach under the rule stated in this Section, but a claim for damages caused by delay in 

§ 277 Renunciation
payment of a debt is such a claim.  See Illustration 3 to § 278.  See § 246 for the effect of acceptance of 
performance on the obligee's right to claim damages for total breach.
Illustrations:
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3, B's renunciation is oral rather than written and occurs 
before B has taken possession of the house rather than after.  A's duty to pay B damages for partial breach is 
discharged.  The result does not depend on whether or not B has paid the price in full before his renunciation.  
As to B's right to restitution, see § 253.
5.  A and B make a contract under which A promises to employ B and B promises to work for A for six months.  
After B has begun work, he commits a breach of the contract giving A a claim for damages for partial breach.  A 
says, "Never mind, I excuse that failure in view of your generally excellent performance," and B continues to 
work for A.  A's claim for damages for partial breach is discharged.  The result would be different if A's 
renunciation occurred after B had finished working for A.
d.  Other situations distinguished.  If the injured party's renunciation is supported by consideration or by 
reliance, it can be sustained without resort to the rule stated in this Section.  If, for example, each of the parties 
believes that he has a claim against the other for damages for total breach, the renunciation by one of his 
disputed claim for damages will furnish the consideration for the renunciation by the other of his disputed claim.  
If a party having a claim for damages for partial breach renounces his claim and the other party relies on the 
renunciation so that it would be unjust not to enforce the renunciation, the reliance will make the renunciation 
enforceable.
Illustration:
6.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3, B's statement to A is oral rather than written.  A's duty to 
pay damages for partial breach is not discharged.  If, however, A relied on the statement by moving from the 
site men and material that might have been used to remedy the defects, a court might hold that A's reliance 
was such that his duty to pay B damages for partial breach was discharged.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is based on Uniform Commercial Code § 1-107 and replaces former § 410.  Subsection (2) is 
based on former § 411.  See 5A Corbin, Contracts §§ 1240-47 (1964); 15 Williston, Contracts § 1826 (3d ed. 
1972).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustrations 1 and 3 to former § 410.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 
2 to former § 410.  Illustration 3 is based in part on Illustration 1 to former § 411.
Comment c.  Illustrations 4 and 5 are based on Illustrations 1 and 2 to former § 411.
Comment d.  Illustration 6 is new.  As to the effect of failure of a buyer of goods to give notice of breach to the 
seller, see Uniform Commercial Code § 2-607(3).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
What constitutes "substantial impairment" entitling buyer to revoke his acceptance of goods under UCC § 2-
608(1).  98 A.L.R.3d 1183.
Damages for wrongful termination of automobile dealership contracts.  54 A.L.R.3d 324.
Purchaser's misrepresentations as to intended use of real property as ground for vendor's equitable relief from 
contract and deed.  35 A.L.R.3d 1369.
Infants misrepresentation as to his age as estopping him from disaffirming his voidable transaction.  29 
A.L.R.3d 1270.
Revocation, prior to execution of formal written contract, of vote or decision of public body awarding contract to 
bidder.  3 A.L.R.3d 864.
Asserted right to rescission or cancellation of contract with decedent as claim which must be presented to his 
personal representative.  73 A.L.R.2d 883.
Digest System Key Numbers:

§ 277 Renunciation
Contracts 313(1)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document