Restat 2d of Contracts, § 30
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 3- Making of Offers        
§ 30 Form of Acceptance Invited
(1)  An offer may invite or require acceptance to be made by an affirmative answer in words, or by 
performing or refraining from performing a specified act, or may empower the offeree to make a 
selection of terms in his acceptance.
(2)  Unless otherwise indicated by the language or the circumstances, an offer invites acceptance in 
any manner and by any medium reasonable in the circumstances.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Required form.  The offeror is the master of his offer.  See Comment a to § 29.  The form of acceptance is 
less likely to affect the substance of the bargain than the identity of the offeree, and is often quite immaterial.  
But the offeror is entitled to insist on a particular mode of manifestation of assent.  The terms of the offer may 
limit acceptance to a particular mode; whether it does so is a matter of interpretation.
Illustration:
1.  A sends a letter to B stating the terms of a proposed contract.  At the end he writes, "You can accept this 
offer only by signing on the dotted line below my own signature." a replies by telegram, "I accept your offer." 
There is no contract.
b.  Invited form.  Insistence on a particular form of acceptance is unusual.  Offers often make no express 
reference to the form of acceptance; sometimes ambiguous language is used.  Language referring to a 
particular mode of acceptance is often intended and understood as suggestion rather than limitation; the 
suggested mode is then authorized, but other modes are not precluded.  In other cases language which in 
terms refers to the mode of acceptance is intended and understood as referring to some more important aspect 
of the transaction, such as the time limit for acceptance.  See §§ 60, 63.
c.  Term supplied in acceptance.  An offer may contain a choice of terms, and may invite or require an 
acceptance making a selection among the terms stated.  Or the offer may indicate a term such as quantity to be 
filled in by the offeree.  An acceptance to be effective must comply with the terms of the offer, and those terms 
or the circumstances may make it plain that the acceptance must specify terms.  Section 60.  In such cases the 
offer does not fail for indefiniteness, but no contract is made by an attempted acceptance which does not 
supply the term as indicated.  See § 33.  The offer assents in advance to the term chosen or filled in by the 
offeree.
Illustration:
2.  A offers to deliver to B at any time during the next 30 days any amount of coal, up to 100 tons, for which B 
will promise to pay $ 15 a ton.  In order to accept this offer B must specify the amount of coal he desires and 
must promise to pay $ 15 a ton for it.  An order for 50 tons by B concludes a definite agreement.
d.  Form not specified.  Interpretation of the offer is necessary in order to determine whether there is any 
limitation on the mode of acceptance.  The meaning given the offer by the offeree controls if it is a meaning of 
which the offeror knew or had reason to know.  See §§ 19, 20.  Since limitation is not customary, the offeror has 
reason to know that the offeree may understand that the offer can be accepted in any reasonable manner, and 
a contrary intention is not operative unless manifested.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-206(1).
Illustrations:

§ 30 Form of Acceptance Invited
3.  A orally offers to sell and deliver to B 100 tons of coal at $ 20 a ton payable 30 days after delivery.  B replies, 
"I accept your offer." B has manifested assent in a sufficient form, even though A neither suggested nor 
required that form.
4.  A makes a bid at an auction sale.  By the usual custom at auctions, the auctioneer may accept by letting the 
hammer fall, by saying "Sold", or by any words manifesting acceptance.
e.  Reasonable manner.  As to acceptance by promise or nonpromissory performance, see § 32.  Cases where 
the contract leaves terms to be chosen in the course of performance are the subject of § 34.  What manner and 
medium are reasonable is governed by the rules stated in §§ 60 and 65.  Sometimes, though not ordinarily, 
even silent inaction may be effective as a mode of acceptance.  See § 69.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is based on former § 29.  Subsection (2) is new.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 31A, 76 (3d ed. 
1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts §§ 62, 70, 77 (1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is new; see Kroeze v. Chloride Group Ltd., 572 F.2d 1099 (5th Cir. 1978); Town of 
Lindsay v. Cooke County Elec. Coop. Ass'n, 502 S.W.2d 117 (Tex. 1973). See also Golden Dipt Co. v. Systems 
Eng'r & Mfg. Co., 465 F.2d 215 (7th Cir. 1972) (while the dictum in the opinion is correct, the court appears 
incorrect in categorizing the proposal involved as an offer rather than an invitation to make an offer; see 
Comment d to § 26).
Comment c.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustrations 1 and 2 to former § 29.
Comment d.  Illustration 3 is new.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 29.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Reward for disproving commercial claim.  96 A.L.R.3d 907.
Timeliness of notice of exercise of option to purchase realty.  87 A.L.R.3d 805.
Knowledge of reward as condition of right thereto.  86 A.L.R.3d 1142.
Advertisement addressed to public relating to sale or purchase of goods at specified price as an offer the 
acceptance of which will consummate a contract.  43 A.L.R.3d 1102.
Private rights and remedies growing out of prize-winning contests.  87 A.L.R.2d 649.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 22
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document