Restat 2d of Contracts, § 46
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 4- Duration of the Offeree’s Power of Acceptance        
§ 46 Revocation of General Offer
Where an offer is made by advertisement in a newspaper or other general notification to the public or to 
a number of persons whose identity is unknown to the offeror, the offeree's power of acceptance is 
terminated when a notice of termination is given publicity by advertisement or other general notification 
equal to that given to the offer and no better means of notification is reasonably available.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Revocability.  This Section is an extension of the principle giving effect to a communicated revocation, and is 
subject to the same limitations.  See § 42; compare § 43.  Theoretically, a general offer may be made 
irrevocable under §§ 25 and 37 in the same ways as any other offer, but irrevocable offers to a number of 
unidentified persons are rare except where such documents as letters of credit are issued.  See Illustration 2 to 
§ 29.  An irrevocable offer, or a revocable offer which has been duly accepted, cannot of course be revoked 
under this Section.  On the other hand, this Section does not exclude revocation under § 42 or § 43 or under a 
power to revoke expressly reserved in the offer; a published notice of revocation which does not comply with 
this Section is nonetheless effective as to an offeree who actually learns of it.
b.  Available means of notice.  The rule of this Section reconciles the principle that an offer is ordinarily 
revocable with the fact that general publication is not a reliable means of informing offerees of the revocation of 
an offer.  Revocation by a notification not actually received is given effect only where such revocation is 
provided for in the offer or where the alternative is that the offer is as a practical matter irrevocable.  Where a 
feasible and customary substitute is available which is better calculated to produce actual receipt of notice, 
newspaper publication is not enough.  Even where publication is the only or the best available means of giving 
notice, it may not be effective immediately.  There must be publicity equivalent to that given the offer, including 
in appropriate cases a reasonable time for equivalent indirect circulation.  Compare Illustration 1 to § 23.
Illustrations:
1.  A, a newspaper, publishes an offer of prizes to the persons who procure the largest number of subscriptions 
as evidenced by cash or checks received by a specified time.  B completes and mails an entry blank giving his 
name and address, which is received by A.  Thereafter, during the contest, A publishes a notice that personal 
checks will not be counted; B does not see the notice.  Unless the original offer provided otherwise, B is not 
bound by the later notice, since A could have given B personal notice.
2.  The United States Government publishes an offer of reward for the arrest of a named fugitive.  Seven 
months later the President publishes a proclamation revoking the offer, which is given the same publicity as the 
offer.  Five months after the proclamation, A, who has been in Italy continuously and who learned indirectly of 
the offer but not of the revocation, arrests the fugitive in Italy.  There is no contract.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 43; the final clause is new.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 59-59A (3d ed. 
1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 41 (1963); Annot., 107 A.L.R. 1085 (1936).
Comment a.  Compare the service of process by publication, which is sometimes held ineffective because 
better means of notification are available.  See Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., 339 U.S. 306 
(1950); Walker v. City of Hutchinson, 352 U.S. 112 (1956).

§ 46 Revocation of General Offer
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is based on Long v. Chronicle Publishing Co., 68 Cal. App. 171, 228 P. 873 (1924). 
Illustration 2 is based on Shuey v. United States, 92 U.S. 73 (1875); cf.  Federal Crop Ins. Corp. v. Merrill, 332 
U.S. 380 (1947).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 19
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document