Restat 2d of Contracts, § 69
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 5- Acceptance of Offers        
§ 69 Acceptance by Silence or Exercise of Dominion
(1)  Where an offeree fails to reply to an offer, his silence and inaction operate as an acceptance in the 
following cases only:
(a)  Where an offeree takes the benefit of offered services with reasonable opportunity to reject them 
and reason to know that they were offered with the expectation of compensation.
(b)  Where the offeror has stated or given the offeree reason to understand that assent may be 
manifested by silence or inaction, and the offeree in remaining silent and inactive intends to accept the 
offer.
(c)  Where because of previous dealings or otherwise, it is reasonable that the offeree should notify the 
offeror if he does not intend to accept.
(2)  An offeree who does any act inconsistent with the offeror's ownership of offered property is bound 
in accordance with the offered terms unless they are manifestly unreasonable.  But if the act is 
wrongful as against the offeror it is an acceptance only if ratified by him.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Acceptance by silence is exceptional.  Ordinarily an offeror does not have power to cause the silence of the 
offeree to operate as acceptance.  See Comment b to § 53.  The usual requirement of notification is stated in § 
54 on acceptance by performance and § 56 on acceptance by promise.  The mere receipt of an unsolicited 
offer does not impair the offeree's freedom of action or inaction or impose on him any duty to speak.  The 
exceptional cases where silence is acceptance fall into two main classes: those where the offeree silently takes 
offered benefits, and those where one party relies on the other party's manifestation of intention that silence 
may operate as acceptance.  Even in those cases the contract may be unenforceable under the Statute of 
Frauds.  See Chapter 5.
b.  Acceptance of offered services.  Services rendered cannot be recovered in specie, and there is in general 
no right to restitution of the value of services rendered officiously or gratuitously.  Even where services are 
rendered by mistake, the right to restitution is limited.  See Restatement of Restitution §§ 40-42, 56.  But when 
the recipient knows or has reason to know that the services are being rendered with an expectation of 
compensation, and by a word could prevent the mistake, his privilege of inaction gives way; under Subsection 
(1) (a) he is held to an acceptance if he fails to speak.  The resulting duty is not merely a duty to pay fair value, 
but a duty to pay or perform according to the terms of the offer.
Illustration:
1.  A gives several lessons on the violin to B's child, intending to give the child a course of twenty lessons, and 
to charge B the price.  B never requested A to give this instruction but silently allows the lessons to be 
continued to their end, having reason to know A's intention.  B is bound to pay the price of the course.
c.  Intent to accept.  The mere fact that an offeror states that silence will constitute acceptance does not deprive 
the offeree of his privilege to remain silent without accepting.  But the offeree is entitled to rely on such a 
statement if he chooses.  The case for acceptance is strongest when the reliance is definite and substantial or 
when the intent to accept is objectively manifested though not communicated to the offeror.  Compare §§ 54, 

§ 69 Acceptance by Silence or Exercise of Dominion
87(2).  Even though the intent to accept is manifested only by silent inaction, however, the offeror who has 
invited such an acceptance cannot complain of the resulting uncertainty in his position.
Illustrations:
2.  A offers by mail to sell to B a horse already in B's possession for $ 250, saying: "I am so sure that you will 
accept that you need not trouble to write me.  Your silence alone will operate as acceptance." B makes no 
reply, but he does not intend to accept.  There is no contract.
3.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 2, B replies by return mail, saying: "I accept your offer." 
There is a contract.
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 2, B makes no reply and remains inactive with the intention 
of thereby expressing his acceptance.  There is a contract.
d.  Prior conduct of the offeree.  Explicit statement by the offeree, usage of trade, or a course of dealing 
between the parties may give the offeror reason to understand that silence will constitute acceptance.  In such 
a situation the offer may tacitly incorporate that understanding, and if the offeree intends to accept the case 
then falls within Subsection (1) (b).  Under Subsection (1) (c) the offeree's silence is acceptance, regardless of 
his actual intent, unless both parties understand that no acceptance is intended.  See § 20.
In a number of recurring situations, statutes have codified the application of theses rules.  See Uniform 
Commercial Code § 2-207(2) on additional terms proposed in an acceptance or written confirmation of a 
contract between merchants for the sale of goods, § 2-327(1) on retention of goods sold on approval, § 4-302 
on retention by a bank of commercial paper received for payment or acceptance.  In many states by statute or 
decision an insurance company is under a duty to act without unreasonable delay on insurance applications 
solicited by its agents; circumstances may be such as to give the applicant reason to understand that he is 
insured if that duty is not performed, particularly where a premium payment has been made.  Compare § 56.
Illustrations:
5.  A, through salesmen, has frequently solicited orders for goods from B, the orders to be subject to A's 
personal approval.  In every case A has shipped the goods ordered within a week and without other notification 
to B than billing the goods to him on shipment.  A's salesman solicits and receives another order from B.  A 
receives the order and remains silent.  B relies on the order and forbears to buy elsewhere for a week.  A is 
bound to fill the order.
6.  A has for years insured B's property against fire under annual policies.  At the expiration of one policy, in 
accordance with the usual practice, A sends B a renewal policy and a bill for the premium.  B retains the policy 
for two months and then refuses to pay the premium on demand.  B is liable for the premium accrued prior to 
his rejection. .
e.  Exercise of dominion.  An offeree in possession of offered property commonly has a duty or privilege to hold 
it for the offeror, or, if storage, is inconvenient or hazardous, to return it, sell it for the offeror's account, or 
otherwise dispose of it.  Compare Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-602 through 2-604, 7-206.  But the offeree's 
privilege to remain silent without accepting does not extend to acts of ownership not assented to by the offeror.  
Hence exercise of dominion, even though not intended as acceptance under Subsection (1) (b) and not given 
meaning by prior conduct under Subsection (1) (c), is a sufficient manifestation of assent under Subsection (2).  
Compare Uniform Commercial Code § 2-606.
Where the exercise of dominion does not comply with the terms of the offer, the offeror is not bound to treat it 
as an acceptance but may instead pursue his remedies for tortious interference with his property.  But the 
offeree is not ordinarily permitted to avoid contract obligation by asserting that he is a tortfeasor rather than a 
promisor; atthe option of the offeror he may be held to an acceptance despite his manifestation of a contrary 
intention.  Such an obligation may fairly be characterized as quasi-contractual rather than contractual, but its 
terms are fixed by the offer rather than by the fair value of the property.  Compare Restatement of Restitution § 
56.
An exception is made where the offered terms are manifestly unreasonable.  In such cases the offeror has 
reason to know that no acceptance is intended, and the offered terms do not serve as an administratively 
convenient substitute for fair value.  Particularly where the offeror seeks to take unconscionable advantage of a 
mistake made in good faith, no social purpose is served by an award plainly in excess of reasonable value even 
though the exercise of dominion is tortious.

§ 69 Acceptance by Silence or Exercise of Dominion
Illustrations:
7.  A sends B a one-volume edition of Shakespeare with a letter, saying, "If you wish to buy this book send me 
$ 6.50 within one week after receipt hereof, otherwise notify me and I will forward postage for return." B 
examines the book and without replying makes a gift of it to his wife.  B owes A $ 6.50.
8.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 7, B examines the book and without replying carefully lays 
it on a shelf to await A's messenger.  There is no contract.
9.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 7, B examines the book and uses it or gives it to his wife, 
writing A at the same time that he has taken the book, but that it is worth only $ 5 and that he will pay no more.  
A may at his option treat B as a tort-feasor or as contracting to pay $ 6.50.
10.  Under a claim of right made in error but in good faith, A digs a well on B's unused land and takes water 
therefrom which has no market value and no value to B, doing no injury to the value of the land.  B notifies A 
that he will charge A $ 50 a day for every day on which A takes water from his land.  Even after it is adjudicated 
that A's right is nonexistent, A does not accept B's terms by taking water.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 72.  Subsection (1) (c) is revised to harmonize with the common reference to 
"duty to speak" in judicial discussion.  Subsection (2) is revised to conform to the language of Uniform 
Commercial Code § 2-606, and the exclusion of offered terms which are "manifestly unreasonable" is new.
See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 91-91D (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts §§ 72-75 (1963 & Supp. 1980); Laufer, 
Acceptance by Silence: A Critique, 7 Duke B. A. J. 87 (1939).
Comment a.  On the traditional reluctance of courts to find acceptance by silence, see Karlin v. Avis, 457 F.2d 
57, 61-62 (2d Cir. 1972), cert. denied, 409 U.S. 849 (1972); Dorton v. Collins & Aikman Corp., 453 F.2d 1161, 
1168 n.4 (6th Cir. 1972) (overstating the rule).  On the changes made by this Section, see William F. 
Klingensmith, Inc. v. District of Columbia ex. rel. Reliance Ins. Co., 370 A.2d 1341 (D.C. Ct. App. 1977)(citing 
this Comment in Tentative Draft).  On the interplay with the Statute of Frauds, see Karlin v. Avis, supra.
Comment b.  Illustration 1 was Illustration 1 to former § 72; see Richard A. Berjian, D.O., Inc. v. Ohio Bell Tel. 
Co., 54 Ohio St.2d 147, 375 N.E.2d 410 (1978).
Comment c.  Illustrations 2-4 were Illustrations 2-4 to former § 72.
Comment d.  See Richard A. Berjian, D.O., Inc. v. Ohio Bell Tel. Co., supra, citing Subsection (1) (c) in 
Tentative Draft; Brooks Towers Corp. v. Hunkin-Conkey Constr. Co., 454 F.2d 1203, 1207 (10th Cir. 1972). For 
a discussion of the role of reliance, see William F. Klingensmith, Inc. v. District of Columbia ex rel. Reliance Ins. 
Co., 370 A.2d 1341 (D.C. Ct. App. 1977). As to delay in acting on insurance applications, see Annot., 32 
A.L.R.2d 487 (1953). Illustration 5 is based on Illustration 5 to former § 72, which was the basis of decision in 
Ammons v. Wilson, 176 Miss. 645, 170 So. 227 (1936). Illustration 6 is based on National Union Fire Ins. Co. v. 
Ehrlich, 122 Misc. 682, 203 N.Y.S. 434 (1924).
Comment e.  See Whittier, The Restatement of Contracts and Mutual Assent, 17 Calif. L. Rev. 441, 452 (1929). 
In Empire Mach. Co. v. Litton Business Tel. Sys., 115 Ariz. App. 568, 566 P.2d 1044 (1977), cashing a down-
payment check and retention of the proceeds for several months was held to raise an issue of fact as to the 
payee's intention to accept an offer that accompanied the check.  Compare Hermes v. William F. Meyer Co., 65 
Ill. App.3d 745, 22 Ill. Dec. 451, 382 N.E.2d 841 (1978). On the offeror's power to treat an exercise of dominion 
as either a conversion or an acceptance, see Raible v. Puerto Rico Indus. Dev. Co., 392 F.2d 424 (1st Cir. 
1968). Illustrations 7-9 were Illustrations 6-8 to former § 72.  Modern consumer protection statutes have greatly 
restricted the power of an offeror of unsolicited merchandise to create an obligation in the recipient.  Under 
such statutes the merchandise may be deemed a gift and the practice may be forbidden and enjoinable.  See, 
e.g., 39 U.S.C. § 3009 (1976) (mailing of unordered merchandise); N.Y. Gen. Bus. Law § 396 (1968) (voluntary 
and unsolicited sending of goods, wares or merchandise); Neb. Rev. Stat. § 63-101 (1976) (similar to New York 
statute).  See Note, 1970 Duke L.J. 991. Illustration 10 is based on Wright v. Sonoma County, 156 Cal. 475, 
105 P. 409 (1909).
Cross Reference

§ 69 Acceptance by Silence or Exercise of Dominion
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 22(1)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document