Restat 2d of Contracts, § 8
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 1- Meaning of 
Terms        
§ 8 Unenforceable Contracts
An unenforceable contract is one for the breach of which neither the remedy of damages nor the 
remedy of specific performance is available, but which is recognized in some other way as creating a 
duty of performance, though there has been no ratification.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Distinction between "voidable" and "unenforceable."  Just as a contract may be voidable by one party or by 
either party, so it may be enforceable by one and not by the other or it may be unenforceable by either.  
Similarly, one party to an unenforceable contract may have a power to make the contract enforceable by all the 
usual remedies, and both voidable and unenforceable contracts may have collateral consequences.  Voidable 
contracts might be defined as one type of unenforceable contract.  As defined here, however, the term 
unenforceable contract refers to rules under which the duty of performance does not depend solely on the 
election of one party.  In the transactions here classified as unenforceable, some legal consequences other 
than the creation of a power of ratification follow without further action by either party.
Illustrations:
1.  A, an infant, orally accepts a written offer signed by B, an adult, to sell a tract of land.  A's promise is 
voidable by him because of his infancy and unenforceable under the Statute of Frauds.  Upon attaining his 
majority, A delivers to B a signed writing stating the terms of the contract and manifesting an election to avoid it.  
Under § 133, the Statute of Frauds no longer prevents enforcement; but the contract is avoided.
2.  A is indebted to B, but the statute of limitations has barred a direct remedy.  A has the power to make direct 
remedies available or to make a new contract without consideration by making a new promise or part payment 
of the debt (see § 82).  Even without such further acts, legal consequences may flow from the barred debt.  If 
the creditor has security, he may have a right to apply it towards payment of the debt.
b.  Types of unenforceable contracts.  Some contracts are unenforceable because they arise out of illegal 
bargains which are neither wholly void nor voidable.  See Comments b-d to § 178; §§ 183-84; Comment b to § 
197.  Others are unenforceable because of laws relating primarily to remedies, such as the Statute of Frauds 
(see Chapter 5) or Statute of Limitations.
Illustrations:
3.  A agrees to sell specific goods to B, and B agrees to buy them.  A has previously contracted to sell the same 
goods to C, as B knows.  The bargain between A and B is unenforceable on grounds of public policy (§ 194), 
and neither party can enforce it while executory.  But if either party performs his promise, he can recover what 
he has transferred or its value.  The return promise, though unenforceable, is given legal effect as showing that 
the performance was not gratuitous, and is therefore a contract.
4.  A makes an oral purchase of goods from B for an agreed price of $ 500.  There is no delivery or part 
payment, and the bargain is unenforceable under the Statute of Frauds.  A insures the goods as owner.  The 
insurer cannot defeat a claim under the policy on the ground that A did not own the goods, although A would 
have had no direct remedy against B for failure to deliver.
c.  Government contracts.  Contracts with a government or governmental agency are sometimes unenforceable 
under remnants of the historic English tradition that the sovereign is immune from suit.  Yet the legal 
consequences of such a contract show that what is promised by the government is due as of right and not as a 
favor.  Thus, a claim against the government arising out of the contract may pass to the executor or trustee in 

§ 8 Unenforceable Contracts
bankruptcy of the claimant.  Sometimes such a claim, though not enforceable by action, may be asserted 
defensively in an action by the government.
Increasingly, governments have enacted statutes giving general consent to actions on contracts.  Contracts 
enforceable by judicial proceedings under such statutes fall outside the present definition of unenforceable 
contracts, even though the action may be brought only in a special court, or relief may be limited to money 
damages, or execution cannot be levied on a money judgment.  The critical element is not compulsion by 
physical force, but the availability of judicial machinery to make a final determination of legal obligation.  Thus, 
where the only direct remedy is by legislative approval of a private bill or by unreviewable administrative action, 
the contract is within the present definition of unenforceable contracts.
The question whether a contract is enforceable by direct legal proceedings is quite different from the question 
whether the legal right will be converted into money or its equivalent.  The latter question may depend on 
whether there is a regular practice of making appropriations to pay judgments, or, as in cases of private 
obligors, on the solvency of the government against whom the judgment is rendered.  There is sometimes more 
assurance of payment under an unenforceable contract than under a judgment.
Illustrations:
5.  A, an American citizen, holds notes issued by B, a foreign government.  Because of the sovereign immunity 
of B, the notes are not enforceable against B in the courts of the United States.  In an action by B against A on 
an unrelated claim, however, A may use the notes as an offset to reduce the amount of B's recovery.
6.  A, an American citizen, has a contract with the United States government, and after a breach by the 
government obtains a judgment for damages in the United States Court of Claims.  Under the tax laws, money 
receivable under the contract is taxable as accrued income when there is a reasonable expectancy that the 
right will be converted into money.  The income accrues in the year in which the time for appellate review of the 
judgment expires, even though Congress does not appropriate money to pay the judgment until the following 
year.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 14.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 16 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 8 
(1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  For a good discussion of the differences among "void," "voidable," and "unenforceable" contracts, 
see Daugherty v. Kessler, 264 Md. 281, 286 A.2d 95 (1972). That case also illustrates the rule that interference 
with an unenforceable contract may be a tort.  Illustration 1 is new; see § 14 and Illustration 4 to § 133.  
Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 14.
Comment b.  For an example of a court's refusal to enforce a labor arbitrator's award because the contract 
provision on which it was based was unenforceable as violative of federal labor law, see Botany Indus., Inc. v. 
New York Joint Board, Amalgamated Clothing Workers, 375 F. Supp. 485 (S.D.N.Y.), vacated as moot, 506 
F.2d 1246 (2d Cir. 1974). Illustration 3 follows former § 600; see Illustration 3 to § 197.  Compare Restatement 
of Restitution §§ 107, 108.  On unenforceable contracts arising out of bargains against public policy, see 14 
Williston, Contracts §§ 1630A, 15 id. § 1762 (3d ed. 1957); 6A Corbin, Contracts §§ 1534-41 (1962 & Supp. 
1980).  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 14.
Comment c.  Illustration 5 is based on National City Bank v. Republic of China, 348 U.S. 356 (1955). Illustration 
6 is based on H. Liebes & Co. v. Commissioner, 90 F.2d 932 (9th Cir. 1937); cf.  Irwin v. Commissioner, 238 
F.2d 874 (3d Cir. 1956). As to the rights against the government of the claimant's executor or trustee in 
bankruptcy, see United States v. Shannon, 342 U.S. 288, 292 (1952); McKay v. United States, 27 Ct. Cl. 422 
(1892). See, generally, Note, Developments in the Law -- Remedies Against the United States and Its Officials, 
70 Harv. L. Rev. 827, 884 (1957); Note, Administration of Claims Against the Sovereign -- A Survey of State 
Techniques, 68 Harv. L. Rev. 506 (1955).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 98

§ 8 Unenforceable Contracts
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document