Restat 2d of Contracts, § Scope
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 9- The Scope of 
Contractual Obligations        
Introductory Note
The typical contract is a bargain -- an agreement in which a promise is exchanged for a consideration; in atypical 
cases a promise is binding because of its formal characteristics, because of reliance by the promisee, or for some 
other reason.  See § 17.  The terms of the agreement or promise to a large extent define the obligation created.  
Certain types of contracts or terms, however, are forbidden or otherwise regulated, and rules of law must fill the gap 
when the parties have not provided for the situation which arises.  Where the parties have adopted a writing as the 
final expression of all or part of their agreement, interpretation focuses on the writing, and its terms may supersede 
other manifestations of intention.  Whether or not there is a writing, the parties' intention is read in its context, and 
usages common to the parties are often an important part of the context.
General rules relating to these matters are stated in this chapter.  Bargains unenforceable on grounds of public 
policy, however, are the subject of a separate chapter.  See Chapter 8.  The scope of a contractual obligation may 
be determined or affected by the meaning of the promise or agreement (Topic 1), by considerations of fairness and 
the public interest (Topic 2), by the adoption of a writing (Topic 3), and by usage (Topic 4).  Some special rules 
relating to conditions and their effect on the scope of contractual obligations are stated at the end of this Chapter 
(Topic 5).
This Chapter analyzes the process of interpreting and applying agreements, stating separately rules with respect to 
various aspects of the process.  Such a separate statement may convey an erroneous impression of the 
psychological reality of the judicial process in which many elements are typically combined in a single ruling.  
Nevertheless, where evidence of an oral term is excluded in an action based on a written agreement with simply the 
imprecise explanation that "the writing speaks for itself," the ruling, when analyzed, may sum up the following 
determinations: the contract was integrated (§ 209); the integration was complete (§ 210); the oral term is 
inconsistent with the written agreement, is within its scope, does not bear on its interpretation, and would not 
naturally be omitted from the writing (§§ 213-16)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document