Restat 2d of Contracts, § Scope
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 6- Mistake        
Introductory Note
The law of contracts supports the finality of transactions lest justifiable expectations be disappointed.  This 
Chapter deals with exceptional situations in which the law departs from this policy favoring finality and allows 
either avoidance or reformation on the ground of mistake.  As § 151 makes clear, the word "mistake" is here 
used to refer to a belief that is not in accord with existing facts, rather than to an act that is the result of such an 
erroneous belief.
The type of mistake dealt with in this Chapter is one that relates to existing facts that the parties regard as a 
basis for making an agreement.  An important sub-category of such mistake is mistake as to expression, in 
which the mistake relates to the contents or effect of a writing that expresses an agreement.  In general, the 
appropriate relief for mistake takes the form of avoidance of the contract.  Where, however, because of a 
mistake of both parties as to expression the writing fails to express an agreement that they have reached 
previously, the appropriate relief ordinarily takes the form of reformation of the writing to make it conform to 
their intention.  To the extent that reformation is available, as it usually will be, to correct the effects of such a 
mistake, it is the exclusive remedy and avoidance is unnecessary and unavailable.  See § 152.  A mistake of 
only one party as to expression, however, may be a basis for avoidance under the rule stated in § 153.  See 
Illustrations 5 and 6 to § 153.
The basic rule for mistake of both parties is stated in § 152.  It allows avoidance by the adversely affected party 
if the mistake was one as to a basic assumption on which the contract was made, if it had a material effect on 
the agreed exchange of performances, and if he does not bear the risk of the mistake.  The situations to which 
this rule is applicable are often similar to those governed by § 266 on existing impracticability or frustration, 
since those latter situations also involve mistake.  However, the justification underlying the two sections is 
significantly different.  Underlying § 266 is the notion of unexpected extreme hardship, either through 
impracticability of performance or frustration of purpose, and the legal consequence is that no duty to render 
performance arises.  Underlying § 152 is the notion of an unexpected material imbalance in the exchange, and 
the legal consequence is merely that the contract is voidable by the party adversely affected.  The 
consequences of impracticability of performance or frustration of purpose are so extreme that it is relatively 
unusual for a party to agree to perform in spite of mistake that results in such unexpected hardship as would 
justify his non-performance on one of these grounds.  Therefore, § 266 provides for an exception only in the 
relatively narrow case where "the language or the circumstances indicate the contrary." See Comment c to § 
261.  The consequences of a mistake that materially affects the exchange of performances may be, on the 
contrary, much less extreme.  It is, therefore, much more common for a party to undertake to perform in spite of 
mistake that would justify his avoidance on this ground.  (Indeed, in the absence of provision to the contrary 
and aside from the exceptional cases of supervening impracticability (§ 261) and frustration (§ 265), a party 
generally bears the entire risk of subsequent changes that affect the agreed exchange.) Therefore, § 152 
provides for an exception, much broader than that in § 266, in all cases where the adversely affected party 
"bears the risk of mistake." The scope of this exception is spelled out in more detail in a separate section, § 
154, since the notion of allocation of risk plays a much more significant role in connection with the law of 
mistake than it does in connection with the law of impracticability and frustration.
The basic rule for mistake of only one party is stated in § 153.  In situations where the rule stated in § 153 
allows the mistaken party to avoid the contract, avoidance will more clearly disappoint the expectations of the 
other party, who was not mistaken, than will avoidance under the rule stated in § 152, where he too was 
mistaken.  Therefore, the rule stated in § 153 is more restrictive than that stated in § 152 and generally allows 

Introductory Note
the mistaken party to avoid only in extreme cases where it would be unconscionable to require him to perform, 
or where the other party had reason to know of the mistake or his fault caused it.
The rules stated in §§ 152 and 153 tell only whether a contract is voidable (§ 7) on the ground of mistake.  A 
party wishing to exercise a power of avoidance will usually simply notify the other party of his rescission, 
offering to return what he has received or the equivalent.  He may then either sue for the return of his own 
performance or the equivalent or set up his rescission as a defense to a suit on the contract.  Sometimes he will 
instead institute direct proceedings for rescission of the contract.  In any case there may be limitations on his 
power of avoidance.  The rules governing this power are stated elsewhere (§§ 380-85), together with those for 
contracts voidable on the ground of incapacity (§§ 12-16) or misrepresentation, duress or undue influence 
(Chapter 7).
The basic rule for mistake of both parties as to expression is stated in § 155.  It allows reformation where the 
parties are mistaken in thinking that a writing correctly expresses an agreement that they have previously 
reached.  Avoidance is not an appropriate remedy where the mistake can be corrected by reformation.  Under 
the rule stated in § 214(d), the parol evidence rule does not prevent reformation in such a case, and, under the 
rule stated in § 156, the Statute of Frauds does not prevent reformation.  However, since reformation is a 
discretionary equitable remedy, the rule stated in § 155 tells only when a court "may" grant such relief, leaving 
open the possibility that it might deny it on equitable grounds.  See Comment d to § 155.
If there is a mistake of only one party as to expression, avoidance may be an appropriate remedy under the rule 
stated in § 153.  See Illustrations 5 and 6 to § 153.  If, however, his mistake is in believing that a writing 
correctly expresses a prior agreement and the other party knows that it does not correctly express that 
agreement, the problem is one of the effect of the latter's failure to disclose this fact.  This is dealt with in §§ 
160-61, together with other instances in which nondisclosure may be tantamount to misrepresentation.
The rules governing all of the situations dealt with in this Chapter have traditionally been marked by flexibility 
and have conferred considerable discretion on the court.  In part, this has been due to the protean character of 
the situations involved and the circumstance that they are almost inevitably unforeseen by the parties.  In part it 
has been due to the fact that the law of mistake was shaped largely by courts of equity which had broad 
discretionary powers.  This characteristic of flexibility marks the rules stated in this Chapter, as is evidenced by 
such necessarily imprecise language as "materially" (§ 152), "unconscionable" (§ 153), and "bears the risk" (§§ 
152, 153, 154).  In addition, § 158 makes it clear that if these rules will not suffice to do substantial justice, it is 
within the discretion of the court to grant relief on such terms as justice requires.  Compare § 272, which makes 
this clear in cases of impracticability and frustration.
A number of problems closely related to those dealt with in this Chapter are found elsewhere in the 
Restatement of this Subject.  Some of these, in contrast to those dealt with here, involve the question whether a 
contract was formed at all.  Thus, the effect of misunderstanding, where the parties attach such different 
meanings to their language or other manifestations that there is no manifestation of mutual assent, is governed 
by the rule stated in § 20.  But cf. Illustration 6 to § 153.  Similarly, the effect of a mistake of the offeree as to 
the fact of a delay in the transmission of an offer is dealt with in § 49, and the effect of a mistake of the offeree 
as to the terms of the offer, caused by defective transmission, would be determined by analogous principles.  
As to the effect of a mistake of a party who makes a contract unaware of the death or insanity of the other, see 
§§ 15 and 48.  Other problems, involving a mistake of one party caused by the fraud or misrepresentation of the 
other, are dealt with in § 161.
Only those aspects of mistake that affect contract law are dealt with in the Restatement of this Subject.  
Important questions may arise as to money paid or other performance rendered by mistake, for example, under 
a mistaken belief that such performance is due under an actual or supposed contract.  These questions, 
however, are not dealt with here unless they are inextricably bound up with the enforceability of contract duties, 
as may be the case for restitution in connection with avoidance of a contract.  Similarly, the Restatement of this 
Subject does not generally cover present transfers, as by assignment or deed.  Such matters are, for the most 
part, left to the Restatement of Restitution.  (As to the effect of mistake on equitable remedies, see § 364(a).)
Furthermore, for the sake of simplicity, the rules stated in this Chapter have been formulated in terms of the 
typical contract based on an exchange of consideration by two parties.  It does not, therefore, deal exhaustively 

Introductory Note
with situations involving several parties (§ 9) including intended beneficiaries (§ 302), promises enforceable 
because of reliance (§ 90), promises enforceable because under seal (§ 95), and other less typical situations.  
See Comment c to § 158
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Chapter deals with matters covered in former Chapter 17, Mistake.  It avoids, as confusing, the use of 
such terms as "unilateral," "mutual," and "common" mistake, and refers instead to the various types of mistake 
in terms more fully descriptive.  Sections 152 and 153 make clearer the distinction between mistake take on the 
one hand and impracticability of performance and frustration of purpose on the other by emphasizing the effect 
on the agreed exchange of performances.  Section 153 states a rule that is substantially more liberal than that 
of former § 503 in allowing avoidance where only one party is mistaken.  This change accords with the current 
trend of judicial decisions.  Section 154 follows a current trend of academic and judicial thought in giving 
considerably more significance to the notion of allocation of risk as a basis of resolving disputes involving 
mistake as to assumption.  Section 156 states a rule that is substantially more liberal than that of former § 509 
in allowing reformation in spite of the Statute of Frauds.  This also accords with the current trend of judicial 
decisions.  Section 158 states a flexible rule for mistake that is analogous to that stated in § 272 for 
impracticability and frustration, giving the court the discretionary power to fashion appropriate relief in the rare 
cases where the other rules stated in this Chapter will not avoid injustice.  The rule stated in former § 505, 
concerning reformation where a mistake of one party is known to the other, is omitted from this Chapter, since 
that matter is now dealt with in connection with fraud and misrepresentation in § 161.
See 3 Corbin, Contracts chs. 27-29 (1960 & Supp. 1980); 13 Williston, Contracts ch. 46 (3d ed. 1970); 2 
Palmer, Law of Restitution chs. 11-12 (1978); 3 id. passim; Palmer, Mistake and Unjust Enrichment (1962); 
McClintock, Mistake and the Contractual Interests, 28 Minn. L. Rev. 460 (1944).
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document