Restat 2d of Contracts, § 165
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 7- 
Misrepresentation, Duress and Undue Influence          >            Topic 1- Misrepresentation        
§ 165 Cure by Change of Circumstances
If a contract is voidable because of a misrepresentation and, before notice of an intention to avoid the 
contract, the facts come into accord with the assertion, the contract is no longer voidable unless the 
recipient has been harmed by relying on the misrepresentation.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  In general, the recipient of a misrepresentation need not show that he has actually been harmed 
by relying on it in order to avoid the contract.  If, however, the effect of misrepresentation has been cured 
because the facts have been brought or have otherwise come into accord with the assertion before he has 
notified the maker of his intention to avoid the contract, there is ordinarily little likelihood of harm.  The rule 
stated in this Section precludes avoidance in such a case, unless the recipient shows that he has actually been 
harmed.  It applies to fraudulent as well as to non-fraudulent misrepresentations.
Illustrations:
1.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to buy land, tells B that the land is unencumbered.  A knows that 
the land is subject to a lien.  B is induced by A's statement to make the proposed contract.  A then removes the 
lien.  If B has not been harmed by the misrepresentation, the contract is no longer voidable by B.
2.  A, seeking to induce B to make a contract to buy land from C, tells B that he has authority from C to sell 
land.  A knows that he has no such authority.  B is induced by C's statement to make the proposed contract.  C 
later ratifies A's sale of the land.  If B has not been harmed by the misrepresentation, the contract is no longer 
voidable by B.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 476(2), but has been extended, in accordance with the cases cited below, to 
cover fraudulent as well as innocent misrepresentations.  Former § 476(3) has been eliminated.
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Davidson v. Moss, 6 Miss. 673 (1841); Smith v. Johns, 113 Or. 351, 232 
P. 786 (1925). Illustration 2 is supported by Comment c to Restatement, Second, Agency § 100.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Proceeding under executory contract after discovering fraud as waiver of right to recover damages for the 
fraud.  13 A.L.R.2d 807.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 94, 98
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document