Restat 2d of Contracts, § 248
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 10- Performance 
and Non-Performance          >            Topic 2- Effect of Performance and Non-Performance        
§ 248 Effect of Insufficient Reason for Rejection as Excusing the Non-
Occurrence Of a Condition
Where a party rejecting a defective performance or offer of performance gives an insufficient reason for 
rejection, the non-occurrence of a condition of his duty is excused only if he knew or had reason to 
know of that non-occurrence and then only to the extent that the giving of an insufficient reason 
substantially contributes to a failure by the other party to cure.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Failure to give a reason for rejection.  Ordinarily a party whose performance or offer of performance has 
been rejected must determine at his peril the reason for that rejection.  Whether or not he is under a duty to 
give that performance, he is not entitled to a statement of reasons from the other party and the other party is 
not prejudiced if he refuses to give such a statement.  The following section states a limited exception to this for 
the case in which the payment of legal tender is required.  (And cf. Uniform Commercial Code § 2-605, under 
which a buyer who fails to particularize his reasons for rejection is precluded, in some circumstances, from 
relying on an unstated defect.)
b.  Giving insufficient reason for rejection.  Just as the injured party is not, as a general rule, precluded from 
relying on a reason for rejection because he stated no reasons (Comment a), he is not precluded by the mere 
fact that he stated an insufficient reason, even though he knew or had reason to know of a sufficient one.  The 
giving of an insufficient reason may, however, so mislead the other party as to induce his failure to cure the 
defective performance or offer of performance within the time allowed by the agreement.  If it does so, the non-
occurrence of the condition is excused, although the injured party still has a claim for damages.  This is a 
specific application of the general rule that requires good faith and fair dealing in the enforcement of contracts.  
See § 205 and Illustration 10 to that section.  As to the requirement that the giving of the insufficient reason 
contribute materially to the failure to cure, see Comment b to § 245.  Where there isa question of fact as to 
whether performance was defective or not, the failure to state a reason or the stating of an insufficient reason 
may be considered in resolving that question, but this Section does not deal with such problems of proof.
Illustrations:
1.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 6 to § 246, on moving into the house B gives A a list of 
seventeen defects to be cured, but omits three others of which he knew or had reason to know.  Absent a 
showing that A could have cured the three defects in time if B had specified them then, B can rely on all of the 
defects to show that A's breach is material and that A has no claim to $ 10,000 under the contract.
2.  A, a subcontractor, makes a contract with B, a contractor, to install a roof on a school that B is building.  
After A has begun work, B notifies him that the contract is cancelled because of A's failure to provide enough 
skilled workmen as required by the contract.  A sues B.  B attempts to show that, although A may have 
provided enough skilled workmen, A so failed to follow specifications as to constitute a material breach.  B is 
not precluded from showing this, even if he knew it at the time of the cancellation, unless A could have cured 
the defects in time if B had specified them then.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 304.  See also 5 Williston, Contracts §§ 743, 744 (3d ed. 1961).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Cawley v. Weiner, 236 N.Y. 357, 140 N.E. 724 (1923). Illustration 2 is 
based on New England Structures, Inc. v. Loranger, 354 Mass. 62, 234 N.E.2d 888 (1968).

§ 248 Effect of Insufficient Reason for Rejection as Excusing the Non-Occurrence Of a Condition
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 321
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document