Restat 2d of Contracts, § 365
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 16- Remedies          
>            Topic 3- Enforcement by Specific Performance and Injunction        
§ 365 Effect of Public Policy
Specific performance or an injunction will not be granted if the act or forbearance that would be 
compelled or the use of compulsion is contrary to public policy.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Act or forbearance against public policy.  If the performance of a contract is contrary to public policy, the 
contract will often be unenforceable under the rules stated in Chapter 8, Unenforceability on Grounds of Public 
Policy.  Its performance may, for example, involve a breach of a duty to a third person arising under tort law, out 
of a fiduciary relation or under a contract.  See §§ 192, 193 and 194.  There are, however, situations in which 
the contract is enforceable but it would be an improper use of judicial power to grant specific performance or an 
injunction because the act or forbearance that would be compelled would adversely affect some aspect of the 
public interest or would otherwise be contrary to public policy.  In such situations, equitable relief will be refused 
even though a judgment for damages will be granted.  See Illustration 1.
Illustration:
1.  A is induced to make a contract to sell land to B, to be paid for out of funds of C that B holds as trustee, by 
B's false representation that such use of C's money is within B's authority as trustee.  A sues B for specific 
performance.  Specific performance will be refused on grounds of public policy, since the act that would be 
ordered would involve a breach of trust, even though B will be held liable in damage for breach of contract.
b.  Compulsion against public policy.  Even though the act or forbearance that would be compelled is not 
contrary to public policy, the use of compulsion to require that act or forbearance may be contrary to public 
policy.  One example of this general principle is the rule under which a court will refuse to grant specific 
performance if the character of performance is such that enforcement will impose a disproportionate burden on 
the court (§ 366).  Another is the rule under which a court will refuse to grant specific performance of a promise 
to render personal services or supervision (§ 367).  The general principle is not, however, limited to these 
situations and another important application occurs where equitable relief is denied on the ground that to grant 
it would give a preference with respect to the assets of an insolvent party.
Illustrations:
2.  A contracts to give B, a railroad company, a right of way in return for B's promise to locate a station and stop 
its express trains at a designated place.  It later turns out that that place is an inconvenient one for the public 
and that the disadvantage to B as well as the public of B's promise is performed will be disproportionate to any 
advantage to A.  B refuses to locate the station as promised, and A sues B for specific performance.  Specific 
performance will be refused on grounds of public policy, even though B will be held liable in damages for 
breach of contract.
3.  A borrows money from B and contracts to transfer to him as security 100 shares of stock in X Corporation 
but does not create a security interest in specific shares.  A dies insolvent without having kept his promise.  B 
sues A's administrator for specific performance.  Specific performance will be refused on grounds of public 
policy because it would compel the administrator to commit a breach of his duty as trustee of the asset in his 
charge, even though A's estate will be held liable in damages for breach of contract.
4.  A contracts to manufacture and deliver to B, for a price paid in advance, 100 articles as to which A has a 
monopoly under a patent.  A manufactures 1,000 such articles but refuses to deliver any of them to B.  B sues 
A for specific performance.  A becomes insolvent and his other creditors file a petition in bankruptcy.  A's 

§ 365 Effect of Public Policy
trustee intervenes in the suit to protect A's assets.  Specific performance will be refused because it would result 
in a preference, even though A will be held liable for breach of contract.  But see Uniform Commercial Code § 
2-502.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 369 and on parts of former §§ 362 and 368.  See 5A Corbin, Contracts § 
1169 (1964); 11 Williston, Contracts § 1429 (3d ed. 1968).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 368.
Comment b.  As to the policy against preferences, see former § 362.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 2 to 
former § 369.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 362.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 2 to 
former § 362; Jamison Coal & Coke Co. v. Gottra, 143 F.2d 889 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 323 U.S. 769 (1944).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Specific performance of agreement for sale of private franchise.  82 A.L.R.3d 1102.
Enforceability, insofar as restrictions would be reasonable, of contract containing unreasonable restrictions on 
competition.
Enforceability of covenant not to compete in infant's employment contract.  17 A.L.R.3d 863.
Failure of artisan or construction contractor to procure occupational or business license or permit as affecting 
validity or enforceability of contract.  82 A.L.R.2d 1429.
Enforceability of covenant against competition, ancillary to sale or other transfer of business, practice, or 
property, as affected by territorial extent of restriction.  46 A.L.R.2d 119.
Enforceability of covenant against competition, ancillary to sale or other transfer of business, practice, or 
property, as affected by duration of restriction.  45 A.L.R.2d 77.
Specific performance of provisions of separation agreement other than those for support or alimony.  44 
A.L.R.2d 1091.
Enforceability of restrictive covenant, ancillary to employment contract, as affected by territorial extent of 
restriction.  43 A.L.R.2d 94.
Validity and enforceability of agreement to drop or compromise will contest or withdraw objections to probate, or 
of agreement to induce others to do so.  42 A.L.R.2d 1319.
Rights and remedies under contract by party to procure insurance on his own life.  12 A.L.R.2d 983.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Injunctions 24
Specific Performance 12
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document