Restat 2d of Contracts, § 368
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 16- Remedies          
>            Topic 3- Enforcement by Specific Performance and Injunction        
§ 368 Effect of Power of Termination
(1) Specific performance or an injunction will not be granted against a party who can substantially 
nullify the effect of the order by exercising a power of termination or avoidance.
(2) Specific performance or an injunction will not be denied merely because the party seeking relief has 
a power to terminate or avoid his duty unless the power could be used, in spite of the order, to deprive 
the other party of reasonable security for the agreed exchange for his performance.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Power in party against whom relief is sought.  Specific performance or an injunction will not be granted 
against a party who, by exercising a power of termination or avoidance, can substantially nullify the effect of the 
order.  The power of termination or avoidance may be derived from a term of the agreement or from a rule of 
law.  If a term of the agreement allows the party to terminate at will so as to make his promise illusory, no 
contract is created and no question of enforcement arises.  See Comment e to § 2.  Even if the term requires 
that notice of termination be given some period of time before it takes effect, so that the promise is not illusory 
and the contract is enforceable, the period may be so short that specific performance or an injunction would be 
pointless.  If, however, the period is a substantial one, for example thirty days, and the performance that would 
have to be rendered during that period would be substantial even if notice were given immediately, equitable 
relief may properly be granted.  As to the situation in which the power can be exercised only at the cost of 
rendering some significant alternative performance, see Comment b to § 361.
Illustrations:
1.  A, a noted opera singer, contracts with B to sing exclusively at B's opera house for two seasons, reserving 
the power to terminate the contract at any time after the end of the first season by giving 24 hours' written 
notice.  A repudiates the contract when the second season is half over in order to sing at C's competing opera 
house, and B sues to enjoin A from doing so.  The injunction will not be granted.  If, however, A repudiates 
when the first season is half over, the injunction may be granted.
2.  A sells his business to B and makes a valid promise not to carry on a competing business, reserving the 
power to terminate his duty not to compete by paying B $ 50,000.  A repudiates his duty not to compete and 
threatens to operate a competing business, and B sues A to enjoin him from doing so.  The injunction may be 
granted, conditional on A not having paid the $ 50,000.
b.  Power in party seeking relief.  The existence of a power of termination or avoidance in the party who seeks 
specific performance or an injunction does not preclude such relief unless the power will seriously threaten the 
other party's security that the agreed exchange will be rendered.  This is a specific application of the general 
rule stated in § 363.  If the power is reserved by a term of the agreement, the court can protect the other party 
by providing that either the decree itself or the other party's performance shall extinguish the power.  If the party 
seeking relief has already rendered part performance or otherwise materially changed his position in reliance 
on the contract, this may give him a stronger economic interest in carrying out the agreement and thus increase 
the other party's security.  If the other party's security cannot be reasonably assured, however, equitable relief 
will be refused.
Illustrations:
3.  A, a minor, makes a contract to transfer a farm to B for $ 100,000.  B repudiates the contract and A sues B 
for specific performance.  Specific performance, even on condition of payment of the $ 100,000, will be refused 

§ 368 Effect of Power of Termination
if A has not reached the age of majority, unless the jurisdiction is one in which the court's decree is conclusive 
on A so as to terminate his power of avoidance.  After A reaches the age of majority and has ratified the 
contract, specific performance will be granted.
4.  A makes a contract with B under which B obtains rights to all the oil and gas that he can produce from A's 
land for 10 years and promises to sink specific wells and pay A a fixed royalty on all oil and gas produced.  The 
contract provides that B may at any time surrender his rights and terminate his duties on payment of $ 1.  After 
B has sunk one well, A repudiates the contract and threatens to make a similar contract with C.  B sues to 
enjoin A from interfering with his right to oil and gas as long as he continues to render substantial performance.  
The injunction may be granted.  The result would be different if A repudiated before any performance by B and 
there was no way reasonably to secure B's performance.
5.  A, a noted opera singer, contracts with B to sing exclusively at B's opera house during the coming season, B 
reserving the right to terminate the contract on 10 days' written notice.  A repudiates the contract when the 
season is half over, after having been paid for that part of the season, in order to sing at C's competing opera 
house, and B sues to enjoin A from singing at C's opera house.  The injunction may be granted, conditional on 
B's continued readiness and willingness to perform his part of the contract.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is based on former § 377.  Subsection (2) is based on former § 376.  See 5A Corbin, Contracts 
§§ 1201-02 (1964); 11 Williston, Contracts § 1442 (3d ed. 1968).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 377; see also Peru Wheel Co. v. Union Coal 
Co., 295 Ill. App. 276, 14 N.E.2d 998 (1938); Childs v. Columbia, 87 S.C. 566, 70 S.E. 296 (1911). Illustration 2 
is based on Illustration 3 to former § 377.
Comment b.  Illustrations 3 and 4 are based on Illustrations 1 and 4 to former § 376.  The first sentence of 
Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 376.  Illustration 5 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 376.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Comment Note. -- Employee's arbitrary dismissal as breach of employment contract terminable at will.  62 
A.L.R.3d 271.
Effect of attempt to terminate employment or agency contract upon shorter notice than stipulated in contract.  
96 A.L.R.2d 272.
Specific performance or injunctive relief against breach of contract, other than lease or agreement therefor, or 
contract for services, terminable by one party but not the other.  8 A.L.R.2d 1208.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Injunctions 57
Specific Performance 59
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document