Restat 2d of Contracts, § 379
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 16- Remedies          
>            Topic 5- Preclusion by Election and Affirmance        
§ 379 Election to Treat Duties of Performance Under Aleatory Contract as 
Discharged
If a right or duty of the injured party is conditional on an event that is fortuitous or is supposed by the 
parties to be fortuitous, he cannot treat his remaining duties to render performance as discharged on 
the ground of the other party's breach by non-performance if he does not manifest to the other party 
his intention to do so before any adverse change in the situation of the injured party resulting from the 
occurrence of that event or a material change in the probability of its occurrence.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Election under an aleatory contract.  An aleatory contract is one in which at least one party is under a duty 
that is conditional on the occurrence of an event that, so far as the parties to the contract are aware, is 
dependent on chance.  Its occurrence may be within the control of third persons or beyond the control of any 
person.  The event may have already occurred, as long as that fact is unknown to the parties.  It may be the 
failure of something to happen as well as its happening.  Common examples are contracts of insurance and 
suretyship, as well as gambling contracts.  If the injured party's duty is conditional on such an event, it would be 
unfair if, after the breach, he were allowed to take advantage of a material change in the likelihood of its 
occurrence when deciding whether to treat his remaining duties as discharged.  If it was more likely that it 
would occur it would be to his advantage to treat those duties as discharged.  For this reason, he is precluded 
from treating them as discharged if there has been an adverse change in his situation because the event has 
occurred or because there has been a material increase in the probability of its occurrence.  The same principle 
applies to the case where a right rather than a duty of the injured party is conditional on the occurrence of such 
an event.
Illustrations:
1.  A, an insurance company, issues to B a policy of fire insurance on B's house for a year in the amount of $ 
100,000.  In consideration, B gives A his promissory note for the premium, payable in three months.  B fails to 
pay the note at maturity.  Four months later, before A has given notice of cancellation, B's house burns.  A 
cannot treat B's failure to pay as discharging it from its duty to pay for the loss under the policy.  A is liable for 
the loss less the amount of the note.
2.  A makes a contract with B under which A guarantees that C will pay a $ 100,000 debt owed B by C and due 
on July 1.  In consideration, B promises to pay A $ 1,000 on May 1.  B fails to pay on that date.  Before A 
manifests to B his intention to treat B's failure as discharging him from his duty to honor his guarantee of C's 
debt, C becomes insolvent.  A cannot treat B's failure as discharging him from that duty and is liable on his $ 
100,000 guarantee less the $ 1,000.
3.  A and B make a contract under which A guarantees a $ 50,000 debt owed to B by C and due on July 1 in 
consideration of a guarantee by B of a $ 100,000 debt owed to A by D and due on August 1.  C fails to pay on 
July 1 and A fails to honor his guarantee.  Before B manifests his intention to treat A's failure as discharging B 
from his duty to honor his guarantee of D's debt, D becomes insolvent.  B cannot treat A's failure as discharging 
him from that duty and is liable on his $ 100,000 guarantee less the $ 50,000 that A owes on his guarantee.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 293.  See also former §§ 291, 292.  See 3A Corbin, Contracts § 730 (1960); 
5 Williston, Contracts §§ 683-88 (3d ed. 1961).

§ 379 Election to Treat Duties of Performance Under Aleatory Contract as Discharged
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 4 to former § 293.  Illustrations 2 and 3 are based on 
Illustrations 1 and 3 to former § 292.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 312
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document