Restat 2d of Contracts, § 383
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 16- Remedies          
>            Topic 5- Preclusion by Election and Affirmance        
§ 383 Avoidance in Part
A contract cannot be avoided in part except that where one or more corresponding pairs of part 
performances have been fully performed by one or both parties the rest of the contract can be avoided.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  No avoidance in part.  A party who has the power of avoidance must ordinarily avoid the entire contract, 
including any part that has already been performed.  He cannot disaffirm part of the contract that is particularly 
disadvantageous to himself while affirming a more advantageous part, and an attempt to do so is ineffective as 
a disaffirmance.  The rule stated in this Section does not preclude avoidance of only one of two or more entirely 
separate contracts.  Nor does it prevent reformation of a part of a contract for either mistake or 
misrepresentation.  See §§ 155 and 166.
Illustration:
1.  A makes a contract to work for B for a year and is induced by B's fraud to assent to a covenant under which 
he agrees to refrain from entering into a similar business in the same town for three years after the termination 
of the employment.  A discovers the fraud after he has worked for a month.  A cannot avoid the covenant not to 
compete without avoiding the rest of the contract.
b.  Exception for "divisible" contracts.  There is an exception to the general rule stated in this Section if the 
contract is "divisible" in the sense that the performances to be exchanged can be apportioned into 
corresponding pairs of part performances under the rule stated in § 240.  In that situation, if one or more pairs 
of part performances have been fully performed by one or both parties, the party who has the power of 
avoidance can avoid the rest of the contract only or can avoid the whole contract.
Illustration:
2.  A is induced by B's fraud to contract to sell B 1,200 tons of coal to be delivered in monthly installments of 
100 tons, payment for each installment to be made on delivery.  A discovers the fraud after the second delivery.  
If A avoids the contract, he must avoid the entire unperformed part, but he does not have to avoid the part that 
has been performed unless he chooses to do so.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section extends to avoidance on any ground the rule of former § 487, which was restricted to avoidance 
for misrepresentation.  See 5 Corbin, Contracts § 1114 (1964 & Supp. 1980); 12 Williston, Contracts § 1460 (3d 
ed. 1970).
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 487; cf.  Miner v. Bradley, 39 Mass. (22 Pick.) 
457 (1839).
Comment b.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 487; cf.  Alabama Football, Inc. v. Greenwood, 
452 F. Supp. 1191 (W.D. Pa. 1978) (frustration of purpose).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 98
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts

§ 383 Avoidance in Part
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document