Restat 2d of Contracts, § 66
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 5- Acceptance of Offers        
§ 66 Acceptance Must Be Properly Dispatched
An acceptance sent by mail or otherwise from a distance is not operative when dispatched, unless it is 
properly addressed and such other precautions taken as are ordinarily observed to insure safe 
transmission of similar messages.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  Under § 50, acceptance by promise is not effective until the offeree has completed every act 
essential to the making of the promise.  Reasonable diligence to notify is essential under § 56, except as stated 
in § 69.  It follows that, notwithstanding § 63, acceptance by mail or telegram is not effective on dispatch unless 
the acceptor exercises reasonable diligence to notify the offeror.  Compare the rules as to acceptance by 
performance stated in § 54.  This Section specifies what constitutes reasonable diligence: it would be most 
unusual for an offer to invite acceptance by the sending, for example, of a misdirected letter or telegram.
b.  Proper address.  The offeree may fulfill the requirement that an acceptance be properly addressed by using 
a return address indicated in the offer, whether in a letterhead or otherwise.  But any other place held out by the 
offeror as the place for receipt of such communications will do as well.  Compare Uniform Commercial Code § 
1-201(26).  Whether a reply to an offer may properly be sent to a residential address not specified in the 
negotiations depends on the circumstances.  If the acceptance is duly received despite misdirection, the rule of 
§ 67 may apply.
c.  Other precautions.  The other precautions to be taken depend on what is ordinarily observed to insure safe 
transmission of similar messages.  In cases of acceptance by mail, the postal regulations are ordinarily 
controlling on such matters as the necessity for prepayment of postage.  In unusual circumstances, however, 
as when the mails are stopped by war, reasonable diligence may require more than compliance with postal 
regulations.  Unless the offeror manifests a contrary intention, an acceptance is not effective on dispatch if the 
offeree knows or has reason to know that it will not reach the offeror.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section was former § 67.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 84 (3d ed. 1957).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 22(3)
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document