CHAPTER 2
THE PROCESS FOR DETERMINING GUILT

The subject matter of criminal law, broadly speaking, is the framework of rules and principles that defines certain conduct as crimes and determines the degree of punishment attached to any given instance of criminal behavior. Be-
cause the media tends to focus on the cases that go to trial, the image of this process is usually that of an adversarial battle in a courtroom, with opposing counsel putting forward their strongest arguments before a decision maker (a jury or a trial
judge) who resolves all disputed questions, in order to arrive at the decision that best reflects the requirements of established law.

But that image ignores the reality and complexity of how substantive law and punishment typically gets implemented. At crucial points, the binding force of this body of law is qualified, and may even be nullified completely, by discre-
tion. Discretion allows decisions concerning culpability and punishment to be made outside the ordinary doctrinal framework, in a process that often can be described as unilateral and administrative rather than adversarial and adjudicative.

“Discretion,” for present purposes, exists when the institutions charged with implementing criminal law doctrine are endowed with authority — legitimate authority — to ignore established rules and decide questions of liability and pun-
ishment on different grounds or on no particular grounds at all.

Acommon intuition is that formal adjudications of guilt at trial require stronger moral justification than charge dismissals because a dismissal confers leniency. The thought seems to be that decisions to impose pains and penalties
require better reasons and more oversight than decisions to withhold sanctions.

In assessing this intuition, two points must be stressed. First, as Professor Kenneth Culp Davis insisted, “the power to be lenient is the power to discriminate”2 so disparities in criminal justice outcomes are often a byproduct of accumu-
lated acts of discretion throughout the process. Second, whatever may have been true in the past, we can no longer describe charging discretion as simply the discretion to withhold deserved punishment. Criminal statutes now commonly permit
(or purport to require) draconian punishments that no one expects to be imposed in the typical case. Indeed, prisons are already filled to capacity and beyond capacity, even ina
world where the most severe available sentences are infrequently inflicted. “Leniency” has therefore become not merely common but a systemic imperative. Under these circumstances, the decision to “withhold leniency” is effectively a decision
to impose severe punishment, and to do so selectively, on grounds that need not be adjudicated or even disclosed.

Yet without discretion, criminal law would have even harsher impact than it does at present and might suffer disparities from too little individualization: Discrimination occurs not only when like cases are not treated alike but also when
dissimilar cases are treated alike. Striking the right balance between equal treatment and individualization is a dilemma throughout the substantive criminal law and its administration.

We will consider discretion at the punishment phase in Chapter 10.5 In this chapter, we focus on the discretion prosecutors have to bring a criminal case and select charges. With most cases resolved by plea instead of trial, this is the
key discretionary decision in the process. Indeed, scholars have documented that prosecutorial charging decisions have been a primary driver of the rise in incarceration in America.4

We begin with a general overview of how cases are typically processed before turning to a prosecutor's charging discretion and then plea bargaining. We will then consider the trial process.

A. AN OVERVIEW OF A CRIMINAL CASE

1. The initial stages of a case. (a) Investigation. Unless an arrest has been made at the scene, police must attempt to identify the perpetrator, and in all cases they must assemble sufficient evidence to prove guilt beyond a rea-
sonable doubt. Most large police departments have a corps of detectives who question victims, suspects, and witnesses; seek physical evidence at the crime scene; and undertake other investigative work. Often, however, the crime simply is not
solvable. In most cases, personal identification by a victim or witness is the only clue to the perpetrator’s identity. FBI statistics for 2014 indicate that of the violent crimes (murder, aggravated assault, forcible rape, and robbery) reported or other-
wise known to the police, only 45.5 percent were cleared by an arrest. Of the serious property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other larceny-thett), less than 20 percent

p78
p79
of offenses known to the police were cleared. For cities with a population of more than 1 million, only 15 percent of serious property offenses were cleared, and only 29 percent of rape cases were cleared.S

(b) Dismissal and diversion. In roughly half of the cases initiated by an arrest, the case is eventually dismissed at an early stage, either by the police, a prosecutor, or a magistrate. Some suspects avoid prosecution because they are
not guilty, or cannot be proved guilty, either because they did not commit the acts in question or because they have a legally acceptable explanation for committing them. Often, however, offenders who could be convicted are released simply
because police or prosecutors are too busy to pursue their cases. In other instances, police or prosecutors decline to proceed because an offender appears to have mental, emotional, or social problems that can be better dealt with by official
agencies, private organizations, or individuals outside the criminal justice process. First-time offenders are often dealt with in this way, as are those who commit minor offenses such as shoplifting (if restitution has been made), statutory rape (when
both parties are young), and automobile theft (when committed by teenagers solely for the purpose of joyriding).

In many jurisdictions, these dismissals sometimes have a more formal character. Defendants may be placed in a “pretrial diversion” program that requires them to meet certain conditions (such as attending a drug or alcohol treatment
program or an anger management class) and to avoid re-arrest for a designated period, usually a year. Defendants who complete such a program successfully then qualify to have all charges formally dismissed; those who fail the program have
their cases reopened.

Since 2014 in New York, prosecutors recommend pretrial diversion for most prostitution defendants. These defendants appear in Human Trafficking Intervention Courts and must attend trauma counseling sessions with service
providers to have their cases dismissed. The courts were created to identify and provide resources to survivors of human trafficking. However, this diversion program has come under criticism for conflating voluntary sex work with trafficking, and
for failing to collect data that could point to the program's success or failure.°

(c) Pretrial release. Most arrestees brought into a magistrate’s court are released (or convicted and sentenced) within 24 hours of their arrest. The remainder may wait weeks or months for the disposition of their cases, depending on
the prosecutor's workload, the complexity of the case, and the calendar of the judge assigned to hear it. Usually, the magistrate who conducts this initial proceeding decides whether to release the defendant pending further proceedings. Tradition-
ally, the device most often used to free untried defendants and at the same time assure their appearance

p79
p80
for trial was money bail. In this system, still in use in many areas, the court fixes the amount of a bond to be posted in cash or by a secured pledge; defendants able to post the required amount win their release and recover the sum upon appear-
ance for trial. Defendants unable to raise the required amount usually attempt to secure the services of a bail-bond agency, which posts the necessary bond in return for a fixed fee, typically 10 percent of the total bail. In this system, the agency's
obligations are satisfied upon the defendant's appearance, but the defendant has to pay the 10 percent charge in any event. Some jurisdictions have tried to eliminate the need for a bail-bond agency by allowing the defendant to post 10 percent
of the face amount of the bail bond directly with the court, and most or all of that sum is refundable when the defendant appears for trial. But even small amounts can prove to be too much for many poor defendants. In New York City, for example,

only 21 percent of arrestees in 2010 were able to make bail for amounts less than $500.7 In 2020, Layleen Polanco, a transgender Latina sex worker, died on Rikers Island after spending nearly two months in jail because she could not afford the
$501 bail set on her case.

The money bail system is unsatisfactory in many respects. It results in confinement of large numbers of untried defendants, solely on account of inability to raise the required amounts. A White House brief notes that all too often it re-
sults in “detaining the poorest rather than the most dangerous defendants before trial.”2 And in many localities, the relationships between bail-bond agencies and court officials have been a source of malfeasance and corruption.

Pretrial detention has individual and social costs. On the individual level, pretrial detention jeopardizes employment, housing, and the ability to receive government assistance. One study estimates $18,000 in lost earnings over the work-
life of a detained defendant. Pretrial release decreases the likelihood of conviction by approximately 14 percent, because incarceration makes preparing for trial more difficult.1° Detained defendants’ families are also affected. On an administrative
level, taxpayers internalize the costs of defendants’ food and housing for the duration of pretrial detention. Acknowledging these costs, progressive district attorneys are limiting bail recommendations. In San Francisco, DA Chesa Boudin has in-
stituted an office policy that seeks to completely eliminate cash bail.!2

During the 1960s and 1970s, bail-reform projects were initiated in numerous cities around the country. The principal aims of these projects were to ascertain the kinds of community ties that would make defendants safe candidates for
release without financial guarantees, to establish procedures for expeditiously collecting

p80

pst
the information necessary to identify these defendants, and to develop a better system of financial guarantees for defendants who could not qualify for release on any other basis. Pretrial release projects are now operational in more than 100 cities.
They help the local magistrates to identify defendants who can be released without money bail and often follow up with defendants to help ensure that they return for any scheduled appearances. Nevertheless, traditional money bail survives in
many localities as the primary avenue of pretrial release.

The Bail Reform Act of 1984, 18 U.S.C. §§1341-1350, expressly authorizes preventive detention prior to trial in federal criminal prosecutions, on a finding that “no condition or conditions [of release] will reasonably assure the appear-
ance of the [defendant] as required and the safety of any other person and the community.” §3142(e). The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of these preventive detention provisions in United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739 (1987). Partly
as a result, pretrial detention in the federal courts has been rising sharply since the 1990s. In 1996, 34 percent of federal defendants were detained prior to trial, but for cases filed during 2012, 77 percent of the defendants were detained until their
trials.19

Today, unconvicted defendants comprise about two-thirds of the national jail population.!4 Studies suggest that Blacks and Hispanics are much more likely to be detained than white defendants facing similar charges.15 Detention rates
in state court remain significant but have not increased substantially since the reforms of the 1970s; in 2006, 42 percent of the felony defendants in large urban counties were detained prior to trial. Again, there are disturbing indications that minor-
ity defendants must meet higher bail and are more likely to be detained than similarly situated whites.1° Bail amounts for Black defendants are on average $9,928 higher than for white defendants.2 When setting bail, judges have discretion to eval-
uate a defendant's flight risk and danger to the community, determinations that likely rely on racial stereotypes and biases.1° Even in jurisdictions that have implemented pretrial reforms, there continue to be racial disparities in pretrial detention.12

Russell Gold highlights how this contrasts with civil litigation, where any form of pretrial relief is viewed as ‘an extraordinary remedy.” He argues that, “Jn criminal law, where liberty is at stake and we purportedly presume defendants
innocent until proven guilty, we should expect to see at least the same degree of caution before imposing a prejudgment deprivation.” But, on the contrary, “[i]nstead of treating prejudgment relief as extraordinary as the civil system does, criminal
law deprives defendants of their liberty before trial as its default position.” Russell M.

pet

p.82
Gold, Paying for Pretrial Detention 98 N.C. L. Rev. 1257, 1258-1259 (2020). Are there other differences between civil and criminal cases that might be sufficient to justify the contrast Professor Gold highlights? Are the risks of unwisely denying a
pre-adjudication remedy comparable in the two settings?

2. The guilty plea. Most convictions — more than 90 percent in most jurisdictions — are not the result of adjudications at trial but of guilty pleas, often obtained by negotiation over the charge or the sentence.20 A plea negotiation can
involve lengthy conferences in which the relevant facts and applicable legal defenses are explored in detail. More often, however, the guilty plea discussion involves little more than a hurried conversation in a courthouse hallway or even a prosecu-
tor's quick “take it or leave it” offer to defense counsel. In some courts, there are no explicit negotiations at all, but most defendants plead guilty nonetheless, usually in the expectation that their plea will win them some leniency from the sentencing
judge. The negotiation process between prosecutors and defense lawyers, a crucially important feature of the American criminal justice system, is explored in greater detail in Section B below. Prosecutorial charging decisions (and the sentencing
consequences that follow) are a main driver — if not the main driver — of mass incarceration. In a world of guilty pleas and few trials, that means the plea stage is the critical point in the process, a stage where prosecutors are the actors in charge.

3. The trial. Cases decided at trial are a small fraction of the total. In one study, 96 percent of the cases filed were resolved by guilty plea, dismissal, or pretrial diversion; only 4 percent of the defendants went to trial, and only 1 percent
were acquitted.2! In 2019, 90 percent of federal cases were resolved through guilty pleas, 8 percent were dismissed, and only 2 percent of cases went to trial. Of the cases that went to trial, only 13 percent resulted in acquittals.22 But the excep-
tional, fully adjudicated cases establish standards that influence much of what happens in matters that never reach the trial stage. The legal rules that define crimes and defenses, the effectiveness of prosecutors, the attitudes of judges, and the
conviction propensities of juries all have an impact (how much of an impact is an important, much debated question) on decisions whether to arrest, charge, dismiss, divert before trial, and bargain over a plea.

4, Sentencing. Although the adjudication of guilt in contested cases is an elaborately formal procedure, the determination of punishment for convicted offenders is much less formal, and it can even be exceedingly informal. We exam-
ine the sentencing process in depth in Chapter 10, infra.

5. The flow of cases through the criminal justice system. The chart presented on the following page2® sets forth in graphic form the flow of cases through the agencies of criminal justice. It dramatically illustrates the filtering
process that winnows out the vast majority of cases prior to trial.

p.82
p.83
A General View of the Criminal Justice System
‘Threat pre sing yet compre view te movement of te hn he inne nem. Prostar nnd jn vay fom hepato ee
roms
ve na anc? \.
ia oe ol oe
= i =
— = no
es — ay —™
pT “Guctgamescrp tee’ “oramammetyites” "yy oni \S
tieeecitaseer Ge emSecY « Goxeaeaaant © Seu —\ateesmirente tipaenaeesieontind
i mar St ES Seiemetes: eet
SESS SESSTSTS AREER emma emanate
= ee eget te ee
eae cRESS

p83
pes
B. PROSECUTORS’ DISCRETION AND THE DECISION TO CHARGE
The key gatekeeping decision in whether a case moves forward after arrest is the prosecutor's charging decision. We will thus consider what political and judicial limits exist on this critical power.
INTRODUCTORY NOTES

1. The existence of discretion. The rules of professional responsibility permit prosecutors to file criminal charges only when they can establish “probable cause,” and usually the prosecutor will file charges only when there is legally
admissible evidence sufficient to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.2S Are there situations where prosecutors should file charges when they have probable cause but are concerned whether a jury will find the defendant guilty? Consider the
rape allegations against Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the former head of the International Monetary Fund. A maid at a hotel where Strauss-Kahn was staying alleged that he sexually assaulted her. At the time the alleged assault was initially reported,
prosecutors believed the maid’s story. Later, however, several facts undermined the housekeeper's credibility, including her ties to individuals with drug convictions, false information on her immigration forms, and recordings where she discussed
a desire to profit from the allegations. The prosecutors ultimately dismissed the charges, stating that “for generations, before determining whether a case should proceed to trial, felony prosecutors in New York County have insisted that they be
personally convinced beyond a reasonable doubt of the defendant's guilt, and believe themselves able to prove that guilt to a jury.”28 Because prosecutors did not believe the complainant beyond a reasonable doubt, their view was they could “not
ask a jury to do so.”27

The ABA proposed but did not pass a revised standard that would have comported with the standard applied by the prosecutors in the Strauss-Kahn case, requiring prosecutors to dismiss charges when they “reasonably believel] that
proof of guilt beyond reasonable doubt is lacking.” Standards for Criminal Justice: Prosecution Function §3-5.5(c) (Proposed Revisions 2009).22 Does a standard that requires prosecutors themselves to believe in guilt beyond a reasonable doubt

pes

p85
properly protect defendants’ rights, or does it risk disadvantaging certain types of victims when credibility is a central issue in the case? The Department of Justice authorizes prosecutors to bring charges when they have “probable cause” that a
person committed a federal offense. Justice Manual §9-27-200. That threshold has been criticized as too low “barring exceptional circumstances such as the need to interdict an immediate threat to public safety or national security.” Anthony S.
Barkow & Beth George, Prosecuting Political Defendants, 44 Ga. L. Rev. 953, 1014-1015 (2010). Are those exceptions warranted? Are there other circumstances where probable cause should be sufficient?

These issues have been at the core in many cases involving police killings of unarmed civilians. Consider the fatal police shooting of 12-year-old Tamir Rice, who was playing with a toy gun in a Cleveland park. A 911 caller reported
seeing Rice brandishing the gun, but the dispatch operator failed to tell the responding officers that the caller also noted that Rice was probably a juvenile and that the gun was probably fake. The officers responded to the call by driving their car
within a few feet from Rice, and allegedly one officer started shooting even before the car had come to a complete stop, without issuing Rice a warning or observing furtive movements. A Cleveland judge viewing a video of the encounter found that
there was probable cause to charge the shooting officer with murder, involuntary manslaughter, reckless homicide, and dereliction of duty, and to charge the shooting officer's partner with negligent homicide and dereliction of duty. Richard Pérez-
Pefia & Mitch Smith, Cleveland Judge Finds Probable Cause to Charge Officers in Tamir Rice Death, N.Y. Times, June 11, 2015. The Cleveland prosecutor ultimately recommended to a grand jury that they not indict the officers because in his view
“the law gives the benefit of the doubt to officers who must make split second decisions.” Timothy Williams & Mitch Smith, Cleveland Officer Will Not Face Charges in Tamir Rice Shooting Death, N.Y. Times, Dec. 28, 2015.

QUESTIONS: Is the Cleveland prosecutor correct that charges in circumstances like these are inappropriate because the benefit of the doubt should go to the officer? Is it appropriate for the prosecutor to play such a large gatekeeping role?
Or should cases involving fatal police shootings of unarmed civilians be charged whenever there is probable cause, so that jurors can resolve these cases on a full trial record? One scholar argues that prosecutors have a duty to charge the most

culpable offenders in police shootings because those cases implicate core democratic principles of equality and fairness. See Rebecca Roiphe, The Duty to Charge in Police Use of Excessive Force Cases, 65 Clev. St. L. Rev. 503 (2017). Are police
shooting cases uniquely associated with democratic values, or are those concerns implicated in other criminal cases as well (for example, in any case involving public corruption or alleged criminal activity by an elected official)?

Is this standard (charge when there is probable cause) appropriate for criminal cases generally? Is it right to confront a defendant with the pressures of plea bargaining (and/or the costs and stress of a trial) when a prosecutor concludes
that, despite probable cause, guilt beyond a reasonable doubt probably cannot be proved?

Even when there is evidence that prosecutors believe shows guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, they still often choose not to pursue all legally sustainable charges. Two reasons commonly offered are limited available enforcement re-
sources and the need to individualize justice. See Wayne R. LaFave, The Prosecutor's Discretion in

p85

p86
the United States, 18 Am. J. Comp. L. 532, 533 (1970). Josh Bowers argues that prosecutors are well positioned to assess the first but not the second. Prosecutors understand the office's strategic priorities and resource limits, but there are rea-
sons to doubt their ability “to reach commonsense determinations of whether defendants normatively ought to be charged.” Josh Bowers, Legal Guilt, Normative Innocence, and the Equitable Decision Not to Prosecute, 110 Colum. L. Rev. 1655,
1657 (2010).

Why might prosecutors be ill positioned to make assessments about individual blameworthiness? Would it be more appropriate for prosecutors to take into account more systemic concerns, such as racial disparities, in deciding to
decline charges? One commentator argues that, given the overburdened penal system, prosecutors should decline to prosecute entire classes of minor offenses when they are the result of policing strategies that disproportionately target people
of color. K. Babe Howell, Prosecutorial Discretion and the Duty to Seek Justice in an Overburdened Criminal Justice System, 27 Geo. J. Legal Ethics 285 (2014). Many recently elected prosecutors are doing just that. For example, Larry Krasner, the
District Attorney in Philadelphia, directed the prosecutors in his office to no longer charge marijuana possession, possession of marijuana paraphernalia, or prostitution (if the person has fewer than three prior prostitution convictions). See Angela
J. Davis, Reimaging Prosecution: A Growing Progressive Movement, 3 UCLA Crim. Just. L. Rev. 1, 11 (2019). Similarly, Chesa Boudin, the District Attorney in San Francisco, has committed not to bring charges in cases of prostitution or public
urination. James Walker, San Francisco's New DA Will Not Prosecute Prostitution, Public Urination Cases: “We Must Think Differently,” Newsweek, Nov. 13, 2019, https://www.newsweek.com/san-francisco-district-attorney-public-urination-
prostitution-not-prosecute-1471475, Are these appropriate prosecutorial decisions, or do they amount to nullification of duly enacted laws? For a discussion of possible judicial challenges to categorical decisions not to prosecute, see infra p. 99.

Are there other discretionary steps that prosecutors can take to address the political dynamic that produces “overcriminalization”? Legislators have many incentives to cast criminal prohibitions in broad terms and to authorize severe
punishments. Legislation expanding the reach of the criminal law and raising penalties is relatively easy to enact and often virtually impossible to repeal. See William J. Stuntz, The Pathological Politics of Criminal Law, 100 Mich. L. Rev. 505 (2001).
This one-way ratchet produces an ever-expanding body of criminal prohibitions that often overlap and that contain ever-increasing sanctions. Such laws presuppose discretion because legislators know that there are not enough resources to.
prosecute all violators, and in many cases the sentence authorized would be grossly disproportionate to behavior that falls within the letter, if not the spirit, of the law.

QUESTIONS: If we were designing a penal system from scratch, would it be better to narrow the reach of criminal law and provide resources sufficient to permit consistent, full enforcement? Or would prosecutorial discretion remain desirable
(and perhaps impossible to eliminate) in any event?

Even if enforcement discretion is inevitable, not every legal system accepts the kind of broad, unstructured discretion commonly found in the United States. Is it desirable to channel prosecutorial discretion by formal standards and to
control it by some system of supervision or review? Consider the Notes that follow.

2. Standards. What factors justify a decision not to prosecute a legally provable case? The current standards of the American Bar Association (ABA) recommend that prosecutors consider a long list of factors: the strength of the
evidence,

p86
p.87

the harm caused, the prosecutor's doubt of guilt, the potential collateral impact on third parties, the possible disproportion between the authorized punishment and the gravity of a particular crime, the defendant's willingness to cooperate in the
prosecution of others, the fair and efficient distribution of prosecutorial resources, whether public interests might be vindicated by any available civil, administrative, or private remedies, and the likelihood of prosecution in another jurisdiction.22
Recent revisions to the ABA Standards also include additional factors, such as “the background and characteristics of the offender,” and “the possible influence of any cultural, ethnic, socioeconomic or other improper biases.”2° Were these revi-
sions advisable? Would failing to consider these factors ignore important differences between offenders that should be considered in making charging decisions? Or are the standards so malleable as to lead to disparate results in similarly situated
cases based on the varying views of the prosecutors applying the standards? For the latter view, see Bennett L. Gershman, Prosecutorial Decisionmaking and Discretion in the Charging Function, 62 Hastings LJ. 1259, 1276 (2011).

For federal prosecutors, the Justice Manual lists in some detail the circumstances to be considered in making decisions to charge, but many are obvious (e.g., the strength of the evidence) and all are essentially open-ended, nonbinding
examples of factors to be weighed.°! A few U.S. Attorneys and local prosecutors have more specific rules for handling recurring issues, such as the appropriate charging of various kinds of assault, theft, and drug cases. See, e.g., Ronald Wright &
Mare Miller, The Screening/Bargaining Tradeoff, 55 Stan. L. Rev. 29 (2002) (describing charging standards in New Orleans). Most, however, give their subordinates no rule books or manuals sufficiently concrete to constrain the front-line prosecu-
tor's discretion to do whatever she thinks best. What are the advantages and disadvantages of establishing detailed standards in advance?

When a prosecutor's office has established detailed charging guidelines, as some scholars recommend, °2 should it then make those guidelines available to the general public and the defense bar? Will publication allow wrongdoers to
exploit loopholes? But without publication, can consistency and political accountability be achieved? For a discussion, see Norman Abrams, Internal Policy: Guiding the Exercise of Prosecutorial Discretion, 19 UCLA L. Rev. 1, 34 (1971).

These issues arose in Britain when a woman asked the Director of Public Prosecutions whether the prosecutor would bring charges against the woman's husband if he helped her travel to Switzerland for physician-assisted suicide
(which is permitted there). The Director declined to answer, but the House of Lords ordered the Director to provide guidance on his “general approach towards the exercise of his discretion regarding the prosecution of this most sensitive and dis-
tressing class

ps7
p88
of cases.” Regina (Purdy) v. Director of Public Prosecutions, [2009] UKHL 45, 76. The Director did so, after first submitting a draft policy for public comment. See p. 902 infra for a description of the final policy statement.
QUESTIONS: Should courts in the United States similarly require prosecutors to provide guidance in advance when the scope of a law is unclear? Is the case of assisted suicide and end-of-life decision making unique because of the heightened
risk of evasion and/or the importance of the rights at stake, or is the need for advance planning and notice sufficiently strong in other situations as well? Regardless of whether the ultimate guidelines are published, is obtaining public comment on
enforcement policies a good idea for prosecutors?

3. Federal versus state prosecution. The last factor mentioned in the ABA Standards — the likelihood of prosecution in another jurisdiction — is especially important for federal prosecutors, because many of the most important
federal crimes (drug distribution, firearms offenses, bank robbery, and mail fraud) also can be charged as state crimes and prosecuted by local district attorneys. State penalties, however, typically are much lower. Indeed, the decision to bring
a federal case is often driven by the desire to obtain a longer sentence than could be obtained in state court. Rachel E. Barkow, Federalism and Criminal Law: What the Feds Can Learn from the States, 109 Mich. L. Rev. 519, 573-578 (2011). As
a result, the decision to refer a case for state rather than federal prosecution can be as significant as the decision whether to prosecute the case at all. See Daniel C. Richman, Federal Criminal Law, Congressional Delegation, and Enforcement
Discretion, 46 UCLA L. Rev. 757 (1999). Should there be formal criteria to determine when federal prosecutors take the lead in cases of overlapping federal/state crimes? Is the difference in punishment an appropriate basis for federal jurisdiction?
What should be done to ensure that any criteria established are consistently applied? The important issue of potential racial bias in the decision to charge a federal rather than a state crime is explored in connection with United States v. Armstrong,
p. 102 infra.

What should federal prosecutors do when the conduct at issue constitutes a federal crime, but the state expressly disagrees with the decision to criminalize the conduct? Thirty-six states allow the use of marijuana for medicinal
purposes, and 16 states and the District of Columbia authorize marijuana for recreational use. These state policies conflict with federal law, which criminalizes all use of marijuana. The Department of Justice issued memos providing guidance to
federal prosecutors to help them decide when conduct that is legal under state law should nevertheless be prosecuted federally.2° But critics argue that these memos speak

p88

p89
in such broad terms that individual federal prosecutors have too much discretion to make their own decisions about whether to bring cases. Should prosecutorial charging decisions that implicate fundamental issues of federalism be subject to
special oversight, such as requiring special authorization from Main Justice before a case can move forward? Or is this discretionary decision no more troublesome than the many other decisions vested with prosecutors?

4, Internal review and office design. The difficulty some newly elected prosecutors have had implementing a reform agenda highlights the importance of internal office management and the ability line attorneys often have to avoid
close supervision of their decisions. In some prosecutors’ offices, supervisors systematically review the charging recommendations of front-line prosecutors. See, e.g., Wright & Miller, supra. In offices with this approach, district attorneys can shift
course in the office more easily by assigning people who share their vision to these supervisory positions. In most offices, however, the charging decision is left to the assistant district attorney assigned to the case. These front-line prosecutors are
often inexperienced and suffer from what Ronald F. Wright and Kay L. Levine call “Young Prosecutor's Syndrome,” which is a tendency to be overly aggressive and adversarial in charging decisions. Wright & Levine, The Cure for Young Prosecu-
tors’ Syndrome, 56 Ariz. L. Rev. 1065 (2014). In addition, if those who investigate a case also make the charging decision, there are reasons to doubt whether they can objectively review the evidence.°4 Despite these concerns, supervisory review
of front-line prosecutors’ charging recommendations is typically perfunctory or nonexistent. This tradition seems to have developed without much conscious thought about its merits. One senior federal prosecutor claimed that his “office cannot
hire excellent attorneys unless they are granted unfettered control over their cases.” See Stephen J. Schulhofer & Ilene H. Nagel, Plea Negotiations Under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, 91 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1284, 1295 (1997) (expressing doubt
about whether the problem was as significant as the prosecutor claimed). Another — more plausible — explanation may simply be that supervisory review takes time. The charging decision is only the first step in a potentially lengthy process of
examining and reexamining a case. Doesn't the initial charging decision, by itself, have implications sufficiently important to justify the resources required for a systematic process of review? If supervisory review is too resource intensive, another
option is to change the allocation of responsibilities within offices so that more senior attorneys who do not suffer from “Young Prosecutors’ Syndrome” make the initial charging decisions.°5

p89
p90

5. Alternatives to outright dismissal and formal charges. Prosecutors do not face the strictly binary choice of dismissing cases outright or bringing charges. They can also elect to defer their prosecution decisions or make a dis-
missal contingent on the defendant participating in a pretrial diversion program. These arrangements, which are sometimes called deferred prosecution agreements, emerged in the early twentieth century and have primarily been used in relatively
minor misdemeanor cases, particularly with juveniles and individuals with no criminal record. Peter R. Reilly, Justice Deferred Is Justice Denied: We Must End Our Failed Experiment in Deferring Corporate Criminal Prosecutions, 2015 BYU L. Rev.
307, 314. Some offices, however, have made pretrial diversion available in more serious cases. The Brooklyn District Attorney, for example, offers a pretrial diversion option to young people in gun cases. Emily Bazelon, Charged: The New Move-
ment to Transform American Prosecution and End Mass Incarceration 30 (2019). Most pretrial diversion often requires defendants to participate in programming to address underlying mental health or substance abuse issues. The requirements
for diversion vary office by office, with some jurisdictions requiring a defendant to plead guilty before participating, and later dismissing the charges upon successful completion. Others do not require an admission of guilt. For a survey of pretrial
diversion programs, see Center for Health and Justice at Treatment Alternatives for Safe Communities, A National Survey of Criminal Justice Diversion Programs and Initiatives (2013), https://www.centerforhealthandjustice.ora/tascblog/Images/
documents/Publications/CHJ%20Diversion%20Report_web.pdf.

6. Independent checks. Should some institution independent of the prosecution have power to ensure that charging decisions in fact conform to applicable office guidelines or other legitimate charging criteria? Aside from the trial
process, there are few additional mechanisms to police prosecutorial overreaching or misconduct in bringing charges. State bars almost never impose sanctions; criminal charges are virtually unheard of, even when the prosecutorial misconduct is
egregious; and civil suits typically fail because of a court-created doctrine conferring absolute immunity on prosecutors when their misconduct is associated with “the judicial phase of the criminal process.” Imbler v. Pachtman, 424 U.S. 409, 430
(1976). As discussed below, selective and vindictive prosecution is similarly difficult to establish. Does the trial process adequately prevent such misconduct? Or should the system do more to check against prosecutorial overcharging?

What remedies, if any, should be available in the opposite situation, where a prosecutor drops a readily provable case or fails to bring charges in the first place? Consider the material that follows.

Inmates of Attica Correctional Facility v. Rockefeller
United States Court of Appeals, Second Circuit
477 F.2d 375 (1973)

MansFieLo, J.: [Plaintiffs] are certain present and former inmates of New York State’s Attica Correctional Facility (“Attica”) [and] the mother of an inmate who was killed when Attica was retaken after the inmate uprising in September
1971... The complaint alleges that before, during, and after the prisoner revolt .. . [which
p.90
pot
resulted in the killing of 29 inmates and 10 civilians who were held hostage by the inmates, as well as the wounding of many others] the defendants, including the Governor of New York, the State Commissioner of Correctional Services, . . . and
other officials, either committed, conspired to commit, or aided and abetted in the commission of various crimes against the complaining inmates. . . . It is charged [that] State Police, Troopers, and Correction Officers . . . intentionally killed some
of the inmate victims without provocation during the recovery of Attica, that state officers . . . assaulted and beat prisoners after the prison had been successfully retaken . . . and that medical assistance was maliciously denied to over 400 inmates
wounded during the recovery of the prison.

The complaint further alleges that [a Deputy State Attorney General specially appointed by the Governor] to investigate [these crimes] “has not investigated, nor does he intend to investigate, any crimes committed by state officers.” ...
With respect to the sole federal defendant, the United States Attorney for the Western District of New York, the complaint simply alleges that he has not arrested, investigated, or instituted prosecutions against any of the state officers accused of
criminal violation of plaintiffs’ federal civil rights. . . . [Plaintiffs request relief in the nature of mandamus (1) against state officials, requiring the State of New York to submit a plan for the independent and impartial investigation and prosecution of
the offenses charged .. . and (2) against the United States Attorney, requiring him to investigate, arrest and prosecute the same state officers for having committed the federal offenses. . . .

The motions of the federal and state defendants to dismiss the complaint [were granted by the court below]. .. .

[Wie believe that even if [the plaintiffs] may properly present their claims for judicial resolution, they seek relief which cannot, in this case at least, be granted either against the state or federal prosecuting authorities.

With respect to the defendant United States Attorney, plaintiffs seek mandamus to compel him to investigate and institute prosecutions against state officers. . . . Federal mandamus is, of course, available only “to compel an officer or
employee of the United States . . . to perform a duty owed to the plaintiff.” 28 U.S.C. §1361. And [federal courts have] uniformly refrained from overturning, at the instance of a private person, discretionary decisions of federal prosecuting authori-
ties not to prosecute persons regarding whom a complaint of criminal conduct is made. This judicial reluctance to direct federal prosecutions at the instance of a private party . .. has been applied even in cases such as the present one where...
serious questions are raised as to the protection of the civil rights and physical security of a definable class of victims. . . .

The primary ground upon which this traditional judicial aversion to compelling prosecutions has been based is the separation of powers doctrine. . .. Although a leading commentator has criticized this [doctrine as] incompatible with the
normal function of the judiciary in reviewing for abuse or arbitrariness administrative acts that fall within the discretion of executive officers, K.C. Davis, Administrative Law Treatise §28.16(4) at 982-990 (1970 Supp.), he has also recognized .. . that
the manifold imponderables which enter into the prosecutor's decision to prosecute or not to prosecute make the choice not readily amenable to judicial supervision.

p.ot
p.92

In the absence of statutorily defined standards, . . . the problems inherent in the task of supervising prosecutorial decisions do not lend themselves to resolution by the judiciary. . . . In the normal case of review of executive acts of
discretion, the administrative record is open, public and reviewable on the basis of what it contains. The decision not to prosecute, on the other hand, may be based upon the insufficiency of the available evidence, in which event the secrecy of the
grand jury and of the prosecutor's file may serve to protect the accused’s reputation from public damage based upon insufficient, improper, or even malicious charges. [Review would not be meaningful without access by the complaining party to
the evidence before the grand jury or U.S. Attorney. . .. Any person, merely by filing a complaint [alleging] unlawful failure to prosecute, could gain access to the prosecutor's file and the grand jury’s minutes, notwithstanding the secrecy normally
attaching to the latter by law.

Nor is it clear what the judiciary's role of supervision should be were it to undertake such a review. At what point would the prosecutor be entitled to call a halt to further investigation as unlikely to be productive? . .. How much judgment
would the United States Attorney be allowed? . . . With limited personnel and facilities at his disposal, what priority would the prosecutor be required to give to cases in which investigation or prosecution was directed by the court? . . . On balance,
we believe that substitution of a court's decision to compel prosecution for the U.S. Attorney's decision not to prosecute, even upon an abuse of discretion standard of review and even if limited to directing that a prosecution be undertaken in
good faith, would be unwise.

Plaintiffs urge, however, that Congress withdrew the normal prosecutorial discretion for the kind of conduct alleged here by providing in 42 U.S.C. §1987 that the United States Attorneys are “authorized and required . . . to institute
prosecutions against all persons violating any of [the criminal statutes protecting civil rights]” (emphasis supplied). . . . This contention must be rejected. The mandatory nature of the word “required” as it appears in §1987 is insufficient to evince a
broad Congressional purpose to bar the exercise of executive discretion in the prosecution of federal civil rights crimes. Similar mandatory language is contained in [many statutes]. Such language has never been thought to preclude the exercise
of prosecutorial discretion. . ..

With respect to the state defendants, plaintiffs . . . have pointed to no statutory language even arguably creating any mandatory duty upon the state officials to bring such prosecutions. To the contrary, New York law reposes in its
prosecutors a discretion to decide whether or not to prosecute in a given case, which is not subject to review in the state courts. . . . The serious charge that the state's investigation is proceeding against inmates but not against state officers, if
shown to be accurate, might lead the Governor to supplement or replace those presently in charge of the investigation. . . . But the gravity of the allegation does not reduce the inherent judicial incapacity to supervise. . . .

The order of the district court is affirmed.

NOTES ON CHECKING THE DECISION NOT TO PROSECUTE
1. Special prosecutors. The Attica case involved at least the appearance of a potential conflict of interest (and many would say an actual conflict of interest) for the state prosecutors, because they were part of the same government
as the
p.92
p93
corrections officers being investigated. Indeed, Heather Ann Thompson describes state government efforts to impede the investigation of what happened when state troopers and corrections officers regained control of the prison. Thompson
argues that there was ample evidence to indict various officers for murder, including evidence of torture, physical evidence that some incarcerated people had been shot multiple times at close range, and witness statements that some incarcer-
ated people had been seen alive immediately after the takeover but were later found dead. See Heather Ann Thompson, Blood in the Water: The Attica Prison Uprising of 1971 and Its Legacy (2016).

Aconcem with a conflict of interest is not unique to dramatic situations like the Attica uprising. In many cases, an actual or perceived conflict of interest might give one reason to doubt whether a prosecutor can make a fair assessment
of whether to bring charges because the prospective defendant is a government employee or has some other connection to the prosecutor's office. Because prosecutors work in partnership with their local police department on a daily basis, some
have argued that this situation presents a paradigmatic situation where there is an inherent conflict of interest. Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleve & Somil Trivedi, To Serve and Protect Each Other: How Police-Prosecutor Codependence Enables Police
Misconduct, 100 B.U. L. Rev. 895 (2020); Kate Levine, Who Shouldn't Prosecute the Police, 101 lowa L. Rev. 1447 (2016). To some, that conflict creates a “compelling need for an independent special prosecutor to handle such cases from start to
finish.” Jay Sterling Silver, Fixing the Conflict of Interest at the Core of Police Brutality Case, Wash. Post., Dec. 4, 2014. For a discussion of the limitations of appointing special prosecutors, see Bruce Green & Rebecca Roiphe, Rethinking Prosecu-
tors’ Conflicts of Interest, 58 B.C. L. Rev. 463, 507-510 (2017).

Special prosecutors — appointed to handle specific matters where the prosecutor normally assigned the case has an actual or perceived conflict — have been used in other contexts. At the federal level, the Ethics in Government Act
was passed to deal with this situation by allowing a panel of three federal judges to appoint a special prosecutor (known as the “Independent Counsel”) to pursue charges against high officials of the federal executive branch, with guarantees
against interference or control by the attorney general.®5 In Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654 (1988), the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of this regime against a separation-of-powers challenge, despite the fact that the Act restricted the
President's power to remove these prosecutors.

This provision of the Ethics in Government Act lapsed in 1999, and there is currently no federal statute requiring the appointment of a special prosecutor in high-profile political cases. The attorney general nonetheless retains, and on
occasion has exercised, the discretion to appoint a special prosecutor, outside the ordinary Justice Department chain of command, to handle politically sensitive cases. For example, in 2017, after Attorney General Jeff Sessions recused himself
from the matter, Deputy Attorney General Rod J. Rosenstein appointed former FBI Director Robert S. Mueller Ill to serve as Special Counsel to oversee the investigation of Russian efforts to influence the 2016 presidential election and related mat-
ters. Mueller's investigation was hindered, however, by an unwillingness to insist on

p93

p94
interviewing Trump because of a fear that Trump would shut down the entire prosecution by having Mueller fired — the very concern that prompted the Independent Counsel law. For a discussion of these dynamics in the Mueller investigation, see
Andrew Weissmann, Where Law Ends: Inside the Mueller Investigation (2020).

In many states, the law permits the governor or state attorney general to appoint a special prosecutor to assume responsibility when a case is especially complicated or when the local district attorney faces a conflict of interest (as, for
example, when serious criminal allegations are made against the district attorney's child or spouse). Such situations present no separation-of-powers problems, however, because the special prosecutor remains an official of the executive branch,
with discretion not to file charges, even when strong evidence is available to sustain them; the Attica case itself was an effort to compel prosecution in a case under the responsibility of a special prosecutor.

2. Prosecutions initiated by judges and victims. American courts have uniformly held that separation-of-powers requirements prohibit judges from compelling an unwilling prosecutor to file charges. A Wisconsin statute, for exam-
ple, provided that if a judge finds probable cause to believe that an individual has committed an offense and the district attorney nonetheless refuses to file a complaint, the judge can direct the commencement of a prosecution. The statute was
tested in State ex rel. Unnamed Petitioners v. Connors, 401 N.W.2d 782 (Wis. 1987), where a dancer claimed to be the victim of an assault by two professional football players in a dressing room at a Milwaukee night club. When the prosecutor
acknowledged the existence of probable cause but refused to proceed, because of doubts about the ability to win convictions at trial, a circuit judge invoked the statute and ordered the prosecution to go forward. The Wisconsin Supreme Court
reversed, holding that the statute violated the separation-of-powers requirements of the state constitution. A California Supreme Court decision raised similar separation-of-powers concerns about a state law that could have been read to allow a
judicial employee to issue misdemeanor complaints for failure to appear in court; the court read the law narrowly to require prosecutorial approval in order to avoid the constitutional question. Steen v. Appellate Div., Superior Court, 331 P.3d 136
(Cal. 2014). Even putting aside the separation-of-powers issues, a court proceeding in a case where the prosecutor did not want to go forward could violate state law. For a recent case rejecting a trial court’s effort to continue with a prosecution
when the prosecutor wanted to dismiss the case, see Commonwealth v. Sangha, 2021 Va. Cir. LEXIS 55 (Va. Cir. Ct. Mar. 29, 2021).

Courts in America have been similarly uniform in holding that private prosecution violates American separation-of-powers principles. People v. Municipal Court, 103 Cal. Rptr. 645 (Ct. App. 1972). The Supreme Court of South Carolina
in In re Richland County Magistrate's Court, 389 S.C. 408, 412 (2010), also offers functional arguments against the practice:

Ifa private party is permitted to prosecute a criminal action, we can no longer be assured that the powers of the State are employed only for the interest of the community at large. In fact, we can be absolutely certain that the

interests of the private party will influence the prosecution, whether the self-interest lies in encouraging payment of a. . . debt, influencing settlement in a civil suit, or merely seeking vengeance.

p94
p95

In contrast, in Great Britain and in many countries of continental Europe, private individuals can initiate a criminal prosecution, become a formal party, or retain counsel to prosecute the case on their own behalf. See Carsten Stahn,
Héctor Olasolo & Kate Gibson, Participation of Victims in Pre-Trial Proceedings of the ICC, 4 J. Int'l Crim. Just. 219, 220 (2006). Despite the formal prohibition on private prosecutions in the United States, Roger Fairfax documents the many ways in
which prosecution has been “outsourced” to private actors, including state contracts with private attorneys to bring prosecutions, part-time prosecutors who maintain a private practice on the side, and victim-funded prosecutions. Roger A. Fair-
fax, Jr., The Delegation of the Criminal Prosecution Function to Private Actors, 43 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 411, 416-444 (2009).

QUESTIONS: (a) Would granting the victims of serious crimes a formal right to compel prosecution (when there is sufficient legally admissible evidence) give victims undue control over the prosecutor's resource-allocation decisions and result in
less effective law enforcement? Would such a right tend to correct charging decisions that disfavor people of color and other disadvantaged groups? Or would victims’ rights of this sort merely enhance the leverage of groups that already have dis-
proportionate influence?

(b) Granting victims a right to compel prosecution could lead to the litigation of even more cases that trigger very long prison sentences attached to the highest grades of many offenses. Would that outcome represent progress, in the sense that
the legislative will was being more fully respected? Or would this result contradict legislative intent because legislatures do not expect anything close to full prosecution and instead expect prosecutors to sift through cases to make sure the most

serious charges and punishments are reserved for the most serious cases? In an age already characterized by unprecedented levels of incarceration, would giving victims such a role exacerbate existing problems of systemic harshness, racial in-
equality, and misallocation of resources?

3. Victim participation in the prosecutor's charging decision. Every American jurisdiction grants victims a right to be kept informed about the course of the investigation and to discuss the case with the prosecutor. The federal
statute, the Crime Victims’ Rights Act of 2004 (CVRA), is typical. It provides victims with the right to notice of hearings, the right to attend those hearings, and a “reasonable right to confer with the attorney for the Government,” 18 U.S.C. §3771(a)
(2016). Some have argued that this statute vests victims with rights even before prosecutors choose to bring formal charges, but the Department of Justice has taken the view that victims do not have rights under the Act until prosecutors file a
complaint, information, or indictment. See Paul G. Cassell et al., Crime Victims’ Rights During Criminal Investigations?, 104 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 59, 61-62 (2014). The issue arose in the prosecution of Jeffrey Epstein, when victims of his alleged
sexual abuse argued they should have received advance notice of the government's decision to offer him a non-prosecution agreement. The government contended that because formal charges were never brought, no notice was required under
the Act. In Doe v. United States, 950 F. Supp. 2d 1262, 1266 (S.D. Fla. 2013), the court disagreed with the government and held that “the CVRA can apply before formal charges are filed against an accused.” State laws vary on whether victims re-
ceive notice before charges are filed. Cassell et al., supra, at 98-101.

p95
p96

Whether jurisdictions provide victims with notice of possible charges in advance or not, they are in universal agreement that victims cannot control or legally challenge the charging decision. Those who support this limit on a victim's
involvement typically stress that the victim's individual interest in “safety and redress” must be subordinate to “the effective and efficient administration of law enforcement.” Dix v. Superior Court, 807 P.2d 1063, 1067 (Cal. 1991). One observer
asks why victims should play a large role in charging decisions when they “would be instantly disqualified from serving on the defendant's jury.”37 But if victims cannot have a voice in charging decisions, is there too great a risk that prosecutors will
not sufficiently account for victims’ concerns? See Erin Ann O'Hara, Victim Participation in the Criminal Process, 13 J.L. & Pol'y 229, 233 (2008). If victims cannot control or challenge the charging decision, why should it matter whether they receive
notice of pending investigations before a formal charge is brought? What kind of influence should victims exercise?

4, Cases involving intimate partner violence. Cases involving intimate partner violence have presented a distinctive set of challenges. Until the 1980s, many police departments discouraged officers from making arrests in such
cases; as a result, prosecutors seldom had to deal with them. In response to widespread concern that this approach was dangerous to victims, police departments began to encourage or mandate an arrest, and some district attorneys’ offices
adopted policies to encourage or mandate the filing of charges. Leigh Goodmark, A Troubled Marriage: Domestic Violence and the Legal System 107-113 (2012). The traditional problem — excessive use of the discretion not to prosecute — was
largely erased.

Concerns began to emerge, however, about whether victims were now being hurt by the opposite problem — over enforcement. See Stephen J. Schulhofer, The Feminist Challenge in Criminal Law, 143 U. Pa. L. Rev. 2151, 2158-2170
(1995). Mandatory arrest and “no-drop” prosecution policies typically require that charges must be pursued even without victims’ consent, because of the danger that they might succumb to intimidation (against their own real desires or interests)
and tell officials that they were opposed to the arrest or prosecution of their abusers. Although some studies suggest that mandatory arrest and prosecution deters batterers more effectively than discretionary policies do, other evidence suggests
the reverse — that mandatory policies deter calls for help by the victim more than they deter violence by the abuser, and that such policies may even aggravate subsequent violence by some types of defendants. (We consider this problem in more
detail in connection with our discussion of intimate partner self-defense, at pp. 820-834 supra.)

There continues to be a broad consensus that prosecutors should press charges when the victim of intimate partner violence supports this step, and indeed special evidentiary rules for these cases now make it easier for the govern-
ment to win convictions. See Erin Collins, The Evidentiary Rules of Engagement in the War Against Domestic Violence, 90 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 397 (2015). Some experts caution against incarcerating the perpetrators, however, because imprisonment can
lead to them to be even more violent when released. Leigh Goodmark, Should Domestic Violence Be Decriminalized?, 40 Harv. J.L. & Gender 53, 109 (2017).

p96
p.97

When the victim opposes prosecution or simply fails to cooperate, prosecutors disagree over whether they should respect the victim's wishes or press charges anyway. Some victims’ advocates protest that the legal system endangers
and in effect re-victimizes the victim of intimate partner violence if it fails to respect the victim's own sense of what would be best. See, e.g., Linda G. Mills, Killing Her Softly: Intimate Abuse and the Violence of State Intervention, 113 Harv. L. Rev.
550 (1999). Many argue that criminalization should not be the only response available to the victims of intimate partner violence and contend that they should receive an array of options, including social services. Beth E. Richie, Arrested Justice:
Black Women, Violence, and America’s Prison Nation 163 (2012). Others argue that a successful response to intimate partner violence requires mandatory prosecution, and that “leaving the choice of prosecution to the victim .. . creates more
problems than it solves.” Cheryl Hanna, No Right to Choose: Mandated Victim Participation in Domestic Violence Prosecutions, 109 Harv. L. Rev. 1848, 1909 (1996).

Should the role of victims be any different in these cases? And if not, what should be the general approach when a victim prefers leniency? As the person most affected by a criminal offense, should the victim who desires leniency be
given a decisive voice? Or are there substantial public interests that can justify prosecution even when the victim, after careful thought, prefers otherwise?

5. Restorative justice. One approach that centers victim participation is restorative justice. Every jurisdiction in America currently leaves it up to the victim to decide whether to participate in the restorative-justice process, even if the
prosecution and defense otherwise agree. But while victims can veto the use of a restorative-justice process, state actors have discretion whether to make restorative justice an option even if victims want it, so the process is not as victim-centered
as it could otherwise be. Victims who do participate in restorative-justice programs tend to be happy with the results. Victims report higher satisfaction rates with restorative justice than with the regular criminal process,°° although there is selec-
tion bias because not all cases or alleged offenders are eligible, see p. 65, supra, and victims can choose not to participate. Does the overall positive evaluation of restorative justice by victims suggest that it should be made available whenever
victims want to use it without giving a state actor a veto? Or does the state need to play a gatekeeping role? What if a state actor wants to use restorative justice but the victim disagrees, particularly because the victim believes that process will be
too lenient and would prefer a harsher sanction from the traditional criminal process? Does it make sense to give victims a veto in that circumstance? What if the veto is exercised overall in a way that disadvantages certain categories of offenders
or offenses?

One suggestion for addressing biases that result from victim preferences about whether to use restorative justice is to use surrogate victims who were victims of crimes similar to the offender's when the actual victim does not want to
participate. While this option can help control biases from victim preferences, it has problems of its own. Adriaan Lanni points out that, “[flor some, these types of

p.97

p98
‘offender-oriented’ restorative justice programs have lost sight of one of the major goals of the movement — to offer an alternative that meets victims’ needs better than the offender-focused criminal legal system. Programs that do not involve
direct victims may also dilute political support for restorative justice by alienating victim advocates.” Adriaan Lanni, Taking Restorative Justice Seriously, 69 Buff. L. Rev. 635, 667 (2021).

6. Victimless crimes. If victim participation provides a valuable safeguard against misguided prosecutorial priorities or “selective indifference” to the concerns of particular groups, what safeguards can serve this function in the case
of so-called victimless crimes? Drug cases represent a substantial segment of the workload in most prosecutors’ offices, and concerns about discriminatory patterns of investigation, arrest, and enforcement are probably more prominent in this
area than in any other. What mechanisms should be available to prevent the abuse of discretion in the large volume of selective judgments that prosecutors inevitably must make with respect to drug crimes?

7. Other checks on decisions not to charge. Dozens of prosecutors have won district attorney elections in the past few years based on campaign promises to use the power of their offices to combat mass incarceration. They have
won on platforms that have included promises to refuse to prosecute certain low-level offenses and to use their charging discretion in other cases to pursue diversion instead of prison sentences. This open politicization of the decision not to
charge has thus brought greater attention to the issue. Some see this new breed of “progressive prosecutor” and their use of discretion not to charge as potentially transformative. Emily Bazelon, Charged: The New Movement to Transform Amer-
ican Prosecution and End Mass Incarceration (2019). Others have expressed reservations about what this movement can accomplish. For example, some highlight the geographic limitations of this model because electoral success on this kind of
platform is not likely in rural areas — areas where incarceration rates continue to rise. See Carissa Byrne Hessick & Michael Morse, Picking Prosecutors, 105 lowa L. Rev. 1537 (2020).

Even when they successfully win their elections, these prosecutors have faced pushback when they have tried to use their charging discretion in the direction of greater leniency. State legislators have given more authority to state-level
prosecutors to pick up the charging slack, federal prosecutors have become more aggressive in taking cases federal, judges have resisted some of their efforts, and even the line attorneys in the offices where progressives have won elections have
resisted the reforms. For example, when the State Attorney of Orlando, Aramis Ayala, announced that her office would no longer seek the death penalty, Governor Rick Scott reassigned her first-degree-murder cases to a different prosecutor, and
the Supreme Court of Florida ruled that this was a permissible use of the governor's power. Ayala v. Scott, 224 So. 3d 755 (Fla. 2017). In Philadelphia, the U.S. Attorney has been aggressive in bringing gun cases that the District Attorney of Phila-
delphia, Larry Krasner, opted not to prosecute. Rachel E. Barkow, Can Prosecutors End Mass Incarceration?, 119 Mich. L. Rev. 1365, 1379 (2021).

A few courts have also indicated that they might be more willing to play a greater oversight role than the court did in the Attica case. A municipal judge in Massachusetts, for example, tried to deny a prosecutor's entry of a nolle prose-

qui, but was ultimately overruled by the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court, in a

p98

p99
decision along the lines of the Attica case. Commonwealth v. Webber, No. SJ-2019-0366, 2019 WL 4263308 (Mass. Sept. 9, 2019). Other courts, however, have concluded that there is some oversight role for a court, particularly when prosecutors
seek to dismiss charges already brought. The Virginia Supreme Court, for example, agreed with lower courts that they had the discretion to deny a Norfolk prosecutor's request to dismiss charges in all cases involving the simple possession of
marijuana. The court ruled that there must be judicial consent to dismiss a charge, rejecting the claim that the separation of powers requires a prosecutor be allowed to exercise discretion free from judicial restraint. The court emphasized that the
categorical nature of the prosecutor's decision usurped the legislative judgment that marijuana possession should be criminalized. In re Underwood, Nos. 190497, 190498, 2019 Va. LEXIS 168, at *2-3 (May 2, 2019). The judges will therefore con-
sider each case individually to determine if the prosecutor can properly dismiss.

How important is it that these prosecutors have announced categorical decisions not to charge? Some scholars have agreed with the Virginia Supreme Court that broad non-enforcement of the law is a separation-of-powers violation
because the government is not enacting the will of the legislative branch. Logan E. Sawyer Ill, Reform Prosecutors and Separation of Powers, 72 Okla. L. Rev. 603, 606-607 (2020). But if voters elected these district attorneys with just that expecta-
tion, is it more democratic to allow those categorical non-prosecution decisions to operate unimpeded by judicial interference?

As a practical matter, what does judicial oversight look like? If the prosecutor in these individual cases argues that resource constraints mean that the office wants to assign prosecutors to more important cases, is there a role for the
court to second guess that? Does individualized review make sense if the rationale given is one that would apply across the category of cases?

PROBLEM

Suppose you are a prosecutor in a state with the following laws: (1) The unlawful possession of any controlled substance for personal use is a misdemeanor punishable by up to 180 days in jail; (2) The unlawful possession with the intent
to distribute any controlled substance is a felony punishable by no less than one year and no greater than 20 years; (3) Any person previously convicted of any offense shall be charged with an enhancement for recidivism and shall receive twice the
applicable punishment for the current offense.

The police have arrested three individuals. The first is Riley, a 19-year-old who was distributing OxyContin to college classmates in exchange for food and books. Riley has a prior misdemeanor conviction for shoplifting. The second
is Alex, a 20-year-old single parent of two who is receiving food stamps and public housing assistance. Alex is addicted to drugs and sells crack cocaine to fellow addicts. Alex has one prior felony conviction for selling small amounts of crack
cocaine. Alex will lose public housing if convicted a second time for any offense. The third is Sam, a 30-year-old individual who is a mid-level heroin dealer in a drug selling organization. Sam comes from a low-income neighborhood and started
selling drugs as a teenager to help care for younger siblings when one of Sam's parents went to prison. Sam has two prior felony convictions for selling low-level amounts of

p99
p. 100
marijuana. How would you charge each of these individuals under state law? What factors are relevant to your decision? If you would adopt a blanket charging policy in drug cases, what would it be and can you justify it consistent with your state's
decision to criminalize possession and distribution?
NOTES ON “COMPULSORY” PROSECUTION IN EUROPE

1. The European prosecution model. Absent special circumstances, prosecutors in many European countries are required to file and pursue all charges for which there is evidence sufficient to support a conviction. The European
prosecutor does have discretion, but that discretion is typically limited by statute and subject to judicial oversight. A prosecuting attorney who decides not to prosecute must explain that decision in writing and the obtain approval of a superior. Erik
Luna & Marianne Wade, Prosecutors as Judges, 67 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 1413, 1478 (2010). Traditionally, European prosecutors lack the vast discretion American prosecutors enjoy regarding whether and how to bring a case, though the European
system is becoming more American in practice. Luna & Wade, supra at 1429-1430. Most decisions to forgo prosecution are subject to judicial review in Europe. See id. at 1450, 1478-1479; Shawn Marie Boyne, Procedural Economy in Pre-Trial
Procedure: Developments in Germany and the United States, 24 S. Cal. Interdisc. L.J. 329, 345 (2015). The primary objective of this model, as Darryl K. Brown explains, is “an anti-discrimination injunction, intended to ensure that prosecutors treat
like cases alike, rather than a mandate to ensure public safety and order through full enforcement.” Brown, Criminal Enforcement Redundancy: Oversight of Decisions Not to Prosecute, 103 Minn. L. Rev. 843, 874-875 (2018). Some observers doubt
that judicial review imposes truly significant constraints. See Joachim Herrmann, Bargaining Justice — A Bargain for German Criminal Justice, 53 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 755, 759 (1992) (“a judge consents as a matter of course”). Nonetheless, such review,
even if a mere formality, provides a degree of accountability unknown in American criminal justice. In addition, aggrieved victims have standing to file a mandamus action that serves to compel prosecution when a dismissal is found to be unwar-
ranted. See Richard S. Frase & Thomas Weigend, German Criminal Justice as a Guide to American Law Reform, 18 B.C. Int'l & Comp. L. Rev. 317, 338 (1995).

2. An illustration of European practice. M.C. v. Bulgaria, [2003] ECHR 39272/98 (Eur. Ct. Hum. Rts,), illustrates common European practice. A prosecutor initially rebuffed a date-rape victim's efforts to press criminal charges. The
victim then lodged a formal objection that required prosecutors to reopen the investigation. After more evidence was gathered, the local prosecutor decided that criminal charges were not warranted. That conclusion was supported, as required,
by a written opinion, which the victim then appealed to higher levels within the supervising state prosecutor's office. Senior prosecutors concurred in the initial decision, supporting their views in two lengthy written opinions. Those opinions, in turn,
formed the basis of the victim's complaint to the European Court of Human Rights, which held that the prosecutors’ restrictive interpretation of their rape law, and their failure to go forward with a criminal prosecution, violated the right of all victims
to state protection of their bodily integrity, as guaranteed by the European Convention on Human Rights.

p. 100

p.101
QUESTIONS: What social and systemic factors might make broad prosecutorial discretion not to charge more (or less) justifiable in the United States than in Europe? In proportion to caseloads, the resources available to the European prosecutor
are greater than those available to American state prosecutors, but not significantly greater than those available to U.S. federal prosecutors. The resource constraint arguably makes charging discretion more necessary in American states than in
Europe, though of course states and localities choose the level of funding they provide to their prosecutors and courts. Another contrast is that sentences authorized or mandated are far more severe in America than in Europe. In addition, European
prosecutors tend to be professional bureaucrats with extensive training and merit-based selection on the basis of competitive national exams, and they are “expected to make decisions about individual cases on their merits, without regard to
public attitudes, opinions, and emotions or to politicians’ preferences or priorities.” Michael Tonry, 41 Crime & Just. 1, 2 (2012). In contrast, American chief prosecutors are typically elected; they openly admit to responding to voter preferences and
often campaign on promises to be tough on crime. Id. at 4. Do these factors make it more desirable — or less desirable — for prosecutors in America to have broad and unreviewable discretion not to pursue legally provable cases? Are there some
subsets of cases — perhaps involving intimate partner violence or excessive use of force by the police — where special oversight of decisions not to charge is needed? Or would subject-matter-specific review inject its own source of anti-defen-
dant bias into the system?
NOTE ON SELECTIVE PROSECUTION

When a prosecutor decides to file charges, our system of criminal procedure provides checks (both prior to and during any trial) to ensure that there is sufficient evidence of guilt. What safeguards should be available to defendants who
cannot dispute the sufficiency of the evidence but claim that they were unfairly singled out for prosecution? While serving as attorney general of the United States, Robert H. Jackson, later a justice of the Supreme Court, observed (Jackson, The
Federal Prosecutor, 31 J. Crim. L. Criminology & Police Sci. 3, 5 (1940)):

With the law books filled with a great assortment of crimes, a prosecutor stands a fair chance of finding at least a technical violation of some [statute] on the part of almost anyone. In such a case, it is not a question of

discovering the commission of a crime and then looking for the man who has committed it, it is a question of picking the man and then searching the law books, or putting investigators to work, to pin some offense on him. It

is in this realm — in which the prosecutor picks some person whom he dislikes or desires to embarrass, or selects some group of unpopular persons and then looks for an offense, that the greatest danger of abuse of pros-

ecuting power lies.

Although courts cannot be asked (as in Attica, p. 90 supra) to compel a prosecution, they clearly have the power to dismiss one. The following case considers problems that arise when the prosecutor's decision to charge allegedly was
based on a clearly impermissible consideration, such as race.

p.101
p.102
United States v. Armstrong
Supreme Court of the United States
517 U.S. 456 (1996)

Cher Justice REHNauIsT delivered the opinion of the Court... .

In April 1992, respondents were indicted in [federal court] on charges of conspiring to possess with intent to distribute more than 50 grams of cocaine base (crack) . . . and federal firearms offenses. [Informants for federal and state
agents] had bought a total of 124.3 grams of crack from respondents and witnessed respondents carrying firearms during the sales. [Agents seized crack and a loaded gun from the hotel room in which the sales were transacted and arrested re-
spondents Armstrong and Hampton]

[Respondents filed a motion for discovery or for dismissal of the indictment, alleging that they were selected for federal prosecution because they are black. In support... . they offered only an affidavit by a “Paralegal Specialist,”
employed by the Office of the Federal Public Defender representing one of the respondents. The only allegation in the affidavit was that, in every one of the 24 [drug] cases closed by the office during 1991, the defendant was black. Accompanying
the affidavit was a “study” listing the 24 defendants, their race, whether they were prosecuted for dealing cocaine as well as crack, and the status of each case... .

The District Court . .. ordered the Government (1) to provide a list of all cases from the last three years in which the Government charged both cocaine and firearms offenses, (2) to identify the race of the defendants in those cases, (3)
to identify what [state and federal agencies] were involved in the investigations of those cases, and (4) to explain its criteria for deciding to prosecute those defendants for federal cocaine offenses.

The Government moved for reconsideration of the District Court's discovery order. [I]t submitted affidavits and other evidence to explain why it had chosen to prosecute respondents and why respondents’ study did not support the
inference that the Government was singling out blacks for cocaine prosecution. . . . An Assistant United States Attorney explained in an affidavit that the decision to prosecute met the general criteria for prosecution, because “there was over 100
grams of cocaine base involved, over twice the threshold necessary for a ten year mandatory minimum sentence; there were multiple sales involving multiple defendants, thereby indicating a fairly substantial crack cocaine ring; . .. there were
multiple federal firearms violations intertwined with the narcotics trafficking; the overall evidence in the case was extremely strong, including audio and videotapes of defendants; . . . and several of the defendants had criminal histories including
narcotics and firearms violations.” The Government also submitted sections of a published 1989 Drug Enforcement Administration report which concluded that “large-scale, interstate trafficking networks controlled by Jamaicans, Haitians and
Black street gangs dominate the manufacture and distribution of crack.”

In response, one of respondents’ attorneys submitted an affidavit alleging that an intake coordinator at a drug treatment center had told her that there are “an equal number of caucasian users and dealers to minority users and dealers.”
Respondents also submitted an affidavit from a criminal defense attorney alleging that in his experience many nonblacks are prosecuted in state court for crack

p.102
p. 103
offenses, and a newspaper article reporting that federal “crack criminals . . . are being punished far more severely than if they had been caught with powder cocaine, and almost every single one of them is black.”

The District Court denied the motion for reconsideration [of its discovery order]. When the Government indicated it would not comply with [that] order, the court dismissed the case. [The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed.]
We granted certiorari to determine the appropriate standard for discovery for a selective-prosecution claim. .. .

Our cases delineating the necessary elements to prove [such a claim] have taken great pains to explain that the standard is a demanding one. [T]he showing necessary to obtain discovery should itself be a significant barrier to the
litigation of insubstantial claims.

A selective-prosecution claim asks a court to exercise judicial power over a “special province” of the Executive. The Attorney General and United States Attorneys . . . are designated by statute as the President's delegates to help him
discharge his constitutional responsibility to “take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed.” U.S. Const., Art. Il, §3. As a result, . . . “in the absence of clear evidence to the contrary, courts presume that they have properly discharged their official
duties.”...

Judicial deference to the decisions of these executive officers rests in part on an assessment of the relative competence of prosecutors and courts. “Such factors as the strength of the case, the prosecution's general deterrence value,
the Government's enforcement priorities, and the case’s relationship to the Government's overall enforcement plan are not readily susceptible to the kind of analysis the courts are competent to undertake.” It also stems from a concern not to
unnecessarily impair the performance of a core executive constitutional function. “Examining the basis of a prosecution delays the criminal proceeding, threatens to chill law enforcement by subjecting the prosecutor's motives and decisionmaking
to outside inquiry, and may undermine prosecutorial effectiveness by revealing the Government's enforcement policy.”

The requirements for a selective-prosecution claim draw on “ordinary equal protection standards.” The claimant must demonstrate that the federal prosecutorial policy “had a discriminatory effect and that it was motivated by a discrim-
inatory purpose.” To establish a discriminatory effect in a race case, the claimant must show that similarly situated individuals of a different race were not prosecuted. . ..

[le turn to the showing necessary to obtain discovery in support of such a claim. If discovery is ordered, the Government must assemble from its own files documents which might corroborate or refute the defendant's claim. . .. It will
divert prosecutors’ resources and may disclose the Government's prosecutorial strategy. The justifications for a rigorous standard for the elements of a selective-prosecution claim thus require a correspondingly rigorous standard for discovery in
aid of such a claim... .

The vast majority of the Courts of Appeals require the defendant to produce some evidence that similarly situated defendants of other races could have been prosecuted, but were not... . The Court of Appeals [in this case] reached its
decision [to the contrary] in part because it started “with the presumption that people of all races commit all types of crimes — not with the premise that any type of crime is the exclusive province of any particular racial or ethnic group.” It cited no

p. 108

p. 108
authority for this proposition, which seems contradicted by the most recent statistics of the United States Sentencing Commission. . . . More than 90% of the persons sentenced in 1994 for crack cocaine trafficking were black, 93.4% of convicted
LSD dealers were white, and 91% of those convicted for pornography or prostitution were white. . . .

The Court of Appeals also expressed concern about the “evidentiary obstacles defendants face.” But . .. if the claim of selective prosecution were well founded, it should not have been an insuperable task to prove that persons of
other races were being treated differently. . . . [Rlespondents could have investigated whether similarly situated persons of other races were prosecuted by the State of California and were known to federal law enforcement officers, but were not
prosecuted in federal court. We think the required threshold — a credible showing of different treatment of similarly situated persons — adequately balances the Government's interest in vigorous prosecution and the defendant's interest in avoid-
ing selective prosecution.

[Rlespondents’ “study” did not constitute “some evidence.” . . . The study failed to identify individuals who were not black and could have been prosecuted. . .. The newspaper article, which discussed the discriminatory effect of federal
drug sentencing laws, was not relevant to an allegation of discrimination in decisions to prosecute. Respondents’ affidavits, which recounted one attorney's conversation with a drug treatment center employee and the experience of another attor-
ney defending drug prosecutions in state court, recounted hearsay and reported personal conclusions based on anecdotal evidence. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is therefore reversed. .. .

Justice Stevens, dissenting. . . .

The District Judge's order should be evaluated in light of three circumstances that underscore the need for judicial vigilance over certain types of drug prosecutions. First, the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 and subsequent legislation
established a regime of extremely high penalties for the possession and distribution of so-called “crack” cocaine. Those provisions treat one gram of crack as the equivalent of 100 grams of powder cocaine. . . . These penalties result in sentences
for crack offenders that average three to eight times longer than sentences for comparable powder offenders.2

Second, the disparity between the treatment of crack cocaine and powder cocaine is matched by the disparity between the severity of the punishment imposed by federal law and that imposed by state law for the same conduct. . .. For
‘example, if respondent Hampton is found guilty, his federal sentence might be as long as a mandatory life term. Had he been tried in state court, his sentence could have been as short as 12 years, less worktime credits of half that amount.

Finally, it is undisputed that the brunt of the elevated federal penalties falls heavily on blacks. While 65% of the persons who have used crack are white, in 1993 they represented only 4% of the federal offenders convicted of trafficking
in crack. Eighty-eight percent of such defendants were black. . . . The Sentencing Commission acknowledges that the heightened crack penalties are a “primary cause of the growing disparity between sentences for Black and White federal
defendants.”

p. 108
p. 105

The extraordinary severity of the imposed penalties and the troubling racial patterns of enforcement give rise to a special concern about the fairness of charging practices for crack offenses. [T]he District Judge . . . acted well within her
discretion to call for the development of facts that would demonstrate what standards, if any, governed the choice of forum where similarly situated offenders are prosecuted. . . .

The majority discounts the probative value of [respondents] affidavits, claiming that they recounted “hearsay.” . . . But the [affidavit of defense attorney] Reed offered information based on his own extensive experience in both federal
and state courts. . . . The criticism that the affidavits were based on “anecdotal evidence” is also unpersuasive. [Defendants do not need to prepare sophisticated statistical studies in order to receive mere discovery in cases like this one. Certainly
evidence based on a drug counselor's personal observations or on an attorney's practice in two sets of courts, state and federal, can “tend to show the existence” of a selective prosecution.

Even if respondents failed to carry their burden of showing that there were individuals who were not black but who could have been prosecuted in federal court for the same offenses, it does not follow that the District Court abused its
discretion in ordering discovery. There can be no doubt that such individuals exist, and indeed the Government has never denied the same. . .. | fail to see why the District Court was unable to take judicial notice of this obvious fact and demand
information from the Government's files to support or refute respondents’ evidence. The presumption that some whites are prosecuted in state court is not “contradicted” by the statistics the majority cites, which show only that high percentages
of blacks are convicted of certain federal crimes, while high percentages of whites are convicted of other federal crimes. Those figures are entirely consistent with the allegation of selective prosecution. . .. The District Court, therefore, was entitled
to find the evidence before her significant and to require some explanation from the Government.®.. . .

PAMELA KARLAN, RACE, RIGHTS, AND REMEDIES IN CRIMINAL ADJUDICATION, 96 MICH. L. REV. 2001, 2023-2025 (1998): When it comes to suspect classes [like race], the Court generally rejects stereotypes whether or not they are true. The very
act of stereotyping is constitutionally illegitimate. . . . By contrast, when it came to “the presumption that people of all races commit all types of crimes,” . . . the Court [in Armstrong] took precisely the opposite tack. Relying on a somewhat circular
set of statistics that showed that more than ninety percent of the defendants sentenced for crack-related offenses were black, it declared that “presumptions at war with
p. 105
p. 106
presumably reliable statistics have no proper place in the analysis of this issue.” [In no other area is the Court] prepared to assume, based on ambiguous statistics, that blacks and whites differ in a legally cognizable way. That the Court adopts
such a position here illustrates a broader point. . . . Whatever the Court says about its commitment to ridding the criminal justice process of racial discrimination, it is in fact quite skeptical that this can be done, at least at an acceptable social cost.
[The Court tacitly accepts the level of disparate impact that discretion seems to produce.
NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Disparate patterns. In Armstrong, the lower courts inferred a pattern of discriminatory enforcement based on two factual assumptions — that both white and Black people were committing crack offenses and that only Black people
were being prosecuted in federal court. Which of these assumptions does the Supreme Court seem to question? Does the Court consider it possible that significant numbers of white people were being prosecuted in federal court, or does the
Court believe that no significant numbers of white people were committing crack offenses? Note the statistics cited by the Court — that more than 90 percent of those convicted on federal crack charges were Black,22 while 93 percent of those
convicted on federal LSD charges were white. The Court concludes that these statistics contradict the lower courts’ assumption that white people are also committing crack cocaine offenses. Is that conclusion persuasive? Under what circum-
stances would these statistics be irrelevant to the lower courts’ analysis?

2. Armstrong’s impact. The Court says that in order to establish the prima facie case of discrimination required to get discovery, a complainant must offer evidence that “similarly situated persons of other races were prosecuted by the
State of California and were known to federal law enforcement officers, but were not prosecuted in federal court.” Yet without access to government files, complainants can seldom obtain evidence of unprosecuted violations. See Andrew Manuel
Crespo, Systemic Facts: Toward Institutional Awareness in Criminal Courts, 129 Harv. L. Rev. 2049, 2097-2098 (2016). Courts, moreover, have held that providing one or two cases where someone of a different race was treated differently is not
sufficient to establish the prima facie case.

In addition, courts seem to interpret the “similarly situated” language to require defendants to identify uncharged individuals who are virtually identical to themselves. Consider the facts in United States v. Lewis, 517 F.3d 20 (1st Cir.
2008), involving a defendant charged with false statements on a federal firearms application. Lewis sought discovery to demonstrate that he was singled out for prosecution because he is African American and Muslim. To meet the threshold for
discovery, Lewis “introduced a series of analyses showing that over a three-year period no one

p. 106

p.107
else [who had no prior record] had been prosecuted in the District of Massachusetts for a weapons-elated offense as picayune as misstating an address on a federal firearms application. [He argued] that statistical probability indicates that while
white non-Muslims quite probably have committed such minor infractions, they have not been prosecuted.” Id. at 26. The appellate court affirmed the trial court’s decision that the “pool of offenders situated similarly to the defendant consisted of
non-African-Americans and/or non-Muslims who had committed multiple misrepresentation offenses in connection with firearms paperwork, who posed a danger of violence, and who may have had links to terrorism.” Was this an appropriate way
to define the pool? Or did the court set the bar too high? Some scholars believe the bar should be lower for claims of selective enforcement by police officers as opposed to prosecutors. They argue both that it would be difficult if not “impossible”
for a defendant to identify a similarly situated group of individuals that police officers did not select for arrest and that police officers generally face greater scrutiny than prosecutors for their decisions so they should do so in this context as well.
See Alison Siegler & William Admussen, Discovering Racial Discrimination by the Police, 115 Nw. U. L. Rev. 987, 1010-1012 (2021). Should police officers face greater scrutiny than prosecutors for their enforcement decisions or should both be
held to the same standard?

3. The federalism issue. The selective prosecution claim in Armstrong is atypical in a sense, because the complaint is not that white defendants are not prosecuted at all, but only that they are prosecuted in state courts, where penal-
ties generally are lower. What considerations and what features of a case should legitimately affect the federal prosecutor's judgment about whether federal rather than state prosecution is appropriate? See pp. 88-89 supra.

4, The transparency issue. The immediate goal of the defendants in Armstrong was simply to get discovery, in order to reveal the criteria being used to make charging decisions. The Court’s approach to that issue was governed
by its sense that exposure of such information could be harmful. Based on that view, the Court believed the threshold showing required to obtain such information should be “demanding,” so that it will pose “a significant barrier.” One could, of
course, argue the opposite — that the public would be well served by making such information available on a routine basis, even when no one is alleging an egregious abuse of discretion. Are there good reasons to protect the confidentiality of in-
formation about the prosecutor's charging criteria? If so, should such information be protected across the board, or should the public interest in disclosure prevail at least with respect to some aspects of the prosecutor's charging policies?

5. Crack reform. For cases brought after its effective date, the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010, Pub. L. No. 111-220, 124 Stat. 2372, reduced the disparity between federal penalties for crack-cocaine and powder-cocaine offenses from
a 100:1 ratio to an 18:1 ratio. The law also eliminated the five-year mandatory minimum for simple possession of crack. Furthermore, the First Step Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-391, 132 Stat. 5194, applied the Fair Sentencing Act retroactively,
making anyone sentenced for a crack cocaine offense prior to August 3, 2010 eligible for a sentence reduction. Does Congress's passage of this law show that judicial involvement was unnecessary? Or does the long period of time before Con-
gress addressed the issue (more than two decades after the crack/powder disparity was put into place),

p.107

p. 108
the eight-year lag time in making the relief retroactive, and the continued disparity in the 18:1 ratio suggest that the political process is a poor outlet for resolving discriminatory effects?
PROBLEM
In highly publicized congressional testimony, Attorney General John Ashcroft proclaimed his intention to use every available means to combat terrorists operating in the United States. He likened his approach to the one Attorney Gen-
eral Robert F. Kennedy used in cracking down on organized crime — tracking terror suspects and arresting them for any offense they commit, no matter how trivial. Kennedy said he would prosecute them even for “spitting on the sidewalk.”£2
Is this tactic legitimate? If citizens considered above suspicion are never prosecuted for spitting on the sidewalk, then the only people prosecuted and jailed will be those whom the attorney general suspects of doing or planning some-
thing illicit. Should it matter whether the attorney general can show any basis for suspicion? Should it matter what penalty is authorized for spitting on the sidewalk? Suppose a state law authorizes a felony sanction of up to two years in prison for
spitting on the sidewalk, jaywalking, or driving even one mile per hour faster than the posted speed limit. When someone happens to violate one of these provisions, is it appropriate to file criminal charges and seek the maximum prison sentence
only because a prosecutor suspects the person of more serious wrongdoing? For discussion, see Daniel C. Richman & William J. Stuntz, Al Capone's Revenge: An Essay on the Political Economy of Pretextual Prosecution, 105 Colum. L. Rev. 583
(2005); Harry Litman, Pretextual Prosecution, 92 Geo. L.J. 1135 (2004).
C. PLEA BARGAINING
Because the overwhelming majority of cases that are charged and not dismissed are resolved by plea, we will first consider the limits and operation of plea bargaining before turning to the trial process.
Brady v. United States
Supreme Court of the United States
397 U.S. 742 (1970)
Mr. Justice WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.
In 1959, petitioner was charged with kidnaping in violation of 18 U.S.C. 1201(a). Since the indictment charged that the victim of the kidnaping was not
p. 108
p. 109
liberated unharmed, petitioner faced a maximum penalty of death if the verdict of the jury should so recommend. Petitioner, represented by competent counsel throughout, first elected to plead not guilty. .. . Upon learning that his codefendant,
who had confessed to the authorities, would plead guilty and be available to testify against him, petitioner changed his plea to guilty. His plea was accepted after the trial judge twice questioned him as to the voluntariness of his plea. Petitioner was
sentenced to 50 years’ imprisonment, later reduced to 30.
[Petitioner sought postconviction relief, claiming that his plea of guilty was not voluntary because he faced the death penalty if he exercised his right to a jury trial. The lower courts denied relief, and the Supreme Court granted
certiorari.]

Waivers of constitutional rights not only must be voluntary but must be knowing, intelligent acts done with sufficient awareness of the relevant circumstances and likely consequences. On neither score was Brady's plea of guilty
invalid. . ..

The State to some degree encourages pleas of guilty at every important step in the criminal process. . . . (Alpprehension and charge, [or] the post-indictment accumulation of evidence may convince the defendant and his counsel that
a trial is not worth the agony and expense to the defendant and his family. All these pleas of guilty are valid in spite of the State's responsibility for some of the factors motivating the pleas. . ..

Of course, the agents of the State may not produce a plea by actual or threatened physical harm or by mental coercion overbearing the will of the defendant. But nothing of the sort is claimed in this case; nor is there evidence that Brady
was so gripped by fear of the death penalty or hope of leniency that he did not or could not, with the help of counsel, rationally weigh the advantages of going to trial against the advantages of pleading guilty. Brady's claim is of a different sort:
[hat a guilty plea is coerced and invalid if influenced by the fear of a possibly higher penalty for the crime charged if a conviction is obtained after the State is put to its proof.

Insofar as the voluntariness of his plea is concerned, there is little to differentiate Brady from (1) the defendant, in a jurisdiction where the judge and jury have the same range of sentencing power, who pleads guilty because his lawyer
advises him that the judge will very probably be more lenient than the jury; (2) the defendant, in a jurisdiction where the judge alone has sentencing power, who is advised by counsel that the judge is normally more lenient with defendants who
plead guilty than with those who go to trial; (3) the defendant who is permitted by prosecutor and judge to plead guilty to a lesser offense included in the offense charged; and (4) the defendant who pleads guilty to certain counts with the under-
standing that other charges will be dropped. In each of these situations,® as in Brady's case, the defendant might never plead guilty absent the possibility or certainty that the plea

p. 109

p.110
will result in a lesser penalty than the sentence that could be imposed after a trial and a verdict of guilty. We decline to hold, however, that a guilty plea is compelled and invalid under the Fifth Amendment whenever motivated by the defendant's
desire to accept the certainty or probability of a lesser penalty rather than face a wider range of possibilities extending from acquittal to conviction and a higher penalty authorized by law for the crime charged.

The issue we deal with is inherent in the criminal law and its administration because guilty pleas are not constitutionally forbidden, because the criminal law characteristically extends to judge or jury a range of choice in setting the
sentence in individual cases, and because both the State and the defendant often find it advantageous to preclude the possibility of the maximum penalty authorized by law. For a defendant who sees slight possibility of acquittal, the advantages
of pleading guilty and limiting the probable penalty are obvious — his exposure is reduced, the correctional processes can begin immediately, and the practical burdens of a trial are eliminated. For the State there are also advantages — the more
promptly imposed punishment after an admission of guilt may more effectively attain the objectives of punishment; and with the avoidance of trial, scarce judicial and prosecutorial resources are conserved for those cases in which there is a
substantial issue of the defendant's guilt or in which there is substantial doubt that the State can sustain its burden of proof. It is this mutuality of advantage that perhaps explains the fact that at present well over three-fourths of the criminal con-
victions in this country rest on pleas of guilty, a great many of them no doubt motivated at least in part by the hope or assurance of a lesser penalty than might be imposed if there were a guilty verdict after a trial to judge or jury.

Of course, that the prevalence of guilty pleas is explainable does not necessarily validate those pleas or the system which produces them. But we cannot hold that it is unconstitutional for the State to extend a benefit to a defendant
who in turn extends a substantial benefit to the State and who demonstrates by his plea that he is ready and willing to admit his crime and to enter the correctional system in a frame of mind that affords hope for success in rehabilitation over a
shorter period of time than might otherwise be necessary. . . .

Bram v. United States, 168 U.S. 532 (1897), held that the admissibility of a confession depended upon whether it was compelled within the meaning of the Fifth Amendment. To be admissible, a confession must be “free and voluntary:
that is, must not be extracted by any sort of threats or violence, nor obtained by any direct or implied promises, however slight, nor by the exertion of any improper influence.” . . . Bram dealt with a confession given by a defendant in custody,
alone and unrepresented by counsel. In such circumstances, even a mild promise of leniency was deemed sufficient to bar the confession, not because the promise was an illegal act as such, but because defendants at such times are too sensi-
tive to inducement and the possible impact on them too great to ignore and too difficult to assess. . ..

Brady's situation bears no resemblance to Bram’s. . .. He had competent counsel and full opportunity to assess the advantages and disadvantages of a trial as compared with those attending a plea of guilty; there was no hazard of an
impulsive and improvident response to a seeming but unreal advantage. His plea of guilty was entered in open court and before a judge obviously sensitive to the requirements of the law with respect to guilty pleas. Brady's plea, unlike Bram's con-
fession, was voluntary.

p.110

pat

The standard as to the voluntariness of guilty pleas must be essentially that defined by Judge Tuttle of the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit: “‘{A] plea of guilty entered by one fully aware of the direct consequences, including the
actual value of any commitments made to him by the court, prosecutor, or his own counsel, must stand unless induced by threats (or promises to discontinue improper harassment), misrepresentation (including unfulfilled or unfulfillable promises),
or pethaps by promises that are by their nature improper as having no proper relationship to the prosecutor's business (e.g., bribes).’”!9 Under this standard, a plea of guilty is not invalid merely because entered to avoid the possibility of a death
penalty.

The record before us also supports the conclusion that Brady's plea was intelligently made. He was advised by competent counsel, he was made aware of the nature of the charge against him, and there was nothing to indicate that he
was incompetent or otherwise not in control of his mental faculties. . . .

This is not to say that guilty plea convictions hold no hazards for the innocent or that the methods of taking guilty pleas presently employed in this country are necessarily valid in all respects. This mode of conviction is no more foolproof
than full trials to the court or to the jury. ... We would have serious doubts about this case if the encouragement of guilty pleas by offers of leniency substantially increased the likelihood that defendants, advised by competent counsel, would
falsely condemn themselves. But our view is to the contrary and is based on our expectations that courts will satisfy themselves that pleas of guilty are voluntarily and intelligently made by competent defendants with adequate advice of counsel
and that there is nothing to question the accuracy and reliability of the defendants’ admissions that they committed the crimes with which they are charged. . ..

Affirmed.

[The concurring opinions of Justices Black and Brennan are omitted.]

ALBERT W. ALSCHULER, THE SUPREME COURT, THE DEFENSE ATTORNEY, AND THE GUILTY PLEA, 47 U. COLO. L. REV. 1, 55-58 (1975): [I]t may be reasonable to equate a competently counseled guilty plea with a knowing guilty plea. . . . In Brady,
however, the Supreme Court seemed to conclude that a competently counseled guilty plea would ordinarily be, not only a knowing plea, but a voluntary plea as well. [But] the presence of counsel has little relevance to the question of voluntariness.
A guilty plea entered at gunpoint is no less involuntary because an attorney is present to explain how the gun works.

Under today's guilty-plea system, the basic function of the defense attorney is indeed to explain “how the gun works” — something that was illustrated by the record in Brady. . . . The defense attorney had two allies in his effort to
persuade the defendant to plead guilty. The trial judge announced from the bench that he thought the defendant “might get the death penalty.” Moreover, when the defense attorney told the judge in chambers that he thought that a guilty plea
would probably be entered at a later date, the judge replied, “Well, | think you are very wise, because | was certainly going to submit the death penalty to the jury.” The attorney dutifully reported this comment to the defendant.

pat
p12

The defendant's mother may also have been influential in altering the defendant's choice of plea. She attempted to visit the defendant in jail but found that “it wasn’t visiting hours.” She testified:

| went through the alley of the city jail where he was being held and | kept yelling, “Brady. Brady.” Then — then there was somebody, some fellow up there that yelled, “Is there a Brady here?” So then Brady came to the

window. It was upstairs. | don’t know how many floors. Brady came to the window and he said, “Mom what are you doing? You are going to get yourself in trouble,” and I just said, “For God's sake, plead guilty. They are

going to give you the death sentence.”

When it became apparent that a codefendant would probably testify against him, the defendant agreed to plead guilty. The defense attorney reported that he “felt very gratified when [the defendant] decided to change his plea in that we
saved him from a death penalty in my opinion.”

The defense attorney was, | think, entitled to feel gratified; he had done a capable job and may indeed have saved the defendant from a death sentence. The defendant's principal complaint did not, however, concer his attorney's
performance; it was directed to the fact that exercise of the right to trial might have incurred an awesome penalty. This underlying reality was beyond the defense attorney's control but not beyond the control of the Supreme Court.

Contrary to the Supreme Court's suggestion, the presence of the defense attorney in Brady did not “dissipate” the “possibly coercive impact” of this reality. Indeed, the record in Brady suggests that the principal function of a com-
petent attorney in the guilty-plea system is exactly the opposite of the function suggested by the Supreme Court. Rather than dispel the coercive impact of a promise of leniency, the attorney must make the defendant realize with full clarity the
coercive power of the alternatives that he faces. In that way, the attorney may persuade the defendant to choose the course that within the confines of a cynical system, is likely to injure him least.

NOTES ON PLEA BARGAINING

1. Guilty plea procedure. As Brady indicates, a guilty plea, to be valid, must be the product of a knowing and intelligent choice, and it must be “voluntary,” in the sense that it does not result from threats or promises other than those
involved in any plea agreement. Before accepting a guilty plea, the trial judge typically will address the defendant in open court, in a colloquy that makes explicit the elements of the offense, the potential sentence, and the three principal rights
being waived by the plea (the privilege against self-incrimination, the right to jury trial, and the right to confront one’s accusers). See, e.g., Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c), (d). For a discussion of the insufficiencies of the superficial guilty plea colloquy in the
federal process, see Julian A. Cook Il, Federal Guilty Pleas: Inequities, Indigence, and the Rule 11 Process, 60 B.C. L. Rev. 1073 (2019).

In recent years, courts have also restricted the scope of waivers of appeal rights. The Court has held that a guilty plea, by itself, does inherently waive a defendant's right to challenge the constitutionality of their statute of conviction on
direct

p12

p11
appeal. Class v. United States, 138 S. Ct. 798 (2018). The Second Circuit rejected an appellate waiver attached to a guilty plea where the defendant did not receive any reduced charges or sentencing reductions in retum, holding that the waiver
was unenforceable because it “was unsupported by consideration.” United States v. Lutchman, 910 F.3d 33, 37 (2018).

2. Knowing and intelligent. The Supreme Court in Brady stated that defendants need “sufficient awareness of relevant circumstances” and any “direct consequences” of a guilty plea for it to be knowing and intelligent. 397 U.S. at
748, 755. What are those relevant circumstances and direct consequences? Courts are clear that maximum sentence exposure is one. Should defendants also be told of mandatory minimum sentences? The Third Circuit believes so, reasoning
that “the mandatory minimum sentence may be far more relevant than the theoretical maximum because that is rarely imposed.” See Jamison v. Klem, 544 F.3d 266, 277 (3d Cir. 2008). Why did the Court in Brady focus on “direct” consequences
and not collateral consequences? Note that collateral consequences, such as termination of federal benefits or the loss of a professional license, can be enormously significant, and even more significant than the “direct” consequence when the
latter is only a small fine.*! Thea Johnson has provided an empirical account of how 25 public defenders assess their clients’ views of various collateral consequences, in order to negotiate pleas that maximize their clients’ preferences. Johnson,
Measuring the Creative Plea Bargain, 92 Ind. L.J. 901 (2017). Johnson argues for more funding to support this holistic model of defense.

Is better funding of defense lawyers sufficient to account for these concerns, or are other institutional reforms also necessary to account for collateral consequences? Should prosecutors and judges take on a greater role in notifying
defendants about collateral consequences of pleas? For discussion, see Brian M. Murray, Beyond the Right to Counsel: Increasing Notice of Collateral Consequences, 49 U. Rich. L. Rev. 1139 (2015). Is it possible for a defendant to be fully in-
formed of all potential collateral consequences? Consider this perspective offered by Eisha Jain, Proportionality and Other Misdemeanor Myths, 98 B.U. L. Rev. 953, 963 (2018):

[Clivil regulatory agencies, private actors, and others also have significant discretion over collateral consequences. Public housing providers, for instance, may deny housing to those with criminal records, even when they are

not statutorily required to do so. Immigration enforcement officials have significant discretion about whether or not to trigger deportation after certain types of convictions. Private actors also exercise discretion. Defendants

have limited information about their future goals. Career and educational plans can change, and an old or dated conviction can suddenly become a barrier to employment. Because a criminal record can be “eternal,” it can

be impossible to know with certainty what all the future collateral consequences could be at the time of the plea.

p.113
pit

If Jain is right, is a knowing and intelligent waiver impossible? How should this issue be addressed within a system that permits guilty pleas at all?

The Model Penal Code’s revised sentencing provisions address the problem as follows (Model Penal Code: Sentencing §7.04 (Official Statutory Text, May 24, 2017)):

At the time of sentencing, . . . the defendant [must be] provided with the following information in writing:

(a) alist of all collateral consequences that apply under state or federal law as a result of the current conviction;
(b) a warning that the collateral consequences applicable to the offender may change over time; [and]
(c) a warning that jurisdictions to which the defendant may travel or relocate may impose additional collateral consequences; . . .

The Comment to §7.04 includes an important qualification: “[T]he court must confirm on the record that the defendant has been given written notice of the existence of all mandatory collateral consequences. . . . The court must also
confirm that the defendant has been informed that discretionary collateral consequences may attend conviction, though it need not specify what those may be. . ..” (emphasis added). Is this an appropriate limitation on the duty to inform? Which
of the consequences that Jain identifies need not be disclosed under §7.04? And when does the defendant receive the information? The MPC Commentary assumes that “[dJefense counsel should routinely . . . discuss such information with the
client . . . before entry of a guilty plea.” But shouldn't the court itself provide this information, and do so before a guilty plea is accepted, rather than only at sentencing?“2

3. Effective assistance of counsel. The Supreme Court has recently paid greater attention to the importance of trial counsel during plea bargaining. In Missouri v. Frye, 566 U.S. 134, 143 (2012), the Court explicitly acknowledged “[t]he
reality. . . that plea bargains have become so central to the administration of the criminal justice system that defense counsel have responsibilities in the plea bargaining process.” Those duties include informing defendants of formal plea offers
that may be favorable to the accused, id. at 145, and advising them about possible deportation consequences before they plead guilty, Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U.S. 356 (2010). A defendant can successfully claim prejudice by demonstrating a
“reasonable probability that, but for counsel's errors, he would not have pleaded guilty and would have insisted on going to trial.” Lee v. United States, 137 S. Ct. 1958, 1965 (2017). The Sixth Circuit has held that defendants are entitled to effective
assistance of counsel in pursuing favorable plea deals even before a plea offer is made, so counsel can be ineffective for falling to pursue a plea deal. Byrd v. Skipper, 940 F.3d 248, 255 (2019). Other than possible deportation consequences, which
of

pit

p16
the other collateral consequences that Jain mentions are so important that failure to mention them should constitute constitutionally ineffective assistance of counsel? All of them? If this obligation is taken seriously (as many argue it should be), will
defense counsel inevitably be ineffective in almost every case?

When counsel is ineffective at the plea-bargaining stage, there remains the question of what remedy is appropriate if the defendant ultimately rejects the plea offer and receives a longer sentence after being convicted at a fair trial. The
Supreme Court rejected the argument that a subsequent trial automatically cures any defect at the plea-bargaining stage so that no additional remedy is necessary. Instead, the Court held that trial courts should have the discretion to determine
whether the appropriate remedy is to require the prosecution to re-offer the plea proposal, to adhere to the post-trial sentence, or to issue a sentence somewhere in between. Lafler v. Cooper, 566 U.S. 156, 170-172 (2012).

For an argument that these recent cases signal a broad recognition of the right to effective counsel at plea bargaining and an outline of the specific professional standards that should apply, see Jenny Roberts, Effective Plea Bargaining
Counsel, 122 Yale L.J. 2650 (2013). For a more skeptical view that sees these cases as minor steps toward policing prosecutors, see |. Bennett Capers, The Prosecutor's Turn, 57 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1277, 1279 (2016). How far should the Court go
in policing prosecutors and defense counsel in this regard?

4, The extent of plea bargaining. At the time of the Brady decision, 70-85 percent of American felony convictions were obtained by guilty plea. The guilty plea rate has risen substantially since the Court expressly endorsed the
process. Nationally, about 98 percent of state court felony convictions in large urban counties are currently obtained by guilty plea,*° and in the federal courts, only about 2 percent of all convictions are obtained at trial.“ These statistics led the
Supreme Court in Frye to concede that “Jn today's criminal justice system . . . the negotiation of a plea bargain, rather than the unfolding of a trial, is almost always the critical point for a defendant.” 566 U.S. at 144. Nonetheless, there are varia-
tions in guilty plea rates, both among states and among jurisdictions within states. Moreover, the variations do not seem to correspond to differences in population or other factors indicative of caseload pressure. In some states, for example, guilty

plea rates are more prevalent in rural than in urban counties, and guilty plea rates are much greater in some large cities than in others. One older study found that for cities with populations over 500,000, the mean guilty plea rate was 93 percent in
New York State but only 65 percent in Pennsylvania.‘ The guilty plea rate, moreover,
pits
p.116
cannot be equated with the bargaining rate. Studies suggest that many defendants plead guilty even though they have no expectation of receiving more lenient treatment in return.

Suppose defendants and their counsel do not negotiate for a specific sentencing concession; instead they decide on a guilty plea because they believe, in light of past experience, that the judge will probably impose a more lenient
sentence than would be imposed after a conviction at trial. Should a guilty plea tendered for that reason be considered the product of “plea bargaining”? Is a practice of tacit or indirect inducements preferable to one in which parties negotiate
explicitly and the defendant knows in advance the precise difference between the sentences to be imposed after a plea and after conviction at trial? Which system is more coercive? Recall Professor Alschuler's observation, p. 111 supra, “A guilty
plea entered at gunpoint is no less involuntary because an attorney is present to explain how the gun works.”

5. Honoring the bargain. In Santobello v. New York, 404 U.S. 257 (1971), the Court held that if the prosecution fails to honor commitments made to the defendant in exchange for the plea, then the defendant must be allowed to
withdraw the plea. This safeguard does not, however, mean that the defendant who pleads guilty will receive precisely the expected sentence. The prosecutor’s commitment might take the form of a promise to dismiss certain counts or to “tec-
ommend” a certain sentence to the judge; the bargain is therefore fulfilled if the prosecutor takes the action promised, even if the judge then imposes a different sentence from the one the defendant expected. Defendants who seek a commitment
that a specific sentence will be imposed are sometimes told that local practice forbids that sort of offer because it intrudes upon the sentencing authority of the judge. Are nonbinding recommendations a preferable form of guilty plea inducement,
because they preserve the judge's role in setting the appropriate punishment? Or are they undesirable because they can mislead a defendant about the actual value of the bargain? For discussion, see Wes R. Porter, The Pendulum in Federal Sen-
tencing Can Also Swing Toward Predictability: A Renewed Role for Binding Plea Agreements Post-Booker, 37 Wm. Mitchell L. Rev. 469, 515-523 (2011).

6. The trial judge’s role. ABA Standards provide that trial judges may not initiate plea discussions, but if the parties request them to become involved, they are free to meet and indicate the plea concessions that they would consider
appropriate. American Bar Assn., Standards: Pleas of Guilty, §14-3.3(c). The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure forbid judicial participation in plea negotiation (Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(e)(1)), but they also provide that judges must explicitly accept or
reject an agreement and must inform the parties whether they are willing to be bound by it. Id., Rule 11(e)(3), (4). As a result, judges in federal cases are inevitably an unseen but important presence in negotiations, with decisive power to control the
contours of any bargain if they wish to do so. For discussions of how judges can play a more active role using various state practices as guides, see Darryl K. Brown, Judicial Power to Regulate Plea Bargaining, 57 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1225 (2016);
Nancy J. King & Ronald F. Wright, The Invisible Revolution in Plea Bargaining: Managerial Judging and Judicial Participation in Negotiations, 95 Tex. L. Rev. 325 (2016).

To what extent is it desirable for judges who will try a case to discuss with defendants the sentence reduction they will grant in return for a guilty plea? Is judicial involvement of this sort unduly coercive? Oris it beneficial because it
allows the

p16

pti
defendant to find out what the plea bargain is really worth? Should the judge seek to provide unambiguous information without coercion, or are these features just two sides of the same coin? A federal judge in West Virginia denied a plea deal in an
opioid drug case on the ground that the bargain was against the public interest. The judge said that the public has an interest in participating through open and viewable trials, especially when a jury trial “reveals the dark details of drug distribution
and abuse to the community in a way that a plea-bargained guilty plea cannot.” United States v. Walker, 423 F. Supp. 3d 281, 297 (S.D. W. Va. 2017). Is it appropriate for a judge to place greater weight on the public's interest in the case than in the
result that the prosecutor and defendant both prefer?

Jenia lontcheva Turner analyzed three jurisdictions (Connecticut, Florida, and Germany) that permit greater judicial involvement in plea negotiations than the federal system does, and she is optimistic that safeguards can guard against
judicial coercion. Turner, Judicial Participation in Plea Negotiations: A Comparative View, 54 Am. J. Comp. L. 199 (2006). Some of the safeguards she discusses are (1) placing all plea discussions with the judge on the record and having appellate
courts closely monitor the exchanges for coercion; (2) prohibiting judges from initiating plea discussions; and (3) precluding a judge who is involved with plea discussions from presiding over the trial or sentencing of the case should the defendant

ultimately decide not to plead guilty or withdraw the plea. Id. at 262-263. Are these sound policies? What are the tradeoffs with adopting these measures? For a 50-state review of judicial participation in the plea process, see Rishi Raj Batra, Judi-
cial Participation in Plea Bargaining: A Dispute Resolution Perspective, 76 Ohio St. L.J. 565 (2015).
NOTE ON PLEA OUTCOMES VERSUS TRIAL OUTCOMES

Does the guilty plea system produce outcomes different from those that would occur at trial? To be more specific, does it convict defendants who are in fact innocent (and would be acquitted) or convict defendants who committed
the offense but could not be found guilty beyond a reasonable doubt at trial? Does the plea negotiation process produce convictions for offenses significantly different from the crimes a defendant may actually have committed? For the many
observers who are inclined to give affirmative answers to these questions, the entire body of substantive criminal law may seem a supreme irrelevance; convictions obtained by guilty pleas are seen as the outcome of hurried horse-trading rather
than the thoughtful application of complex legal principles to the known facts. What is the practical significance of substantive law in a world dominated by plea bargaining? Consider the following comments:

ARNOLD ENKER, PERSPECTIVES ON PLEA BARGAINING, IN PRESIDENT’S COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENT AND THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, TASK FORCE REPORT: THE COURTS 113-114 (1967): [C]oncern over the possibility that a
negotiated plea can result in an erroneous judgment of conviction assumes . . . an objective truth existing in a realm of objective historical fact which it is the sole function of our process to discover. Some, but by no means all, criminal cases fit this
image. For example, this is a relatively accurate description of the issues at stake in a case in which the defendant asserts a defense of mistaken identity. . ..
pti
p18

But not all criminal cases fit the above picture. ... Much criminal adjudication concerns the passing of value judgments on the accused's conduct as is obvious where negligence, recklessness, reasonable apprehension of attack, use
of unnecessary force, and the like are at issue. . . . In many of these cases, objective truth is more ambiguous, if it exists at all. Such truth exists only as it emerges from the fact-determining process, and accuracy in this context really means rela-
tive equality of results as between defendants similarly situated and relative congruence between the formal verdict and our understanding of society's less formally expressed evaluation of such conduct.

The negotiated plea can, then, be an accurate process in this sense. So long as the judgment of experienced counsel as to the likely jury result is the key element entering into the bargain, substantial congruence is likely to result. Once
we recognize that what lends rationality to the factfinding process in these instances lies not in an attempt to discover objective truth but in the devising of a process to express intelligent judgment, there is no inherent reason why plea negotiation
need be regarded any the less rational or intelligent in its results.

Indeed, it may be that in some instances plea negotiation leads to more “intelligent” results. A jury can be left with the extreme alternatives of guilty of a crime of the highest degree or not guilty of any crime, with no room for any interme-
diate judgment. And this is likely to occur in just those cases where an intermediate judgment is the fairest and most “accurate” (or most congruent). . . . The low visibility of the negotiated plea allows this compromise which may be more rational
and congruent than the result we are likely to arrive at after a trial. While the desire to protect the symbolism of legality and the concern over lay compromises may warrant limiting the jury to extreme alternative[s], it does not follow that to allow the
defendant to choose such a compromise is an irrational or even a less rational procedure.

ARLEN SPECTER, BOOK REVIEW, 76 YALE L.J. 604, 606-607 (1967): The dictum that “justice and liberty are not the subjects of bargaining and barter” does not fit the realities of a typical barroom killing. . . . There is ordinarily sufficient evidence of
malice and deliberation in such cases for the jury to find the defendant guilty of murder in the first degree, which [in Pennsylvania] carties either life imprisonment or death in the electric chair. Or, the conceded drinking by the defendant may be
sufficient to nullify specific intent . . . to make the case second-degree murder, which calls for a maximum of 10 to 20 years in jail. From all the prosecutor knows by the time the cold carbon copies of the police reports reach the district attorney's
office, the defendant may have acted in “hot blood,” which makes the offense only voluntary manslaughter with a maximum penalty of 6 to 12 years. And, the defense invariably produces testimony showing that the killing was pure self-defense.

When such cases are submitted to juries, a variety of verdicts are returned, which leads to the inescapable conclusion of variable guilt. Most of those trials result in convictions for second-degree murder or voluntary manslaughter. The
judges generally impose sentences with a minimum range of 5 to 8 years and a maximum of 10 to 20 years. That distilled experience enables the assistant district attorney and the defense lawyer to bargain on the middle ground of what experience
has shown to be “justice” without the defense running the risk of the occasional first-degree conviction . . . and without the Commonwealth tying up a jury room for 3 to 5 days and running the risk of acquittal.

p16

p.119
ALBERT W. ALSCHULER, THE PROSECUTOR'S ROLE IN PLEA BARGAINING, 36 U. CHI. L. REV. 50, 71-79 (1968): [District Attorney Specter’s] argument seems to rest on the notion that when a man has seen one barroom killing, he has seen them all.
[Yet] Specter’s argument is a forceful one. In the homicide area particularly, . .. the distinctions drawn by the criminal code . . . sometimes prove too fine for workable, everyday application.

.. If the perspective of these practitioners is sound, the best solution to the defects they perceive in the trial system does not lie in a shift from trial procedures to off-stage compromises. It lies instead in a simplification of the criminal
code to reflect “everyday reality.” [But] it seems doubtful that plea negotiation can eliminate the irrationalities of the criminal code without substituting more serious irrationalities of its own. . . . Most barroom killings seem to end in bargained pleas
to voluntary manslaughter; but some end in bargained pleas to second-degree murder; some end in bargained pleas to various categories of felonious assault; and | know of one barroom shooting that was resolved by a guilty plea to the crime of
involuntary manslaughter, which, under the circumstances, seemed to be the last crime in the code of which the defendant might be guilty. It is therefore not clear that plea negotiation leads to greater uniformity of result than trial by jury.

Juries, of course, have biases, but the rules of evidence attempt to direct their attention to relevant issues. There are no rules of evidence in plea negotiation; individual prosecutors may be influenced not only by a desire to smooth out
the irrationalities of the criminal code but by thoroughly improper considerations that no serious reformer of the penal code would suggest. . . . Juries may react differently to the circumstances of indistinguishable crimes, but at least they react to
the circumstances of the crimes. A jury is unlikely to seek conviction for the sake of conviction, to respond to a defense attorney's tactical pressures, to penalize a defendant because he has taken an inordinate share of the court's and the prose-
cutor’s time, to do favors for particular defense attorneys in the hope of future cooperation, or to attempt to please victims and policemen for political reasons.

STEPHANOS BIBAS, PLEA BARGAINING OUTSIDE THE SHADOW OF TRIAL, 117 HARV. L. REV. 2463, 2464-2468 (2004): The conventional wisdom is that litigants bargain toward settlement in the shadow of expected trial outcomes. [T]he classic
shadow-of-trial model predicts that the likelihood of conviction at trial and the likely post-trial sentence largely determine plea bargains. .. .

The shadow-of-trial model is, however, far too simplistic. . . . First, there are many structural impediments that distort bargaining in various cases. Poor lawyering, agency costs [the difficulty a client faces in trying to monitor the perfor-
mance of her agent, the lawyer] and lawyers’ self-interest are prime examples, as are bail rules and pretrial detention. .. . Second, the shadow-of-trial model assumes that the actors are fundamentally rational. Recent scholarship on negotiation
and behavioral law and economics, however, undercuts this strong assumption of rationality. Instead, overconfidence, self-serving biases, . . . denial mechanisms, . . . and risk preferences all skew bargains.

[As a result,] many plea bargains diverge from the shadows of trials. By “the shadows of trials,” | mean the influence exerted by the strength of the evidence and the expected punishment after trial. Structural forces and psychological
biases sometimes inefficiently prevent mutually beneficial bargains or induce harmful

p.119

p.120
ones. [Some] defendants plead when they would otherwise go to trial, or go to trial (and usually receive heavier sentences) when they would otherwise plead. Furthermore, some defendants’ plea bargains diverge from trial shadows much more
than others’. . . . Rather than basing sentences on the need for deterrence, retribution, incapacitation, or rehabilitation, plea bargaining effectively bases sentences in part on wealth, sex, age, education, intelligence, and confidence. Though trials
allocate punishment imperfectly, plea bargaining adds another layer of distortions that warp the fair allocation of punishment.
ANDREW MANUEL CRESPO, THE HIDDEN LAW OF PLEA BARGAINING, 118 COLUM. L. REV. 1303, 1338 (2018): Beyond inflating the size, number, or weight of the piles of charges that a defendant could face, a prosecutor can also inflate the
individual charges themselves, in one of three ways: First, she can overreach beyond the facts of the case, filing charges that are unlikely to satisfy the burden of proof at trial. Second, she can overreach on the law, filing charges that rest on ag-
gressive interpretations of the statutes or precedents defining criminal liability. Finally, she can overreach beyond the equities of the case, filing charges that are simply too severe, even if the facts and the law could technically support a conviction.

In each instance, the prosecutor trades on the defendant's fear that a jury might go along with the inflated charges — fear that the prosecutor can exacerbate through even greater overreaching, and that the defendant can extinguish
only by pleading guilty to some lower offense. Therein, however, lies the rub, for if the defendant pleads guilty there will not be any adjudication on the merits, and one of the main checks against overreaching will disappear. Regulating overreach
thus requires interposing some other check, beyond a trial, on the factual, legal, and equitable merit of the charges.

NOTES

1. Judges and jurors as insufficient checks. Professor Crespo argues that prosecutors can inflate charges and put pressure on defendants to plead guilty because defendants may “fear that a jury” will agree with those inflated
charges. Why might a jury agree with charges that go “beyond the facts of the case”? See pp. 160-188 infra for a discussion of jury decision making. Crespo also argues that prosecutors can inflate charges by overreaching on the law with aggres-
sive interpretations of statutes. Why might defendants lack confidence that judges will check these broad interpretations?

2. Conflicts of interest. Professor Bibas highlights another way in which negotiations can be skewed, specifically “lawyers’ self-interest.” Can you think of personal motivations that might (consciously or subconsciously) lead a
defense attorney to advise her client to accept an unduly severe plea offer? Can you think of personal motivations that might lead a prosecutor to offer an overly lenient plea offer? Would it ever be in a defense attorney's self-interest to recommend
rejection of a favorable plea agreement?

3. Agency costs. Where potential conflicts of interest exist, monitoring is essential; there must be some way to assure that attorneys act in the best interests of their clients — the accused in the case of the defense attorney and the
general

p.120
p12
public in the case of the prosecutor. What factors make it difficult for some (or all) defendants to determine whether their attorney's advice is influenced by the attorney's personal interests? What factors make it difficult for the general public to
determine whether the prosecutor's actions are influenced by her personal interests? For further discussion of the problems of attorney self-interest and agency costs, see Stephen J. Schulhofer, Criminal Justice Discretion as a Regulatory System,
17 J. Legal Stud. 43 (1988).
NOTES ON THE POLICY DEBATE

A voluminous literature discusses the supposed merits and demerits of plea bargaining.‘° These Notes examine several of the most important issues.

1. Necessity. Compare these viewpoints:

SANTOBELLO v. NEW YORK, 404 U.S. 257, 260 (1971) (BURGER, C]): [Plea bargaining] is an essential component of the administration of justice. . .. If every criminal charge were subjected to a full-scale trial, the States and the Federal Government
would need to multiply by many times the number of judges and court facilities.

[More explicitly, in a speech to the American Bar Association,® the Chief Justice declared, “The consequence of what might seem on its face a small percentage change in the rate of guilty pleas can be tremendous. A reduction from 90
percent to 80 percent in guilty pleas requires the assignment of twice the judicial manpower and facilities — judges, court reporters, bailiffs, clerks, jurors and courtrooms. A reduction to 70 percent trebles this demand.”]

ALBERT W. ALSCHULER, BOOK REVIEW, 12 CRIM. L. BULL. 629, 632 (1976): The prospect of multiplying current criminal court resources several times over may seem unthinkable until one realizes how limited these resources are. The situation in
my own jurisdiction, however, seems typical. [In] a county of more than 250,000 people, one judge hears felony cases full-time, and another hears felony cases part-time. To multiply these resources five times, or ten . . . would require no more than
the building and staffing of a single new courthouse, a task that might be almost as difficult as the building and staffing of a new hospital or a new high school. If the need were in the area of medicine or education, however, responsible citizens
would at least talk about meeting it. They would not insist that “practical necessity” required bargaining with patients to “waive” their operations or with students to “waive” their classes.
QUESTIONS: If a trial with the full package of due process safeguards is simply too time-consuming and expensive to provide in every criminal case, should
p12
p.122

jurisdictions seek, in lieu of plea bargaining, to solve that problem by streamlining their trial procedures while ensuring that these more efficient trials are afforded without penalty to every defendant who wants one? Would the dangers to the inno-
cent of reducing our traditional due process safeguards be greater than the dangers of preserving those safeguards while making them costly for defendants to invoke?

In one approach to the resource problem, pioneered in Philadelphia, defendants typically receive no inducement to plead guilty but gain sentencing concessions by waiving their right to a jury and accepting a bench trial. Commenting
on this solution, one observer notes (Stephen J. Schulhofer, Is Plea Bargaining Inevitable?, 97 Harv. L. Rev. 1037, 1083-1084 (1984)):

By waiving a jury, the defendant [often reduces] the probability of an acquittal on grounds of reasonable doubt. . . . [But even when the jury waiver does deprive the defendant of a valuable procedural right, it does not de-

prive him of all valuable procedural rights. . .. The defendant retains the rights to confront the witnesses against him, to object on constitutional or other grounds to the admissibility of evidence, to cross-examine witnesses,

to develop factual defenses, to have his guilt determined on the basis of the testimony presented in open court, to have that testimony evaluated under applicable substantive law, and to test by appeal any of the trial judge's

rulings on matters of admissibility, legal interpretation, or evidentiary weight. . . . [Apart from isolated aberrations, all the bench trials we observed were genuinely contested proceedings. The lawyers remained within their

traditional adversary roles, and the judges took seriously their obligation to adjudicate. Participants were (normally) courteous to one another, but they did not cooperate at the expense of their separate institutional respon-

sibilities. Cases were not compromised but were decided on the governing law and the evidence.

QUESTIONS: Is the Philadelphia solution preferable to a two-tier system that offers most defendants either a full-fledged jury trial or a guilty plea with a substantially reduced sentence? Nearly all American jurisdictions prefer the two-tier ap-
proach. What might explain the unpopularity of the Philadelphia solution?

Another proposal for streamlining trials is to have prosecutors and defendants bargain over which aspects can be eliminated or modified. For example, defendants could agree to limit the number of witnesses they will call, to waive the
right to confront witnesses, or to give up the privilege against self-incrimination and testify in exchange for leniency from the prosecutor in the form of dropped charges or sentencing concessions. Gregory M. Gilchrist, Trial Bargaining, 101 lowa
L. Rev. 609, 622-623 (2016). Is this model of prosecutors and defendants bargaining over specific trial rights beyond the right to a jury preferable to the Philadelphia model because it allows the parties to evaluate which aspects of a trial are most
important to them? Or does this approach create too great a risk that defendants will lose important constitutional protections given the bargaining leverage prosecutors have? Is this risk more significant than the risk that exists when defendants
agree to waive all trial rights and plea?

2. The propriety of sentencing concessions. Is there a legitimate justification for imposing a lower sentence on defendants who plead guilty than on

p.122

p.128
defendants whose offense and other relevant circumstances are identical, except that they were found guilty at trial? In United States v. Rodriguez, 162 F.3d 135 (1st Cir. 1998), three members of a cocaine distribution conspiracy pleaded guilty
and were sentenced to time served, 17 months and 60 months, respectively, with the differences primarily reflecting differences in their prior records. Two of their co-conspirators, whose records were comparable and whose alleged roles in the
offense were essentially identical, pleaded not guilty; after conviction at trial, they were sentenced to 235 months and 260 months respectively. Why should the defendants who chose to go to trial have received longer sentences? Why should they
have received sentences that were that much longer?

Courthouse legend has it that many a judge will justify these kinds of sentence differentials by explaining openly and without embarrassment, “He takes some of my time; | take some of his.” Are there better reasons? The American Bar
Association has noted that concessions are appropriate when a defendant is “genuinely contrite”; when concessions allow for “alternative correction measures”; when “the defendant, by making public trial unnecessary, has demonstrated genuine
remorse or consideration for the victims”; and when the defendant's cooperation results in the prosecution of others who have committed equally serious or more serious crimes. American Bar Association, Standards: Pleas of Guilty, §14-1.8(a) (3d
ed. 1999).

For another view, consider the following:

SCOTT v. UNITED STATES, 419 F.2D 264, 271, 276-277 (D.C. CIR. 1969) (BAZELON, C.J.) [The court first rejected the “contrition” rationale for sentencing concessions, but then offered a different justification for them,] If the defendant were unaware
that a proper display of remorse might affect his sentence, his willingness to admit the crime might offer the sentencing judge some guidance. But with the inducement of a lighter sentence dangled before him, the sincerity of any cries of mea
culpa becomes questionable.

[It may seem that] the defendant who insists upon a trial and is found guilty pays a price for the exercise of his right when he receives a longer sentence than his less venturesome counterpart who pleads guilty. In a sense he has. . . .
After the fact, the defendant who pleads innocent and is convicted receives a heavier sentence. But, by the same token, the defendant who pleads innocent and is acquitted receives no sentence. To the extent that the bargain struck reflects only
the uncertainty of conviction before trial, the “expected sentence before trial” — length of sentence discounted by probability of conviction — is the same for those who decide to plead guilty and those who hope for acquittal but risk conviction
by going to trial. . .. If the sentence expectations of those two classes at that time are the same, then there will be no chilling effect upon exercise of the right to trial, and it is accurate to say that no “price” has been placed upon exercise of the
right. ...

The situation is quite different when the prosecutor engages in bargaining not because he is willing to take a sure half loaf rather than to await the outcome of a trial, but because his limited resources convince him he must deter
defendants from demanding a trial. The divide between the two situations may be difficult to locate for even the best-intentioned prosecutor, and even more difficult for a trial judge to review. . .. But this reality imposes a special duty upon courts
to provide what guidance they can for prosecutors entrusted with such discretion. In the area of plea bargaining, the lodestar must be the realization that our law solemnly

p.128

p12
promises each man accused his day in court. If a prosecutor enters plea and charge negotiations not with the purpose of adjusting the charge to reflect the uncertainties of litigation but with the goal of deterring the defendant from the exercise of
his right to a trial, the chasm between promise and reality is no narrower because the trial court affects a righteous air of non-involvement.

3. Cooperation. The ABA highlights cooperation as an appropriate ground for making a sentencing concession in a plea deal. At the federal level, the number one basis for a departure below the recommended sentencing guideline
is a prosecution motion that the defendant provided substantial assistance.‘7 Offering substantial assistance to the government is also the only way for most defendants to avoid an otherwise applicable mandatory minimum sentence. 18 U.S.C.
§3553(e). In a letter opposing reforms to federal mandatory minimum laws, an organization representing Assistant United States Attorneys emphasized that those sentences are needed to entice defendants to cooperate and to enable prosecutors
to work their way “up the food chain” of drug conspiracies. Robert Gay Guthrie, NAAUSA Letter to Senate Judiciary Committee regarding Mandatory Minimum Sentencing, 26 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 233, 234-235 (2014). On what theory of punishment is
cooperation worthy of a sentencing discount? Are cooperation discounts different in principle from discounts for waiving the right to trial? If so, which practice is more dubious?

What are the costs of giving discounts to cooperators? For a general discussion, see Miriam Hechler Baer, Cooperation’s Cost, 88 Wash. U. L. Rev. 903 (2011). Note that only defendants who know about other offenders can obtain this
discount. As a result, bigger fish in a criminal organization, because they know of lots of other criminal activity, often can obtain a significant discount, yet those at the lowest level may have nothing to offer and receive a much higher sentence. Is
there adequate justification for imposing more severe sentences on the defendants at the lowest levels of criminal responsibility? The Innocence Project estimates that 15 percent of the wrongful conviction cases involved false testimony by infor-
mants who had incentives to lie, including from deals with prosecutors for lower sentences. Innocence Project, Safeguarding Against Unreliable Jailhouse Informant Testimony, https://innocenceproject.org/?causes=incentivized-informants (last
visited June 20, 2021). For an argument that plea deals are a major source of wrongful convictions, see Alexandra Natapoff, Negotiating Accuracy: DNA in the Age of Plea Bargaining, in Wrongful Convictions and the DNA Revolution: Twenty-Five
Years of Freeing the Innocent 85 (Daniel Medwed ed., 2017).

4. Criminal history. Sentencing laws that mandate long sentences for repeat offenders increase the bargaining power of prosecutors because offenders with criminal histories face especially long sentences if convicted at trial. As a
result, one scholar argues, prosecutors effectively bear a lower burden of proof in cases involving recidivists than cases with first-time offenders. Russell D. Covey, Longitudinal Guilt: Repeat Offenders, Plea Bargaining, and the Variable Standard
of Proof, 63 Fla. L. Rev. 431 (2011). Is this situation justified by the offender's criminal past or

p12
p. 126

should greater protections be in place to ensure that offenders with a criminal history are not coerced into pleading guilty to a crime they did not commit?

5. Freedom of choice. Many critics of plea bargaining believe that defendants are harmed by sentencing concessions that pressure them to waive their trial rights. Others see plea bargaining through the lens of contract, arguing that
defendants who take pleas view their trial rights as worth less than the leniency they gained by “selling” them; if not, they would have rejected the offer. As in a commercial transaction, when each party can choose whether to accept or reject a
proposal, an agreement they both prefer to accept seems, by definition, to leave them better off (in their own best judgment) than they would be without the deal. Consider Robert E. Scott & William J. Stuntz, Plea Bargaining as Contract, 101 Yale
LJ. 1909, 1914-1915 (1992):

The defendant has the right to . . . force the prosecutor to prove the case at trial. The prosecutor has the right to seek the maximum sentence. .. . It is easy to imagine some circumstances where each party values the other's

entitlement more than his own. If so, the conditions exist for an exchange that benefits both parties and harms neither. The defendant will trade the right to . . . force a trial for the prosecutor's right to seek the maximum

sentence. ...

Moreover, the gains the participants realize from the exchange presumably have social value, not just value to the bargaining parties. Plea bargaining provides a means by which prosecutors can obtain a larger

net return from criminal convictions, holding resources constant. Criminal defendants, as a group, are able to reduce the risk of the imposition of maximum sanctions. . . . In short, the existence of entitlements implies the

right to exploit those entitlements fully, which in turn implies the right to trade the entitlement or any of its associated risks.

QUESTIONS: (a) Given that prosecutors are entitled to seek the maximum sentence for any provable offense, does it follow that the existence of those entitlements “implies the right to exploit those entitlements fully”? Or are there considerations,
independent of the plea, that should guide the prosecutor's judgment about the appropriate sanction?

(b) As applied to a defendant like Brady (p. 108 supra), who faced the death penalty, is it plausible to consider his guilty plea a voluntary choice? Or, as Alschuler puts it (p. 111 supra), was his decision in effect made “at gunpoint,” like
arobbery victim who agrees to turn over his cash to avoid physical violence? Should plea bargains be treated like coerced confessions, where too much pressure renders the defendant's choice unlawful? See Drips, supra. Does it make a mean-
ingful difference that Brady's predicament resulted only because there was a significant chance of lawfully sentencing him to death after conviction at trial?

(© Ifa bargain is beneficial to particular defendants (because of the severe sentence they would face after conviction at trial), does it follow that the institution of plea bargaining benefits defendants as a group? The unconstitutional
conditions doctrine forbids bargains in which parties agree to abandon their constitutional rights, because such bargains may detract from overall social welfare. Absent such a doctrine, individuals might nevertheless agree to such socially de-
structive bargains.

p. 126

p.126
For an argument that plea bargains place unconstitutional conditions on the exercise of the jury trial right, see Robert Schehr, The Emperor's New Clothes: Intellectual Dishonesty and the Unconstitutionality of Plea-Bargaining, 2 Tex. A&M L. Rev.
385 (2015). The Court’s willingness to accept plea bargaining appears to be an exception to the general rule against bargaining away constitutional rights. Why should criminal trial rights be treated differently from other constitutional rights?

The plea-bargaining system presumably would benefit defendants generally if — after abolition of plea bargaining — defendants convicted at trial would face the same severe sentences that they had faced before abolition; such
defendants would be worse off after abolition than when they were able to plead guilty in exchange for leniency. But if guilty plea concessions were abolished, would society impose on all defendants the relatively severe sentences that are now
reserved for only the small, 5-10 percent minority of defendants who refuse to plead guilty? What would happen to prison populations and state budgets in that event? Alternatively, if the abolition of guilty plea concessions required a substantial
reduction of average sentences imposed after conviction at trial, would defendants as a group be better or worse off than they were in the system that permits plea bargaining?

(@) Josh Bowers argues that the system of plea bargaining helps one common type of innocent defendant: an innocent recidivist in a low-stakes case. He argues that such a defendant is better off having than not having the option of a
plea bargain because the guilty plea often gets that defendant out of pretrial detention quickly and avoids an unwelcome pretrial process. Josh Bowers, Punishing the Innocent, 156 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1117 (2008). But is the plea-bargaining system —
the practice of imposing higher sentences on defendants who go to trial — necessary for the innocent defendant in misdemeanor cases to realize those benefits? Why can’t jurisdictions abolish plea bargaining without insisting that every defen-
dant go through a full trial?

6. Structural problems. Can we be reasonably confident that defendants considering a plea offer will make the choice that is in their own best interest? Of course, “buyer's remorse” is a common phenomenon in ordinary commercial
transactions; it does not in itself suggest that consumers should be prohibited from buying what they think they want. But plea bargaining presents an additional complication because — unlike a contract negotiation between a single buyer and
seller — the relevant parties to a plea bargain (the defendant and the public) are each represented by agents (the defense attorney and the prosecutor). And those agents may be influenced by personal interests at odds with the best interests of the
party they represent. Are there times when a plea bargain could be to the advantage of a prosecutor, even though it was not in the best interests of the public? Prosecutors, particularly in large counties and districts, face crushing caseloads. Some
commentators argue that these resource pressures create an environment where prosecutors are “asked to commit malpractice on a daily basis by handling far more cases than any lawyer can competently manage,” which can lead to errors that
harm defendants, victims, and the public. Adam M. Gershowitz & Laura R. Killinger, The State (Never) Rests: How Excessive Prosecutorial Caseloads Harm Criminal Defendants, 105 Nw. U. L. Rev. 261, 263-265 (2011). One commentator proposes
having prosecutors responsible for jail budgets to better align plea-bargaining incentives with their fiscal costs. Adam M. Gershowitz, Consolidating Local Criminal Justice: Should the Prosecutors Control the Jails?, 51 Wake Forest L. Rev. 677
(2016).

p.126
p.127

Various biases may lead plea bargaining to disadvantage particular communities and individuals. For a discussion of cognitive factors that may distort prosecutorial priorities, see Sarah Anne Mourer, Believe It or Not: Mitigating the
Negative Effects Personal Belief and Bias Have on the Criminal Justice System, 43 Hofstra L. Rev. 1087 (2015); Alafair S. Burke, Prosecutorial Passion, Cognitive Bias, and Plea Bargaining, 91 Marq. L. Rev. 183 (2007). For a discussion of how the
race of the defendant leads to disparate outcomes in plea bargaining, particularly in cases of misdemeanors and low-level felonies, see Carlos Berdejo, Criminalizing Race: Racial Disparities in Plea-Bargaining, 59 B.C. L. Rev. 1187, 1191 (2018).

Could a plea bargain benefit a defense attorney even though it was not advantageous to her client? Stephanos Bibas discusses some biases that may affect defense counsel, including financial incentives and psychological irrationali-
ties. Stephanos Bibas, Plea Bargaining Outside the Shadow of Trial, 117 Harv. L. Rev. 2463 (2004). See also Molly K. Walker Wilson, Defense Attorney Bias and the Rush to Plea, 65 Kan. L. Rev. 271 (2016) (arguing that, because of defense attorney
biases, defendants themselves should have more control and involvement in the plea-bargaining process).

Consider Stephen J. Schulhofer, Plea Bargaining as Disaster, 101 Yale L.J. 1979, 1987-1990 (1992):

Both the chief prosecutor (the District Attorney) and her assistants have numerous incentives to pursue goals that diverge from the public's interest in optimal [punishment]. [For example, the D.A. may seek] a high conviction

rate, a good relationship with influential private attorneys, and an absence of high-profile trial losses. [Often] she will want to ensure settlement, even if this requires overly generous plea offers. . . . Front-line prosecutors . . .

may or may not share the District Attorney's [goals]. Hence, there is an additional layer of [conflicting interests] in the relationship between the chief prosecutor and her assistants. . . .

Like prosecutors, defense attorneys [often] have powerful incentives to avoid trial, even when a trial would be in the client's interest. . . . [NJearly all [retained] attorneys work for a flat fee paid in advance. Since
court rules usually prohibit defense counsel from withdrawing once an appearance has been entered, a retained attorney is obliged to take her case to trial if settlement negotiations fail, and in that event, her additional ser-
vices are rendered free of charge. Accordingly, financial pressure to settle is intense.

Counsel appointed for the indigent [sometimes] are conscripted from the list of those admitted to the bar and are required to serve without any compensation [or at rates far below market value]. Understanding

the impact of such systems on the attorney's incentives to settle does not require a Ph.D. in economics. . . . Appointed attorneys in many jurisdictions volunteer for criminal defense work and are paid for their services. But

in nearly all cases, compensation takes the form of either a flat fee per case, or a low hourly rate coupled with a ceiling on total compensation [that is] almost invariably identical for guilty plea cases and those that go to trial.

[The attorney who counsels his client against accepting a plea must do so knowing that his time spent preparing and trying the case will be provided entirely free of charge... .

p.127
p.128

Conflict of interest problems are less dramatic for public defenders because they have no immediate financial incentive to avoid trial. But defender organizations, which are typically run as agencies of state or

county government, . . . develop a strong priority for moving their caseloads.

[Blecause both prosecutors and defense counsel have interests that diverge from those of the parties they represent, both sides may lack sufficient zeal. . .. But we have no reason to expect that conflict of inter-

est effects neatly balance one another in any particular case. More likely, [conflicts of interest] generate inadequate deterrence in some cases and harm to defendants, especially innocent defendants, in others.

QUESTIONS: If criminal defense services are typically underfunded and infected by conflicts of interest, won't those problems undermine the faimess and reliability of the trial process as well? Judge Frank Easterbrook writes (Criminal Procedure
asa Market System, 12 J. Legal Stud. 289, 309 (1983) that conflict-of-interest problems in plea bargaining are “trivial” because “[]]awyers may cut corners at trial too.” In what ways, specifically, can conflicts of interest affect an attorney's perfor-
mance at trial? Are the conflict-of- interest effects more serious (or less serious) than those at work in the plea-bargaining context? How do the opportunities for monitoring poor representation differ in the two contexts? See Stephen J. Schulhofer,
Criminal Justice Discretion as a Regulatory System, 17 J. Legal Stud. 43, 57-59 (1988).

7. Penalties and coercion. The very phrase plea “bargain” suggests that defendants get a benefit for pleading guilty. But another way to view the dynamic is that defendants get penalized for opting to go to trial. How one character-
izes the nature of the arrangement may depend on how big the difference is between the offers made and the sentences defendants receive if they go to trial. In the 1970s, when the official acknowledgment and endorsement of plea bargaining
was still recent, statistics suggested that, on average, the sentencing concession received for a guilty plea was small or nonexistent. See Stephen J. Schulhofer, Due Process of Sentencing, 128 U. Pa. L. Rev. 733, 757 & n.97 (1980).

Current data indicate, however, that the trial penalty is now substantial. In a 2018 report, the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, using data from the U.S. Sentencing Commission, notes that for most offense categories,
the average post-trial sentence was more than three times longer than the average post-plea sentence.“® There is some evidence that trial penalties are greater in large urban counties. Jeffrey T. Ulmer & Mindy S. Bradley, Variation in Trial Penalties
Among Serious Violent Offenses, 44 Criminology 631, 656 (2006). Nonetheless, there is considerable evidence that defendants sometimes plead guilty believing they are getting a “good deal,” only to receive a sentence just as severe as the one
they would have received if convicted at trial. Is this phenomenon unfair, or does it give society “the best of both worlds”? Conversely, consider the situation in jurisdictions where sentences imposed after jury trials routinely are three times longer
than those imposed in comparable cases after pleas. Is that phenomenon reassuring (the

p.128
p.129
guilty plea defendants got a substantial bargain) or worrisome (defendants faced too much pressure to plead guilty whether actually guilty or not)?

Note that the percentage of acquittals after a trial has declined dramatically in many jurisdictions in recent decades, raising the possibility that many defendants who previously would have elected a trial and won acquittal are now
pleading guilty instead. Ronald F. Wright, Trial Distortion and the End of Innocence in Federal Criminal Justice, 154 U. Pa. L. Rev. 79 (2005). This raises the “innocence problem”: Innocent defendants will plead guilty if the trial penalty is large
enough. One study found that 148 of 166 attorneys had had at least one case where a client chose to plead guilty despite maintaining innocence.‘2 We know that 11 percent of individuals exonerated by DNA evidence (typically defendants con-
victed of rape or murder) had pled guilty.52

John Blume and Rebecca Helm point out that the incentives may vary depending on the type of crime the defendant is accused of committing. Defendants charged with minor crimes who are innocent may have an incentive to plead
guilty to avoid process costs. Many are detained in jail pending their trial because they are too poor to make bail; thus a guilty plea gets them out of confinement and back to work or caring for their families. Even those released pending trial
may prefer to plead guilty to avoid having to report for various hearings that cause them to miss work or other obligations. Blume & Helm, The Unexonerated: Factually Innocent Defendants Who Plead Guilty, 100 Cornell L. Rev. 157, 174 (2014).
Innocent individuals facing more serious charges have a different set of incentives and are more likely to plead guilty when the risk of a much longer sentence after conviction at trial is too great to run. Id. at 180. An experimental study tested this
dynamic in the context of students facing academic discipline and found that more than half of innocent students were willing to falsely admit wrongdoing in exchange for leniency. Lucian E. Dervan & Vanessa A. Edkins, The Innocent Defendant's
Dilemma, 103 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1 (2013).

How can we ensure that a prosecutor does not threaten defendants with sentences that, even after discounting for the possibility of acquittal, are much more severe than the sentences the defendants can guarantee themselves by
pleading guilty? Consider the case that follows.

Bordenkircher v. Hayes

Supreme Court of the United States
434 U.S. 357 (1978)

Justice Stewart delivered the opinion of the Court... .

The respondent, Paul Lewis Hayes, was indicted by a Fayette County, Ky., grand jury on a charge of uttering a forged instrument in the amount of $88.30, an offense then punishable by a term of 2 to 10 years in prison. After arraign-
ment, Hayes, his retained counsel, and the Commonwealth's Attorney met in the presence of the Clerk of the Court to discuss a possible plea agreement. During these conferences

p.129

p. 190
the prosecutor offered to recommend a sentence of five years in prison if Hayes would plead guilty to the indictment. He also said that if Hayes did not plead guilty and “savel] the court the inconvenience and necessity of a trial,” he would return
to the grand jury to seek an indictment under the Kentucky Habitual Criminal Act, which would subject Hayes to a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment by reason of his two prior felony convictions. Hayes chose not to plead guilty, and the
prosecutor did obtain an indictment charging him under the Habitual Criminal Act. . . . A jury found Hayes guilty on the principal charge of uttering a forged instrument and [as] required by the habitual offender statute, he was sentenced to a life
term in the penitentiary. The Kentucky Court of Appeals [affirmed].

On Hayes’ petition for a federal writ of habeas corpus, [the court of appeals] thought that the prosecutor’s conduct during the bargaining negotiations had violated the principles . . . which “protect{ed] defendants from the vindictive
exercise of a prosecutor's discretion.” Accordingly, the court ordered that Hayes be discharged “except for his confinement under a lawful sentence imposed solely for the crime of uttering a forged instrument.” We granted certiorari... .

This Court held in North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711, 725, that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment “requires that vindictiveness against a defendant for having successfully attacked his first conviction must play
no part in the sentence he receives after a new trial.” . .. To punish a person because he has done what the law plainly allows him to do is a due process violation of the most basic sort. . .. But in the “give-and-take” of plea bargaining, there is no
such element of punishment or retaliation so long as the accused is free to accept or reject the prosecution's offer.

Plea bargaining flows from “the mutuality of advantage” to defendants and prosecutors, each with his own reasons for wanting to avoid trial. Defendants advised by competent counsel and protected by other procedural safeguards are
presumptively capable of intelligent choice in response to prosecutorial persuasion, and unlikely to be driven to false self-condemnation. ...

While confronting a defendant with the risk of more severe punishment clearly may have a “discouraging effect on the defendant's assertion of his trial rights, the imposition of these difficult choices [is] an inevitable” — and permissible
— “attribute of any legitimate system which tolerates and encourages the negotiation of pleas.” It follows that, by tolerating and encouraging the negotiation of pleas, this Court has necessarily accepted as constitutionally legitimate the simple
reality that the prosecutor's interest at the bargaining table is to persuade the defendant to forgo his right to plead not guilty. [So] long as the prosecutor has probable cause to believe that the accused committed an offense defined by statute,
the decision whether or not to prosecute, and what charge to file or bring before a grand jury, generally rests entirely in his discretion.® Within the limits set by the legislature's constitutionally valid definition of chargeable offenses, “the conscious
exercise of some selectivity in enforcement is not in itself a federal constitutional violation” so long as “the selection was [not] deliberately based upon an unjustifiable standard such as race, religion, or other arbitrary classification.” To hold that the
prosecutor's desire to induce a guilty

p. 190

p13
plea is an “unjustifiable standard,” which, like race or religion, may play no part in his charging decision, would contradict the very premises that underlie the concept of plea bargaining itself. Moreover, a rigid constitutional rule that would prohibit
a prosecutor from acting forthrightly in his dealings with the defense could only invite unhealthy subterfuge that would drive the practice of plea bargaining back into the shadows from which it has so recently emerged.

There is no doubt that the breadth of discretion that our country’s legal system vests in prosecuting attorneys carries with it the potential for both individual and institutional abuse. And broad though that discretion may be, there are
undoubtedly constitutional limits upon its exercise. We hold only that the course of conduct engaged in by the prosecutor in this case, which no more than openly presented the defendant with the unpleasant alternatives of forgoing trial or facing
charges on which he was plainly subject to prosecution, did not violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. . . .

Justice BLACKMUN, with whom JusTice BRENNAN and JusTICE MARSHALL join, dissenting. . . .

In Pearce, as indeed the Court notes, it was held that “vindictiveness against a defendant for having successfully attacked his first conviction must play no part in the sentence he receives after a new trial.” . . . Yet in this case vindictive
ness is present to the same extent as it was thought to be in Pearce . . . ; the prosecutor here admitted, that the sole reason for the new indictment was to discourage the respondent from exercising his right to a trial...

It might be argued that it really makes little difference how this case, now that it is here, is decided. The Court's holding gives plea bargaining full sway despite vindictiveness. A contrary result, however, merely would prompt the aggres-
sive prosecutor to bring the greater charge initially in every case, and only thereafter to bargain. The consequences to the accused would still be adverse, for then he would bargain against a greater charge, face the likelihood of increased bail, and
run the risk that the court would be less inclined to accept a bargained plea. Nonetheless, it is far preferable to hold the prosecution to the charge it was originally content to bring and to justify in the eyes of its public.

p13
p. 192

Justice PoweLL, dissenting. ..

The deference that courts properly accord the exercise of a prosecutor's discretion perhaps would foreclose judicial criticism if the prosecutor originally had sought an indictment under [the Habitual Criminal] Act, as unreasonable as it
would have seemed. But here the prosecutor evidently made a reasonable, responsible judgment not to subject an individual to a mandatory life sentence when his only new offense had societal implications as limited as those accompanying the
uttering of a single $88 forged check. . . . | think it may be inferred that the prosecutor himself deemed it unreasonable and not in the public interest to put this defendant in jeopardy of a sentence of life imprisonment... .

[If the plea-bargaining] system is to work effectively, prosecutors must be accorded the widest discretion, within constitutional limits, in conducting bargaining. [But iJmplementation of a strategy calculated solely to deter the exercise of
constitutional rights is not a constitutionally permissible exercise of discretion. | would affirm the opinion of the Court of Appeals on the facts of this case.

DAVID LYNCH, THE IMPROPRIETY OF PLEA AGREEMENTS: A TALE OF TWO COUNTIES, 19 LAW & SOC. INQUIRY 115, 125 (1994): After spending three years as a public defender, [I was hired] as an assistant district attorney . . . in nearby Lincoln
County [the author's pseudonym for a county of 350,000 people in a large Eastern state]. . . .| quickly learned that prosecutors in Lincoln County were the real judges when it came to sentencing decisions. By allowing plea bargaining, . .. Lincoln
County judges successfully dumped the burdens of sentencing most criminal defendants onto prosecutors. How did prosecutors in Lincoln County handle this sentencing burden? The answer, | quickly learned, was “any way they wanted to.”
There were no official rules that bound me or my fellow prosecutors in the making of plea-bargaining offers. And though some counties here and there do have them, there were no internal office guidelines in Lincoln County either. . .. Prosecutors,
then, had nearly complete discretion in deciding what offers to make to defense counsel.

Unlike judges, who in Lincoln County were required by law to consider sentences in light of official guidelines developed by the state legislature, Lincoln County prosecutors merely used such guidelines as general starting points. If their
“gut” told them that the guidelines weren't appropriate, they could ignore them entirely, or else re[-Jlabel one crime as something else, so that it would fit neatly into the sentence guideline range they desired. There were many instances in which
prosecutors would decide the appropriate sentence; offer it to defense counsel who then accepted; then search the crimes code for some offense that would produce the “correct” sentence.

This is not to say that prosecutors spent long periods of time agonizing over appropriate sentences. A prosecutor would often work through a pile of cases in machine-gun fashion, making snap decisions as to appropriate punishments
in

p. 192

p. 138
just a few minutes per case. These few minutes (perhaps 3 or so for misdemeanors and 10 for serious felonies) included all the time devoted to (1) examining police reports and all the evidence; (2) reviewing the defendant's prior criminal history; (3)
deciding the defendant's fate as to sentencing; and (4) putting the plea offer into a form letter to be sent to defense counsel. [W]hat was also noteworthy was the surprising lack of training we prosecutors received for our sentencing roles. . . .

There were, in fact, people who were equipped to help the court decide appropriate sentences — presentence investigators who constituted a specialized unit within the probation office. They would, when asked, carefully prepare
sophisticated, lengthy presentence reports [which] included detailed background information on the defendant, . .. sentencing recommendations, and other vital information. But these reports were typically prepared only when judges were going
to be doing the sentencing. Since prosecutors did most of the real sentencing, this crucial resource was grossly underutilized.

NOTES

1. Line-attorney discretion. The environment described in the preceding excerpt appears to be common. Most district attorneys’ offices do not significantly constrain the plea-agreement terms that front-line prosecutors can
negotiate. The prevailing pattern in U.S. Attorneys’ offices seems to be somewhat different. Nearly all offices require that plea agreements be in writing, and most have review procedures of some sort. See Mary Patrice Brown & Stevan E. Bunnell,
Negotiating Justice: Prosecutorial Perspectives on Federal Plea Bargaining in the District of Columbia, 43 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1063 (2006). But in practice supervisory review is often cursory, and the review procedures leave considerable room for
evasion. In some U.S. Attorneys’ offices, for example, prosecutors must seek approval to dismiss readily provable counts, but need not seek approval to dismiss a count that the front-line prosecutor deems not readily provable. See Stephen J.
Schulhofer & Ilene H. Nagel, Plea Negotiations Under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, 91 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1284, 1295 (1997).

QUESTIONS: David Lynch is skeptical of the value of allowing front-line prosecutors the kind of unsupervised discretion that he himself was permitted to exercise in “Lincoln County.” Does such a system have any advantages? Why do so many
chief district attorneys accept it?

2. The court's supervisory role and the separation of powers. If district attorneys’ offices are unwilling to channel or supervise the plea-bargaining practices of their front-line prosecutors, should the courts themselves impose
some guidelines or review procedures?

Jeffrey Bellin points out the importance of judges (Reassessing Prosecutorial Power Through the Lens of Mass Incarceration, 116 Mich. L. Rev. 835, 849 (2018)):

Judges must approve all plea deals. If the judge believes the deal does not fairly reflect the defendant's conduct, she can reject it. . . . If the judge approves a deal, she typically retains final say on the sentence. While some

p. 198
p. 194

plea agreements dictate a particular sentence, others leave the sentence to the judge. In either scenario, the judge determines the ultimate sentence by implicitly approving the parties’ stipulated sentence or explicitly

selecting the sentence. . . . The empirical basis for th[e] contention [that judges acquiesce to the deals struck by defendants and prosecutors] is uncertain. But even if it is an accurate assessment, a powerful check on pros-

ecutorial plea bargaining exists. That judges routinely approve plea bargains does not mean that they are powerless. It suggests only that judges’ preferences align with those of the attorneys who work in their courts.

Why might judges fail to serve as stronger checks on prosecutorial plea-bargaining practices? Is Bellin right that this failure might be explained by the fact that judges agree with prosecutors, and if so, why might they share a common view?
Judges are disproportionately drawn from the ranks of former prosecutors, so that might help explain some of this dynamic. But even judges who are not former prosecutors typically sign off on plea agreements. What are some other reasons they
might be reluctant to second guess the deal reached by the parties?

Would greater judicial oversight violate the separation of powers, by interfering with a legitimate prosecutorial function? Or would it preserve the separation of powers, by protecting the judicial authority to determine appropriate pun-
ishment? Consider State v. Lagares, 601 A.2d 698 (N.J. 1992). The case involved a statute allowing prosecutors complete discretion in deciding whether to seek an extended sentence for drug offenders with a previous drug conviction. The court
required the state attorney general to develop guidelines for determining when it was permissible for a prosecutor to seek the extended sentence. Did this measure violate or preserve an appropriate separation of powers?

The Supreme Court of New Jersey explained in a later case what it deems necessary to avoid separation-of-powers problems when the legislature gives sentencing discretion to prosecutors: (1) “uniform statewide guidelines designed
to channel that discretion and minimize sentencing disparity between counties”; (2) a written statement by the prosecutor with reasons why the prosecutor exercised discretion in a particular way, “in order to facilitate effective judicial review”; and
(3) judicial oversight by the sentencing court “to ensure that prosecutorial discretion is not exercised in an arbitrary and capricious manner.” State v. A.T.C., 217 A.3d 1158, 1171 (N.J. 2019). The court set out these requirements in the context of a
case involving a New Jersey statute that allowed prosecutors to waive a mandatory minimum. Are these requirements an appropriate exercise of the judicial role, or do they interfere with executive authority? Should legislatures impose these re-
quirements as a means of allowing judges to check prosecutorial overreach?

Another scholar proposes that the criminal justice system borrow an approach from the civil class action system: When judges have concern about prosecutors’ plea decisions, they should state those concerns on the record and ask
prosecutors to state reasons for those decisions on the record in open court. “That record would help direct information to supervisors in the prosecutor's office and improve the direct political check on prosecutors by providing fodder for elec-
toral challengers and more information to voters.” Russell M. Gold, “Clientless” Prosecutors, 51 Ga. L. Rev. 693, 701 (2017).

p19
p. 195

3. Imposing a consistency requirement. For another possible approach for promoting the proper exercise of prosecutorial discretion in plea bargaining, consider William J. Stuntz, The Political Constitution of Criminal Justice, 119
Harv. L. Rev. 780, 838, 841 (2005):

For all crimes with a sentence of incarceration, prosecutors should be required to show that some number of other defendants in factually similar cases within the same state have been convicted of the same crime. [T]his

rule would limit prosecutors’ ability to threaten unusual criminal liability in order to extract guilty pleas. . . . For prosecutors, the message [of Bordenkircher] is: threaten everything in your arsenal in order to get the plea you

want. [Legislators [then] have every reason to vote for harsh penalties, secure in the knowledge that prosecutors need not and will not enforce them as written. [T]he only way to break this cycle is to require that the laws be

enforced regularly or not at all.

QUESTIONS: What does it mean to require a law to be enforced “regularly”? Would this requirement get to the root problem of plea bargaining or simply give prosecutors an incentive to threaten harsh penalties more often, in order to get to
“some number” of convictions that would be sufficient to establish a regular practice?

4, Putting a cap on the trial penalty. Another possible solution to excessive prosecutorial leverage is for jurisdictions to limit the differential between sentences offered in pleas and those given after trial. One commentator argues for
plea-based ceilings to guarantee that defendants would not receive a sentence following a trial conviction that is more severe than any plea offer made to them — except by a “modest, pre-determined amount.” Russell D. Covey, Fixed Justice:
Reforming Plea Bargaining with Plea-Based Ceilings, 82 Tul. L. Rev. 1237 (2008). Maximo Langer similarly suggests that, during the plea colloquy, the trial judge should ask the defendant what the prosecutor threatened the sentence would be after
trial, and advocates that the judge should reject the plea if the potential trial sentence is “clearly disproportionate.” Langer, Rethinking Plea Bargaining: The Practice and Reform of Prosecutorial Adjudication in American Criminal Procedure, 33 Am.
J. Crim. L. 223, 284 (2006). Another scholar proposes that trial penalties should be ruled unconstitutionally coercive as a matter of due process when a rational innocent person would plead guilty, a determination made by looking at the difference
between the likely sentence after conviction as compared to the plea offer and the risk that the trial will result in an erroneous conviction. Donald A. Dripps, Guilt, Innocence, and Due Process of Plea Bargaining, 57 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1343 (2016).
Gerard E. Lynch
Our Administrative System of Criminal Justice

66 Fordham L. Rev. 2117 (1998)
Because our governing ideology does not admit that prosecutors adjudicate guilt and set punishments, the procedures by which they do so are neither formally
p. 195
p. 196
regulated nor invariably followed . . . 2 The rules conceive of the prosecutor as an autonomous party to an adversary proceeding, who has no more obligation to listen to his adversary's arguments before acting than does any civil litigant... .

[In practice, however] prosecutors are generally prepared to [listen]. [Flederal white-collar criminal investigations involving well-financed defendants . . . represent the system in its most elaborate form. . . . Defense counsel's contacts

with the prosecutor during the preliminary stages of an investigation range from informal contacts designed to find out the nature of the allegations, .. . to elaborate formal presentations arguing that prosecution is not appropriate. . . As the inves-

tigation reaches its conclusion, defense counsel will often make extensive, formal arguments. . ..[Ilf the line prosecutor rejects the defense’s contentions, counsel may seek “appellate review” by the prosecutor's supervisors, at ascending levels
of prosecutorial bureaucracy. . ..

Although both the defense lawyers and the prosecutorial bureaucracy may operate with one eye on the eventual litigation that may result at the end of the internal process . . . it would be a mistake to analogize these decisions too
closely to settlement discussions involving private parties. [P]rosecutors are not seeking simply to maximize the amount of jail time that can be extracted from their adversaries, regardless of guilt or innocence; rather, they undertake to determine,
in response to the defendant's arguments, whether the evidence truly demonstrates guilt, and if so, what sentence is appropriate. . . .

That such procedures exist, and that they undertake a quasi-judicial function, does not mean that they are necessarily fair. . .. Unlike a judge or jury, the prosecutor remains free to speak ex parte with either the defense lawyer or the
police, and frequently does so. Moreover, the extent and nature of these ex parte contacts are hardly symmetrical. . .. Law enforcement agencies and prosecutors are . . . part of the same “team,” and their discussions, unlike those between pros-
ecutors and defense lawyers, are affirmatively concerned with accomplishing shared goals . . . 2 Even more importantly, the usual burdens of production and persuasion tend to be reversed. . . . The precise nature of the charges has not usually
been specified, and the evidence on which they will be based is not often disclosed. . . . The decisionmaker, moreover, is under no obligation to give reasons for a rejection of the defendant's arguments. [W]hen the process operates at its best, . ..
the process cannot be dismissed as arbitrary. It is not, however, an adversarial or judicial system. It is an inquisitorial and administrative one, characterized by informality and ad hoc flexibility of procedure.

Seen in the light of this administrative adjudicatory structure, it becomes apparent that the very term “plea bargaining” is something of a misnomer. . . . First of all, in many courts not all that much haggling goes on. [YJou will get no
farther “bargaining” with the prosecutor than you will by making a counteroffer on the price of a can of beans at the grocery.

p. 196
p.197

On the other hand, not every case comes off the rack; some need, and receive, custom tailoring. [I]n a typical white-collar fraud investigation, defense counsel . . . will often spend hour after hour in the prosecutor's office, making pre-
sentations and arguments. [Blecause [the prosecutor] does not see herself as an interested party seeking personal advantage [but] as a public official, seeking “justice” . .. [] the self-definition of the prosecutor affects the nature of the arguments
that can be used. . . . The ideology of at least some marketplaces permits the merchant openly to rely on superior bargaining power and to reject arguments from fairness; prosecutors, who will often have the power to impose terms, would be
sharply criticized if they declined to consider arguments that the terms imposed are unjust. . . .

The frequent disparity of power between the prosecutor and the defendant makes the role-definition of the prosecutor particularly important to the outcome of the negotiation. [T]he prosecutor may hold the virtually unilateral power to
inflict pain on the defendant. In many cases, for example, potential defendants perceive that an indictment alone, even if it ultimately results in acquittal, is an unbearable outcome. . . . In other situations, conviction [and a] harsh outcome at trial
[may be a certainty], given the elastic definitions of substantive crimes, the severe and unpredictable (or in the case of mandatory sentences, all too predictable) sentences that may be applicable. .. . In such cases, the defendant is often likely to
take, in the end, whatever plea the prosecutor can be persuaded to offer. Defense counsel's bargaining posture may implicitly threaten a trial, but both sides may know that the defense is very likely arguing to the ultimate decisionmaker about the
nature of a fair outcome, rather than proposing an exchange of values based on relative bargaining strength. . ..

Because American lawyers have a large investment in the myth of the adversarial system, it is hard for us even to see this administrative system of punishment, let alone to approve of it. . .. Because the prosecutor represents one side
in an anticipated adversarial proceeding, to acknowledge her role as a de facto adjudicator would be to make her the judge in her own case. Of course, if we continue to see the prosecutor as an adversarial “bargainer,” settling her client's dispute
with the defendant, this problem disappears, for this kind of bargaining between adversaries is an accepted part of an adversarial system. Legitimizing plea bargaining by insisting on the prosecutor's role as an adversarial bargainer, however, may
encourage prosecutors to indulge exactly the wrong aspects of their divided mentality. . .. Treating pre-indictment decisionmaking and plea bargaining as an aspect of the adversary process makes it inevitable that decisions that ought to be taken
in a spirit of judgment will be heavily influenced by considerations of adversarial tactics. Justice is much better served when prosecutors determining whether to indict or making plea offers see themselves as quasi-judicial decisionmakers, obli-
gated to reach the fairest possible results, rather than as partisan negotiators looking to extract every ounce of advantage for their client. .. .

We should not [of course] abandon the due process model in favor of a formalized administered system, that would substitute for judicial judgment in criminal cases an administrative finding by a “Criminal Adjudication Agency.” . .. So
long as the de facto administrative process operates within the shell of the due process model, defendants retain the power to opt out of that process and submit

p.197

p. 198
themselves instead to a formal judicial procedure that is bound strictly by due process rules. That is a much stronger protection for the innocent than a deferential reasonableness review of prosecutorial decisions. .. .

An understanding of the different functions of the administrative and judicial aspects of our current system, [however], should help us to identify areas in need of change — and areas where change is not needed. First, an appreciation of
the true role of the jury trial in our system might make us a little more cautious about efforts to streamline courtroom procedure in the interest of more efficient law enforcement. In our actual system, [the] jury trial serves . . . as the fail-safe appellate
process that promotes the reasonableness of prosecutorial-administrative determinations by setting the limits within which it operates. That trials are cumbersome does not directly harm the efficiency of criminal procedure, because most cases
do not involve trials at all...

Second, . . . greater formality of procedure could enhance the fairness of the [plea bargaining] process. . . . Defendants should have a right to be heard, both by the prosecutor in charge of a case and by supervisory prosecutors. . . .
Greater attention should also be paid to the selection of prosecutors, and to the nature of their career paths. In [European] systems, both prosecutors and judges are career civil servants, selected at an early age by merit-based criteria, and then
advanced over the course of their careers by normal bureaucratic processes. American prosecutors [often] are more transient, seeking a few years of excitement, public service, or intense trial experience before pursuing private sector opportu-
nities as criminal defense lawyers or civil litigators. The district attorneys and United States Attorneys who direct their efforts may be elected or appointed, and constitute a mix of career prosecutors, prominent members of the bar, and politically
active lawyers. .. . Some greater measure of independence and judiciousness would seem suited to officials who have the awesome and often final power wielded by prosecutors today. . . .

[Wie should not be entirely cynical about the possibility that government officials can conduct themselves with fairness and in the broadest public interest. [MJost do. [But we] need institutional checks, . . . not primarily to detect those
who act in bad faith, but to prevent the excesses that can be committed with good intentions.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. The administrative law/criminal law contrast. If charging and the making of plea offers have indeed become administrative processes of the sort Judge Lynch describes, should they be subject to the safeguards we routinely
require for other administrative actions affecting individuals? In formal administrative proceedings, individuals get notice of charges, a right to be heard, a written decision supported by reasons and evidence, and a right of appeal to higher levels
within the agency. Should all of these rights be available in the context of charging decisions and plea offers? Would giving defendants these rights increase the perceived legitimacy of the criminal justice system? See Michael O'Hear, Plea Bar-
gaining and Procedural Justice, 42 Ga. L. Rev. 407 (2008). Or would such requirements prove so cumbersome that prosecutors would evade them — moving decisions about charges and plea offers even further into the shadows than they are
now? Which safeguards are both required for fairness and workable in practice?

Administrative law suggests other caveats for plea bargaining. Judge Lynch observes that prosecutors essentially “adjudicate guilt and set punishments.” To the

p. 198

p. 199
extent that charging and bargaining are administrative processes, shouldn't criminal law follow the administrative-law principle that those who investigate a case should be barred from adjudicating — in this case, from deciding what to charge or
what plea to accept? Some scholars argue that this is a workable means to police plea bargaining.°! For additional institutional-design proposals rooted in administrative models, see Rachel Elise Barkow, Prisoners of Politics: Breaking the Cycle
of Mass Incarceration 144-154 (2019); Stephanos Bibas, Designing Plea Bargaining from the Ground Up: Accuracy and Fairness Without Trials as Backstops, 57 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1055 (2016). For an argument that we should shift from an adver-
sarial-run system to an inquisitorial one, in which judges have greater control, see Christopher Slobogin, Plea Bargaining and the Substantive and Procedural Goals of Criminal Justice: From Retribution and Adversarialism to Preventative Justice
and Hybrid-Inquisitorialism, 57 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1505 (2016).

2. The federal/state contrast. Judge Lynch focuses especially on the dynamics of charging and bargaining in federal prosecutions for white-collar crime. That setting has several distinctive features. First, although no prosecutor's
resources are ever unlimited, the U.S. Attorney's Office, together with the federal agencies that investigate white-collar crime — for example, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Environmental Protection Agency — have greater re-
sources at their disposal for investigating and trying cases than the typical district attorney's office. Second, a federal prosecutor has more freedom to set priorities and choose cases than her state counterpart does. Some white-collar cases (such

as fraud) can be referred out for prosecution in the state courts, and nearly all cases can be downgraded to civil enforcement actions or dropped completely; in state courts, in contrast, much of the caseload consists of traditional crimes against
persons and property that may be more difficult to disregard. Finally, the white-collar defendant in a federal case is typically represented by experienced, well-compensated counsel.

What safeguards would be appropriate to ensure that an “administrative” system functions properly when (as in more than 80 percent of all criminal cases) the defendant is represented by the public defender or by court-appointed
counsel paid under a schedule of strictly limited fees? For a proposal that the criminal system adopt a fee-shifting scheme from the civil system to provide more funding for public defenders, see Russell M. Gold, Carissa Byrne Hessick & F. Andrew
Hessick, Civilizing Criminal Settlements, 97 B.U. L. Rev. 1607, 1652-1656 (2017).

D. FORMAL TRIALS
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The course of a criminal trial naturally differs in some points of detail from jurisdiction to jurisdiction and from case to case. This preliminary overview nonetheless provides a broadly accurate summary of how a formal criminal trial
typically unfolds.

p. 199
p. 140

Akey player at the trial, the finder of fact, will be either a jury or a single judge sitting without a jury. The latter procedure, called a bench trial, can be used only if the defendant agrees to waive a jury, and it is employed only in a small
minority of formal trials.

A jury trial typically begins with selection of the jurors. A panel of prospective jurors (called a venire) enters the courtroom, and the judge describes the nature of the case and the identity of the parties, so that prospective jurors who
are personally involved can be excused. Prospective jurors are then questioned individually by the judge or by opposing counsel to determine possible bias. On the basis of this questioning (called voir dire) prospective jurors may be excused for
cause, and both prosecution and defense may remove a certain number of the panel, without showing cause, by exercising peremptory challenges. When the requisite number of acceptable jurors (usually 12) has been obtained by this procedure,
the panel members take their oath and are sworn in.

Now the presentation of the case begins. Usually the indictment is read to the jury, and the prosecution makes an opening statement outlining the facts it plans to prove. Defense counsel also may make an opening statement. Claims
made in these statements do not constitute evidence; they serve only to help the jury understand the testimony about to be presented. In many jurisdictions, motions relating to the scope or validity of the indictment and motions to suppress evi-
dence must be made prior to trial. In others, such motions can be made at the outset of the trial. If the judge grants a motion to dismiss the indictment, the case will terminate at this point. Otherwise the trial goes forward, although motions may be
made or renewed as the trial proceeds.

Next the prosecution calls its witnesses. Their testimony often evokes objections from counsel, and the judge must decide the bounds of permissible testimony under complex rules of evidence. We examine some of these rules in the
section that follows. When the prosecution finishes presenting its evidence, the defense may choose to stand on the presumption of innocence and move for a directed verdict or judgment of acquittal on the ground that the charges have not been
proved beyond a reasonable doubt. If that motion is not made, or if the motion is made and denied, the defense may decide to offer its own evidence (through the defendant or other witnesses). The prosecution can then present further evidence
in rebuttal. When both sides finish presenting their evidence, opposing counsel may make closing arguments to the jury. Ordinarily the prosecution's closing argument is presented first (because it bears the burden of proof), and the prosecutor is
usually allowed an opportunity for rebuttal after the closing argument of the defense.

At this point the work of the opposing parties has been completed. The judge now takes a crucial step — presenting instructions to the jury. Ordinarily, judicial comment on the evidence tends to be cautious and limited. Formal instruc-
tions on the law, however, are always given, and they are typically quite detailed. The instructions serve both as a guide for the jury's deliberations and as a focal point for challenges on appeal in the event of a conviction. Usually the instructions

cover responsibilities of the jurors (for example, how to elect a foreperson, when to refrain from discussing the case with other jurors or outsiders), matters related to the relevance of particular kinds of testimony, and, above all, detailed explana-
tions of the substantive criminal law applicable to the case, including the facts necessary to establish the offense charged and definitions of legal concepts that the jury is called on to apply.
p.140
p.14t

Finally, the jury retires to deliberate in secret. Its verdict of guilty or not guilty on each charge must be reached unanimously. When the jury is unable to agree unanimously on a verdict of either guilty or not guilty (a hung jury case), a
mistrial is declared, and the defendant then may be retried at the prosecutor's discretion.

After a verdict of guilty, the trial usually terminates, and the jurors are excused. Typically the judge will determine the defendant’s punishment 30 or 60 days later, after the judge reviews a court officer's presentence report. (In a few
states, the jury determines the sentence at the trial itself.) There may of course be an appeal. The reviewing court, ifit finds trial errors, will reverse the conviction, and it is permitted to order another trial, since American double jeopardy principles
generally do not bar the retrial of a defendant who has successfully appealed the conviction.£2 A verdict of not guilty is not subject to review of any kind, even when flagrant errors prejudicial to the prosecution occurred at trial.22

This, in rough outline, is how guilt must be established when a criminal case is fully litigated. The further details of trial procedure are a subject for other books and other courses, but the remainder of this section focuses on three
procedural issues that are especially important for understanding substantive criminal law. First, it briefly explains what “evidence” is and when such evidence can be formally presented in court. Then it explores in depth two matters of procedure
that have a decisive impact on how criminal law functions in practice — the requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt and the role of the jury.

1. The Presentation of Evidence
NOTES

1. The order of proof. At trial the evidence is presented in a formally prescribed order. The prosecution first calls witnesses in an effort to prove the elements of the offense charged. As we have seen, p. 140 supra, the case may
terminate at this point if the prosecution fails to sustain its burden of proof. If not, the defense may then call witnesses to refute the prosecution's case-in-chief or to establish some affirmative defense. The prosecution has an opportunity to recall
witnesses or to call new witnesses for purposes of rebuttal, that is, to refute evidence offered by the defense. The defense in turn is afforded a chance to answer by rejoinder any matters introduced in the prosecutor's rebuttal.

p.14t
p.142

Within these stages the examination of each witness follows a similar pattern. The witness is first questioned by the party that called the witness (direct examination), and afterward the opposing party has an opportunity to question
that witness (cross-examination). Further questioning by the first party (re-direct) and by the opposing side (re-cross) may follow.

2. Relevance. The rules governing the admissibility of evidence are extremely complex. For present purposes, it will be useful to begin by focusing on one obvious but deceptively simple requirement, the rule of relevancy. Irrelevant
‘evidence is never admissible. The converse cannot be stated so categorically. Relevant evidence is generally admissible, but there are many exceptions to this principle. Before turning to the exceptions, we must first be clear about the meaning
of relevancy.

Evidence is considered relevant for purposes of the rules of evidence only if it is both probative and material, and these are precise terms of art:

Evidence is probative only if it tends to establish the proposition for which it is offered or — to be precise — if the proposition is more likely to be true given the evidence than it would be without the evidence. The meaning of the techni-
cal term probative therefore is different from that of two similar terms — proof and probable. Evidence can be probative without by itself proving the proposition in question; probative evidence does not even have to make the proposition probable.
Instead, probative value is a comparative idea; it requires only that the evidence makes the proposition more likely to be true than it would be without that evidence. So if certain evidence creates a 10 percent chance that the proposition is true,

when there is only a 1 percent chance that the proposition would be true without that evidence, then the 10 percent chance of being true is enough to make that evidence probative. In other words, probative evidence is only one link in a chain of
relevant facts that, taken together, establish a defendant's guilt. The idea is often summed up by saying “a brick is not a wall”: A solid “brick” of incriminating evidence can be admissible without by itself establishing guilt; proof results from the wall
built from many individual bricks.

Consider this example: Suppose that A is on trial for the murder of A’s spouse B, and suppose that the prosecution wants to introduce evidence that A stood to inherit a substantial estate on B’s death. This classic evidence of motive
— that A would benefit financially from B's death — clearly is probative. Of course, the existence of the motive does not, by itself, make it probable that is the killer. But A is more likely to be the killer if A had a motive than if A did not; this greater
likelihood is all that is required to establish probative value.

Evidence must also be material. Probative value alone is often thought of as synonymous with relevancy. But relevancy for purposes of the rules of evidence requires in addition that the evidence be material — it must tend to prove a
proposition that will affect the outcome of the case. In a homicide prosecution, evidence that the defendant acted in self-defense is material, because substantive criminal law recognizes self-defense as a defense. But evidence that the deceased
asked to be killed is not material, because homicide law does not accept the deceased's consent as a defense. Evidence that D killed V because V was in great pain and pleaded with D to end V's life might be important to the ordinary person's in-
tuitive assessment of D's culpability, but at trial on the question whether D is guilty of murder, that evidence is not “relevant” within the meaning of the rules of evidence because V’s consent is not a defense to a homicide charge.

p.142
p.149

In short, evidence may be excluded as irrelevant for one of two distinct reasons — either because the evidence does not tend to establish the proposition in question or because that proposition is not material to the outcome of the
case. The materiality requirement means that the first prerequisite for determining the relevancy and hence the admissibility of evidence is a command of the substantive law of crimes.

We may sum up what we have so far said about relevancy by quoting the formulation used in the Federal Rules of Evidence:

Rule 401

Evidence is relevant if (a) it has any tendency to make a fact more or less probable than it would be without the evidence; and (b) the fact is of consequence in determining the action.

Rule 402

Relevant evidence is admissible unless [otherwise provided]. Irrelevant evidence is not admissible.

3. Privilege. When is relevant evidence not admissible? The law of evidence embodies dozens of distinct rules requiring the exclusion of relevant evidence. For example, the various rules relating to privilege give individuals the right to
withhold certain kinds of relevant testimony, often in order to protect particular interests of a witness or particularly important relationships with others.

One of the most important privileges is the privilege against self-incrimination. The Fifth Amendment provides: “[NJor shall [any person] be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.” The Supreme Court has
construed this provision to imply that the government cannot require a criminal defendant to take the witness stand, cannot invite a jury to draw adverse inferences from a defendant's refusal to testify, and cannot in any other way compel the
defendant to disclose potentially incriminating facts about the case. These principles are of great significance for the substantive criminal law. They not only make the prosecutor's task more difficult than it otherwise would be, but they pose an
especially difficult barrier when the defendant's own frame of mind is an essential part of what the prosecutor must prove. The privilege against self-incrimination places largely beyond the government's reach the best (and sometimes the only) in-
formation about these elusive state-of-mind facts. As a result, substantive criminal law must constantly consider whether the government should be obliged to prove state-of-mind facts, and if so, what kinds of evidence will satisfy that obligation.

4, Other exclusionary rules: prejudice. Like the rules of privilege, many other rules exclude relevant evidence. One of the best known is the rule barring the use of evidence obtained through an illegal search. Indeed, criminal lawyers
often refer to this prohibition as the exclusionary rule, and it is a major topic of study in criminal procedure. We will consider some of the other exclusionary rules in connection with the substantive crimes for which they have the greatest signifi-
cance.*4 We focus here on one pervasively important rule — the rule that evidence must be excluded whenever its probative value is substantially outweighed by its prejudicial effect.

p.149

p44

The term prejudicial effect has a technical meaning. To pursue the example previously mentioned, suppose that in A’s murder prosecution, testimony is offered that, shortly before the discovery of B's bullet-ridden body, A was seen
running from the scene carrying a smoking revolver. This testimony will undoubtedly be harmful to A’s chances for acquittal, but it will not be prejudicial in the technical sense, because its harmfulness flows solely from its legitimate probative
value. Evidence is considered prejudicial only when it is likely to affect the result in some improper way. Thus, prejudice is involved if the jury is likely to overestimate the probative value of the evidence or if the evidence will arouse undue hostility
toward one of the parties. To ensure clarity on this point, the rules of evidence in many jurisdictions stipulate that in order to be excludable because of illegitimate harm to a party's case, the evidence must involve unfair prejudice. Again, the Fed-
eral Rules of Evidence give a typical formulation of this principle:

Rule 403 . . . The court may exclude relevant evidence if its probative value is substantially outweighed by a danger of one or more of the following: unfair prejudice, confusing the issues, misleading the jury, undue delay,

wasting time, or needlessly presenting cumulative evidence.

Concern about prejudicial effect, even when evidence is logically relevant, has a major influence on the substantive criminal law, and we will encounter it repeatedly in the chapters that follow. The principle of weighing probative value against
prejudicial effect is particularly central to developing doctrines in such areas as rape shield laws; the adequacy of victim provocation in homicide; battered spouse evidence; and testimony concerning intoxication, diminished capacity, and the in-
sanity defense.

5, Analternative to exclusion: cautionary instructions. When evidence might arouse undue prejudice in the minds of the jury, one alternative often used instead of complete exclusion of the evidence is for the judge to admit it but
then wam the jury to consider that evidence only for its legitimate probative value, putting out of mind its potentially prejudicial effect. A similar situation arises when a defendant invokes the privilege against self-incrimination. It is natural for jurors
to assume that a defendant who does not testify “has something to hide.” The jury therefore may take the defendant's silence as evidence of guilt. To counteract that dynamic, the jury will be instructed that the defendant has a constitutional right
to remain silent and that the jury must not consider that silence to be evidence of guilt. Yet such an instruction requires the jury to perform an intellectual task that is bound to run counter to the jury's natural inclinations. The problem arises over
and over in administering the complex rules that ostensibly govern the criminal process. Just as the jury creates the need for many of these rules, the nature of the jury raises doubts about whether subtle or counterintuitive instructions actually af-
fect the outcome of the case.

Experienced judges have expressed sharply divergent views about the effectiveness of jury instructions. In Spencer v. Texas, 385 U.S. 554, 565 (1967), the Supreme Court expressed its faith in “the ability of juries to approach their task
responsibly and to sort out discrete issues given to them under proper instructions.” Others have been more skeptical. Justice Robert H. Jackson warned: “The

pias

p. 146
naive assumption that prejudicial effects can be overcome by instructions to the jury . . . all practicing lawyers know to be unmitigated fiction.” Krulewitch v. United States, 336 U.S. 440, 453 (1949) (concurring opinion). In Dunn v. United States, 307
F.2d 883, 886 (5th Cir. 1962), the court was equally pessimistic:

[O]ne cannot unring a bell; after the thrust of the saber it is difficult to say forget the wound; and finally, if you throw a skunk into the jury box, you can’t instruct the jury not to smell it.

The empirical evidence is mixed. A study of pretrial publicity found that volunteer “jurors” exposed to a sensational newspaper account of the case were much more likely to convict, but among jurors instructed to disregard the news-
paper accounts, the difference in conviction rates disappeared.®° In contrast, researchers found that exposure to a legally inadmissible confession significantly increased the likelihood of a guilty verdict when other evidence was weak and that
instructions to disregard the confession had no significant effect on the likelihood of conviction.5° Studies focusing on the impact of juror exposure to a defendant's record of prior convictions often find that evidence of previous similar offenses
substantially increases the likelihood of conviction and that cautionary instructions remove little or none of the prejudicial effect.57 Some studies suggest, ironically, that a cautionary instruction actually may increase the likelihood of conviction, es-
pecially when it is given at the end of the trial — possibly because the instruction reminds the jury about the negative information and makes it more salient just when deliberations are about to begin.5°

To the extent that cautionary instructions fail to eradicate prejudicial effects, the result could be due, in part, to jurors’ inability to understand the subtle distinctions that such instructions sometimes require. Several studies have pro-
duced disturbing evidence that jurors often do not grasp the judge’s explanations of legal concepts. One study found that the average juror understands less than half of the judge’s instructions on the law.52
p.145
p.146
QUESTIONS ON JURY INSTRUCTIONS

Whatever the available evidence may suggest about the usefulness of jury instructions, there clearly remain substantial doubts about whether instructions are as effective in practice as they are assumed to be in theory. What are the
implications of this situation? Given that jury instructions function imperfectly (at best), what is the alternative?

One pragmatic approach has been to work on improving the wording of instructions, so that their meaning is easier to understand.®2 Beyond this, when judges tell a jury to disregard evidence, should they explain why the law considers
the evidence misleading? The standard cautionary instructions tend to be rather perfunctory. For ways to convey a more forceful message, see Albert W. Alschuler, Courtroom Misconduct by Prosecutors and Trial Judges, 50 Tex. L. Rev. 629,
652-654 (1972).

Can ameliorative reforms cure these difficulties, or is the basic problem more fundamental? Note that jury instructions are necessary in the first place only because we want citizens without special training to participate, and at the same
time, we want their decisions to conform to law. Do these partially inconsistent desires require a system that is simply too complex to function properly? This problem can be reconsidered in connection with the materials on other countries’ ap-
proaches to lay participation. See pp. 169-170 infra.

2. Proof Beyond a Reasonable Doubt
In re Winship

‘Supreme Court of the United States

397 U.S. 358 (1970)

[The defendant, a juvenile, was charged with committing acts that, if done by an adult, would have constituted larceny. The juvenile court found by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant had committed the acts as
charged, and it ordered him confined for one and a half years at a “training school.” In one part of its opinion, the Supreme Court held that the judge in a juvenile delinquency proceeding cannot apply a lower standard of proof than that applicable
in a criminal trial. The Court accordingly had to decide whether the preponderance-of-the-evidence standard was constitutionally permissible in a criminal case.)

Justice BRENNAN delivered the opinion of the Court... .

The requirement that guilt of a criminal charge be established by proof beyond a reasonable doubt dates at least from our early years as a Nation. . .. The

p.146
p.147

reasonable-doubt standard . . . is a prime instrument for reducing the risk of convictions resting on factual error. The standard provides concrete substance for the presumption of innocence — that bedrock “axiomatic and elementary” principle
whose “enforcement lies at the foundation of the administration of our criminal law.” . .

The accused during a criminal prosecution has at stake interests of immense importance, both because of the possibility that he may lose his liberty upon conviction and because of the certainty that he would be stigmatized by the
conviction. Accordingly, a society that values the good name and freedom of every individual should not condemn a man for commission of a crime when there is reasonable doubt about his guilt. ...

Moreover, use of the reasonable-doubt standard is indispensable to command the respect and confidence of the community in applications of the criminal law. It is critical that the moral force of the criminal law not be diluted by a
standard of proof that leaves people in doubt whether innocent men are being condemned. It is also important in our free society that every individual going about his ordinary affairs have confidence that his government cannot adjudge him guilty
of acriminal offense without convincing a proper factfinder of his guilt with utmost certainty.

[Wie explicitly hold that the Due Process Clause protects the accused against conviction except upon proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to constitute the crime with which he is charged.

Justice HARLAN, concurring. ..

If. .. the standard of proof for a criminal trial were a preponderance of the evidence rather than proof beyond a reasonable doubt, there would be a smaller risk of factual errors that result in freeing guilty persons, but a far greater risk
of factual errors that result in convicting the innocent. Because the standard of proof affects the comparative frequency of these two types of erroneous outcomes, the choice of the standard to be applied in a particular kind of litigation should, in
a rational world, reflect an assessment of the comparative social disutility of each.

When one makes such an assessment, the reason for different standards of proof in civil as opposed to criminal litigation becomes apparent. In a civil suit between two private parties for money damages, for example, we view it as no
more serious in general for there to be an erroneous verdict in the defendant's favor than for there to be an erroneous verdict in the plaintiff's favor. ..

In acriminal case, on the other hand, we do not view the social disutility of convicting an innocent man as equivalent to the disutility of acquitting someone who is guilty. . . . In this context, | view the requirement of proof beyond a
reasonable doubt in a criminal case as bottomed on a fundamental value determination of our society that it is far worse to convict an innocent man than to let a guilty man go free.

NOTES
1. The basis of the no-reasonable-doubt requirement. Is it clear, as Justice Harlan argues, that the “social disutility” of convicting an innocent person is always far worse than that of releasing a guilty person? William Blackstone
went even further, asserting the often-repeated view that it is “better that ten guilty persons
p.147
p.148
escape, than that one innocent suffer.” 4 William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England *352 (1765). Other judges and commentators have approved even higher ratios, such as one hundred to one or even more. See Alexander Volokh,
n Guilty Men, 146 U. Pa. L. Rev. 173, 187-191 (1997). But how can we really be sure that it is less “costly” to release ten (or one hundred) suspected serial killers who are in fact guilty than to convict one suspected serial killer who is innocent?

If we think about the issue solely from a cost-benefit perspective, is the no-reasonable-doubt requirement too high in the case of a fine-only misdemeanor offense? See Gustavo Ribeiro, The Case for Varying Standards of Proof, 56 San
Diego L. Rev. 161 (2019); Talia Fisher, Conviction Without Conviction, 96 Minn. L. Rev. 833 (2012). How should the indirect burdens and downstream consequences of a criminal conviction (for example, impediments to getting a job and sentenc-
ing enhancements for having a prior record) affect this calculus?

Conversely, consider the all-too-frequent occurrence of cases in which an innocent person is wrongfully convicted despite the requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt. Do these cases suggest that the no-reasonable-doubt
requirement should be made even more demanding? See Keith A. Findley, Reducing Error in the Criminal Justice System, 48 Seton Hall L. Rev. 1265 (2018). Should we insist on an especially high burden of proof, even higher than proof beyond a
reasonable doubt, when the cost of erroneous conviction is unusually high, for example when a conviction carries the death penalty or a sentence of life without parole?

Although the no-reasonable-doubt requirement appears to enjoy broad support, some skeptics wonder where Blackstone and Justice Harlan can get the information necessary to calculate and compare these kinds of social costs. If
the cost comparisons are arbitrary and indeterminate, does it follow that the no-reasonable-doubt requirement is not justified after all? Or does the no-reasonable-doubt requirement rest on a different principle? Regardless of any alleged balance
of societal gains and losses, doesn't every individual enjoy a fundamental right not to suffer punishment in the absence of reliable proof of fault?

2. How burden-of-proof problems arise. Problems relating to the reasonable-doubt issue normally arise first at the close of the prosecution's case. If the judge decides that the evidence raises a reasonable doubt about guilt as a
matter of law (an elusive concept explored in the next Note), the judge must direct a verdict for the defendant. The same problem of assessing the sufficiency of the evidence may be presented to the judge again at the close of all the evidence
(when the defendant may again move for a directed verdict); it will be a central concem of the jurors in their deliberations; and it may arise again on appeal (when the defendant may seek reversal on the basis of insufficient evidence).

3. Reasonable doubt as a matter of law. Courts often have difficulty determining whether the evidence is insufficient as a matter of law. In a sense the judges must give the defendant the benefit of the doubt. If there is a reasonable
doubt, then a guilty verdict would seem improper. On the other hand, before taking a case away from the jury (or reversing a jury's verdict), judges must resolve all evidentiary doubts against the proponent of the motion; in this sense the courts
must give the prosecution the benefit of the doubt on the question whether its evidence does prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The following comment from Curley v. United States, 160 F.2d 229, 232-233 (D.C. Cir. 1947), helps clarify this
problem and explains the test that judges apply to determine evidentiary sufficiency:

p.148
p.149

[It is sometimes said] that unless the evidence excludes the hypothesis of innocence, the judge must direct a verdict . . . [and] that if the evidence is such that a reasonable mind might fairly conclude either guilt or innocence,

a verdict of guilt must be reversed on appeal. But obviously neither of those translations is the law. Logically the ultimate premise of that thesis is that if a reasonable mind might have a reasonable doubt, there is, therefore,

reasonable doubt. That is not true. . ..

The functions of the jury include the determination of the credibility of witnesses, the weighing of the evidence, and the drawing of justifiable inferences of fact from proven facts. It is the function of the judge to

deny the jury any opportunity to operate beyond its province: The jury may not be permitted to conjecture merely, or to conclude upon pure speculation or from passion, prejudice or sympathy. . .. If the evidence is such that

reasonable jurymen must necessarily have [a reasonable] doubt, the judge must require acquittal, because no other result is permissible within the fixed bounds of jury consideration. But if a reasonable mind might fairly have

reasonable doubt or might fairly not have one, . . . the decision is for the jurors to make... .

The true rule, therefore, is that a trial judge, in passing upon a motion for directed verdict of acquittal, must determine whether upon the evidence, giving full play to the right of the jury to determine credibility,

weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact, a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. .. . If he concludes that either of the two results, a reasonable doubt or no reasonable

doubt, is fairly possible, he must let the jury decide the matter.

4, Explaining reasonable doubt. The problem of evidentiary sufficiency arises not only for judges but for the jury, and the instructions accordingly must tell the jury how to evaluate the evidence. Empirical studies confirm that jurors
convict more readily when instructed under a more-likely-than-not standard than when instructed under the no-reasonable-doubt standard,°1 and courts must protect the jury against any instruction that might dilute the latter standard. Accord-
ingly, a conviction must be reversed for error in explaining the no-reasonable-doubt requirement to the jury, even when the appellate court does not find the evidence insufficient as a matter of law.

(a) In McCullough v. State, 657 P.2d 1157 (Nev. 1983), the trial judge had explained degrees of proof to the jury in terms of “a scale of zero to ten.” He placed the burden of persuasion in civil trials at just over five. He then described
beyond a reasonable doubt as “seven and a half, if you had to put it on a scale.” The Nevada Supreme Court reversed, stating (id. at 1159): “The concept of reasonable doubt is inherently qualitative. Any attempt to quantify it may impermissibly
lower the prosecution's burden of proof, and is likely to confuse rather than clarify.” In In re As. H., 851 A.2d 456 (D.C. 2004), the only witness to identify the suspect as the perpetrator testified that her level of certainty was “seven or eight” on a
scale of one to ten. Although acknowledging that it is “difficult (if not impossible) to place a

p.149
Tne 9150

meaningful numerical value on reasonable doubt,” the court found that “very few judges would consider an 80% probability sufficient” and that 70 percent was “altogether inadequate.” Accordingly, the court held (over one dissent) that as a matter
of law “the evidence was insufficient to prove [guilt] beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. at 457, 461.

(b) Courts often get into trouble when attempting to explain “reasonable doubt” in qualitative terms. In Cage v. Louisiana, 498 U.S. 39 (1990), the trial judge in a first-degree murder prosecution had instructed the jury that “a reasonable
doubt [must be] founded upon a real tangible substantial basis and not upon mere caprice and conjecture. It must be such doubt as would give rise to a grave uncertainty. . . . A reasonable doubt is not a mere possible doubt. . . . What is required
is not an absolute or mathematical certainty, but a moral certainty.” The Supreme Court reversed the conviction, holding that the references to “grave uncertainty” and “moral certainty” improperly diluted the Winship standard.

(©) A traditionally accepted definition of reasonable doubt was the following, which was required by Cal. Penal Code §1096 (1994):

Reasonable doubt is . . . not a mere possible doubt; because everything relating to human affairs, and depending on moral evidence, is open to some possible or imaginary doubt. It is that state of the case which, after the

entire comparison and consideration of all the evidence, leaves the minds of the jurors in that condition that they cannot say they feel an abiding conviction, to a moral certainty, of the truth of the charge.

This language was drawn verbatim from an 1850 jury instruction given by Massachusetts Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw. See Commonwealth v. Webster, 59 Mass. 295, 320 (1850). What is the meaning, to a modern juror, of “moral evi-
dence” and “moral certainty”? Does the instruction meet the requirements of Winship and Cage v. Louisiana?

In Victor v. Nebraska, 511 U.S. 1 (1994) (decided with a companion case from California), the Court distinguished Cage and upheld the constitutionality of the California instruction. The Court conceded that “the phrase ‘moral evidence’
is not a mainstay of the modern lexicon,” and that “moral certainty is ambiguous” but concluded that the instruction as a whole gave sufficient content to the no-reasonable-doubt requirement. Several concurring justices agreed that use of the
nineteenth-century phrases was not unconstitutional but urged states to choose more modern language. California responded the following year by deleting the phrase “moral certainty”; the current statute describes reasonable doubt as a situa-
tion in which jurors “cannot say they feel an abiding conviction of the truth of the charge.” Cal. Penal Code §1096 (2021). Massachusetts, where the “moral certainty” language originated, continues to use it but now explains to the jury that moral
certainty means “the highest degree of certainty possible in matters relating to human affairs.” Commonwealth v. Russell, 23 N.E.3d 867, 878 (Mass. 2015). If taken literally, is this formulation too demanding?

Studies suggest that among various formulations, jurors told that they must be “firmly convinced” were most likely to differentiate between strong and weak cases, acquitting in the latter. But even when given the “firmly convinced”
language, “more than one-third of the [mock] juries voted to convict when the prosecution's

p. 150

p.151
evidence did not even satisfy a preponderance of the evidence standard.” See Stoltie v. California, 501 F. Supp. 2d 1252, 1261 (C.D. Cal. 2007). Many experts believe “[cJolloquial words that describe subjective certainty will likely be more effective
in explaining to the jury the truly high standard of proof.” Id. at 1262. But to date, courts have not required more emphatic explanations of this sort.

(d) Because reasonable doubt is difficult to explain correctly, courts in many states hold that trial judges should give the jury no explanation at all. E.g., People v. Downs, 69 N.E.3d 784 (lll. 2015).®2 In United States v. Walton, 207 F.3d
694 (4th Cir. 2000), a jury that had received no explanation of reasonable doubt sent the judge a note asking him to define it. After the judge refused, the jury convicted. The Fourth Circuit affirmed, stating that trying to explain things will “confuse
rather than clarify.” Is this an appropriate solution to the problem?

a. Allocating the Burden of Proof
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

An important aspect of the overall sufficiency of the evidence is the burden of proof on particular subsidiary issues in the case. Even though the prosecution must prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the defense sometimes can be

required to bear the burden of persuasion on certain subsidiary issues.

The Supreme Court considered one such effort to subdivide the burden of proof in Mullaney v. Wilbur, 421 U.S. 684 (1975). Mullaney involved Maine's complex scheme of homicide statutes. The state defined murder as a killing with
“malice aforethought,” and malice aforethought was defined as a state of mind consisting of, among other things, an intent to kill “without a considerable provocation.” A killing with provocation, classified as manslaughter, carried a lower punish-
ment. At the defendant's trial, the jury was instructed that any intentional killing would involve “malice aforethought” and would therefore constitute murder, unless the defendant could rebut malice aforethought by proving, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that he had acted “in the heat of passion, on sudden provocation.”

The Supreme Court held that the defendant's due process rights were violated by giving him the burden of proving provocation. Because provocation negated the “malice aforethought” required to convict him of murder, Maine had
violated the Winship requirement that the state prove “beyond a reasonable doubt every fact necessary to constitute the crime charged.”

Mullaney, however, left room for argument about why the absence of provocation was a necessary fact. Was it because provocation was inherently important in determining the degree of culpability and punishment? Or was it because
the absence of provocation had been included in the statutory definition of what murder was? The Supreme Court soon faced a case requiring it to choose between these two explanations.

p.151
p. 152
Patterson v. New York
Supreme Court of the United States
432 U.S. 197 (1977)

Justice WiITe delivered the opinion of the Court. ..

After a brief and unstable marriage, the appellant, Gordon Patterson, Jr., became estranged from his wife, Roberta. Roberta resumed an association with John Northrup, a neighbor to whom she had been engaged prior to her marriage
to appellant. On December 27, 1970, Patterson borrowed a rifle from an acquaintance and went to the residence of his father-in-law. There, he observed his wife through a window in a state of semiundress in the presence of John Northrup. He en-
tered the house and killed Northrup by shooting him in the head.

Patterson was charged with second-degree murder. In New York there are two elements of this crime: (1) “intent to cause the death of another person”; and (2) “caus|ing] the death of such person or of a third person.” Malice afore-
thought is not an element of the crime. In addition, the State permits a person accused of murder to raise an affirmative defense that he “acted under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance for which there was a reasonable explanation or
excuse.”2

New York also recognizes the crime of manslaughter. A person is guilty of manslaughter if he intentionally kills another person “under circumstances which do not constitute murder because he acts under the influence of extreme emo-
tional disturbance.” Appellant confessed before trial to killing Northrup, but at trial he raised the defense of extreme emotional disturbance.

The jury was . . . instructed, consistently with New York law, that the defendant had the burden of proving his affirmative defense by a preponderance of the evidence. The jury was told that if it found beyond a reasonable doubt that
appellant had intentionally killed Northrup but that appellant had demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that he had acted under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance, it had to find appellant guilty of manslaughter instead of
murder. The jury found appellant guilty of murder. [The New York Court of Appeals affirmed, rejecting Patterson's argument that the statutory scheme had improperly shifted to him the burden of proof on the crucial question of extreme emotional
disturbance]

In determining whether New York's allocation to the defendant of proving the mitigating circumstances of severe emotional disturbance is consistent with due process, it is . .. relevant to note that this defense is a considerably
expanded version of the common-law defense of heat of passion on sudden provocation and that at common law the burden of proving the latter, as well as other affirmative defenses — indeed, “all . . . circumstances of justification, excuse or al-
leviation” — rested on the defendant. 4 W. Blackstone, Commentaries *201. This was the rule when the Fifth Amendment was adopted, and it was the American rule when the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified.

p. 152

p. 153

In 1895 the common-law view was abandoned with respect to the insanity defense in federal prosecutions. Davis v. United States, 160 U.S. 469 (1895). This ruling had wide impact on the practice in the federal courts with respect to the
burden of proving various affirmative defenses, and the prosecution in a majority of jurisdictions in this country sooner or later came to shoulder the burden of proving the sanity of the accused and of disproving the facts constituting other affirma-
tive defenses, including provocation. Davis was not a constitutional ruling, however, as Leland v. Oregon, [343 U.S. 790 (1952)], made clear.

At issue in Leland v. Oregon was the constitutionality under the Due Process Clause of the Oregon rule that the defense of insanity must be proved by the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. Noting that Davis “obviously estab-
lish{ed] no constitutional doctrine,” the Court refused to strike down the Oregon scheme, saying that the burden of proving all elements of the crime beyond reasonable doubt, including the elements of premeditation and deliberation, was placed
on the State under Oregon procedures and remained there throughout the trial. To convict, the jury was required to find each element of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt, based on all the evidence, including the evidence going to the issue of
insanity. Only then was the jury “to consider separately the issue of legal sanity per se. . ..” This practice did not offend the Due Process Clause even though among the 20 States then placing the burden of proving his insanity on the defendant,
Oregon was alone in requiring him to convince the jury beyond a reasonable doubt... .

We cannot conclude that Patterson's conviction under the New York law deprived him of due process of law. . . . The death, the intent to kill, and causation are the facts that the State is required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt if a
person is to be convicted of murder. No further facts are either presumed or inferred in order to constitute the crime. . . . It seems to us that the State satisfied the mandate of Winship [p. 146 supra] that it prove beyond a reasonable doubt “every
fact necessary to constitute the crime with which [Patterson was] charged.”

Even if we were to hold that a State must prove sanity to convict once that fact is put in issue, it would not necessarily follow that a State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt every fact, the existence or nonexistence of which it is
willing to recognize as an exculpatory or mitigating circumstance affecting the degree of culpability or the severity of the punishment. Here, in revising its criminal code, New York provided the affirmative defense of extreme emotional disturbance,
a substantially expanded version of the older heat-of-passion concept; but it was willing to do so only if the facts making out the defense were established by the defendant with sufficient certainty. The State was itself unwilling to undertake to
establish the absence of those facts beyond a reasonable doubt, perhaps fearing that proof would be too difficult and that too many persons deserving treatment as murderers would escape that punishment if the evidence need merely raise a
reasonable doubt about the defendant's emotional state. . .. The Due Process Clause, as we see it, does not put New York to the choice of abandoning such defenses or undertaking to disprove their existence in order to convict of a crime which
otherwise is within its constitutional powers to sanction by substantial punishment. . . .

This view may seem to permit state legislatures to reallocate burdens of proof by labeling as affirmative defenses at least some elements of the crimes now defined in their statutes. But there are obviously constitutional limits beyond
which

p. 153

p. 154
the States may not go in this regard. “[I]t is not within the province of a legislature to declare an individual guilty or presumptively guilty of a crime.” McFarland v. American Sugar Rfg. Co., 241 U.S. 79, 86 (1916). The legislature cannot “validly
command that the finding of an indictment, or mere proof of the identity of the accused, should create a presumption of the existence of all the facts essential to guilt.” Tot v. United States, 319 U.S. 463, 469 (1943). . ..

Itis urged that Mullaney v. Wilbur necessarily invalidates Patterson's conviction. . . . Mullaney's holding, it is argued, is that the State may not permit the blameworthiness of an act or the severity of punishment authorized for its com-
mission to depend on the presence or absence of an identified fact without assuming the burden of proving the presence or absence of that fact, as the case may be, beyond a reasonable doubt. In our view, the Mullaney holding should not be so
broadly read... . The Maine Supreme Judicial Court made it clear that. . . malice, in the sense of the absence of provocation, was part of the definition of that crime. Yet malice, i.e., lack of provocation, was presumed and could be rebutted by the
defendant only by proving by a preponderance of the evidence that he acted with heat of passion upon sudden provocation. . . .

‘As we have explained, nothing was presumed or implied against Patterson. . . . The judgment of the New York Court of Appeals is affirmed.

Justice PoweLL, with whom Justice BRENNAN and JUSTICE MARSHALL join, dissenting. .. .

Mullaney held invalid Maine's requirement that the defendant prove heat of passion. The Court today, without disavowing the unanimous holding of Mullaney, approves New York's requirement that the defendant prove extreme
emotional disturbance. The Court manages to run a constitutional boundary line through the barely visible space that separates Maine's law from New York's. It does so on the basis of distinctions in language that are formalistic rather than sub-
stantive. .. . The test the Court today establishes allows a legislature to shift, virtually at will, the burden of persuasion with respect to any factor in a criminal case, so long as it is careful not to mention the nonexistence of that factor in the statutory
language that defines the crime. . ..

With all respect, this type of constitutional adjudication is indefensibly formalistic. ... What Winship and Mullaney had sought to teach about the limits a free society places on its procedures to safeguard the liberty of its citizens be-
comes a rather simplistic lesson in statutory draftsmanship. Nothing in the Court's opinion prevents a legislature from applying this new learning to many of the classical elements of the crimes it punishes. . . 2

p. 154
p. 155

The Court understandably . . . issues a warning that “there are obviously constitutional limits beyond which the States may not go in this regard.” . . . But if the State is careful to conform to the drafting formulas articulated today, the
constitutional limits are anything but “obvious.” This decision simply leaves us without a conceptual framework for distinguishing abuses from legitimate legislative adjustments of the burden of persuasion in criminal cases.

Itis unnecessary for the Court to retreat to a formalistic test for applying Winship. . . . The Due Process Clause requires that the prosecutor bear the burden of persuasion beyond a reasonable doubt only if the factor at issue makes a
substantial difference in punishment and stigma. The requirement of course applies a fortiori if the factor makes the difference between guilt and innocence. But a substantial difference in punishment alone is not enough. It also must be shown that
in the Anglo-American legal tradition the factor in question historically has held that level of importance. If either branch of the test is not met, then the legislature retains its traditional authority over matters of proof. . ..

. .. New York’s provisions allocating the burden of persuasion as to “extreme emotional disturbance” are unconstitutional when judged by these standards. “Extreme emotional disturbance” is . . . the direct descendant of the “heat
of passion” factor considered at length in Mullaney. . . . The presence or absence of extreme emotional disturbance makes a critical difference in punishment and stigma, and throughout our history the resolution of this issue in fact, although
expressed in somewhat different terms, has distinguished manslaughter from murder. . .. New ameliorative affirmative defenses, about which the Court expresses concern, generally remain undisturbed by the holdings in Winship and Mullaney —
and need not be disturbed by a sound holding reversing Patterson's conviction.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. The burden of production versus the burden of persuasion. The burden of proof deals with two distinct problems. The first concerns the burden of coming forward with enough evidence to put a certain fact in issue. This is
commonly referred to as the burden of production. The second problem concerns the burden of convincing the trier of fact. This is commonly referred to as the burden of persuasion. With respect to most facts relevant to guilt, the prosecution
bears both burdens. That is, the prosecution must introduce enough evidence not only to put the facts in issue but also to persuade the trier of fact beyond a reasonable doubt. In some instances state law may require the defense to bear both
burdens. But note that an intermediate position is possible: State law might allocate the burden of production to the defense but the burden of persuasion to the prosecution. For example, the state might provide that a defendant seeking acquittal
on grounds of duress must introduce some evidence of duress, but that once this is done, the prosecution must prove the absence of duress beyond a reasonable doubt. In this situation it is sometimes said (confusingly) that the defendant bears
the initial burden of proof and that, once duress is at issue, the burden “shifts” to the prosecution. Or it may be said that absence of duress is “presumed,” but that when evidence of duress is introduced the presumption is “rebutted” or simply
“disappears.” All these expressions are equivalent to the more straightforward statement that the defendant bears the burden of production and the prosecution the burden of persuasion.

p. 155
p. 156

When the defendant bears the burden of production on an issue, the issue is commonly referred to as an affirmative defense. In some states, when an issue is designated an affirmative defense, the defendant must bear the burdens of
both production and persuasion, but often the burdens of production and persuasion are treated as separate issues: The defendant will be required to bear the burden of production, but the prosecution will retain the burden of persuasion on that
issue.

When the defendant bears the burden of production, how much evidence is necessary to satisfy that burden so that the prosecution will be required to disprove the claim beyond a reasonable doubt? Most courts require that the evi-
dence be sufficient to raise at least a reasonable doubt on the matter. See Frazier v. Weatherholtz, 572 F.2d 994 (4th Cir. 1978).

2. Allocating the burden of persuasion: the basis of Patterson. Are states free to allocate the burden of persuasion however they choose, or does the reasoning of Patterson suggest some limits? Consider the following problems.

(a) Liberalizing and nonliberalizing changes in the law. In Patterson the affirmative defense involved “a substantially expanded version of the older heat-of-passion concept,” and the Court stressed the need for permitting the
states flexibility in this situation. But what if, after Patterson, a state shifts to the defendant a burden of persuasion previously imposed on the prosecution and does not enlarge the scope of the defense? Should it matter whether the traditional de-
fense might otherwise have been restricted or repealed?

(b) Gratuitous defenses. The Patterson majority assumed that New York could eliminate the “extreme emotional disturbance” defense altogether, a point conceded by Justice Lewis Powell's dissent. If this is so, how can there be
any serious challenge to the constitutionality of recognizing the defense only in diluted form, that is, when the defendant can prove it? Several commentators argue that “the greater power should include the lesser.”° Under this analysis, states
would be free to reallocate burdens of persuasion relating to any fact that is not a constitutionally mandated prerequisite to just punishment. But conversely, states would be required to prove a fact beyond a reasonable doubt if punishment would
be impermissible (or excessive, violating Eighth Amendment proportionality requirements) as applied to conduct not involving that fact. See, e.g., Ronald Allen, The Restoration of In re Winship: A Comment on Burdens of Persuasion in Criminal
Cases After Patterson v. New York, 76 Mich. L. Rev. 30 (1977). Consider the following comment:

JOHN C. JEFFRIES JR. & PAUL B. STEPHAN, DEFENSES, PRESUMPTIONS AND BURDENS OF PROOF IN THE CRIMINAL LAW, 88 YALE L.J. 1325, 1345-1347 (1979): Implementing the presumption of innocence — whether on an actual or a symbolic level
— requires that something be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. It does not, however, speak to the question of what that something must be. [When] the state considers a gratuitous defense, that is, one that it may grant or deny as it sees fit,

p. 156

p.157
a constitutional insistence on proof beyond a reasonable doubt no longer makes sense. Such a rule would purport to preserve individual liberty . . . by forcing the government either to disprove the defense beyond a reasonable doubt or to elimi-
nate the defense altogether. The latter solution results in an extension of penal liability despite the presence of mitigating or exculpatory facts. It is difficult to see this result as constitutionally compelled and harder still to believe that it flows from
a general policy, whether actual or symbolic, in favor of individual liberty. . . . The trouble lies in trying to define justice in exclusively procedural terms. Winship’s insistence on the reasonable doubt standard is thought to express a preference for
letting the guilty go free rather than risking conviction of the innocent. This value choice, however, cannot be implemented by a purely procedural concern with burden of proof. Guilt and innocence are substantive concepts. Their content depends
on the choice of facts determinative of liability. If this choice is remitted to unconstrained legislative discretion, no rule of constitutional procedure can restrain the potential for injustice. . .

For scholarship critical of Patterson's “greater includes the lesser” approach, see Russell L. Christopher, Time and Punishment, 66 Ohio St. LJ. 269, 274 (2005) (discussing how the “greater includes the lesser” doctrine has fallen out
of favor since Patterson was decided). See also Scott E. Sundby, The Reasonable Doubt Rule and the Meaning of Innocence, 40 Hastings L.J. 457 (1989); Donald A. Dripps, The Constitutional Status of the Reasonable Doubt Rule, 75 Cal. L. Rev.
1665 (1987). Both authors argue that the Due Process Clause should be construed to require proof beyond a reasonable doubt for any fact that makes a significant difference in the authorized range of punishment. Compare Luis E. Chiesa, When
an Offense Is Not an Offense: Rethinking the Supreme Court's Reasonable Doubt Jurisprudence, 44 Creighton L. Rev. 647 (2011), arguing that Winship should not be read to require the prosecution to disprove excuse defenses beyond a reason-
able doubt.

(c) Nongratuitous defenses. In Patterson the affirmative defense was “gratuitous,” in the sense that the state could have eliminated the defense completely. Should the state's freedom to shift the burden of proof extend to defenses
that are not gratuitous? What is the justification for permitting states to avoid the reasonable-doubt requirement and to “dilute” a defense that may be constitutionally mandated?

In connection with these questions, consider Martin v. Ohio, 480 U.S. 228 (1987). The defendant, a battering victim, shot her husband in what she claimed was an act of self-defense. She was charged with aggravated murder, defined
under Ohio law as a killing “purposely, and with prior calculation and design.” Ohio law provides that self-defense is a complete defense when “the defendant was not at fault in creating the situation giving rise to the argument; [and] had an honest
belief that she was in imminent danger of death or great bodily harm and that her only means of escape from such danger was in the use of such force. . ..” At trial, the jury was instructed that the prosecution had to prove beyond a reasonable

doubt all the elements of aggravated murder, but that the defendant was required to prove her self-defense claim by a preponderance of the evidence. The defendant's aggravated murder conviction was upheld by the Supreme Court. Writing for
the majority, Justice White said (id. at 233-235):
p.157
p. 158

The State did not exceed its authority in defining the crime of murder as purposely causing the death of another with prior calculation or design. It did not seek to shift to Martin the burden of proving any of those elements,

and the jury's verdict reflects that none of her self-defense evidence raised a reasonable doubt about the state’s proof that she purposefully killed with prior calculation and design. . . .

Justice Powell, writing for the four dissenters, argued that the defense claim of imminently necessary self-defense was inherently inconsistent with the prosecution claim of killing “by prior calculation and design.” But no member of the
Court challenged Justice White's assertion that “[t]he State did not exceed its authority in defining the crime of murder as purposely causing the death of another. . ..” Is this so clear? Could a state constitutionally abolish the defense of self-de-
fense altogether? Could the state condemn as a murderer, and sentence to long-term imprisonment, a person who kills when such an act is the only available means to avoid an unlawful threat of imminent death?

3. Sentencing enhancements. Legislatures often define a crime and then specify that the punishment to be imposed will depend on certain characteristics of the offense committed (such as whether the offense involved a firearm or a
given quantity of drugs). Usually the judge determines at a sentencing hearing whether those circumstances exist and then imposes sentence accordingly. The procedure at the sentencing hearing is relatively informal, and judges are not required
to find beyond a reasonable doubt every fact they consider in fixing the sentence. Clearly, this technique affords an easy way to ease the burden of compliance with the requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt — facts that support a large
increase in punishment can be established merely by a preponderance of the evidence. But this technique is available only when the facts at issue are merely “sentencing factors,” rather than elements of a separate offense. For facts of the latter
sort, as Mullaney holds, nothing less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt will suffice. A question of statutory structure therefore takes on great importance — when is a fact that enhances the sentence merely a sentencing factor and when is it
an element of a separate, aggravated offense?

In Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000), the Supreme Court held that states do not have unlimited discretion to characterize facts as mere sentencing considerations. Apprendi involved a “hate-crimes” statute that doubled the
maximum punishment for any offense if the sentencing judge found by a preponderance of the evidence that the offense was committed with “a purpose to intimidate an individual or group of individuals because of race, color, gender, handicap,
religion, sexual orientation, or ethnicity.” (Id. at 469.) The Court held this scheme unconstitutional, ruling that any fact (other than prior criminal record) that increases the maximum penalty applicable to an offense is an “element” of the offense,
which therefore must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. And the Court has held the Apprendi principle applicable not only to facts that increase a statutory maximum but also to facts that increase the maximum punishment authorized under
sentencing guidelines. Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296 (2004); United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005). Similarly, in Alleyne v. United States, 570 U.S. 99, 103 (2013), the Court held that legislatures cannot require judges to impose a
mandatory minimum sentence on the basis of facts proved by a mere preponderance of

p. 158
p. 159
the evidence; the Court declared that “[alny fact that, by law, increases the penalty for a crime is an ‘element’ that must be submitted to the jury and found beyond a reasonable doubt.”

In contrast, however, facts that affect the choice of sentence within an authorized range continue to be treated merely as “sentencing factors,” and such facts do not have to be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Legislatures therefore
can give themselves considerable flexibility simply by setting a very high maximum sentence for an offense. They can then authorize or even require judges to impose a lower sentence if certain facts are proved by a mere preponderance. This.
distinction between facts that are offense “elements” and those that are mere “sentencing factors” has important implications not only for the reasonable-doubt principle but also for the right to jury trial and for the dynamics of the sentencing
process. We explore those implications below at p. 186 with respect to jury trial, and at pp. 1148-1149 with respect to sentencing.

4, How should a jurisdiction exercise its discretion? Where Patterson leaves a jurisdiction free to impose a burden of persuasion on the defendant, legislatures (or courts, when statutes do not control) must decide whether it is
desirable to do so. The Supreme Court has held, for example, that in a federal prosecution for illegally receiving a firearm, a defendant who claims duress must prove that defense by a preponderance of the evidence. Dixon v. United States, 548

U.S. 1 (2006). In contrast, the New Hampshire Supreme Court has held that once a defendant presents some evidence supporting the partial defense of provocation, the state must prove the absence of provocation beyond a reasonable doubt.
State v. Soto, 162 N.H. 708 (2011). Burden-of-proof questions therefore must be reconsidered in light of problems associated with particular substantive law doctrines.
b. Presumptions

As the preceding section shows, the prosecution’s burden of proof can be eased by defining an offense in such a way that the burden of proving certain facts can be assigned to the defense. Another device that can ease the prosecu-
tor’s burden is the presumption. A presumption can come into play even when the state has not exercised the Patterson option of reallocating the burden of proof. Suppose, for example, that murder is defined as an intentional killing. The state
might hesitate to redefine murder as including all killing (with lack of intent relevant only as an affirmative defense). Can the state instead choose to retain intent as a required element of murder, but then provide that the existence of the necessary
intent will be presumed from some other fact (for example, from the use of a deadly weapon)? The question has great practical importance because intent is a required element of so many criminal offenses, but there is often no direct evidence
of what was going on in the defendant’s mind. The Supreme Court has held that it is sometimes — but not always — permissible to presume the existence of an essential fact (like intent) from proof of some other fact. The Court has said that a
mandatory presumption — one that the jury is required to accept in the absence of defense rebuttal — is constitutionally acceptable only if, over the universe of all cases in general, the presumed relationship holds true beyond a reasonable doubt.
In contrast, in order for the prosecution to rely on a permissive inference — one that the jury may choose to accept or reject even in the absence of any defense rebuttal — all that is

p.159
p.160
required is that the relationship be “more likely than not” to hold true under the circumstances of the particular case. County Court v. Allen, 442 U.S. 140 (1979).

Consider the application of this standard to one of the criminal law’s most commonly invoked presumptions — the presumption that a “person of sound mind and discretion is presumed to intend the natural and probable consequences
of his acts.” Is reliance on this presumption constitutionally permissible? For example, if the defendant, a person of sound mind, shoots at the victim, hitting him in the chest and killing him, is it permissible to presume that the defendant intended to
kill? The issue was presented in Francis v. Franklin, 471 U.S. 307 (1985). The case involved a person who escaped from prison (Franklin) who shot a 72-year-old man while attempting to steal the man’s car. The trial judge told the jury that Franklin
was “presumed to intend the natural and probable consequences of his acts, but the presumption may be rebutted.” Franklin was convicted of murder and sentenced to death. The Supreme Court held the jury instruction unconstitutional and re-
versed the conviction. Do you see why?

3. The Role of the Jury

Until now, we have largely focused on official actors. But ordinary citizens play a critical role in criminal cases by serving on the jury. While jury trials have become rare in an age of plea bargaining, pleas operate in the shadow of these
trials because the defendant’s key bargaining chip is the ability to take the case to a jury. Professor Anna Offit’s empirical study of prosecutorial decision making finds, for example, that juries loom large in the minds of prosecutors “because even
the remote possibility of lay scrutiny creates an opening for prosecutors to make commonsense assessments of (1) the evidence in their cases, (2) the character of witnesses, defendants, and victims, and (3) their own moral and professional char-
acter as public servants.” Offit, Prosecuting in the Shadow of the Jury, 113 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1071, 1072 (2019). So the jury’s role remains important in checking the government in criminal cases. The material that follows explores the ways this check
‘operates and whether it should be made more (or less) powerful.

Duncan v. Louisiana
‘Supreme Court of the United States
391 U.S. 145 (1968)

Justice Wiire delivered the opinion of the Court.

Appellant, Gary Duncan, was convicted of simple battery in the Twenty-fifth Judicial District Court of Louisiana. Under Louisiana law simple battery is a misdemeanor, punishable by two years’ imprisonment and a $300 fine.2
p. 160
p.161

Appellant sought trial by jury, but because the Louisiana Constitution grants jury trials only in cases in which capital punishment or imprisonment at hard labor may be imposed, the trial judge denied the request. Appellant was con-
victed and sentenced to serve 60 days in the parish prison and pay a fine of $150. Appellant sought review in the Supreme Court of Louisiana, asserting that the denial of jury trial violated rights guaranteed to him by the United States Constitution.
The Supreme Court [of Louisiana denied review.] We noted probable jurisdiction. . .

While driving on Highway 23 in Plaquemines Parish on October 19, 1966, [appellant] saw two younger cousins engaged in a conversation by the side of the road with four white boys. Knowing his cousins, Negroes who had recently
transferred to a formerly all-white high school, had reported the occurrence of racial incidents at the school, Duncan stopped the car, got out, and approached the six boys. . . . The testimony was in dispute on many points, but the witnesses
agreed that appellant and the white boys spoke to each other, that appellant encouraged his cousins to break off the encounter and enter his car, and that appellant was about to enter the car himself for the purpose of driving away with his
cousins. The whites testified that just before getting in the car appellant slapped Herman Landry, one of the white boys, on the elbow. The Negroes testified that appellant had not slapped Landry, but had merely touched him. The trial judge con-
cluded that the State had proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Duncan had committed simple battery, and found him guilty.

[Despite the clear language of the Sixth Amendment (“In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury. . ..”), the jury trial issue before the Court in Duncan was not straight-
forward, because in Barron v. Mayor of Baltimore, 32 U.S. (7 Pet.) 243 (1833), the Court had held that the first eight amendments to the Constitution apply only to the federal government and are not directly binding on the states. The principal
limitation on criminal procedure in state prosecutions is the clause of the Fourteenth Amendment providing that “[no] State [shall] deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law.” The Court had interpreted “due process”
in this context to forbid only those procedures that violate fundamental fairness. Thus the precise issue before the Court in Duncan was whether denying a criminal defendant the opportunity to be tried by jury was fundamentally unfair]

. .. Because we believe that trial by jury in criminal cases is fundamental to the American scheme of justice, we hold that the Fourteenth Amendment guarantees a right of jury trial in all criminal cases which — were they to be tried in a
federal court — would come within the Sixth Amendment's guarantee. Since we consider the appeal before us to be such a case, we hold that the Constitution was violated when appellant's demand for jury trial was refused.

The history of trial by jury in criminal cases has been frequently told. [Bly the time our Constitution was written, jury trial in criminal cases had been in existence in England for several centuries and carried impressive credentials traced
by many to the Magna Carta. Its preservation and proper operation as a protection against arbitrary rule were among the major objectives of the revolutionary settlement which was expressed in the Declaration and Bill of Rights of 1689... .

p.161
p. 162

The guarantees of jury trial in the Federal and State Constitutions reflect a profound judgment about the way in which law should be enforced and justice administered. A right to jury trial is granted to criminal defendants in order to
prevent oppression by the Government. Those who wrote our constitutions knew from history and experience that it was necessary to protect against unfounded criminal charges brought to eliminate enemies and against judges too responsive to
the voice of higher authority. The framers of the constitutions strove to create an independent judiciary but insisted upon further protection against arbitrary action. Providing an accused with the right to be tried by a jury of his peers gave him an
inestimable safeguard against the corrupt or overzealous prosecutor and against the compliant, biased, or eccentric judge. If the defendant preferred the common-sense judgment of a jury to the more tutored but perhaps less sympathetic reaction
of the single judge, he was to have it. Beyond this, the jury trial provisions in the Federal and State Constitutions reflect a fundamental decision about the exercise of official power — a reluctance to entrust plenary powers over the life and liberty of
the citizen to one judge or to a group of judges. . .. The deep commitment of the Nation to the right of jury trial in serious criminal cases as a defense against arbitrary law enforcement qualifies for protection under the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment, and must therefore be respected by the States. . ..

We are aware of the long debate, especially in this century, among those who write about the administration of justice, as to the wisdom of permitting untrained laymen to determine the facts in civil and criminal proceedings. [AJt the
heart of the dispute have been express or implicit assertions that juries are incapable of adequately understanding evidence or determining issues of fact and that they are . .. little better than a roll of dice. Yet, the most recent and exhaustive study

of the jury in criminal cases concluded that juries do understand the evidence and come to sound conclusions in most of the cases presented to them and that when juries differ with the result at which the judge would have arrived, it is usually be-
cause they are serving some of the very purposes for which they were created and for which they are now employed.2°

The State of Louisiana urges that holding that the Fourteenth Amendment assures a right to jury trial will cast doubt on the integrity of every trial conducted without a jury. ... We would not assert, however, that every criminal trial — or
any particular trial — held before a judge alone is unfair or that a defendant may never be as fairly treated by a judge as he would be by a jury. Thus we hold no constitutional doubts about the practices, common in both federal and state courts, of
accepting waivers of jury trial and prosecuting petty crimes without extending a right to jury trial. However, the fact is that in most places more trials for serious crimes are to juries than to a court alone; a great many defendants prefer the judgment
of a jury to that of a court. Even where defendants are satisfied with bench trials, the right to a jury trial very likely serves its intended purpose of making judicial or prosecutorial unfairness less likely.

p. 162
p. 168

Louisiana's final contention is that even if it must grant jury trials in serious criminal cases, the conviction before us is valid and constitutional because here the petitioner was tried for simple battery and was sentenced to only 60 days
in the parish prison. We are not persuaded. It is doubtless true that there is a category of petty crimes or offenses which is not subject to the Sixth Amendment jury trial provision and should not be subject to the Fourteenth Amendment jury trial
requirement here applied to the States. . .. We need not, however, settle in this case the exact location of the line between petty offenses and serious crimes. It is sufficient for our purpose to hold that a crime punishable by two years in prison is,
based on past and contemporary standards in this country, a serious crime and not a petty offense. Consequently, appellant was entitled to a jury trial and it was error to deny it. . .. Reversed and remanded.

Justice HARLAN, with whom Justice StewaRT joins, dissenting. .. .

[There] is a wide range of views on the desirability of trial by jury, and on the ways to make it most effective when it is used; there is also considerable variation from State to State in local conditions such as the size of the criminal
caseload, the ease or difficulty of summoning jurors, and other trial conditions bearing on fairness. We have before us, therefore, an almost perfect example of a situation in which the celebrated dictum of Mr. Justice Brandeis should be invoked. It
is, he said, “one of the happy incidents of the federal system that a single courageous state may, if its citizens choose, serve as a laboratory. . ..” New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U.S. 262, 280, 311 (dissenting opinion). This Court, other courts,
and the political process are available to correct any experiments in criminal procedure that prove fundamentally unfair to defendants.

NOTES

1. Duncan in context. Justice White mentions, early in his opinion, that Duncan's cousins had recently transferred to a previously all-white high school where “racial incidents” had been reported. That description of the circumstances
was a colossal, and no-doubt deliberate, understatement. The previous year, the U.S. attorney general had declared Plaquemines Parish one of the nine most discriminatory counties in the nation, and in 1966, at the time of incident, the parish was
in the midst of a ferocious school desegregation battle, pitting Justice Department attomeys, civil rights lawyers, and the federal courts against Leander H. Perez, Sr., a political figure and ardent segregationist (known locally as “the Bonaparte of
the Bayou”) who had ruled the parish with an iron fist for decades. Perez had hand-picked all judges and other officials in the parish, and he tolerated no opposition. Many civil rights activists who dared to enter the parish were arrested as “outside
agitators.” When the civil rights lawyer who had taken Duncan's case appeared at the courthouse to file a motion needed for the appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, the Plaquemines sheriff arrested him on a charge of practicing law without a
license and confiscated the briefcase that contained all of Duncan's appeal papers. For a fascinating, in-depth description of this background, see Nancy J. King, Duncan v. Louisiana: How Bigotry in the Bayou Led to Federal Regulation of State
Juries, in Criminal Procedure Stories (C. Steiker ed., 2006).

p. 168
p.164

Why didn’t the Court make more of these local circumstances? The political situation in Plaquemines Parish seems to afford a perfect opportunity to make vivid the value of the jury as a check on official power. Would an emphasis on
these facts have made the Court's opinion more persuasive? Or would such an emphasis detract from the Court's effort to establish a more general principle — that the jury should be considered an important safeguard against abuse even in a
well-functioning democracy?

2. The scope of the right to jury trial. Justice Felix Frankfurter once wrote that “[nJo changes or chances can alter the content of the verbal symbol of ‘jury’ — a body of twelve men who must reach a unanimous conclusion if the
verdict is to go against the defendant.” Rochin v. California, 342 U.S. 165, 170 (1952). Except for the limitation to males, which had passed away long before Justice Frankfurter reiterated it, this statement expressed a nearly universal view about
what was meant by a jury. Nevertheless, in Williams v. Florida, 399 U.S. 78, 86 (1970), the Court said that the decision to fix the size of the jury at 12 “appears to have been a historical accident, unrelated to the great purposes that gave rise to the
jury” and held that a 6-member jury satisfied the constitutional requirement.

Support for the unanimity requirement was once incomplete. Rule 31a) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires a unanimous verdict in federal prosecutions, and so does the law in almost all the states. But for almost half a
century, the Court upheld Louisiana and Oregon rules allowing guilty verdicts obtained by 11-1 and 10-2 votes. See Apodaca v. Oregon, 406 U.S. 404 (1972). This picture changed in Ramos v. Louisiana, 140 S. Ct. 1390 (2020); there the Court re-
pudiated Apodaca and held, in accord with the original understanding, that the Sixth Amendment requires jury unanimity.

Duncan did not resolve the question of what may be deemed a “petty offense,” for which the Sixth Amendment jury trial guarantee would be inapplicable. In Baldwin v. New York, 399 U.S. 66 (1970), the Court held that no offense may
be deemed petty where imprisonment for more than six months is authorized. In such cases a defendant has a constitutional right to jury trial, whether or not imprisonment is in fact likely to be imposed.

3. The effect of jury trial on criminal case processing. (a) The entire texture of the trial is influenced by the existence of the jury. Instead of addressing arguments to one law-trained person, the lawyers address themselves to 12 lay
people. Lawyers are often convinced that nonlegal factors will influence the jury even when those factors are not technically “relevant,” and as a result they often attempt, with some success, to find indirect ways to make the jury aware of such
matters.

(b) Because lay people may not assess items of proof as carefully as trained lawyers, Anglo-American law includes elaborate rules for excluding certain evidence at the trial.

(c) The judge is judge of the law; the jury decides questions of fact. The legal system must characterize the nature of a given question: Is it a question of law or of fact?

(d) Judges must formulate for jurors’ use an acceptable statement of applicable legal rules, though these rules are often extremely complex. When significant errors are made in stating these rules, a conviction must be reversed, and a
new trial must be held.

p.164
p. 165

4. The representative jury. Contrary to popular folklore, there is no requirement that a defendant be tried by a jury of the defendant's “peers.” The Supreme Court has held that the “venire” — the panel of potential jurors from which
the trial jury is drawn — must reflect “a fair cross section of the community.” Taylor v. Louisiana, 419 U.S. 522, 537 (1975). But there is no requirement that the trial jury ultimately chosen from the venire reflect the demographic character of the
locality. And the Court has not recognized an independent Sixth Amendment right to a jury that represents the community in any broader sense. See Nina W. Chernoff, Wrong About the Right: How Courts Undermine the Fair Cross-Section Guar-
antee by Confusing It with Equal Protection, 64 Hastings LJ. 141 (2012); Laura G. Dooley, The Dilution Effect: Federalization, Fair Cross-Sections, and the Concept of Community, 54 DePaul L. Rev. 79 (2004).

Once the venire is assembled, potential jurors who know the defendant, the victim, or a witness can be challenged “for cause” and removed from the pool. The opposing attorneys are then allowed “peremptory challenges,” which
permit them to remove a certain number of potential jurors without giving any reason, simply because they suspect that the potential juror may be unsympathetic to their side. In Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986), and J.E.B. v. Alabama, 511
U.S. 127 (1994), the Supreme Court held that attorneys cannot use peremptory challenges to deliberately exclude potential jurors on grounds of race or gender. But the requirement is difficult to enforce because a peremptory challenge can pass
muster when the attorney can offer a plausible race-neutral and gender-neutral explanation for making it. Ostensibly race-neutral explanations can, for example, rely on a prospective juror’s ideological leanings that can be highly correlated with
race. See Joshua Revesz, Comment, Ideological Imbalance and the Peremptory Challenge, 125 Yale L.J. 2535 (2016).

The net result is that the jury ultimately empaneled often will differ markedly from the character of the community as a whole, even when the venire was well balanced. In particular, African Americans are especially likely to be under-
represented or excluded entirely. An experienced federal judge reported that in Boston, “the vast majority of juries in federal court . . . did not have a single African-American member.” Nancy S. Gertner, 12 Angry Men (and Women) in Federal

Court, 82 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 613, 619 (2007). And the increasing deployment of “big data” to aid litigants in exercising their peremptories greatly exacerbates this problem, creating a “large-scale Batson workaround.” See Andrew Gutherie Fergu-
son, The Big Data Jury, 91 Notre Dame L. Rev. 935, 997 (2016) (noting that “[wJith big data, litigants can now provide numerous race- or gender-related, but not unconstitutional, reasons for a strike”).

5. How competent is the jury? Consider these comments:

GLANVILLE WILLIAMS, THE PROOF OF GUILT 271-272 (3D ED. 1963): [I]t is an understatement to describe a jury, with Herbert Spencer, as a group of twelve people of average ignorance. There is no guarantee that members of a particular jury
may not be quite unusually ignorant, credulous, slow-witted, narrow-minded, biased or temperamental. The danger of this happening is not one that can be removed by some minor procedural adjustment; itis inherent in the English notion of a jury
as a body chosen from the general population at random.

p. 165

p. 166
LAUREN M. OUZIEL, BEYOND LAW AND FACT: JURY EVALUATION OF LAW ENFORCEMENT, 92 NOTRE DAME L. REV. 691, 734-735 (2016): [W]e know jury decisionmaking may be compromised by intrinsic human biases and cognition deficits. We
know that demographic characteristics, particularly race, age, and geographic region of residence, play some role in juror decisionmaking. . . . And we know that the adversarial trial process itself can sometimes exacerbate these biases and
deficits... .

Arguably tempering Professor Ouziel’s concern is a common assumption underlying the jury system — that group deliberation will tend to iron out biases and produce a kind of collective wisdom. But this view assumes that the jurors
will be a diverse group with diverse perspectives. The dynamic may well be different if, despite Batson, the jury is racially homogeneous, for example predominantly or entirely white. And the dangers were especially great under the Oregon and
Louisiana rules that until recently permitted non-unanimous verdicts. In Ramos v. Louisiana, supra, where the Court struck down those rules, the defendant had been convicted of murder and sentenced to life without parole even though two of the
trial jurors voted to acquit him. None of the appellate opinions indicates the defendant's race or that of the jurors. But the Court emphasized that Louisiana endorsed non-unanimous jury verdicts for serious crimes for the first time only in 1898, at a
constitutional convention that had an avowed purpose, according to one of its committee chairs, to “establish the supremacy of the white race.” And among the package of stringent Jim Crow laws the convention adopted was the rule permitting
10-to-2 verdicts in order “to ensure that African-American juror service would be meaningless.” See Ramos, supra, 140 S. Ct. at 1394, citing Thomas Ward Frampton, The Jim Crow Jury, 71 Vand. L. Rev. 1593 (2018).64

When jury verdicts must be unanimous (as the Court now holds the Constitution to require), evidence suggests that the presence of even a single Black juror can mitigate racial bias, not only in the jury's deliberation itself but also by
affecting how prosecution and defense argue their cases. But Professor Rappaport cautions that when jurors hold troubling biases, group deliberation can exacerbate these biases, and that members of a deliberating group often end up taking
amore extreme position than they held before deliberation began; thus group deliberation may inflame rather than calm racial biases. John Rappaport, Some Doubts About “Democratizing” Criminal Justice, 87 U. Chi. L. Rev. 711, 773, 796-798
(2020). Compare Robert P. Burns, The Death of the American Trial (2009), mounting a strong defense of the view that juries afford insight and experience not available at bench trials, where factfinding is entrusted entirely to a judge.

p. 166
p.167

6. The broader policies served (and disserved) by jury trial. The Court in Duncan summarizes the principal reasons why it regards the availability of trial by jury as an essential component of fair procedure. Is it clear that the advan-
tages of jury trial outweigh its costs or that experimentation with different kinds of factfinding procedures should be considered intolerable? Consider these comments:

HARRY KALVEN & HANS ZEISEL, THE AMERICAN JURY 7-9 (1966): The [jury] controversy centers around three large issues. First, there is a series of collateral advantages and disadvantages that are often charged against, or pointed to on behalf
of, the jury as an institution. In this realm fall such positive points as that the jury provides an important civic experience for the citizen®; that, because of popular participation, the jury makes tolerable the stringency of certain decisions; that, be-
cause of its transient personnel, the jury acts as a sort of lightning rod for animosity and suspicion which otherwise might center on the more permanent judge; and that the jury is a guarantor of integrity, since it is said to be more difficult to reach
twelve men than one. Against such affirmative claims, serious collateral disadvantages have been urged, chiefly that the jury is expensive; . .. that jury service imposes an unfair tax and social cost on those forced to serve®; and that, in general, ex-
posure to jury duty disenchants the citizen and causes him to lose confidence in the administration of justice.

Second, there is a group of issues that touch directly on the competence of the jury. . .. On the one hand, it is urged that the judge, as a result of training, discipline, recurrent experience, and superior intelligence, will be better able to
understand the law and analyze the facts than laymen, selected from a wide range of intelligence levels, who have no particular experience with matters of this sort, and who have no durable official responsibility. On the other hand, it is argued that
twelve heads are inevitably better than one; that the jury as a group has wisdom and strength which need not characterize any of its individual members; that it makes up in common sense and common experience what it may lack in professional
training, and that its very inexperience is an asset because it secures a fresh perception of each trial, avoiding the stereotypes said to infect the judicial eye.

The third group of issues about the jury goes to what is perhaps the most interesting point. The critics complain that the jury will not follow the law, either because it does not understand it or because it does not like it, and that thus only
avery uneven and unequal administration of justice can result from reliance on the jury; indeed, it is said that the jury is likely to produce that government by man, and not by rule of law, against which Anglo-American political tradition is so stead-
fastly set.

p.167
p. 168

This same flexibility of the jury is offered by its champions as its most endearing and most important characteristic. The jury, it is said, is a remarkable device for insuring that we are governed by the spirit of the law and not by its letter;
for insuring that rigidity of any general rule of law can be shaped to justice in the particular case. One is tempted to say that what is one man’s equity is another man’s anarchy.

JOSH BOWERS, UPSIDE-DOWN JURIES, 111 NW. U. L. REV. 1655, 1657, 1671 (2017): [Juries] are particularly well suited to evaluate the moral (and even prudential) questions of when and whether it is equitably appropriate to arrest, charge, brand,
and punish. They are comparatively worse at analyzing and applying formal legal tests. . . . As a result, they] answer the wrong types of questions at the wrong stages, adjudicating only formal guilt, and] play no meaningful role in the borderline
cases that raise the most significant normative questions.

DALE W. BROEDER, THE FUNCTIONS OF THE JURY — FACTS OR FICTIONS?, 21 U. CHI. L. REV. 386, 413-417 (1947): From the time of the Alien and Sedition Acts, the government's attempted inroads on civil rights seem to have received the enthu-
siastic support of jurors. . . . But the case against the criminal jury as a protector of individual liberty extends further than to contests between government and citizens opposed to its policies. Minority groups have often suffered at the hands of
jurymen. Wholesale acquittals of lynch-law violators, convictions of Negroes on the slightest evidence, and numerous other occurrences which have now almost become a part of the jury tradition might be instanced as examples. . . .

Aside from the incidental psychological functions which the criminal jury is alleged to perform, the sole remaining virtue claimed for it lies in its ability to make allowances for the circumstances of the particular case — to dispense with
atule of law. As noted previously, however, law-dispensing is a two-edged sword, and there is no current means of ascertaining which way it more often swings. It may seriously be doubted whether entrusting the jury with law-dispensing powers
is justified. While flexibility of legal administration is desirable, it would seem that the necessary exceptions to the normal rules could with better reason be fashioned by the legislature or court.

7. Defense interests versus community interests. Suppose that the defendant prefers not to be tried by a jury. Should the defendant's preference control, or does the community have its own interest in jury decision making?
American jurisdictions are divided on the issue. See Uzi Segal & Alex Stein, Ambiguity Aversion and the Criminal Process, 81 Notre Dame L. Rev. 1495, 1501-1504 (2006). Many courts permit the prosecutor to demand a jury trial, even over the
defendant's objection, e.g., State v. Greenwood, 297 P.3d 556, 561 (Utah 2012), and some courts, as in State v. Burks, 674 N.W.2d 640 (Wis. Ct. App. 2003), permit the trial judge to insist on a jury trial even when both the defense and the prose-
cution prefer a non-jury trial.

How should these issues be resolved? The Sixth Amendment, of course, grants the defendant the right to have a jury, but not a right to waive the jury, i.e., to insist upon a bench trial instead. In fact, Professor Laura |. Appleman argues
that in the original understanding, “the right of the jury trial . .. is all about representation, or the participation of the citizenry in [the] rule of law. Faimess to the defendant plays a part, . . . but the right emphasized over and over again is that belong-
ing to the local community and to the people at large.” Appleman, The Lost Meaning of

p. 168
p. 169

the Jury Trial Right, 84 Ind. LJ. 397, 413 (2009). As Janet C. Hoeffel explains in Death Beyond a Reasonable Doubt, 70 Ark. L. Rev. 267, 271 (2017), “The history of the jury trial right illuminates it as a collective right of the people to stand in the
place of the sovereign to impose punishment on anyone. . . . It is therefore simultaneously a collective right of the people to judge and the individual right of the defendant to be judged by his peers.” See also George C. Harris, The Communitarian
Function of the Criminal Jury Trial and the Rights of the Accused, 74 Neb. L. Rev. 804, 805 (1995):

[The] public interest in trial by jury in criminal cases [is] distinct from the public's interest in a fair trial for the accused or the reliable determination of guilt and innocence. This separate public interest derives from what can

be called the criminal jury's “communitarian” function. The communitarian function of public trial by jury in criminal cases can be divided into three related aspects: 1) a democratic vehicle for community participation in

government in general and the criminal justice system in particular; 2) a means by which the community is educated regarding our system of justice; and 3) a ritual by which the faith of the community in the administration of

justice is maintained.

QUESTIONS: Should the community's interest in jury decision making override defendants’ perception of the procedure most likely to afford them a fair trial? If so, who (the prosecutor or the judge) should have the authority to insist upon a jury
trial over the defendant's objections? Should bench trials be eliminated altogether? Or would forcing a defendant into an unwanted jury trial undercut the perceived faimess of a criminal conviction?

8. The prevalence (or non-prevalence) of jury trial in the United States. As we saw earlier in this chapter, jury trials are rare. Currently more than 95 percent of criminal cases are resolved by dismissal, pretrial diversion, or guilty
plea.©5 And this is by no means a new phenomenon. Observers have mourned the “vanishing jury” for almost a century.°° Guilty plea rates have been rising, more or less steadily, since the Civil War or earlier, and 50 years ago a presidential crime
commission estimated the nationwide guilty plea rate at 87 percent of all convictions.®” Personal and institutional incentives for certainty, efficiency, and convenience appear to drive this dynamic in the absence of legal doctrines to discourage
bargaining for trial waivers.

9. Lay adjudicators in other countries. In Canada, the criminal trial jury remains a “robust” institution that accounts for a significant proportion of criminal case dispositions. See Neil Vidmar, The Canadian Criminal Jury: Searching
for a Middle Ground, 62 Law & Contemp. Probs. 141, 172 (1999). Elsewhere in the common law world, jury trials have dwindled, in part because governments concerned about costs and the jury's competence have steadily narrowed the range of
criminal cases in which jury trial is available. See Freedom's Lamp Dims, Economist, June

p. 169

p.170
23, 2005. In nations outside the common-law tradition, independent juries on the American model are rare, but Spain introduced criminal jury trials in 1995, and more qualified forms of citizen participation are widespread. Indeed, 55 of the 192 UN
member states — including such culturally diverse nations as Croatia, Kazakhstan, Japan, Mexico, Russia, and South Korea — use or are currently adopting some form of lay participation to aid in criminal trials.08

But most nations, including many with strong democratic traditions (such as India, Israel, and the Netherlands) do not use jury trials in criminal cases.®2 For discussion of the practice in more than two dozen countries, see Symposium
on Juries and Lay Participation: American Perspectives and Global Trends, 90 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 785 (2015); Ethan J. Leib, A Comparison of Criminal Jury Trial Rules in Democratic Countries, 5 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 629 (2008). Do these patterns cast
doubt on the importance of jury trials in the American setting? If non-jury criminal trials are fully compatible with democracy, what features of American culture or the American judicial system might make jury trials especially important here?

10. The behavior of the jury in the United States. The empirical study referred to in Duncan, Harry Kalven & Hans Zeisel, The American Jury (1966), sought to determine the extent to which juries and judges decide cases differently
and the sources of such differences.”° The authors found that judges and juries disagree in roughly 25 percent of jury trial cases. In a small portion of these (2 percent of the total), the jury convicts when the judge would acquit; in 17 percent of all
cases the jury acquits when the judge would convict; in roughly 6 percent of the cases the jury “hangs” (fails to agree on a verdict). Id. at 56-57.

The authors examined in depth the reasons for judge-jury disagreement. They attributed 79 percent of the disagreements to differences in assessing the evidence in close cases. Other major factors that helped account for disagree-
ment were jury sentiments about the law (50 percent of the disagreements), jury sentiments about the defendant (22 percent), facts only the judge knew (5 percent), and disparity of counsel (8 percent). Id. at 111. Often there was more than one
reason for disagreement in a case. In fact, the closeness of the evidence usually appeared with one of

p.170

part
the other reasons, so that this factor apparently “liberated the jury to respond to non-evidentiary factors.” Id, at 106. Jury sentiment about the law was thus especially significant, and this factor of course lies close to the heart of the jury's function
as a guarantor of lenity and equity in dispensing criminal justice. The study suggested that “in cases having a de minimis cast or a note of contributory fault or provocation . . . the jury will exercise its de facto powers to write these equities into the
criminal law.” Id. at 285. Other sentiments about the law that appeared to have significant impact included “impatience with the nicety of the law's boundaries hedging the privilege of self-defense” (jd. at 241) and resistance to the enforcement of
a few unpopular laws, which at the time of the study included hunting, gambling, and drunken-driving laws. While the study provided evidence of extensive jury nullification, it also should be noted that judge and jury agreed in 75 percent of the
cases, that only half the disagreements involved jury sentiments about the law, and that these sentiments usually emerged in combination with other factors, principally the closeness of the evidence. The authors observed that the “jury's war with
the law is now a polite one” (id. at 76) and concluded (at 498):

The jury thus represents a uniquely subtle distribution of official power, an unusual arrangement of checks and balances. It represents also an impressive way of building discretion, equity and flexibility into a legal system.

Not the least of the advantages is that the jury, relieved of the burdens of creating precedent, can bend the law without breaking it.

Notice that in Duncan the Court, referring to Kalven and Zeisel, says that when juries differ from the judge “it is usually because they are serving some of the very purposes for which they were created.” Does this mean that the jury's
equity-dispensing function is constitutionally protected and that procedures designed to minimize nullification would be unconstitutional?

United States v. Dougherty
United States Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit
473 F.2d 1113 (1972)

LEVENTHAL, J. Seven of the so-called “D.C. Nine” bring this joint appeal from convictions arising out of their unconsented entry into the Washington office of the Dow Chemical Company, and their destruction of certain property therein.
[The defendants had disrupted Dow's operations in an attempt to publicize their opposition to the Vietnam War. They then sought to use their criminal trial as a platform to further publicize their views and attempted to argue to the jury that they
should be acquitted because their actions were morally justified.] . . . [Alfter a six-day trial, the seven were each convicted of two counts of malicious destruction. . .

Appellants urge [that] the judge erroneously refused to instruct the jury of its right to acquit appellants without regard to the law and the evidence, and refused to permit appellants to argue that issue to the jury. [They] say that the jury
has a well-recognized prerogative to disregard the instructions of the court even as to matters of law, and that they accordingly have the legal right that the jury be informed of its power. . ..

part
p17

There has evolved in the Anglo-American system an undoubted jury prerogative-in-fact, derived from its power to bring in a general verdict of not guilty in a criminal case, that is not reversible by the court. The power of the courts to
punish jurors for corrupt or incorrect verdicts . . . was repudiated in 1670 when Bushell’s Case, 124 Eng. Rep. 1006 (C.P. 1670), discharged the jurors who had acquitted William Penn of unlawful assembly. Juries in civil cases became subject to the
control of ordering a new trial; no comparable control evolved for acquittals in criminal cases.

The pages of history shine on instances of the jury's exercise of its prerogative to disregard uncontradicted evidence and instructions of the judge. Most often commended are the 18th century acquittal of Peter Zenger of seditious libel,
on the plea of Andrew Hamilton, and the 19th century acquittals in prosecutions under the fugitive slave law. The values involved drop a notch when the liberty vindicated by the verdict relates to the defendant's shooting of his wife's paramour, or
purchase during Prohibition of alcoholic beverages. . ..

The existence of an unreviewable and unreversible power in the jury, to acquit in disregard of the instructions on the law given by the trial judge, has for many years co-existed with legal practice and precedent upholding instructions to
the jury that they are required to follow the instructions of the court on all matters of law... .

The rulings [in the early cases] did not run all one way, but rather precipitated “a number of classic exchanges on the freedom and obligations of the criminal jury.”2° This was, indeed, one of the points of clash between the contending
forces staking out the direction of the government of the newly established Republic. . . . As the distrust of judges appointed and removable by the king receded, there came increasing acceptance that under a republic the protection of citizens lay
not in recognizing the right of each jury to make its own law, but in following democratic processes for changing the law. . . .

Since the jury's prerogative of lenity . . . introduces a “slack into the enforcement of law, tempering its rigor by the mollifying influence of current ethical conventions,” it is only just, say appellants, that the jurors be so told. It is unjust to
withhold information on the jury power of “nullification,” since conscientious jurors may come, ironically, to abide by their oath as jurors to render verdicts offensive to their individual conscience, to defer to an assumption of necessity that is con-
trary to reality.

This so-called right of jury nullification is put forward in the name of liberty and democracy, but its explicit avowal risks the ultimate logic of anarchy. “To encourage individuals to make their own determinations as to which laws they will
obey and which they will permit themselves as a matter of conscience to disobey is to invite chaos. No legal system could long survive if it gave every individual the option of disregarding with impunity any law which by his personal standard was
judged morally untenable. . . . ” [United States v. Moylan, 417 F.2d 1002, 1009 (4th Cir. 1969)] [T]he advocates of jury “nullification” apparently assume that the articulation of the jury's power will not extend its use or extent, or will not do so signif-
icantly or obnoxiously. Can this assumption fairly be made? . . .

p.172
p.173

The way the jury operates may be radically altered if there is alteration in the way it is told to operate. The jury knows well enough that its prerogative is not limited to the choices articulated in the formal instructions of the court. The jury
gets its understanding as to the arrangements in the legal system from more than one voice. . ..

When the legal system relegates the information of the jury's prerogative to an essentially informal input, it is not being duplicitous. . . . The limitation to informal input is, rather, a governor to avoid excess: the prerogative is reserved
for the exceptional case, and the judge's instruction is retained as a generally effective constraint. We “recognize a constraint as obligatory upon us when we require not merely reason to defend our rule departures, but damn good reason.”£2 The
practicalities of men, machinery and rules point up the danger of articulating discretion to depart from a rule, that the breach will be more often and casually invoked. . . . The danger of the excess rigidity that may now occasionally exist is not as
great as the danger of removing the boundaries of constraint provided by the announced rules. . .

Moreover, to compel a juror involuntarily assigned to jury duty to assume the burdens of mini-legislator or judge, as is implicit in the doctrine of nullification, is to put untoward strains on the jury system. It is one thing for a juror to know
that the law condemns, but he has a factual power of lenity. To tell him expressly of a nullification prerogative, however, is to inform him, in effect, that it is he who fashions the rule that condemns. That is an overwhelming responsibility, an extreme
burden for the jurors’ psyche. [A] juror called upon for an involuntary public service is entitled to the protection, when he takes action that he knows is right, but also knows is unpopular, either in the community at large or in his own particular
grouping, that he can fairly put it to friends and neighbors that the was merely following the instructions of the court. .. .

[Whhat is tolerable or even desirable as an informal, self-initiated exception, harbors grave dangers to the system if it is opened to expansion and intensification through incorporation in the judge's instruction. . . .

BazeLon, C.J., concurring in part and dissenting in part. ..

[The Court apparently concedes — although in somewhat grudging terms — that the power of nullification is a “necessary counter to case-hardened judges and arbitrary prosecutors,” and that exercise of the power may, in at least
some instances, “enhance the over-all normative effect of the rule of law.” We could not withhold that concession without scoffing at the rationale that underlies the right to jury trial in criminal cases, and belittling some of the most legendary
episodes in our political and jurisprudential history.

The sticking point, however, is whether or not the jury should be told of its power to nullify the law in a particular case. Here, the trial judge not only denied a requested instruction on nullification, but also barred defense counsel from
raising the issue in argument before the jury. The majority affirms that ruling. | see no justification for, and considerable harm in, this deliberate lack of candor.

p17
p74

[)he justification for this sleight-of-hand lies in a fear that an occasionally noble doctrine will, if acknowledged, often be put to ignoble and abusive purposes — or, to borrow the Court's phrase, will “run the risk of anarchy.” . .. The
Court assumes that these abuses are most likely to occur if the doctrine is formally described to the jury by argument or instruction. . . . it seems substantially more plausible to me to assume that the very opposite is true. . . .

[The Court takes comfort in the fact that informal communication to the jury “generally convey[s] adequately enough the idea of prerogative, of freedom in an occasional case to depart from what the judge says.” . . . [But if] awareness
is preferable to ignorance, then | simply do not understand the justification for relying on a haphazard process of informal communication whose effectiveness is likely to depend, to a large extent, on whether or not any of the jurors are so well-ed-
ucated and astute that they are able to receive the message. If the jury should know of its power to disregard the law, then the power should be explicitly described by instruction of the court or argument of counsel. .. .

NOTES AND QUESTIONS ON NULLIFICATION

1. Effects in practice. A fundamental question underlying the nullification debate is whether jurors who nullify are reflecting the community sense of justice, or instead (as the Dougherty court feared) are responding to vengeful
instincts and emotional biases triggered by characteristics of the victim or the defendant. A further question, then, is whether explicit instructions about the nullification power will exacerbate these possibilities. One empirical study probing these
issues considered the effect of instructing mock juries that “nothing would bar them from acquitting the defendant if they feel that the law . . . would produce an inequitable or unjust result.” In a case involving a doctor tried for the “mercy” killing of
a terminally ill cancer patient, mock juries given the nullification instruction were, predictably, much less likely to convict than mock juries not given the instruction.71 But an earlier study found, unexpectedly, that mock juries given the same nullfi-
cation instruction were more likely to convict in a homicide case involving a drunk driver who struck and killed a pedestrian; in deliberations, mock juries spent less time discussing the evidence and more time discussing the defendant's character
when a nullification instruction had been given.72 Another study found that in cases where the faimess of the underlying law was a concern, jurors given negative information about the victim were less likely to convict when given a nullification in-
struction, whereas negative information about the victim did not affect the likelihood of conviction when jurors were given standard jury instructions, without reference to nullification.72

p17
p17

2. Current state of the law. The federal courts and nearly all the states follow Dougherty and refuse to permit instructions informing the jury of its nullification power. See, e.g., United States v. Manzano, 945 F.3d 616, 626 (2d Cir.
2019). In State v. Kelly, 727 S.E.2d 912, 915 (N.C. Ct. App. 2012), the court declared that granting a right to nullification instructions “would lead to chaos.” In contrast, in United States v. Woody, 336 F.R.D. 293 (D.N.M. 2020), the court acknow!-
edged that precedent precluded a nullification instruction but offered a powerful originalist defense of nullification and argued that withholding information about the nullification power does violence to the Founders’ vision. For further development
of that argument, see Clay S. Conrad, Jury Nullification 13-115 (2014).

In Georgia, Indiana, and Maryland, state constitutions appear to authorize jury nullification, through provisions that the jury shalll be the judge of the law as well as the fact. Ga. Const. art. 1, §1, §11(a); Ind. Const. art. 1, §19; Md. Const.,
Decl. of Rights, art. 23. Judicial decisions, however, sharply limit the effect of these provisions. In Georgia, courts forbid defense counsel to argue that the jury should disregard the law and have upheld a charge that the jurors must apply the law as
stated in the court’s instructions. See Newsome v. State, 747 S.E.2d 99 (Ga. Ct. App. 2013). In a marijuana-possession trial of a man who admitted using marijuana to treat his chronic pain, Georgia defense attorney Catherine Bernard tried to read
the Georgia constitutional provision aloud in the courtroom. The judge cut her off, saying it was “not a correct statement of the law”!4 In Maryland, “case law makes plain that it is improper for an attorney to argue jury nullification to a jury, and that
jury instructions about the law are binding and that trial courts advise juries as much.” State v. Sayles, 2021 WL 302807, at “16 (Md. 2021).7° Indiana practice is summarized in Kenneth Duvall, The Contradictory Stance on Jury Nullification, 88 N.D.
L. Rev. 409, 414 (2012).

3. Is nullification ever desirable? The Dougherty court appears to believe that the jury's nullification power is desirable, so long as it is not exercised too often. Compare State v. Ragland, 105 N.J. 189, 519 A.2d 1361, 1871-1372
(1986):

[Jury nullification . . . is absolutely inconsistent with the most important value of Western democracy, that we should live under a government of laws and not of men. . . . With jury nullification, [the jurors] are told,

p17

p.176
either explicitly or implicitly, that they are the law, . . . and that if they want to, they may convict every poor man and acquit every rich man; convict the political opponent but free the crony; put the long-haired in jail but the
crew-cut on the street; imprison the black and free the white; or, even more arbitrarily, just do what they please whenever they please.

One of the biggest problems in the administration of criminal justice is the inequality of its enforcement. . . . Absolutely nowhere in the system is there some notion that someone should have the power, arbitrarily,
to pick and choose who shall live and who shall die. But that is precisely what jury nullification is: the power to undo everything that is precious in our system of criminal justice, the power to act arbitrarily to convict one and
acquit another where there is absolutely no apparent difference between the two.

. .. The lengths to which we go to exclude irrelevant evidence, the expenditures made to protect defendants from juror prejudice, the energy, study, and work devoted to a particular prosecution, all of these are

prodigious. Having gone through that process, admired by us both for its thoroughness and its goals, astonishing to others for its devotion to fairness and reason, it is incomprehensible that at the very end we should tell

those who are to make the judgment that they may do so without regard to anything that went before and without guidance as to why they should disregard what went on before, and without the obligation of explaining why

they so disregarded everything. . ..

Jury nullification is an unfortunate but unavoidable power. It should not be advertised, and, to the extent constitutionally permissible, it should be limited.

4, Other mechanisms of “arbitrary” leniency. The Ragland court rests part of its case against jury nullification on the ground that this power “arbitrarily, to pick and choose” defendants for unexplained leniency exists “[albsolutely
nowhere [else] in the system.” But at the outset of this book we noted the importance of discretion throughout the criminal justice system. The judgments of police and prosecutors about whether and what to charge are largely unguided and
uncontrolled. See p. 68 supra, and the flow chart on p. 83 supra. State governors and the President can grant executive clemency, a power that is likewise unrestricted and therefore in essence “arbitrary.” In Ex parte Garland, 71 U.S. (4 Wall) 333,
380 (1867), the Supreme Court declared that “[t]he benign prerogative of mercy reposed in [the President] cannot be fettered by any legislative restrictions.” Given the phenomenon of pervasive discretion, does jury nullification really deserve spe-
cial skepticism? Is unexplained leniency granted by a citizen group serving on a one-time basis more trustworthy or more problematic than unexplained leniency granted by elected officials accountable to voters and the political process?

Professor Andrew D. Leipold considers nullification undesirable, and he challenges the Ragland court's premise that the nullification power is unavoidable. He would restrict the de facto nullification power by authorizing prosecution
appeals (a view that would require reversal of current double jeopardy case law);7° at the

p.176
Teen TF
same time, he would permit explicit instructions authorizing nullification in cases involving de minimis harms, and prosecution appeal from an acquittal on that ground (if made explicit by a jury's special verdict) would be barred. See Leipold, Re-
thinking Jury Nullification, 82 Va. L. Rev. 253 (1996).

A different view is developed in Sherman J. Clark, The Courage of Our Convictions, 97 Mich. L. Rev. 2381 (1999). Professor Clark argues that jury trials “serve as a means through which we as a community take responsibility for — own
up to — inherently problematic judgments regarding the blameworthiness or culpability of our fellow citizens.” Id. He suggests, accordingly, that “procedures governing the criminal jury trial [should] engender in jurors a sense of personal responsi-
bility for the fate of the accused.” Id. at 2382. He recommends that jurors be instructed in a way that stresses their responsibility for their decision and makes them aware of their nullification power, without expressly encouraging them to use it —
for example, by telling the jurors (id. at 2446) that “the responsibility for this decision is entirely yours and .. . you will not be required to explain or justify your verdict except to your own conscience.”

5. The legality principle. A traditional principle of criminal law — also a constitutional mandate under the requirement of “due process of law” — is that punishment can be imposed only for violation of clear standards promulgated in
advance of the defendant's conduct. See pp. 190-233 infra. Suppose that the jurors are instructed, over the defendant's objection, that they are the judges of the law as well as the facts. Does such an instruction subject defendants to capricious
judgment and violate their right to be tried in accordance with ascertainable law, with guilt established beyond a reasonable doubt? Or are due process concerns met by the trial judge's power to set aside a conviction not supported by sufficient
evidence? See State v. Waine, 122 A.3d 294, 301 (Md. 2015).

6. Biased nullification. In United States v. Luisi, 568 F. Supp. 2d 106, 121 (D. Mass. 2008), the court observed: “History is replete with . . . ‘shameful examples of how nullification has been used to sanction murder and lynching.”
Consider Tania Tetlow, Discriminatory Acquittal, 18 Wm. & Mary Bill Rts. J. 75, 75 (2009):

From the Emmett Till trial to that of Rodney King, there is a long history of juries acquitting white defendants charged with violence against black victims. . . . Moreover, just as juries have permitted violence against those who

allegedly violated the racial order, juries use acquittals to punish female victims of rape and domestic violence for failing to meet gender norms. [T]he “appropriateness” of a female victim's behavior is one of the most accu-

rate predictors of conviction for gender-based violence.

Discriminatory acquittals violate the Constitution. Jurors may not constitutionally discriminate against victims of crimes any more than they may discriminate against defendants. Jurors are bound by the Equal
Protection Clause because their verdicts constitute state action. . . . [And] defendants have no countervailing right to jury nullification based on race or gender discrimination against victims. The Sixth Amendment promises
defendants an “impartial” jury, not a partial one.
QUESTIONS: If Professor Tetlow is right, what can be done to preserve nullification as a safeguard against government overreach while countering its dangers for underprotected victims?
pir
p17

7. Constraining nullification. If jury nullification is usually or (as the Ragland court argues) always undesirable, how far can courts go to discourage it? In a civil suit, the judge can set aside a jury verdict for one party and enter
judgment notwithstanding the verdict (often called “judgment n.o.v.”) for the other side. But in a criminal case, a judgment n.o.v. or directed verdict for the prosecution violates the defendant's Sixth Amendment right to trial by jury. Connecticut v.
Johnson, 460 U.S. 73, 84 (1983). Are other judicial efforts to prevent nullification similarly barred by the Sixth Amendment? Consider these situations:

(a) In People v. Fernandez, 31 Cal. Rptr. 2d 677 (Ct. App. 1994), the jurors interrupted their deliberations to send the judge a note in which they stated their belief that the defendant had committed battery with serious bodily injury and
then asked whether they nonetheless had the power to acquit on that charge and instead return a verdict of guilty on the lesser offense of assault. The trial judge simply replied, “No.” The court of appeal held that this response was not error.

(b) In State v. Smith-Parker, 340 P.3d 485, 499 (Kan. 2014), the defendant was convicted of murder after the judge instructed the jury: “If you do not have a reasonable doubt from all the evidence that the State has proven murder in the
first degree on either or both theories, then you will enter a verdict of guilty” (emphasis added). The Kansas Supreme Court reversed, holding that the “wording at issue here — ‘will’ — filles] too close to the sun of directing a verdict for the State. A
judge cannot compel a jury to convict, even if it finds all elements proved beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. at 507.

Space for jury nullification was similarly protected in United States v. Kleinman, 880 F.3d 1020, 1031 (8th Cir. 2017). Kleinman was convicted of distributing medical marijuana in violation of federal law, after the trial judge had instructed
that “[{]here is no such thing as valid jury nullification[.] You would violate your oath and the law if you willfully brought a verdict contrary to the law given to you in this case.” The court declared this instruction improper because it implied that jurors
could be punished for nullification, and therefore it “might be perceived as coercive.” Id. at 1035. In another marijuana case just a year later, however, the Ninth Circuit distinguished Kleinman and upheld an instruction that “[n]ullification is by def-
inition a violation of the juror’s oath. . .. [Y]ou cannot substitute your sense of justice, whatever it may be, for your duty to follow the law, whether you agree with the law or not.” United States v. Lynch, 903 F.3d 1061, 1079 (9th Cir. 2018). Similarly,
United States v. Brown, 945 F.3d 597, 603-604 (1st Cir. 2019), upheld an instruction telling the jury that “it would be a violation of your sworn duty to base a verdict upon any other view of the law than that given in the instructions of the court.” For
discussion of the fragile line between firmly discouraging nullification (which is permissible) and coercing a verdict (which is not), see Susan Yorke, Jury Nullification Instructions as Structural Error, 95 Wash. L. Rev. 1441 (2020).

(©) United States v. Thomas, 116 F.3d 606 (2d Cir. 1997), was a prosecution of several African-American defendants charged with conspiracy to distribute cocaine. During deliberations, several jurors informed the judge that Juror No. 5,
the sole African American on the panel, was refusing to follow the judge’s instructions, was calling his fellow jurors “racists,” and was adamantly holding out for acquittal. The judge interrupted the deliberations and interviewed each of the jurors.
According to several of them, Juror No. 5 had said he thought the government's evidence was

p17
p.179

unreliable, and Juror No. 5 told the judge that he needed “substantial evidence” of guilt. But several other jurors testified that Juror No. 5 had said he favored acquittal because the defendants were Black and had committed the alleged crimes out
of economic necessity. The trial judge accepted the latter account and dismissed Juror No. 5 on the ground that he would not convict “no matter what the evidence was” and had “preconceived . . . economic [or] social reasons [for acquittal] that
are totally improper.” The remaining jurors then unanimously convicted.

On appeal, the court “categorically reject[ed] the idea that jury nullification is desirable or that courts may permit it to occur when it is within their authority to prevent it.” The court held that the Constitution permits removal whenever
there is unambiguous evidence of a juror's refusal to follow the judge's instructions. The court reversed the convictions, however, because Juror No. 5's intentions were ambiguous and there was “some possibility” he had based his vote on his
view of the evidence.

Roughly in accord with the Thomas standard, other decisions hold that it is error to remove an allegedly recalcitrant juror if there is “any reasonable possibility” that the juror is following the judge's instructions. State v. Morfin, 287 P.3d
600, 605 (Wash. Ct. App. 2012). In United States v. Abbell, 271 F.3d 1286, 1302 (11th Cir. 2001), the court described this as “basically a ‘beyond reasonable doubt’ standard.” Nonetheless, courts often find that this tough requirement has been
met. E.g., United States v. Wilkerson, 966 F.3d 828 (D.C. Cir. 2020). And in Johnson v. Williams, 568 U.S. 289, 304 (2013), the Court upheld a more permissive California approach that allows a juror to be discharged when inquiry reveals a “demon-
strable reality” that the juror is unwilling or unable to deliberate.

QUESTIONS: If jury departures from the law are so unequivocally bad, why should the defendant have a constitutional right to jury trial in the first place? Was Duncan wrongly decided? Conversely, if the jury's equity-dispensing function is central
to its constitutional role, how can it be proper for a trial judge to remove jurors who reveal their intent to exercise that function? And what effect will the existence of such a removal power have on jurors’ ability to express their views candidly during
deliberation? For discussion of the issues, compare Nancy S. Marder, The Myth of the Nullifying Jury, 98 Nw. U. L. Rev. 877, 947-952 (1999) (criticizing Thomas), with Nancy J. King, Silencing Nullification Advocacy Inside and Outside the Court-
room, 65 U. Chi. L. Rev. 433, 438-491 (1998) (supporting the Thomas approach).

(d) The Fully Informed Jury Association (FIJA) is a Montana-based organization supported by a politically diverse array of protest groups, including anti-abortion activists, supporters of alternative medicines, and opponents of laws
regulating firearms, marijuana, motorcycle helmets, prostitution, and the right to die. See King, supra at 434; Marder, supra at 942. Through a national newsletter, website, and handbills distributed at courthouses, FIJA seeks to spread awareness
of the nullification power and encourage its use. At many courthouses throughout the country, FIJA distributes pro-nullification literature to potential and actual jurors, and encourages them to call an 800 number to hear a recorded message de-
scribing what one juror discovered were “more rights than what was read to me by the judge.”77

p.179
p. 160

Recall that in Dougherty, the majority considered formal nullification instructions unnecessary, in part because “the jury gets its understanding . . . from more than one voice”; the court concluded that awareness of the nullification power
can best come from “informal input.” Are FIJA’s activities therefore legitimate and perhaps even desirable? Many judges and other court officials apparently do not think so. FIJA activists who contact jurors or engage in leafleting at the courthouse
have been charged with jury tampering, obstruction of justice, and contempt of court, even though FIJA’s informational materials are not alleged to be incorrect or misleading. An Alaska case involved an FIJA activist who approached three potential
jurors and urged them to call a toll-free number to hear a recorded message about the jury's powers. He was convicted of jury tampering under a state statute that prohibits “directly or indirectly communicat{ing] with a juror . .. with intent to. . .
influence the juror’s vote, opinion or decision.” The U.S. Court of Appeals rejected his First Amendment challenge to the conviction. Turney v. Pugh, 400 F.3d 1197, 1199 (th Cir. 2005). In a New York case, federal authorities filed jury tampering
charges against Julian Heicklen, a 79-year-old retired university professor who allegedly stood on the plaza outside the U.S. Courthouse in Manhattan handing out brochures to passers-by (some of whom could have been potential jurors), accu-
rately explaining the jury's power to acquit in cases where they disagree with the law. The government used an undercover agent to secretly record a conversation in which Heicklen allegedly said, “I'm not telling you to find anybody not guilty. But
if there is a law you think is wrong then you should do that.” Prosecutors insisted that his speech was not protected by the First Amendment. Lawyers helping to defend him commented that the prosecution would raise awareness of the nullification
power and “surely convert more to the cause than poor Mr. Heicklen ever could on his own.” See Benjamin Weiser, Prosecution Explains Jury Tampering Charge, N.Y. Times, Nov. 27, 2011. Ultimately, the trial court dismissed the jury-tampering
charge, holding that the statute banned communication on an “issue or matter” before the jury, and that brochures merely describing a juror's duties did not involve an “issue or matter” unless directed to a specific case. United States v. Heicklen,
858 F. Supp. 2d 256, 275 (S.D.N.Y. 2012).

Municipalities have responded to FIJA’s efforts by enacting laws to more tightly restrict contact with potential jurors in or near the courthouse.2° Freedom of speech principles do not prohibit reasonable restrictions on advocacy within
a fixed distance from decision-making sites like courthouses or voting booths.72 But First Amendment considerations aside, why should it be a crime to give a juror truthful information about her rights and responsibilities? If society wants to block
both formal and informal sources of information about the jury's equity-dispensing role, why bother having a jury at all? For analysis of judicial efforts to silence nullification advocacy, see King, supra Note 7(c), at 492-499.

p. 160
p.161

Professor Andrew D. Leipold raises an additional concern. If jurors are supposed to decide whether application of the law is unfair in a given case, they “would probably want to know [a host of details, including] whether the defendant
is contrite]... whether he had a criminal record, and if so, how serious were his prior crimes. [They] might wonder how the prosecution enforces this crime against others: are African-Americans disproportionately targeted[?] . . . The problem is
that almost none of this information is admissible at trial.” Leipold, Race-Based Jury Nullification: Rebuttal (Part A), 30 J. Marshall L. Rev. 923, 923-924 (1997). Can we assume that the jury will glean this information from informal sources? And if
nullification is a legitimate option, does such information become legally relevant, so that it should be admissible at trial? What are the perils of that approach?

8. Can race-based nullification be benign? In Detroit, Washington, D.C., parts of New York City, and several other urban centers, observers have claimed that jury nullification is becoming more common, especially in drug prosecu-
tions involving African-American defendants. See Marder, supra Note 7(c), at 899-901. Consider the following comments:

PAUL BUTLER, RACIALLY BASED JURY NULLIFICATION: BLACK POWER IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM, 105 YALE L.J. 677 (1995): Considering the costs of law enforcement to the black community and the failure of white lawmakers to devise
significant nonincarcerative responses to black antisocial conduct, it is the moral responsibility of black jurors to emancipate some guilty black outlaws. . . . | hope that the destruction of the status quo will not lead to anarchy, but rather to the im-
plementation of certain noncriminal ways of addressing antisocial conduct. . . .

According to [some], whom | will call law enforcement enthusiasts, ... itis in the best interest of the black community to have more, rather than less, [law enforcement]. Allowing criminals to live unfettered in the community would harm,
in particular, the black poor, who are disproportionately the victims of violent crime. Indeed, the logical conclusion of the enthusiasts’ argument is that African-Americans would be better off with more, not fewer, black criminals behind bars.

To my mind, the enthusiasts embrace law enforcement too uncritically: They are blind to its opportunity costs. . .. [W]hen locking up black men means that “violent criminals . . . who attack those most vulnerable” are off the streets,
most people — including most law enforcement critics — would endorse the incarceration. But what about when locking up a black man has no or little net effect on public safety, when, for example, the crime with which he was charged is
victimless? . .

There is no question that jury nullification is subversive of the rule of law. . .. To borrow a phrase from the D.C. Circuit, jury nullification “betrays rather than furthers the assumptions of viable democracy. . . .” [But] “democracy,” as
practiced in the United States, has betrayed African-Americans far more than they could ever betray it... .

Because the United States is both a democracy and a pluralist society, it is important that diverse groups appear to have a voice in the laws that govern them. Allowing black people to serve on juries strengthens “public respect for our
criminal justice system and the rule of law.” . . . But what of the black juror who endorses racial critiques of American criminal justice? Such a person holds no “confidence in the integrity of the criminal justice system.” If she is cognizant of the im-
plicit message that the

p.161

p. 162
Supreme Court believes her presence sends, she might not want her presence to be the vehicle for that message. . . . Ina sense, the black juror [who nullifies] engages in an act of civil disobedience, except that her choice is better than civil dis-
obedience because it is lawful. Is the black juror’s race-conscious act moral? Absolutely. It would be farcical for her to be the sole color-blind actor in the criminal process, especially when it is her blackness that advertises the system's fairness. . ..

In cases involving violent malum in se crimes like murder, rape, and assault, jurors should consider the case strictly on the evidence presented, and, if they have no reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty, they should convict. For
nonviolent malum in se crimes such as theft or perjury, nullification is an option that the juror should consider, although there should be no presumption in favor of it. A juror might vote for acquittal, for example, when a poor woman steals from

Tiffany's, but not when the same woman steals from her next-door neighbor. Finally, in cases involving nonviolent, malum prohibitum offenses, including “victimless” crimes like narcotics offenses, there should be a presumption in favor of nullfi-
cation. . . . Black people have a community that needs building, and children who need rescuing; as long as a person will not hurt anyone, the community needs him there to help... .

| am not encouraging anarchy. Instead, | am reminding black jurors of their privilege to serve a higher calling than law: justice. . . . | hope that there are enough of us out there, fed up with prison as the answer to black desperation and
white supremacy, to cause retrial after retrial,2 until, finally, the United States “retries” its idea of justice.
RANDALL L. KENNEDY, RACE, CRIME, AND THE LAW 301-310(1996): [JJury nullification is an exceedingly poor means for advancing the goal of a racially fair administration of criminal law. . . . Jury nullification as typically implemented is a low-
visibility, highly ambiguous protest unlikely to focus the attention of the public clearly on social problems in need of reform. [Moreover, if] a large number of blacks clearly engage in “guerrilla warfare” as jurors, their action might call into question
the right of blacks to be selected for jury service on precisely the same terms as others. Widespread adoption of Butler's proposal would likely give rise to measures designed to exclude prospective nullfiers from juries, measures that would result
almost certainly in the disproportionate exclusion of blacks. . ..

Butler exudes keen sympathy for nonviolent drug offenders and similar criminals. By contrast, Butler is inattentive to the aspirations, frustrations, and fears of law-abiding people compelled by circumstances to live in close proximity to
the criminals for whom he is willing to urge subversion of the legal system. Butler simply overlooks the sector of the black law-abiding population that desires more rather than less prosecution and punishment for all types of criminals. . .

Ifa large number of blacks have views on the administration of criminal law that are counter to Butler's, why worry about his proposal? . .. [I]t would not take many people to wreak havoc with the jury system. The unanimity requirement
renders juries uniquely susceptible to disruption by a resolute cadre of nullfiers. ..

p. 162
p. 168

The most fundamental reason to oppose Professor Butler’s call for racially selective jury nullification is that it is based on a sentiment that is regrettably widespread in American culture: an ultimately destructive sentiment of racial
kinship that prompts individuals of a given race to care more about “their own” than people of another race. [Butler] assumes that it is proper for prospective black jurors to care more about black communities than white communities, that it is
proper for black jurors to be more concerned with the fate of black defendants than white defendants, and that it is proper for black jurors to be more protective of the property (and perhaps the lives?) of black people than white people. Along
that road lies moral and political disaster. The disaster includes not only increasing but, worse, legitimizing the tendency of people to privilege in racial terms “their own.” Some will say that this racial privileging has already happened andis, in any
event, inevitable. The situation can and will get worse, however, if Butler's plan and the thinking behind it gains adherents. His program, although animated by a desire to challenge racial injustice, would demolish the moral framework upon which
an effective, attractive, and compelling alternative can and must be built.
NOTE ON RACE-BASED NULLIFICATION

Professor Butler has analogized his proposal to the Fourth Amendment exclusionary rule, which tolerates the acquittal of a guilty offender in hopes of deterring violations of the constitutional protection against “unreasonable searches
and seizures.” Similarly, he argues, when police or prosecutors engage in discriminatory enforcement, “jury nullification gives jurors a special power to send the message that black lives matter.” Paul Butler, Jurors Need to Take the Law into Their
Own Hands, Wash. Post, Apr. 5, 2016. Professor Josh Bowers is sympathetic to Professor Butler's proposal but argues that “his wrecking ball is aimed at a largely deserted building. Vanishingly few criminal defendants take cases to trial.” He
suggests that “grand-jury nullification is a better vehicle . . . [because] grand juries exercise nullification power at the time that matters most — before the case has even started.” Josh Bowers, Grand-Jury Nullification: Black Power in the Charging
Decision, in Criminal Law Conversations 578, 578-579 (Paul H. Robinson et al. eds., 2009).

In contrast, Professor Robin Charlow, citing her experience as a federal defender, stresses the concern that Butler's proposal, if carried out, could hurt Black defendants by magnifying prosecutor efforts to deploy peremptory chal-
lenges against prospective Black jurors. See Robin Charlow, The Effect of Race-Based Jury Nullification on Batson, in Criminal Law Conversations, supra at 572, 572-573. For further discussion of the Butler proposal, see Darryl K. Brown, Jury
Nullification Within the Rule of Law, 81 Minn. L. Rev. 1149, 1185-1191 (1997); Andrew D. Leipold, The Dangers of Race-Based Jury Nullification, 44 UCLA L. Rev. 109 (1996); Marder, supra Note 7(c), at 937-943.

NOTES ON THE JURY'S ROLE IN SENTENCING

Because Duncan emphasizes that a central jury function is to afford protection against the “compliant, biased, or eccentric judge,” it might seem that the constitutional right to jury trial should include a right to have the jury decide not
only matters of guilt and innocence, but also the offender's punishment. In capital cases,

p. 163

p. 164
nearly all states do give the jury this broader responsibility; we explore the jury's special role in this context in Chapter 10, pp. 1172-1183 infra. But for other sentencing matters, only six states allow for punishment to be determined largely by the
jury. In all the others, the sentencing decision is left to the judge, and this arrangement is normally not thought to violate Sixth Amendment requirements. Why not? Why should decisions about the sentence be treated differently from decisions
about whether to convict? And what freedom should states have to shift factual questions from the guilt phase, where the jury must resolve them, to the sentencing phase, where the prosecution needs only to convince a single judge? Consider the
Notes that follow.

1. Jury sentencing. In Arkansas, Kentucky, Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas, and Virginia, defendants who plead guilty or opt for a bench trial are sentenced by a judge, but those who elect to go to trial before a jury are sentenced by the
same jury, usually in a “bifurcated” proceeding — the trial on guilt or innocence occurs first, and if the jury convicts, it then hears further evidence and retires to deliberate separately on the question of punishment. (The principal exception is Ok-
lahoma, where defendants without a prior record are tried and, if convicted, then sentenced in a unitary proceeding.) At the penalty phase, sentencing juries typically are not given guidelines of any sort. Instead, they are simply asked to pick any
sentence within the authorized statutory range. (In contrast, in many jurisdictions, guidelines and presentence reports shape the sentencing decisions of judges, as discussed in Chapter 10, infra.)

As a result, jury sentencing produces enormous variation in the sentences imposed on similarly situated offenders. See Nancy J. King & Rosevelt L. Noble, Felony Jury Sentencing in Practice: A Three-State Study, 57 Vand. L. Rev. 885
(2004); Jenia lontcheva, Jury Sentencing as Democratic Practice, 89 Va. L. Rev. 311 (2003). In addition, sentencing juries typically have fewer options for leniency than are available when the sentence is fixed by the judge. For example, in several
of the jury-sentencing states, judges can grant probation or a suspended sentence, but juries cannot. And an analysis of institutional dynamics suggests that because each jury focuses on a single case, the jury has little opportunity to consider
the “broader social costs or benefits of its punishment decisions”, jury sentences are thus likely to prioritize retribution over other punishment goals. See Aaron Rappaport, The Institutional Design of Punishment, 60 Ariz. L. Rev. 913, 932 (2018).
For this reason and others, studies suggest, defendants sentenced by a jury typically receive more severe sentences than similarly situated defendants sentenced by a judge. See Nancy J. King & Rosevelt L. Noble, Jury Sentencing in Non-Capital
Cases: Comparing Severity and Variance with Judicial Sentences in Two States, 2 J. Empirical L. Stud. 331 (2005).22

Despite these features (or pethaps because of them), state officials have shown little enthusiasm for reforms that would permit more leniency or consistency in jury sentencing, through sentencing guidelines and other devices now
widely used

p. 184

p. 185
to promote uniformity in sentencing by judges. Prosecutors and legislators in jury-sentencing states seem to believe that the greater severity and unpredictability of jury sentencing is an important factor in inducing guilty pleas, so that cases can
be disposed of quickly and cheaply. Professor Nancy King concludes that “the wild card aspect of jury sentencing helps to funnel defendants to guilty pleas and bench trials. . . . For criminal justice insiders, the unpredictability of jury sentencing is
a blessing, not a curse; the more freakish, the better.” Nancy J. King, How Different Is Death? Jury Sentencing in Capital and Non-Capital Cases Compared, 2 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 195, 198 (2004). Yet courts have consistently rejected the argument
that unguided jury discretion in non-capital cases violates due process. E.g., Torres v. United States, 140 F.3d 392, 397 (2d Cir. 1998).

Do these problems suggest that at the sentencing stage, the jury cannot serve as an effective equity-dispensing mechanism for the benefit of defendants? Or do they simply show that jury sentencing has not been permitted to fulfill its
potential?

2. Judicial sentencing: what is the jury permitted to know? Does it follow from Dougherty that a judge not only may refuse to inform the jury of its nullification power, but also may refuse to inform the jury about the severity of the
sentence that a defendant faces upon conviction? The question has become increasingly important with the proliferation of mandatory minimum sentencing laws, which often dictate long terms of imprisonment for possession of small quantities

of drugs, even when the defendant is a first offender. Yet nearly all courts hold that, because the jury's role is solely to determine the facts relevant to guilt, the jury has no legitimate concern with the consequences of a conviction. E.g., Shannon v.
United States, 512 U.S. 573 (1994). For criticism of this approach, see Daniel Epps & William Ortman, The Informed Jury (July 26, 2021). available at https://papers.sstn.com/sol3/papers.cm?abstract_id=3893933; Jeffrey Bellin, Is Punishment Rel-
evant After All? A Prescription for Informing Juries of the Consequence of Conviction, 90 B.U. L. Rev. 2223 (2010); Michael T. Cahill, Punishment Decisions at Conviction: Recognizing the Jury as Fault-Finder, 2005 U. Chi. Legal F. 91.

United States v. Polizzi, 549 F. Supp. 2d 308 (E.D.N.Y. 2008), illustrates another challenge to the prevailing view. The defendant was convicted on 12 counts of receiving child pornography. The jury rejected his insanity plea despite
evidence that he had suffered vicious sexual abuse as a child, had nonetheless established a home with a loving family, and had no prior criminal history. After the verdict, a poll of the jurors revealed that, had they been aware of the applicable five-
year mandatory minimum sentence, they would not have convicted, because they thought the defendant should receive treatment and close supervision to prevent a recurrence, not a long prison term. Noting that a properly informed jury would
likely have deadlocked or found the defendant not guilty by reason of insanity, the district judge awarded a new trial. Based on an extensive review of the history of jury trial, the judge held that, under these circumstances, the failure to inform the
jury of the mandatory minimum sentence prior to its deliberations deprived the defendant of his constitutional right to jury trial, as that right had been understood at the time of the framing of the Bill of Rights. However, the Court of Appeals re-
versed, holding that absent unusual circumstances, it is an abuse of discretion for a trial judge to inform the jury of the sentencing consequences of its verdict.

p. 185

p. 186
United States v. Polouizzi [a/k/a/ Polizzi], 564 F.3d 142 (2d Cir. 2009).°! Compare United States v. Datcher, 830 F. Supp. 411, 414-418 (M.D. Tenn. 1993), where another district judge, protesting against the prevailing bar on instructions about
sentencing consequences, commented:

Argument against allowing the jury to hear information that might lead to nullification evinces a fear that the jury might actually serve its primary purpose, that is, it evinces a fear that the community might in fact think a law

unjust. . . . Overly harsh punishments were the impetus to development of jury nullification. Institution of the jury system was meant to protect against unjust punishment . . ., not merely unjust conviction. . ..

No instruction on jury nullification was requested by the defendant, and none would be given if it were requested. . .. But Mr. Datcher is entitled to have the jury perform its full oversight function, and informing the

jury of possible punishment is essential to this function. The court finds no good reason for opposing candor.

3. Judicial sentencing: when can factual questions be shifted from the jury’s domain to that of the judge? Duncan protects the defendant's right to have the jury determine, under a strict beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard,
all facts necessary to constitute the crime charged — that is, all “elements” of the offense. But a single judge, acting under a preponderance-of-the-evidence standard, can determine all other facts relevant to the level of punishment — that is, all
“sentencing factors.” Years of imprisonment can therefore turn on whether the fact is characterized as an “element” of the offense or merely as a “sentencing factor.” For discussion of the case law on this issue, see p. 158, Note 3 supra. Consider
to what extent the “sentencing factor” option (together with the rule against informing the jury about the sentencing consequences of a conviction (Note 2 supra)) enables the legislature to defeat the jury's constitutionally protected functions
identified in Duncan — the functions of restraining overly harsh laws and preventing prosecutors from using generally reasonable laws in an oppressive manner. For discussion, see Rachel E. Barkow, Recharging the Jury: The Criminal Jury's Con-
stitutional Role in an Era of Mandatory Sentencing, 152 U. Pa. L. Rev. 33 (2003).

NOTES AND QUESTIONS ON INCONSISTENT VERDICTS

1. The problem and the prevailing solution. When a prosecution involves several separate counts, it sometimes happens that the jury's verdict on one count will be irreconcilably in conflict with its verdict on another count. Con-

sider, for example, DeSacia v. State, 469 P.2d 369 (Alaska 1970). The defendant's reckless
p. 186
p.167

driving forced another vehicle off the road, and both the driver and passenger in the other vehicle were killed. The defendant was prosecuted on two counts of manslaughter. The jury convicted on the count charging manslaughter of the passenger
but acquitted on the count charging manslaughter of the driver of the other car. Because the defendant's conduct had endangered the two victims in precisely the same way, he was in principle guilty of manslaughter either in both cases or in nei-
ther. Should the inconsistent verdicts nevertheless be allowed to stand?

In the DeSacia case, the court noted that the verdict of acquittal was final; any relitigation of that count would violate the Double Jeopardy Clause. But the court set aside the conviction on the other count, to assure that the conviction
was not the product of jury confusion or irrationality. The court therefore remanded for a new trial on the count relating to the death of the passenger. Similarly, in Price v. State, 949 A.2d 619, 630 (Md. 2008), the court acknowledged that inconsis-
tent verdicts had been accepted in the interests of lenity or compromise, but held that such verdicts, because illogical, would no longer be tolerated.

Although several other American jurisdictions refuse to accept inconsistent verdicts, the federal courts and the great majority of the states permit the inconsistent conviction to stand. See Priest v. State, 879 A.2d 575 (Del. 2005); People
v. Jones, 207 Ill. 2d 122, 133 (2003); Eric L. Muller, The Hobgoblin of Little Minds? Our Foolish Law of Inconsistent Verdicts, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 771, 787-788 (1998). Which approach seems more faithful to the premises of jury trial? If the jury is ex-
pected to give voice to the rough common sense of the community, isn’t the DeSacia court's desire for consistency out of place? Do inconsistent verdicts facilitate the exercise of the jury's leniency, or do they encourage compromise convictions
‘on counts about which the jury may not really be persuaded beyond a reasonable doubt? In United States v. Powell, 469 U.S. 57, 65 (1984), the Supreme Court noted:

Inconsistent verdicts . . . present a situation where “error,” in the sense that the jury has not followed the court's instructions, most certainly has occurred, but it is unclear whose ox has been gored. Given this uncertainty,

and the fact that the Government is precluded from challenging the acquittal, it is hardly satisfactory to allow the defendant to receive a new trial on the conviction as a matter of course. . . . For us, the possibility that the in-

consistent verdicts may favor the criminal defendant as well as the Government militates against review of such convictions at the defendant's behest.

2. Criticism of the prevailing acceptance of inconsistent verdicts. The Powell Court’s assumptions have drawn sharp criticism. Professor Leipold notes that “[flor every case where the jury extends mercy to a deserving defendant,
there may well be another (or two, or five others) where the verdict is based on improper considerations.” Andrew Leipold, Rethinking Jury Nullification, 82 Va. L. Rev. 253, 304 (1996). Professor Muller, supra Note 1, at 795, argues that “by refusing
to disturb inconsistent verdicts, the Court is buying a chance for [leniency] at the price of protecting jury confusion, mistake, and compromise.” He concludes that courts should set aside inconsistent convictions unless the evidence supporting the
conviction is so overwhelming that any jury error can be deemed harmless.

p.167

p. 168
QUESTIONS: What if the prosecution seeks an instruction, in a case like DeSacia, that the jury must either acquit on both counts or convict on both counts? Does the result in DeSacia in effect require such an instruction in future cases? If so,
would the defendant then be justified in claiming that the instruction improperly constrained the jury's equity-dispensing function?

In connection with these problems, consider whether it was entirely a coincidence that the DeSacia jury convicted for the death of the passenger, but acquitted for the death of the driver of the other car. As we shall see, contributory
negligence is not a defense in a criminal prosecution, see p. 510 infra, but the Kalven and Zeisel study, p. 170 supra, at 242-257, showed that jury nullification often occurred in cases involving contributory fault by the victim. If this factor played
arole in the driver's acquittal in DeSacia, then wasn't the jury — to quote from Duncan v. Louisiana, p. 162 supra — “serving some of the very purposes for which [it was] created”? Or are the dangers identified by Professor Muller (ury confusion,
mistake, inappropriate compromise, and disregard of the reasonable-doubt requirement) more concerning than the risk of chilling the jury's equity-dispensing function?

11, An early exploration of this problem appears in Sanford H. Kadish, Legal Norm and Discretion in the Police and Sentencing Process, 75 Harv. L. Rev. 904 (1962).

2, Kenneth Culp Davis, Discretionary Justice 170 (1968).

‘3, Some other important examples of discretion in criminal law and punishment — such as police discretion whether to investigate or arest and the executive's discretion to parole or grant clemency — are similarly important but typically beyond the scope of the basic material covered in a criminal
law course,

4, John F. Pfaff, Locked In: The True Causes of Mass Incarceration and How to Achieve Real Reform 72 (2017) (highlighting increasing rates of felony flings by prosecutors as the key driver of mass incarceration); Shima B. Baughman & Megan S. Wright, Prosecutors and Mass Incarceration, 94 S.
Cal, L. Rev. (forthcoming 2021) (observing that, even though arrest rates have gone down in recent years, prosecutors have been charging more cases per arrest since 2003 in spite of falling crime rates and public sentiment against mass incarceration),

‘5, FBI, Clearances (2018), htips://ucr bi,gov/crime-n-the-u,s/2016/crime-in-the-u,s.-2016/topie-pages/clearances; FBI, Percent of Offenses Cleared by Arrest or Exceptional Means (2018), hitps://ucr.fbl.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2018/erime-in-the-u.s.-2016/tables/table-27.

6, Christina Goldbaum, Charged with Prostitution, She Went to a Special Court. Did It Help2, N.Y. Times, Jan. 6, 2020, hitps:/www.nytimes.com/2020/01/06/nyregion/ny-prostitution-courts. html,

Council of Economic Advisers Issue Brief, Fines, Fees, and Ball, p. 6 (Dec. 2018), https://www.whitehouse.qov/sites/cefault/files/page/fles/1215_cea fine fee ball issue brief.paf,

8, Jan Ransom & Ed Shanahan, 17 Rikers Guards Wil Be Disciplined in Death of Transgender Woman, N.Y. Times, June 26, 2020, htips://www.nytimes.conv2020/06/26/nyregion/layleen-polanco-tikers-transgender-death, html,

2 Council of Economic Advisers Issues Brief, supra note 7, Id. at 7.

110, Will Dobbie, Jacob Goldin & Crystal S. Yang, The Effects of Pretrial Detention on Conviction, Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges, Am. Econ. Rev. (2018), htips://pubs.aeaweb.org/dol/pafplus/10.1257/aer. 20161503.

111, Crystal S. Yang, Toward an Optimal Ball System, 92 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1399 (2017).

112, Colin Doyle, Chesa Boudin's New Bail Policy Is Nation's Most Progressive. It Also Reveals Persistence of Tough-on-Crime Norms, The Appeal, Jan. 30, 2020, htips:/theappeal.org/politicalreport/chesa-boudin-cash-bail-predictions/,

13, US. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Federal Justice Statistics, 2011-2012 (Jan. 2015), p. 16.

114, Prison Policy Initiative, How Race Impacts Who Is Detained Pretrial (ct. 9, 2019), hitps://www prisonpolicy.org/blog/2019/10/09/pretrial_race/,

15.14.

16, U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Pretrial Release and Misconduct in Federal District Courts, 2008-2010 (Nov. 2012); lan Ayres & Joel Waldfogel, A Market Test for Race Discrimination in Ball Setting, 46 Stan. L. Rev. 987 (1994).

117, David Arnold, Will Dobbie & Crystal S. Yang, Racial Bias in Bail Decisions, NBER Working Paper No. W23421 (May 24, 2017), available at http://www. law.nyu.edu/sites/default/flles/upload_documents/Yang9%20paper%20DE0%206%20ADY RacialBias.pdt,

118, Oynthia E. Jones, “Give Us Free”: Addressing Racial Disparities in Bail Determinations, 16 N.Y.U. J. Legis. & Pub. Pol'y 919, 943 (2013).

119, Prison Policy Initiative, supra note 14.

20. Guilty pleas accounted for 94 percent of felony convictions in state courts in 2006, U.S. Dept. of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics, Felony Convictions in State Courts, 2006 (Dec. 2008), and 96 percent of convictions in federal courts in 2008. U.S. Dept. of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics,
Federal Justice Statistics, 2008 — Statistical Tables (Nov. 2010), p. 18.

21, Daniel Givelber, Lost Innocence: Speculation and Data About the Acquitted, 42 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1167, 1172 (2005),

22, Pew Research Center, Only 2% of Federal Criminal Defendants Go to Trial, and Most Who Do Are Found Guilty (June 11, 2019), https://www, pewresearch org/fact-tank/2019/06/11/only-2-f-federal-criminal-defendants-go-to-trial-and-most-who-do-are-found-quilty/.

23, The chart is based on one that appears in President's Commission, p. 69 n. 81 supra, at 8.

24, American Bar Assn, Model Rules of Professional Conduct, Rule 3.8 (5th ed. 2003)

25, American Bar Assn. Criminal Justice Standards: The Prosecution Function §3-4.3(b) (th ed. 2017).

26, New York v. Strauss-Kahn, Recommendation for Dismissal 4, Aug. 22, 2011, available at hitp/vww.nytimes.com/interactive/2011/08/22/nyregion/dsk-recommendation-to-dismiss-case.himl (emphasis added).

27.10. at 2.

28, The current ABA standard allows a prosecutor to maintain charges only if “the prosecutor continues to reasonably believe that probable cause exists and that admissible evidence will be sufficient to support conviction beyond a reasonable doubt.” American Bar Assn. Criminal Justice Stan-
dards: The Prosecution Function §3-4.3(b) (4th ed. 2017).

29, American Bar Assn. Criminal Justice Standards: The Prosecution Function §3-4.4(a) (ath ed. 2016).

30.1.

31, See Justice Manual, Principles of Federal Prosecution, htip://www.usdo),gov/usao/eousa/foia reading room/usamitle9/27merm.him,

82, See, e.g,, John Pfaff, Prosecutorial Guidelines, in3 Reforming Crim. J. 101, 108-104 (Erik Luna ed., 2017).

‘38, Memorandum from David W. Ogden, Deputy Attorney Gen. of the United States, to Selected U.S. Attomeys (Oct. 19, 2009), http://www.justice.gov/opa/blog/memorandum-selected-united-state-attomeys-investigations-and-prosecutions-states; Memorandum from James M. Cole, Deputy
Attomey Gen. of the United States, to the U.S. Attorneys (June 29, 2011), http://www justice. gov/sites/defaull/iles/oip/leqacy/2014/07/23/dag-quidance-2011-for-medical-marijuana-use.pdf; Memorandum from James M. Cole, Deputy Attomey Gen. of the United States, to the U.S. Attorneys (Aug. 29, 2013),
http://www. justice. qov/iso/opa/resources/3052013829132756857467.pdf; Memorandum from Jefferson B. Sessions, Il, Attomey Gen. of the United States, to All U.S. Attomeys (Jan. 4, 2018), htips:/AvwwJustice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-issues-memo-marijuana-enforcement.

84, See Rachel E. Barkow, Institutional Design and the Policing of Prosecutors: Lessons from Administrative Law, 61 Stan. L. Rev. 669 (2009).

‘35, That is the recommendation of the Pretrial Justice Working Group, a multi-disciplinary working group convened by the Office of Justice Programs. Pretrial Justice Institute, Implementing the Recommendations of the National Symposium on Pretrial Justice: The 2013 Progress Report 2, http://
www pretrial.org/download/infostop/Implementing%20the%20Recommendations%200f%20the%20National%20Symposium%200n%20Pretrial%20.Justice-%20The%202013%20Progress%20Report.pdt.

‘36, See Independent Counsel Reauthorization Act of 1994, 28 U.S.C. §§591-599 (1994).

‘37, See Stephen J. Schulhofer, The Trouble with Trials; The Trouble with Us, 105 Yale LJ. 625, 847 (1995).

‘38, Sarah Anne Behtz, Justice for All?: Victim Satisfaction with Restorative Justice Conferences (Dec. 2004) (thesis, East Tennessee State University), Electronic Theses and Dissertations Paper 947, https://do.ctsu.edu/eta/974,

1a. Congress passed legislation to reduce the disparity to 18-to-1. See p. 107 note 5 infra. — EDS.

6. Also telling was the Government's response to respondents’ evidentiary showing. [It] offered the names of 11 nonblack defendants whom it had prosecuted for crack offenses. All 11, however, were members of other racial or ethnic minorities. The District Court was authorized to draw adverse
inferences from the Government's inability to produce a single example of a white defendant, especially when the very purpose of its exercise was to allay the Court's concems about the evidence of racially selective prosecutions. As another court has said: “Statistics are not, of course, the whole answer, but
nothing is as emphatic as zero... .”

‘39. The 90 percent figure technically refers to those sentenced based on crack charges, but for this purpose there is no significant difference between the percentage of those convicted and the percentage of those sentenced.

40, See “Transforming the Federal Government to Protect America from Terrorism,” Hearing Before the H. Select Comm. on Homeland Sec., 107th Cong,, 2d Sess. 23-25 (2002) (statement of John Ashcroft)

8. We here make no reference to the situation where the prosecutor or judge, or both, deliberately employ their charging and sentencing powers to induce a particular defendant to tender a plea of guilty. In Brady's case there is no claim that the prosecutor threatened prosecution on a charge not
Justified by the evidence or that the trial judge threatened Brady with a harsher sentence if convicted after tral in order to induce him to plead guilty.

18. Shelton v. United States, 246 F.2d 571, 572 n.2 (Sth Cir. 1957) (en bano), rev'd on confession of error on other grounds, 356 U.S. 26 (1958).

41, See American Bar Assn., Internal Exile: Collateral Consequences of Conviction in Federal Laws and Regulations (2009); American Bar Assn., National Inventory of the Collateral Consequences of Conviction, available at http:/www.abacollateralconsequences.org.

42. With respect to collateral consequences applicable primarily to persons convicted of a sexual offense, the MPC duty to inform is more complete (t includes discretionary consequences as well), and the sentencing judge Is required to provide this information “[bjefore accepting a guilty plea,
and at the time of sentencing after conviction on a guilty plea or at tral.” Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses, Tentative Draft No. 5 (May 4, 2021) (approved June 7, 2021), §213.11B(1) (emphasis added)

43. Brian A. Reeves, Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Dept. of Justice, Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 2009 — Statistical Tables (2013), available at https://b|s.ojp.qov/content/pub/pdt/fdluc09.pa.

44, Pew Research Center, Only 2% of Federal Criminal Defendants Go to Trial, and Most Who Do Are Found Gullty (2019), httos:/www,pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/06/1 1/only-2-of-federal-criminal-defendants-go-to-trial-and-most-who-do-are-found-guilty/. Less than 3 percent of state court
convictions are obtained via a jury tral. Id.

45. See H. Miller, W. McDonald & J. Cramer, Plea Bargaining in the United States 16-24 (1978). See also Stephen J. Schulhofer, Is Plea Bargaining Inevitable?, 97 Harv. L. Rev. 1037, 1051 (1984) (reporting a guilty plea rate of 45 percent for Philadelphia, where most felony cases received fully
contested bench trials).

46. The starting point for any consideration of the issues is Professor Albert W. Alschuler's groundbreaking portrait of the system, as conducted by its three most important practitioners. See The Prosecutor's Role in Plea Bargaining, 36 U. Chi. L. Rev. 50 (1968); The Defense Attorney's Role in Plea
Bargaining, 84 Yale LJ. 1179 (1975); The Trial Judge’s Role in Plea Bargaining, Part |, 76 Colum. L. Rev. 1059 (1976).

‘a. Burger, The State of the Judiciary — 1970, 56 A.B.A. J. 929, 931 (1970). — EDs.

47. U.S. Sentencing Commn., Preliminary Quarterly Data Report, tbl. 1 (2075), http://www.ussc. gov/sites/defautt/files/pdt/tesearch-and-publications/tederal-sentencing-statistics/quarterly-sentencing-updates/USSC-2015 3rd_Quarterly Report.pat.

48. National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers (NACDL) and Foundation for Criminal Justice, The Trial Penalty: The Sixth Amendment Right to Trial on the Verge of Extinction and How to Save It 15 (2018), wivw.nacdl.org/trialpenaltyreport.

49, Rebecca K. Helm, Valerie F. Reyna, Allison A. Franz et al., Limitations on the Ability to Negotiate Justice: Attorney Perspectives on Guilt, Innocence, and Legal Advice in the Current Plea System, Psychol., Crime & L. 24, no. 9, 915-934 (2018).

‘50. The Trial Penalty, supra note 48, at 9

8. This case does not involve the constitutional implications of a prosecutor's offer during plea bargaining of adverse or lenient treatment for some person other than the accused, which might pose a greater danger of inducing a false guilty plea by skewing the assessment of the risks a defendant
must consider.

|L.In Brady v. United States, 397 U.S. 742 (1970), where the Court as a premise accepted plea bargaining as a legitimate practice, it nevertheless observed: “We here make no reference to the situation where the prosecutor or judge, or both, deliberately employ their charging and sentencing
powers to induce a particular defendant to tender a plea of guilty.”

2. That prosecutors . .. sometimes bring charges more serious than they think appropriate for the ultimate disposition of a case, in order to gain bargaining leverage with a defendant, does not add support to today’s decision, for this Court, in its approval of the advantages to be gained from plea
negotiations, has never openly sanctioned such deliberate overcharging or taken such a cynical view of the bargaining process. Normally, of course, it is impossible to show that this is what the prosecutor is doing, and the courts necessarily have deferred to the prosecutor's exercise of discretion in initial
charging decisions.

Even if overcharging Is to be sanctioned, there are strong reasons of fairness why the charges should be presented at the beginning of the bargaining process, rather than as a filiped threat at the end... . Visibility is enhanced if the prosecutor is required to lay his cards on the table with an indict-
ment of public record at the beginning of the bargaining process, rather than making use of unrecorded verbal warnings of more serious indictments yet to come. .

. Ina footnote, Justice Powell added, “The majority's view confuses the propriety of a particular exercise of prosecutorial discretion with its unreviewability. In the instant case, however, we have no problem of proof.” — EDS.

a. This article, written before Judge Lynch's appointment to the bench, is based in part on his experience as an Assistant U.S. Attomey in the Southem District of New York. — EDS.

b. For in-depth analysis of these relationships, see Daniel C. Richman, Prosecutors and Their Agents, Agents and Their Prosecutors, 103 Colum. L. Rev. 749 (2003). — EDS.

51. Eg,, Rachel E. Barkow, Institutional Design and the Policing of Prosecutors: Lessons from Administrative Law, 61 Stan. L. Rev. 869 (2009),

‘52, Burks v. United States, 497 U.S. 1 (1978). The English practice is somewhat different. In that country, when a reviewing court finds prejudicial error, the conviction is “quashed,” and ordinarily no retrial is permitted. Criminal Appeal Act, ch. 19, §2(2)-(3). But the English courts have discretion to
order a new trial when “the interests of justice so require.” Id. §7.

‘5S. To avoid this difficulty many states provide for rulings prior to the start of trial on significant issues of law and permit the prosecutor to appeal an adverse ruling at that point. For discussion of prosecution appeals, see James A. Strazzella, The Relationship of Double Jeopardy to Prosecution
Appeals, 73 Notre Dame L. Rev. 1 (1997).

‘54, For example, special restrictions intended to protect the privacy of a witness are examined in connection with the materials on rape, pp. 455-460 infra.

‘55, Rita James Simon, The Effects of Newspapers on the Verdicts of Potential Jurors, in R. Simon, The Sociology of Law 617-627 (1968).

‘56, See Saul M. Kassin & Lawrence S. Wrightsman, Coerced Confessions, Judicial Instruction and Mock Juror Verdicts, 11 J. Applied Soc. Psych. 489 (1981).

57. See Joel D. Lieberman & Bruce D. Sales, What Social Science Teaches Us About the Jury Instruction Process, 3 Psychol. Pub. Pol'y & L. 589, 601-602 (1997). See also Nancy Steblay et al., The Impact on Juror Verdicts of Judicial Instructions to Disregard inadmissible Evidence: A Meta-Anal-
ysis Study, 30 Law & Hum. Behav. 469, 477-481 (2006).

‘58, Lisa Eichorn, Social Science Findings and the Jury's Ability to Disregard Evidence Under the Federal Rules of Evidence, 52 Law & Contemp. Probs. 341, 344-346 (1989).

‘59. Alan Reifman, Spencer Grusick & Phoebe C. Ellsworth, Real Jurors’ Understanding of the Law in Real Cases, 16 Law & Hum. Behav. 539 (1992). See also V. Gordon Rose & James R.P. Ogloff, Evaluating the Comprehensibility of Jury Instructions: A Method and an Example, 25 Law & Hum.
Behav. 409 (2001)

60. Wiliam E. Schwartzer, Communicating with Juries: Problems and Remedies, 69 Cal. L. Rev. 731 (1981). See also Lawrence J. Severance, Edith Greene & Elizabeth F. Loftus, Toward Criminal Jury Instructions that Jurors Can Understand, 75 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 198 (1984).

61. For exploration of the impact of jury instructions generally, see pp. 144-146 supra.

62, See Timothy James Ting, it’s Time to Define Beyond a Reasonable Doubt, 106 Ill. BJ. 24 (2018) (Identifying ten states that take this approach).

a. The relevant provisions of the New York Penal Code may be found at pp. 467-468 infra. — EDs.

8. For example, a state statute could pass muster under the only solid standard that appears in the Court's opinion if it defined murder as mere physical contact between the defendant and the victim leading to the victim’s death, but then set up an affirmative defense leaving it to the defendant to
prove that he acted without culpable mens rea. The State, in other words, could be relieved altogether of responsibilty for proving anything regarding the defendant's state of mind, provided only that the face of the statute meets the Court's drafting formulas. .

63. The originator of the greater-includes-the-lesser argument in this context is generally thought to be Justice Holmes, who advanced it in his opinion for the Court in Ferry v. Ramsey, 277 U.S. 88 (1928).

a. The applicable Louisiana statute provided: “Simple battery is a battery, without the consent of the victim, committed without a dangerous weapon.” La. Rev. Stat. §14:35 (1950). As traditionally understood, a battery includes any “offensive touching”; neither pain nor physical injury is required.
‘See Wayne R. LaFave, Criminal Law 861 (Sth ed. 2010). — Eos,

26. Kalven & Zelsel, [The American Jury (1966)].

64, See also 140 S. Ct. at 1417-1418 (Kavanaugh, J., concurring): “In light of the racist origins of the non-unanimous jury, it is no surprise that non-unanimous juries can make a difference in practice, especially in cases involving black defendants, victims, or jurors. [T]hat was the whole point of
adopting the non-unanimous jury requirement in the first place. And the math has not changed. Then and now, non-unanimous juries can silence the voices and negate the votes of black jurors. ... The non-unanimous jury operates much the same as the unfettered peremptory challenge, a practice that for
many decades likewise functioned as an engine of discrimination against black defendants, victims, and jurors. In effect, the non-unanimous jury allows backdoor and unreviewable peremptory strikes against up to 2 of the 12 jurors.”

1. For discussion of the jury’s importance as a vehicle for civic education and ways in which that function should be enhanced, see Andrew Guthrie Ferguson, Jury Instructions as Constitutional Education, 64 U. Colo. L. Rev. 283 (2013). — EDs.

b. As Professor Rappaport explains (Some Doubts About “Democratizing” Criminal Justice, 87 U. Chi. L. Rev. 711, 756 (2020): “Jury service is stressful and some jurors, particularly those who hear violent or disturbing matters, actually experience adverse health effects. The costs to individuals,
who are called but not seated are substantial as well. Overall, the annual total social cost of the jury system is probably in the billions.” — EDs.

65, See p. 82 supra.

86. Raymond Moley, The Vanishing Jury, 2 S. Cal. L. Rev. 97 (1928).

G7. See Stephen J. Schulhofer, Criminal Justice, Local Democracy, and Constitutional Rights, 111 Mich. L. Rev. 1045, 1064-1065 (2013).

68. Ryan Y. Park, The Globalizing Jury Trial: Lessons and Insights from Korea, 58 Am. J. Comp. L. 525, 527 (2010). See also Gennady Esakov, The Russian Criminal Jury: Recent Developments, Practice, and Current Problems, 60 Am. J. Comp. L. 665 (2012); Valerie P. Hans, What Difference Does
a Jury Make?, 3 Yonsel LJ. 36 (2012) (Japan and South Korea).

69, See World Jury Systems (Neil Vidmar ed., 2000).

70. This groundbreaking study remains a landmark in jury trial research. For a critique of its methodology, see Michael H. Walsh, The American Jury: A Reassessment, 79 Yale LJ. 142 (1969). In more recent research, the rate of judge-Jury disagreement has been similar to that found in the Kalven-
Zeisel study, and evidentiary strength, in combination with other factors, continues to play an important role in explaining the differences. See Valerie P. Hans, What Difference Does a Jury Make?, 3 Yonsel LJ. 36, 42-44 (2012); Amy S. Farrell & Daniel James Givelber, Liberation Reconsidered: Why Judges
and Juries Disagree About Guilt, 100 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1549 (2010). For a close look at three especially important sources of judge-jury disagreement (provocation, setf-defense, and insanity), see Norman J. Finkel, Commonsense Justice: Jurors’ Notions of the Law (1996).

‘36. MR. Kadish and S.H. Kadish, On Justified Rule Departures by Officials, 59 Calif. L. Rev. 905, 914 (1971).

49. Kadish and Kadish, supra, note 36, 59 Calif. L. Rev. at 926. [The “damn-good-reason” position is criticized in Alan Scheflin & Jon Van Dyke, Jury Nullification: The Contours of a Controversy, 43 Law & Contemp. Probs. 51, 98-108 (1980). — EDS.]

1, Liana C. Peter-Hagene & Chasity L. Ratliff, When Jurors’ Moral Judgments Resutt in Jury Nullification: Moral Outrage at the Law as a Mediator of Euthanasia Attitudes on Verdicts, Psychiatry, Psych. & L. (May 7, 2020), hittpsi//ciol.org/10.1080/13218719.2020.1751741.

72, Irwin A. Horowitz, Jury Nullfication: An Empirical Perspective, 26 N. lll. U. L. Rev. 425, 442-444 (2008).

73. Irwin A. Horowitz et al., Chaos in the Courtroom Reconsidered: Emotional Bias and Juror Nullification, 30 Law & Hum. Behav. 163 (2006).

74, Bernard nonetheless won an acquittal, without mentioning “nullification,” by presenting her client as a fallible but decent person “who didn’t deserve to be ground up by the wheels of the penal system.” See J.D. Tuccille, A Strategy for Jury Nullfication Victories in Georgia, Reason Magazine,
July 18, 2078.

75, ANew Hampshire statute, N.H. Rev. Stat. §519:23-a (2021), met a similar fate. it requires the trial judge to “permit the defense to inform the jury of its right to judge the facts and the application of the law in relation to the facts in controversy.” But the New Hampshire Supreme Court has held
that the statute “merely delineates the jury's traditional function of determining how the law applies to the facts as it has found them [and] does not require the court to allow the defendant to inform the jury that it has the right to judge the law or the right to ignore the law. In other words, itis not a jury nullif-
cation statute.” State v. Paul, 104 A.Sd 1058, 1061, 1063 (N.H. 2014) (upholding instruction, id. at 1060, that “[yJou should follow the law as | explain it regardless of any opinion you may have as to what the law ought to be").

76. E.g,, United States v. Ball, 163 U.S. 662 (1896).

‘7. Tummey v. State, 936 P.2d 533, 597 n.4 (Alaska 1997).

78. See, eg, Fully Informed Jury Assn. v. San Diego, 1996 U.S. App. LEXIS 4254 (8th Cir.) (upholding restrictions).

79, Burson v. Freeman, 504 U.S. 191 (1992).

‘a, Because this kind of nullification by a single juror would not resutt in an acquittal (which requires a super-majority or sometimes unanimity in support of that result), the single hold out would force a mistrial, and the prosecution would normally seek to retry the case. — EDS.

‘80. There is some indication, however, that jurors might be more lenient than federal juciges who apply the federal sentencing guidelines. See James S. Gwin, Juror Sentiment on Just Punishment: Do the Federal Sentencing Guidelines Reflect Community Values?, 4 Harv. L. & Pol'y Rev. 173 (2010).

81. As an example of circumstances that could warrant such an instruction, the court mentioned the situation in which comments during the trial had given jurors a false impression about dispositional consequences. Thus, if a witness had stated that acquittal by reason of insanity would allow the
defendant to “go free,” the trial judge could properly explain that civil commitment would be available to ensure confinement in the event of such a verdict. See Polouizzi, supra, 564 F.3d at 162; see also Shannon, supra, 512 U.S. at 587.

p. 188
