Restat 2d of Contracts, § 104
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 3- Contracts Under Seal; Writing as a Statutory 
Substitute for the Seal        
§ 104 Acceptance or Disclaimer by the Promisee
(1)  Neither acceptance by the promisee nor knowledge by him of the existence of a promise is 
essential to the formation of a contract by the delivery of a written promise which is binding without 
consideration.
(2)  A promisee who has not manifested assent to a written promise may, within a reasonable time after 
learning of its existence and terms, render it inoperative by disclaimer.
(3)  Acceptance or disclaimer is irrevocable.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Acceptance.  It is sometimes said that acceptance of a promise which is beneficial to the promisee is 
presumed.  But the "presumption" cannot be rebutted in the cases governed by the rule stated in Subsection 
(1), and a more accurate form of statement is that acceptance is unnecessary.  Compare §§ 306, 327.  Thus a 
promise under seal to make a gift to a person without capacity to assent by reason of infancy or mental illness 
is not revoked by the death of the promisor, and may be accepted thereafter.  But Subsection (1) is applicable 
only to promises binding without consideration; where by statute a seal merely raises a presumption of 
consideration, proof of failure to accept may rebut the presumption.
The promise may of course be explicitly conditional on an acceptance by the promisee, or such a condition may 
be imposed by the terms of delivery under § 103.  Where a return promise is contemplated, such a condition 
may be implied, or the promisor may manifest an intention to create an option contract pending acceptance by 
return promise.  The rules governing cases where an acceptance is contemplated are stated in §§ 105-07.
Illustration:
1.  A makes a promise to B under seal, and unconditionally delivers the document to C, an independent third 
person, as a present contract.  It is immediately operative according to its terms and remains so unless B 
disclaims within a reasonable time after learning of its existence and terms.
b.  Disclaimer.  An offeree is entitled to reject an offered benefit, whether or not there is a related burden.  See 
§ 38.  Where no return promise is invited, there is no problem of justifiable reliance by the promisor, and a 
disclaimer by the promisee is effective in accordance with his manifested intention.  See § 53(3).  No particular 
formality is required for disclaimer, and its usual effect is the same as if no promise had been made.  But once 
the promisee has manifested assent, either before or after the making of the promise, disclaimer is effective 
only if the requirements are met for discharge of a contractual duty.  Compare § 37.
Illustration:
2.  A seals and delivers to B a written promise to C to transfer Blackacre to C, stating at the time that the 
promise is to be enforceable only when C shall marry X.  On learning of the promise either before or after 
marrying X, C notifies either A or B that he refuses the benefit of the promise.  The contract under seal is 
discharged, and an intervening conveyance by A to D is validated even though D knew of the contract.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 104.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 213-14 (3d ed. 1957); 1A Corbin, 
Contracts § 245 (1963).

§ 104 Acceptance or Disclaimer by the Promisee
Comment a.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 104; see Twining v. National Mortgage Corp., 
268 Md. 549, 302 A.2d 604 (1973). Contrast, Humble Oil & Ref. Co. v. Cox, 207 Va. 197, 148 S.E.2d 756 
(1966), discussed in Reporter's Note to Comment c to § 103.
Comment b.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 104.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 43
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document