Restat 2d of Contracts, § 287
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 12- Discharge by 
Assent or Alteration          >            Topic 4- Alteration        
§ 287 Assent to or Forgiveness of Alteration
(1)  If a party, knowing of an alteration that discharges his duty, manifests assent to the altered terms, 
his manifestation is equivalent to an acceptance of an offer to substitute those terms.
(2)  If a party, knowing of an alteration that discharges his duty, asserts a right under the original 
contract or otherwise manifests a willingness to remain subject to the original contract or to forgive the 
alteration, the original contract is revived.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Assent to alteration.  An alteration may be regarded as manifesting a desire on the part of its maker to have 
a contract in the altered form, and assent by the other party will be treated as if it were acceptance of an offer to 
substitute the altered terms.  The same requirements must be met as in the case of any substituted contract, 
including those imposed by the doctrine of consideration and by the Statute of Frauds.  If two or more persons 
are under duties to perform the same act and only one of them assents to an alteration, the fact that the others 
are discharged does not affect the liability of the one who assents, and his assent has the same effect as to him 
as it would have had if no duties of the others had been discharged.
Illustrations:
1.  A and B make an integrated agreement under which B promises to employ A for one year from the date of 
the contract at a stated monthly salary.  B fraudulently erases "one year" and substitutes "two years." A, on 
learning of the alteration, writes B, "I shall be glad to work for you for two years at the stated salary." Although 
the alteration was both fraudulent and material, A's manifestation of assent is equivalent to an acceptance of an 
offer by B to employ A for two years, and both A and B are bound by a contract on those terms.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A manifests his assent over the telephone instead of in 
writing.  A's assent is not enforceable against him because of the Statute of Frauds (§ 130).
b.  Forgiveness of alteration.  The innocent party loses none of his rights as the result of an alteration made 
without his consent and can always assert them under the original contract.  If he does assert them, however, 
he is regarded as having forgiven the alteration and the original contract is revived.  Any other manifestation of 
a willingness to remain subject to the duties under the original contract or to forgive the alteration has the same 
effect.  Forgiveness need not be supported by consideration.  If two or more persons are under duties to 
perform the same act, the effect of forgiveness by one of them is the same as the effect of assent as discussed 
in Comment a.
Illustrations:
3.  A and B make an integrated contract for the sale of goods to be delivered by A for which B promises to pay 
a price of $ 1,000.  A fraudulently erases "$ 1,000" and substitutes "$ 1,100." B, on learning of the alteration, 
writes A that he must deliver the goods as promised.  Although the alteration is both fraudulent and material, A 
can enforce the contract against B.
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3, B instead of writing A that he must deliver the goods, 
writes A that he forgives the alteration.  Although the alteration is both fraudulent and material, A can enforce 
the contract against B.
REPORTER'S NOTES

§ 287 Assent to or Forgiveness of Alteration
This Section is based on former §§ 436 and 437.  See 6 Corbin, Contracts § 1317 (1962); 15 Williston 
Contracts §§ 1896-97 (3d ed. 1972).
Comment a.  The part of the rule of former § 438(1) relating to the liability of one of several parties who assents 
to an alteration is now found in Comment a.  Illustrations 1 and 2 are based on Illustration 2 to former § 437.
Comment b.  The part of the rule of former § 438(1) relating to the liability of the one of several parties who 
excuses an alteration is now found in Comment b.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 436.  
Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 6 to former § 437.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
What are additional terms materially altering contract within meaning of UCC § 2-207(2)(b).  72 A.L.R.3d 479.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Alteration of Instruments 13
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document