Restat 2d of Contracts, § 346
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 16- Remedies          
>            Topic 2- Enforcement by Award of Damages        
§ 346 Availability of Damages
(1) The injured party has a right to damages for any breach by a party against whom the contract is 
enforceable unless the claim for damages has been suspended or discharged.
(2) If the breach caused no loss or if the amount of the loss is not proved under the rules stated in this 
Chapter, a small sum fixed without regard to the amount of loss will be awarded as nominal damages.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Right to damages.  Every breach of contract gives the injured party a right to damages against the party in 
breach, unless the contract is not enforceable against that party, as where he is not bound because of the 
Statute of Frauds.  The resulting claim may be one for damages for total breach or one for damages for only 
partial breach.  See § 236.  Although a judgment awarding a sum of money as damages is the most common 
judicial remedy for breach of contract, other remedies, including equitable relief in the form of specific 
performance or an injunction, may be also available, depending on the circumstances.  See Topic 3.  In the 
exceptional situation of a contract for transfer of an interest in land that is unenforceable under the Statute of 
Frauds, action in reliance makes the contract enforceable by specific performance even though it gives rise to 
no claim for damages for breach.  See Comment c to § 129.  A duty to pay damages may be suspended or 
discharged by agreement or otherwise, and if it is discharged the claim for damages is extinguished.  See 
Introductory Note to Chapter 12.  When this happens, the right to enforcement by other means such as specific 
performance or an injunction is also extinguished.  If the duty of performance, as distinguished from the duty to 
pay damages, has been suspended or discharged, as by impracticability of performance or frustration of 
purpose, there is then no breach and this Section is not applicable.
The parties can by agreement vary the rules stated in this Section, as long as the agreement is not invalid for 
unconscionability (§ 208) or on other grounds.  The agreement may provide for a remedy such as repair or 
replacement in substitution for damages.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 2-719.
b.  Nominal damages.  Although a breach of contract by a party against whom it is enforceable always gives 
rise to a claim for damages, there are instances in which the breach causes no loss.  See Illustration 1.  There 
are also instances in which loss is caused but recovery for that loss is precluded because it cannot be proved 
with reasonable certainty or because of one of the other limitations stated in this Chapter.  See §§ 350-53.  In 
all these instances the injured party will nevertheless get judgment for nominal damages, a small sum usually 
fixed by judicial practice in the jurisdiction in which the action is brought.  Such a judgment may, in the 
discretion of the court, carry with it an award of court costs.  Costs are generally awarded if a significant right 
was involved or the claimant made a good faith effort to prove damages, but not if the maintenance of the 
action was frivolous or in bad faith.  Unless a significant right is involved, a court will not reverse and remand a 
case for a new trial if only nominal damages could result.
Illustration:
1.  A contracts to sell to B 1,000 shares of stock in X Corporation for $ 10 a share to be delivered on June 1, but 
breaks the contract by refusing on that date to deliver the stock.  B sues A for damages, but at trial it is proved 
that B could have purchased 1,000 shares of stock in X Corporation on the market on June 1 for $ 10 a share 
and therefore has suffered no loss.  In an action by B against A, B will be awarded nominal damages.
c.  Beneficiaries of gift promises.  If a promisee makes a contract, intending to give a third party the benefit of 
the promised performance, the third party may be an intended beneficiary who is entitled to enforce the 

§ 346 Availability of Damages
contract.  See § 302(1)(b).  Such a gift promise creates overlapping duties, one to the beneficiary and the other 
to the promisee.  If the performance is not forthcoming, both the beneficiary and the promisee have claims for 
damages for breach.  If the promisee seeks damages, however, he will usually be limited to nominal damages: 
although the loss to the beneficiary may be substantial, the promisee cannot recover for that loss and he will 
ordinarily have suffered no loss himself.  In such a case the remedy of specific performance will often be an 
appropriate one for the promisee.  See § 307.
Illustration:
2.  As part of a separation agreement B promises his wife A not to change the provision in B's will for C, their 
son.  A dies and B changes his will to C's detriment, adding also a provision that C will forfeit any bequest if he 
questions the change before any tribunal.  In an action by A's personal representative against B, the 
representative can get a judgment for nominal damages.  As to the representative's right to specific 
performance, see Illustration 2 to § 307.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section consolidates the rules stated in former §§ 327 and 328.  See 5 Corbin, Contracts §§ 992-96, 1001 
(1964 & Supp. 1980); 11 Williston, Contracts §§ 1338-39A (3d ed. 1968).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 328.
Comment c.  This Comment replaces former § 345(1).  The facts in Illustration 2 are taken from Illustration 2 to 
§ 307.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Damages for wrongful termination of automobile dealership contracts.  54 A.L.R.3d 324.
Awarding damages for delay, in addition to specific performance, of contract for sale of corporate stock.  28 
A.L.R.3d 1401.
Tenant's right to damages for landlord's breach of tenant's option to purchase.  17 A.L.R.3d 976.
Right and measure of recovery for breach of obligation to drill exploratory oil or gas wells.  4 A.L.R.3d 284.
Attorneys' fees incurred in litigation with third person as damages in action for breach of contract.  4 A.L.R.3d 
270.
Measure of damages, to advertiser, for radio or television station's breach or wrongful termination of contract.  
90 A.L.R.2d 1199.
Private rights and remedies growing out of prize-winning contests.  87 A.L.R.2d 649.
Comment Note. -- Contractual provision as to remedy as excluding other possible remedies.  84 A.L.R.2d 322.
Measure and elements of damages for breach of contract to marry.  73 A.L.R.2d 553.
Measure and items of compensation of contractor under cost-plus contract which is terminated, without breach, 
before completion.  28 A.L.R.2d 867.
Burden of proving value of relief from performing contract in suit based on defendant's breach preventing or 
excusing full performance.  17 A.L.R.2d 968.
Rights and remedies under contract by party to procure insurance on his own life.  12 A.L.R.2d 983.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 321
Damages 3-14
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document