Restat 2d of Contracts, § 385
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 16- Remedies          
>            Topic 5- Preclusion by Election and Affirmance        
§ 385 Effect of Power of Avoidance on Duty of Performance or on Duty 
Arising Out of Breach
(1) Unless an offer to restore performance received is a condition of avoidance, a party has no duty of 
performance while his power of avoidance exists.
(2) If an offer to restore performance received is a condition of avoidance, a duty to pay damages is 
terminated by such an offer made before the power of avoidance is lost.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  No duty of performance.  If a party has the power to avoid the contract simply by disaffirmance, without 
offering to restore performance received, his refusal or failure to perform is not a breach under the rule stated in 
Subsection (1).  This is so even if he is ignorant of his power of avoidance and believes that his refusal or 
failure is a breach.  As a general rule, the legal consequences of a party's refusal or failure to perform are not 
affected by the fact that he is ignorant of some justification or excuse for his refusal or failure.  See Comment e 
to § 225 and Comment c to § 237.
Illustrations:
1.  A is induced by B's fraud to make a contract to buy goods from B.  While A is still ignorant of the fraud and 
before he has received the goods from B, A writes a letter telling him that he refuses to perform.  B sues A for 
damages for total breach by repudiation.  A is not liable to B because, since A has no duty of performance, his 
letter was not a repudiation.
2.  A is induced by B's fraud to make a contract to buy goods from B.  A delays for an unreasonable time after 
discovery of the fraud and then, before he has received the goods, writes B a letter telling him that he refuses to 
perform on the ground of fraud.  B sues A for damages for total breach by repudiation.  A is liable to B because, 
A's power of avoidance having been lost by delay, he had a duty of performance and his letter was a 
repudiation.
b.  Duty arising out of breach terminated.  If an offer to restore performance received is a condition of avoidance 
(§ 384), a party with a power of avoidance is under a duty of performance until such an offer is made.  His 
refusal or failure to perform is therefore a breach.  A subsequent offer to restore performance, however, 
terminates the duty to pay damages that arises from that breach if the offer is made before the power of 
avoidance is lost.
Illustration:
3.  A is induced by B's fraud to make a contract to buy goods from B.  While A is still ignorant of the fraud but 
after he has received the goods from B, A commits a material breach by failure to pay B.  A then discovers the 
fraud and tenders the goods back to B.  B sues A for damages for total breach of contract.  Even if an offer to 
return the goods was a condition of avoidance by A, A is not liable to B because A's breach was nullified by the 
tender of what he had received.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:

§ 385 Effect of Power of Avoidance on Duty of Performance or on Duty Arising Out of Breach
Contracts 98, 275
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document