Restat 2d of Contracts, § 78
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 1- The Requirement of Consideration        
§ 78 Voidable and Unenforceable Promises
The fact that a rule of law renders a promise voidable or unenforceable does not prevent it from being 
consideration.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  The value of a promise depends on its terms and on the probability that it will be performed.  The 
value is not necessarily affected adversely by the fact that no legal remedy will be available in the event of 
breach; the probability of performance may be greater for a voidable or unenforceable promise, or even for a 
promise which is not binding or is against public policy, than for the judgment or decree of a court.  In general 
the law of contracts leaves to the parties the valuation of a promise in the formation of a bargain.  See § 79.  
The fact that no legal remedy is available for breach of a promise does not prevent it from being a part of a 
bargain or remove the bargain from the scope of the general principle that bargains are enforceable.  See §§ 
17, 71.  As to "void" promises, see Comment d to § 75.
b.  Voidable promises.  A contract may be voidable by one party by reason of his incapacity or mistake, or by 
reason of the fraud, breach or other fault of the other party.  See § 7.  In many such cases a reservation of a 
similar power by the terms of the agreement would mean that he had made no promise or that his promise was 
not consideration for a return promise.  See § 77.  But where the power of avoidance is given by the law to 
protect one party from actual or possible imposition, he often regards himself as bound in conscience if not in 
law.  He may in some circumstance lose the power by ratification without consideration.  See § 85.  Until the 
power is exercised, it does not prevent enforcement of a return promise.
Illustration:
1.  A makes a promise in exchange for a return promise by B.  The fact that the contract is voidable by A 
because of his own infancy or because of B's fraud does not prevent A's promise from being consideration for 
B's promise.
c.  Unenforceable promises.  A promise may be unenforceable by reason of lack of consideration or public 
policy, or because of a statute relating to remedies, such as the Statute of Frauds, or because of the traditional 
immunity of the sovereign from suit.  See § 8.  In such cases a return promise may or may not be 
unenforceable on the same or other grounds.  But the fact that a promise is unenforceable does not mean that 
the return promise lacks consideration.  See Illustrations 4-6 to § 75.
Illustrations:
2.  A makes a promise in exchange for a return promise by B.  The fact that A's promise is unenforceable under 
the local Statute of Frauds does not prevent it from being consideration for B's promise.
3.  A makes a promise in exchange for a promise by B, a foreign government not subject to suit.  The fact that 
B's promise is unenforceable does not prevent it from being consideration for A's promise.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section consolidates subject matter found in former §§ 80 and 84(e).  The principle stated in former § 80 is 
abandoned, since former § 84(e) deprived it of effect.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 103, 105 (3d ed. 1957); 1 
Corbin, Contracts §§ 146-47 (1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  For a holding contrary to the rule of this Section, see In re Johnson's Estate, 74 Misc.2d 788, 346 
N.Y.S.2d 283 (Surr. Ct. 1973).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 was Illustration 6 to former § 84.

§ 78 Voidable and Unenforceable Promises
Comment c.  Courts sometimes speak loosely of contracts as involving illegal or immoral "consideration." See, 
e.g., Rehak v. Mathis, 239 Ga. 541, 238 S.E.2d 81 (1977). Compare Dick v. Dick, 167 Conn. 210, 355 A.2d 110 
(1974). See Comment a to § 71.  Illustrations 2 and 3 are revised from Illustrations 7 and 8 to former § 84.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Establishment of "family" relationship to raise presumption that services were rendered gratuitously, as 
between persons living in same household but not related by blood or affinity.  92 A.L.R.3d 726.
Failure of artisan or construction contractor to procure occupational or business license or permit as affecting 
validity or enforceability of contract.  82 A.L.R.2d 1429.
Recovery, on theory of quasi contract, unjust enrichment, or restitution, of money paid in reliance upon 
unenforceable promise to accept a bill of exchange or draft.  81 A.L.R.2d 587.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 57, 81
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document