Restat 2d of Contracts, § 80
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 1- The Requirement of Consideration        
§ 80 Multiple Exchanges
(1)  There is consideration for a set of promises if what is bargained for and given in exchange would 
have been consideration for each promise in the set if exchanged for that promise alone.
(2)  The fact that part of what is bargained for would not have been consideration if that part alone had 
been bargained for does not prevent the whole from being consideration.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  One consideration for a number of promises.  Since consideration is not required to be adequate in value 
(see § 79), two or more promises may be binding even though made for the price of one.  A single performance 
or return promise may thus furnish consideration for any number of promises.  But if the performance or return 
promise would not be consideration for a single promise, it is not consideration for that promise as part of a set 
of promises, or for the other promises in the set.
Illustrations:
1.  A pays B or promises B to pay him $ 5, not then owed by A, in consideration of which B promises A to give 
him a book and also promises to surrender a letter.  Both of B's promises are supported by consideration.
2.  A pays B or promises B to pay him $ 50 not then owed by A, in exchange for the following promises: a 
promise by C to dig a well for D, a promise by E to discharge F from a debt of $ 100 owing by F to E.  All the 
promises are supported by consideration.
b.  Several performances or return promises as consideration.  In cases within Subsection (2) the promisor has 
received all he bargained for.  The fact that part of it would not have been consideration standing alone does 
not make enforcement of the bargain unjust to the promisor or contrary to the public interest.  The effect of 
public policy on part of the consideration, however, may invalidate the entire bargain under some 
circumstances.  See §§ 178, 183-85.
Illustration:
3.  A owes B $ 5.  B promises to give A a book if A will pay the $ 5 and $ 1 in addition.  A pays the $ 6.  B's 
promise is binding, although A's payment of the $ 5 which he owed would not of itself have been consideration.
c.  Compositions with creditors.  Composition agreements between a debtor and his creditors illustrate 
Subsection (2).  The consideration for which each assenting creditor bargains may be any or all of the following: 
(1) part payment of the sum due him, (2) the promise of each other creditor to forego a portion of his claim, (3) 
forbearance or promise of forbearance by the debtor to pay the assenting creditors more than equal 
proportions, (4) the action of the debtor in securing the assent of the other creditors, (5) the part payments 
made to the other creditors.  The first is not consideration, but each of the others may be consideration.  The 
last two are seldom bargained for in fact, but (2) and (3) are practically always bargained for by implication if not 
in so many words.  Still other considerations may be agreed upon in any case.
Illustration:
4.  A makes a composition with B, C and D, three of his creditors, whereby each of them promises to accept 
forty cents on the dollar as full satisfaction, A promising to treat all assenting creditors equally.  A's promise and 
the promises of the other two creditors are consideration for the promise of each creditor, even though there 
are other non-assenting creditors.
REPORTER'S NOTES

§ 80 Multiple Exchanges
Subsection (1) is former § 83 rewritten to reflect the abandonment of the principle stated in former § 80.  
Subsection (2) is a revision of former § 84(b).  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 134, 137A (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, 
Contracts §§ 125, 126 (1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  Illustrations 1 and 2 were Illustrations 1 and 2 to former § 83.
Comment b and c.  These are revised from Comments c and d to former § 84.  Illustration 3 was Illustration 2 to 
former § 84; see Mitchell v. Lawson, 444 S.W.2d 192 (Tex. Civ. App. 1969); compare Illustration 3 to former § 
83.  Illustration 4 was Illustration 3 to former § 84.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Construction of provision in real-estate mortgage, land contract, or other security instrument for release of 
separate parcels of land as payments are made.  41 A.L.R.3d 7.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 50
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document