Restat 2d of Contracts, § 1
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 1- Meaning of 
Terms        
§ 1 Contract Defined
A contract is a promise or a set of promises for the breach of which the law gives a remedy, or the 
performance of which the law in some way recognizes as a duty.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Other meanings.  The word "contract" is often used with meanings different from that given here.  It is 
sometimes used as a synonym for"agreement" or "bargain." It may refer to legally ineffective agreements, or to 
wholly executed transactions such as conveyances; it may refer indifferently to the acts of the parties, to a 
document which evidences those acts, or to the resulting legal relations.  In a statute the word may be given 
still other meanings by context or explicit definition.  As is indicated in the Introductory Note to the Restatement 
of this Subject, definition in terms of "promise" excludes wholly executed transactions in which no promises are 
made; such a definition also excludes analogous obligations imposed by law rather than by virtue of a promise.
b.  Act and resulting legal relations.  As the term is used in the Restatement of this Subject, "contract," like 
"promise," denotes the act or acts of promising.  But, unlike the term "promise," "contract" applies only to those 
acts which have legal effect as stated in the definition given.  Thus the word "contract" is commonly and quite 
properly also used to refer to the resulting legal obligation, or to the entire resulting complex of legal relations.  
Compare Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(11), defining "contract" in terms of "the total legal obligation which 
results from the parties' agreement."
c.  Set of promises.  A contract may consist of a single promise by one person to another, or of mutual 
promises by two persons to one another; or there may be, indeed, any number of persons or any number of 
promises.  One person may make several promises to one person or to several persons, or several persons 
may join in making promises to one or more persons.  To constitute a "set," promises need not be made 
simultaneously; it is enough that several promises are regarded by the parties as constituting a single contract, 
or are so related in subject matter and performance that they may be considered and enforced together by a 
court.
d.  Operative acts other than promise.  The definition does not attempt to state what acts are essential to create 
a legal duty to perform a promise.  In many situations other acts in addition to the making of a promise are 
essential, and the formation of the contract is not completed until those acts take place.  For example, an act 
may be done as the consideration for a contract (see § 71), and may be essential to the creation of a legal duty 
to perform the promise (see § 17).  Similarly, delivery is required for the formation of a contract under seal (see 
§ 95).  Such acts are not part of the promise, and are not specifically included in the brief definition of contract 
adopted here.
e.  Remedies.  The legal remedies available when a promise is broken are of various kinds.  Direct remedies of 
damages, restitution and specific performance are the subject of Chapter 16.  Whether or not such direct 
remedies are available, the law may recognize the existence of legal duty in some other way such as 
recognizing or denying a right, privilege or power created or terminated by the promise.
Illustration:
1.  A orally agrees to sell land to B; B orally agrees to buy the land and pays $ 1000 to A.  The agreement is 
unenforceable under the Statute of Frauds.  B's right to restitution of the $ 1000, however, is governed by the 
same rules as if the agreement were enforceable.  B has a right to recover the $ 1000 paid if A refuses to 
convey the land, but not if A is ready and willing to convey.  See § 140 and the provisions on restitution in § 
375.  By virtue of this indirect recognition of the duty to convey, the agreement is a contract.

§ 1 Contract Defined
f.  Varieties of contracts.  The term contract is generic.  As commonly used, and as here defined, it includes 
varieties described as voidable, unenforceable, formal, informal, express, implied (see Comment a to § 4), 
unilateral, bilateral.  In these varieties neither the operative acts of the parties nor the resulting relations are 
identical.
g.  "Binding promise."  A promise which is a contract is said to be "binding." As the term "contract" is defined, a 
statement that a promise is binding does not necessarily mean that any particular remedy is available in the 
event of breach, or indeed that any remedy is available.  Because of the limitations inherent in stating or 
illustrating rules for the legal relations resulting from promises, it frequently becomes necessary to indicate that 
a legal duty to perform arises from the facts stated, assuming the absence of other facts.  In order to avoid the 
connotation that the duty stated exists under all circumstances, the word "binding" or a statement that the 
promisor is "bound" is used to indicate that the duty arises if the promisor has full capacity, if there is no 
illegality or fraud in the transaction, if the duty has not been discharged, and if there are no other similar facts 
which would defeat the prima facie duty which is stated.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section carries forward former § 1.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 1 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 3 
(1963).  For other important discussions of what contracts are, see Gilmore, The Death of Contract (1974); 
Friedman, Contract Law in America: A Social and Economic Case Study (1965); Symposium, The Relevance of 
Contract Theory, 1967 Wis. L. Rev. 303; Macauley, Contract Law and Contract Research, 20 J. Legal Ed. 452 
(1968); Farnsworth, The Past of Promise: An Historical Introduction to Contract, 69 Colum. L. Rev. 576 (1969); 
Macneil, The Many Futures of Contract, 47 So. Cal. L. Rev. 691 (1974); Macneil, Restatement, Second, of 
Contracts and Presentiation, 60 Va. L. Rev. 589 (1974); Atiyah, Contracts, Promises and the Law of 
Obligations, 94 L. Q. Rev. 193 (1978); see also Leff, Contract as Thing, 19 Amer. U. L. Rev. 131 (1970).
Comments a and b.  For a concise discussion of what constitutes a contract, how it can be created and its 
relation to tort actions for fraud, see Steinberg v. Chicago Medical School, 69 Ill.2d 320, 371 N.E.2d 634 (1977).
Comment e.  Illustration 1 is new.
Comment f.  Section 12 of the original Restatement defined unilateral and bilateral contracts.  It has not been 
carried forward because of doubt as to the utility of the distinction, often treated as fundamental, between the 
two types.  As defined in the original Restatement, "unilateral contract" included three quite different types of 
transaction: (1) the promise which does not contemplate a bargain, such as the promise under seal to make a 
gift, (2) certain option contracts, such as the option under seal (see §§ 25, 45), and (3) the bargain completed 
on one side, such as the loan which is to be repaid.  This grouping of unlike transactions was productive of 
confusion.
Moreover, as to bargains, the distinction tends to suggest, erroneously, that the obligation to repay a loan is 
somehow different if the actual delivery of the money was preceded by an advance commitment from the 
obligation resulting from a simultaneous loan and commitment.  It also causes confusion in cases where 
performance is complete on one side except for an incidental or collateral promise, as where an offer to buy 
goods is accepted by shipment and a warranty is implied.  Finally, the effect of the distinction has been to 
exaggerate the importance of the type of bargain in which one party begins performance without making any 
commitment, as in the classic classroom case of the promise to pay a reward for climbing a flagpole.
The principal value of the distinction has been the emphasis it has given to the fact that a promise is often 
binding on the promisor even though the promisee is not bound by any promise.  This value is retained in § 25 
on option contracts.  But the terms unilateral and bilateral are generally avoided in this Restatement.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
What constitutes a contract for sale under uniform commercial code § 2-314.  78 A.L.R.3d 696.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 1

§ 1 Contract Defined
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 2
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 1- Meaning of 
Terms        
§ 2 Promise; Promisor; Promisee; Beneficiary
(1)  A promise is a manifestation of intention to act or refrain from acting in a specified way, so made as 
to justify a promisee in understanding that a commitment has been made.
(2)  The person manifesting the intention is the promisor.
(3)  The person to whom the manifestation is addressed is the promisee.
(4)  Where performance will benefit a person other than the promisee, that person is a beneficiary.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Acts and resulting relations.  "Promise" as used in the Restatement of this Subject denotes the act of the 
promisor.  If by virtue of other operative facts there is a legal duty to perform, the promise is a contract; but the 
word "promise" is not limited to acts having legal effect.  Like "contract," however, the word "promise" is 
commonly and quite properly also used to refer to the complex of human relations which results from the 
promisor's words or acts of assurance, including the justified expectations of the promisee and any moral or 
legal duty which arises to make good the assurance by performance.  The performance may be specified either 
in terms describing the action of the promisor or in terms of the result which that action or inaction is to bring 
about.
b.  Manifestation of intention.  Many contract disputes arise because different people attach different meanings 
to the same words and conduct.  The phrase "manifestation of intention" adopts an external or objective 
standard for interpreting conduct; it means the external expression of intention as distinguished from 
undisclosed intention.  A promisor manifests an intention if he believes or has reason to believe that the 
promisee will infer that intention from his words or conduct.  Rules governing cases where the promisee could 
reasonably draw more than one inference as to the promisor's intention are stated in connection with the 
acceptance of offers (see §§ 19 and 20), and the scope of contractual obligations (see §§ 201, 219).
c.  Promise of action by third person; guaranty.  Words are often used which in terms promise action or inaction 
by a third person, or which promise a result obtainable only by such action.  Such words are commonly 
understood as a promise of conduct by the promisor which will be sufficient to bring about the action or inaction 
or result, or to answer for harm caused by failure.  An example is a guaranty that a third person will perform his 
promise.  Such words constitute a promise as here defined only if they justify a promisee in an expectation of 
some action or inaction on the part of the promisor.
d.  Promise of event beyond human control; warranty.  Words which in terms promise that an event not within 
human control will occur may be interpreted to include a promise to answer for harm caused by the failure of 
the event to occur.  An example is a warranty of an existing or past fact, such as a warranty that a horse is 
sound, or that a ship arrived in a foreign port some days previously.  Such promises are often made when the 
parties are ignorant of the actual facts regarding which they bargain, and may be dealt with as if the warrantor 
could cause the fact to be as he asserted.  It is then immaterial that the actual condition of affairs may be 
irrevocably fixed before the promise is made.
Words of warranty, like other conduct, must be interpreted in the light of the circumstances and the reasonable 
expectations of the parties.  In an insurance contract, a "warranty" by the insured is usually not a promise at all; 
it may be merely a representation of fact, or, more commonly, the fact warranted is a condition of the insurer's 

§ 2 Promise; Promisor; Promisee; Beneficiary
duty to pay (see § 225(3)).  In the sale of goods, on the other hand, a similar warranty normally also includes a 
promise to answer for damages (see Uniform Commercial Code § 2-715).
Illustrations:
1.  A, the builder of a house, or the inventor of the material used in part of its construction, says to B, the owner 
of the house, "I warrant that this house will never burn down." This includes a promise to pay for harm if the 
house should burn down.
2.  A, by a charter-party, undertakes that the "good ship Dove," having sailed from Marseilles a week ago for 
New York, shall take on a cargo for B on her arrival in New York.  The statement of the quality of the ship and 
the statement of her time of sailing from Marseilles include promises to pay for harm if the statement is untrue.
e.  Illusory promises; mere statements of intention.  Words of promise which by their terms make performance 
entirely optional with the "promisor" whatever may happen, or whatever course of conduct in other respects he 
may pursue, do not constitute a promise.  Although such words are often referred to as forming an illusory 
promise, they do not fall within the present definition of promise.  They may not even manifest any intention on 
the part of the promisor.  Even if a present intention is manifested, the reservation of an option to change that 
intention means that there can be no promisee who is justified in an expectation of performance.
On the other hand, a promise may be made even though no duty of performance can arise unless some event 
occurs (see §§ 224, 225(1)).  Such a conditional promise is no less a promise because there is small likelihood 
that any duty of performance will arise, as in the case of a promise to insure against fire a thoroughly fireproof 
building.  There may be a promise in such a case even though the duty to perform depends on a state of mind 
of the promisor other than his own unfettered wish (see § 228), or on an event within the promisor's control.
Illustration:
3.  A says to B, "I will employ you for a year at a salary of $ 5,000 if I go into business." This is a promise, even 
though it is wholly optional with A to go into business or not.
f.  Opinions and predictions.  A promise must be distinguished from a statement of opinion or a mere prediction 
of future events.  The distinction is not usually difficult in the case of an informal gratuitous opinion, since there 
is often no manifestation of intention to act or refrain from acting or to bring about a result, no expectation of 
performance and no consideration.  The problem is frequently presented, however, whether words of a seller of 
goods amount to a warranty.  Under Uniform Commercial Code § 2-313(2) a statement purporting to be merely 
the seller's opinion does not create a warranty, but the buyer's reliance on the seller's skill and judgment may 
create an implied warranty that the goods are fit for a particular purpose under Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
315.  In any case where an expert opinion is paid for, there is likely to be an implied promise that the expert will 
act with reasonable care and skill.
A promise often refers to future events which are predicted or assumed rather than promised.  Thus a promise 
to render personal service at a particular future time commonly rests on an assumption that the promisor will be 
alive and well at that time; a promise to paint a building may similarly rest on an assumption that the building 
will be in existence.  Such cases are the subject of Chapter 11.  The promisor may of course promise to answer 
for harm caused by the failure of the future event to occur; if he does not, such a failure may discharge any duty 
of performance.
Illustration:
4.  A, on seeing a house of thoroughly fireproof construction, says to B, the owner, "This house will never burn 
down." This is not a promise but merely an opinion or prediction.  If A had been paid for his opinion as an 
expert, there might be an implied promise that he would employ reasonable care and skill in forming and giving 
his opinion.
g.  Promisee and beneficiary.  The word promisee is used repeatedly in discussion of the law of contracts, and 
it cannot be avoided here.  In common usage the promisee is the person to whom the promise is made; as 
promise is defined here, the promisee might be the person to whom the manifestation of the promisor's 
intention is communicated.  In many situations, however, a promise is complete and binding before the 
communication is received (see, for example, §§ 63 and 104(1)).  To cover such cases, the promisee is defined 
here as the addressee.  As to agents or purported agents of the addressee, see § 52 Comment c.
In the usual situation the promisee also bears other relations to the promisor, and the word promisee is 
sometimes used to refer to one or more of those relations.  Thus, in the simple case of a loan of money, the 

§ 2 Promise; Promisor; Promisee; Beneficiary
lender is not only the addressee of the promise but also the person to whom performance is to be rendered, the 
person who will receive economic benefit, the person who furnished the consideration, and the person to whom 
the legal duty of the promisor runs.  As the word promisee is here defined, none of these relations is essential.
Contractual rights of persons not parties to the contract are the subject of Chapter 14.  The promisor and 
promisee are the "parties" to a promise; a third person who will benefit from performance is a "beneficiary." A 
beneficiary may or may not have a legal right to performance; like "promisee", the term is neutral with respect to 
right and duties.  A person who is entitled under the terms of a letter of credit to draw or demand payment is 
commonly called a beneficiary, but such a person is ordinarily a promisee under the present definition.  See 
Uniform Commercial Code § 5-103.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section substitutes the concept of a "manifestation of intention to act . . ." for the phrase used in former § 
2(1): "an undertaking . . . that something shall happen. . . ." The older definition did not identify the essential 
characteristics of an undertaking.  See Gardner, An Inquiry Into the Principles of Contracts, 46 Harv. L. Rev. 1, 
5 (1932). The present definition of promise is based on 1 Corbin, Contracts § 13 (1963 & Supp. 1980).  See 
also 1 id. § 15; 1 Williston, Contracts § 1A (3d ed. 1957).  The definitions of "promisor," "promise" and 
"beneficiary" are new.  Compare Gardner, Massachusetts Annotations, Restatement of Contracts, Chapter 6, at 
64 (1935).
Comment a.  See Coffman Industries, Inc. v. Gorman-Taber Co., 521 S.W.2d 763 (Mo. Ct. App. 1975); 
Farnsworth, The Past of Promise: An Historical Introduction to Contract, 69 Colum. L. Rev. 576 (1969).
Comment d.  This Comment is based on former § 2(2).  Illustrations 1 and 2 are based on Illustrations 2 and 3 
to former § 2.
Comment e.  See Pappas v. Bever, 219 N.W.2d 720 (Iowa 1974). Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 4 to 
former § 2.
Comment f.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 2.  More stringent liability for opinions and 
predictions may be created by statutes and administrative rules governing such areas as securities regulation, 
unfair trade practices and deceptive advertising.  See also §§ 159-73 on misrepresentation, especially §§ 168-
71.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 15, 187
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 3
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 1- Meaning of 
Terms        
§ 3 Agreement Defined; Bargain Defined
An agreement is a manifestation of mutual assent on the part of two or more persons.  A bargain is an 
agreement to exchange promises or to exchange a promise for a performance or to exchange 
performances.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Agreement distinguished from bargain.  Agreement has in some respects a wider meaning than contract, 
bargain or promise.  On the other hand, there are contracts which do not require agreement.  See, e.g., §§ 82-
90, 94, 104.  The word "agreement" contains no implication that legal consequences are or are not produced.  It 
applies to transactions executed on one or both sides, and also to those that are wholly executory.  The word 
contains no implication of mental agreement.  Such agreement usually but not always exists where the parties 
manifest assent to a transaction.
b.  Manifestation of assent.  Manifestation of assent may be made by words or by any other conduct (see § 19).  
Even silence in some circumstances is such a manifestation (see § 69).  Compare the definition of "agreement" 
in Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(3).
c.  Bargain distinguished from agreement.  Bargain has a narrower meaning than agreement, since it is 
applicable only to a particular class of agreements.  It includes agreements which are not contracts, such as 
transactions where one party makes a promise and the other gives something in exchange which is not 
consideration, or transactions where what would otherwise be a contract is invalidated by illegality.  As here 
defined, it includes completely executed transactions, such as exchanges of goods (barters) or of services, or 
sales where goods have been transferred and the price paid for them, although such transactions are not within 
the scope of this Restatement unless a promise is made.
d.  Offer.  A bargain is ordinarily made by an offer by one party and an acceptance by the other party or parties, 
the offer specifying the two subjects of exchange to which the offeror is manifesting assent (see §§ 22 and 24).
e.  Contract distinguished from bargain.  A contract is not necessarily a bargain.  Thus, a promise to make a 
gift, if made under seal, may be a contract (see § 95), but it is not a bargain.  Other contracts which are not 
bargains are the subject of §§ 82-94.  Such contracts do not require manifestations of mutual assent in the form 
of offer and acceptance.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former §§ 3 and 4.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 2, 2A (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, 
Contracts §§ 9-10 (1963).
Comment a.  On the difference between an agreement and a contract, see Corbit v. J. I. Case Co., 70 Wash.2d 
522, 424 P.2d 290 (1967), quoting from the similar Comment a to former § 3; Gaskins v. Blue Cross-Blue 
Shield of South Carolina, 271 S.C. 101, 245 S.E.2d 598 (1978).
Comment b.  See Kabil Devs. Corp. v. Mignot, 279 Or. 151, 566 P.2d 505 (1977), discussing the admissibility of 
testimony about a person's state of mind as evidence of his manifestation of assent; see also Gaskins v. Blue 
Cross-Blue Shield of South Carolina, supra, regarding inference of assent from parties' acts.
Comment c.  In ordinary usage, "bargain" includes executed transactions.  1 Williston, Contracts § 2A (3d ed. 
1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 10 (1963).
Cross Reference

§ 3 Agreement Defined; Bargain Defined
ALR Annotations:
What constitutes a contract for sale under uniform commercial code § 2-314.  78 A.L.R.3d 696.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 15, 25
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 4
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 1- Meaning of 
Terms        
§ 4 How a Promise May Be Made
A promise may be stated in words either oral or written, or may be inferred wholly or partly from 
conduct.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Express and implied contracts.  Contracts are often spoken of as express or implied.  The distinction 
involves, however, no difference in legal effect, but lies merely in the mode of manifesting assent.  Just as 
assent may be manifested by words or other conduct, sometimes including silence, so intention to make a 
promise may be manifested in language or by implication from other circumstances, including course of dealing 
or usage of trade or course of performance.  See Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(3), defining "agreement."
Illustrations:
1.  A telephones to his grocer, "Send me a ten-pound bag of flour." The grocer sends it.  A has thereby 
promised to pay the grocer's current price therefor.
2.  A, on passing a market, where he has an account, sees a box of apples marked "25 cts. each." A picks up 
an apple, holds it up so that a clerk of the establishment sees the act.  The clerk nods, and A passes on.  A has 
promised to pay twenty-five cents for the apple.
b.  Quasi-contracts.  Implied contracts are different from quasi-contracts, although in some cases the line 
between the two is indistinct.  See Comment a to § 19.  Quasi-contracts have often been called implied 
contracts or contracts implied in law; but, unlike true contracts, quasi-contracts are not based on the apparent 
intention of the parties to undertake the performances in question, nor are they promises.  They are obligations 
created by law for reasons of justice.  Such obligations were ordinarily enforced at common law in the same 
form of action (assumpsit) that was appropriate to true contracts, and some confusion with reference to the 
nature of quasi-contracts has been caused thereby.  They are dealt with in the Restatement of Restitution.  See 
also §§ 141, 158, 197-99, 272, 370-77.
Illustration:
3.  A's wife, B, separates from A for justifiable cause, and, in order to secure necessary clothing and supplies, 
buys them from C and charges their cost to A.  A is bound to pay for them, though he has directed C not to 
furnish his wife with such supplies; but A's duty is quasi-contractual, not contractual.  See Restatement of 
Restitution § 113.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is derived from former § 5, but is substantially reworded.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 3-3A (3d 
ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts §§ 18-19 (1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  A major source of confusion in this area is the use of the term "implied in fact" for actual but 
nonverbal contracts inferred from facts such as the parties' conduct.  See Reporter's Note to § 19.  Compare 
Arizona Bd. of Regents v. Arizona York Refrig. Co., 115 Ariz. 338, 565 P.2d 518 (1977); Bloomgarden v. Coyer, 
479 F.2d 201 (D.C. Cir. 1973); Kabil Devs. Corp. v. Mignot, 279 Or. 151, 566 P.2d 505 (1977). Illustrations 1 
and 2 are based on Illustrations 1 and 2 to former § 5.  The provision of § 69(2) is not an exception to the 
requirements of this Section, but a statement of an obligation that does not rest on a manifestation of intention.
Comment b.  As opposed to the inferred from fact ("implied in fact") contract, the "implied in law" quasi-contract 
is no contract at all, but a form of the remedy of restitution.  On the difference, see Bloomgarden v. Coyer, 479 
F.2d 201 (D.C. Cir. 1973); Continental Forest Prods. v. Chandler Supply Co., 95 Idaho 739, 518 P.2d 1201 

§ 4 How a Promise May Be Made
(1974); United States ex rel. J. C. Schaefer Elec., Inc. v. O. Frank Heinz Constr. Co., 300 F. Supp. 396 (S.D. Ill. 
1969). Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 5; compare Compbell v. Tennessee Valley Auth., 421 
F.2d 293 (5th Cir. 1969), 1970 Duke L. J. 573; Paschall's, Inc. v. Dozier, 219 Tenn. 45, 407 S.W.2d 150 (1966).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Reward for disproving commercial claim.  96 A.L.R.3d 907.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 16
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 5
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 1- Meaning of 
Terms        
§ 5 Terms of Promise, Agreement, or Contract
(1)  A term of a promise or agreement is that portion of the intention or assent manifested which relates 
to a particular matter.
(2)  A term of a contract is that portion of the legal relations resulting from the promise or set of 
promises which relates to a particular matter, whether or not the parties manifest an intention to create 
those relations.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Agreed terms.  The terms of a promise or agreement are those expressed in the language of the parties or 
implied in fact from other conduct.  Both language and conduct are to be understood in the light of the 
circumstances, including course of dealing or usage of trade or course of performance.  See Comment a to § 4.  
If a promise is binding, a term of the promise becomes a term of the contract unless it is rendered inoperative 
by some rule of law.
b.  Contract terms supplied by law.  Much contract law consists of rules which may be varied by agreement of 
the parties.  Such rules are sometimes stated in terms of presumed intention, and they may be thought of as 
implied terms of an agreement.  They often rest, however, on considerations of public policy rather than on 
manifestation of the intention of the parties.  In the Restatement of this Subject, such rules are stated in terms 
of the operative facts which make them applicable.
c.  Statutory contract terms.  Statutes providing for contract terms vary in the extent to which they follow the 
terminology used here, and in the extent to which they permit variation by agreement.  Under Uniform 
Commercial Code § 1-102(3), for example, the effect of provisions of the Code may be freely varied by 
agreement, with limited exceptions; at the other extreme are statutes or administrative regulations prescribing 
standard forms of such documents as insurance policies or bills of lading. Transactions entered into under 
statutes providing either optional or required terms commonly contain promises within the present definition, but 
they may also produce obligations which do not rest upon any manifestation of the intention of the obligor.
Such statutory obligations are beyond the scope of the Restatement of this Subject.  The statutes are 
sometimes written in terms of presumed intention, and they are sometimes properly interpreted as imposing the 
same legal consequences as if one of the parties to a contract had made a promise in the prescribed terms.  If 
so, rules stated here may be applicable.
Illustration:
1.  A contracts to sell B a described automobile.  Both parties sign a printed contract form on which the 
description is typed and which contains the printed words, "Seller hereby excludes all warranties, express or 
implied." Under Uniform Commercial Code § 2-316 the quoted words do not exclude an implied warranty of 
merchantability, and under § 2-314 A warrants that the automobile is fit to drive.  Under § 2-714 the warranty 
has the effect of a promise to pay for harm if the warranty is broken.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 1, 1A, 2 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts §§ 3, 9, 13 (1963 
& Supp. 1980).
Comments a and b.  The choice of terms is primarily a power of the parties to a contract.  Nonetheless, their 
freedom of choice is increasingly circumscribed by rules of law.  A term may be unenforceable because it 

§ 5 Terms of Promise, Agreement, or Contract
offends public policy, § 178; or because it is unconscionable, § 208.  It generally will be interpreted against the 
draftsman, § 206, and in a manner favoring the public, § 207.  In some circumstances terms in standardized 
agreements will not be enforced despite the adhering party's manifestation of assent, Comment c to § 211; and 
affirmative relief such as injunction and specific performance may be denied because terms are unfair even 
though the terms would be enforced in an action for damages, § 364.
Comment c.  As to statutory contract terms see Kessler, Contracts of Adhesion -- Some Thoughts about 
Freedom of Contract, 43 Colum. L. Rev. 629 (1943); Lenhoff, Optional Terms (Jus Dispositivum) and Required 
Terms (Jus Cogens) in the Law of Contracts, 45 Mich. L. Rev. 39 (1946). As to bills of lading, see 10 Williston, 
Contracts § 1078 (3d ed. 1957).  The Federal Trade Commission has promulgated Trade Regulation Rules 
requiring that many consumer contracts contain specified terms giving consumers rights or forbidding the 
waiver of those rights.  See, e.g., 16 C.F.R. § 433.1-.3 (1975) (preserving consumers' claims and defenses 
against holders in due course or assignees); 16 C.F.R. § 429.1 (1974) (giving buyers in door-to-door 
transactions three days to rescind the contract).  Illustration 1 is new.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 16, 189
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 6
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 1- Meaning of 
Terms        
§ 6 Formal Contracts
The following types of contracts are subject in some respects to special rules that depend on their 
formal characteristics and differ from those governing contracts in general:
(a)  Contracts under seal,
(b)  Recognizances,
(c)  Negotiable instruments and documents,
(d)  Letters of credit.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  "Formal contracts."  The contracts referred to in this Section are sometimes referred to as "formal contracts," 
and other contracts may then be called "informal" or "simple" contracts.  This usage is avoided in this 
Restatement because contracts other than those enumerated are also subject to formal requirements.  Thus 
statutes modeled on the English Statute of Frauds make certain classes of contracts unenforceable unless 
evidenced by a writing; rules developed under such statutes are stated in Chapter 5.  Similarly, Uniform 
Commercial Code § 9-201 gives effect to a "security agreement" according to its terms, with exceptions which 
include the specification of formal requisites in § 9-203.  Except for contracts under seal, the special rules 
governing the contracts enumerated in this Section are not stated in the Restatement of this Subject.  Many of 
the rules here stated as applicable to contracts in general also have application to these special types of 
contract.  See, for example, Uniform Commercial Code § 1-103.
b.  Contracts under seal.  The rules governing the formation of sealed contracts are stated in Chapter 4, and 
peculiar incidents attached to such contracts after formation are referred to where appropriate.  In many States 
the legal effect of seals has been modified or abolished by statute.  Under Uniform Commercial Code § 2-203, 
contracts or offers to buy or sell goods are not contracts under seal even though a seal is affixed.  Under 
Uniform Commercial Code § 3-113, a negotiable instrument under seal is nevertheless subject to Article 3 of 
the Code, including the rule of § 3-408 that want or failure of consideration is a defense.
c.  Recognizances.  A recognizance is an acknowledgment in court by the recognizor that he is bound to make 
a certain payment unless a specified condition is performed.  They are in use chiefly to secure, first, the 
attendance in court at a future day of the recognizor, or, second, the prosecution of an action, or, third, the 
payment of bail.
d.  Negotiable instruments.  Negotiable instruments are such drafts, certificates of deposit, and promissory 
notes as are payable to bearer or to the order of a specified person, and such bonds, certificates of shares of 
stock, and other investment securities as are in bearer or registered form.  In every State they are subject either 
to Article 3 or Article 8 of the Uniform Commercial Code or to the older statutes, the Uniform Negotiable 
Instruments Law and the Uniform Stock Transfer Act.
e.  Negotiable documents.  Negotiable documents are such warehouse receipts, bills of lading, and other 
documents of title as run to bearer or to the order of a named person, or, where recognized in overseas trade, 
to a named person or assigns.  Warehouse receipts are subject in every State either to Article 7 of the Uniform 
Commercial Code or to the Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act.  Interstateand export bills of lading are subject to 

§ 6 Formal Contracts
the Federal Bills of Lading Act; import and local bills are subject in most States to Article 7 of the Uniform 
Commercial Code or to the Uniform Bills of Lading Act.
f.  Letters of credit.  A letter of credit is a promise to honor drafts or other demands for payment which is within 
the scope of Article 5 of the Uniform Commercial Code.  The Code defines that scope, prescribes formal 
requirements, provides that no consideration is necessary to establish a letter of credit, and partially codifies the 
governing law.  The governing law is closely related to the law of negotiable instruments; it has been developed 
from the law merchant and influenced by Section 135 of the Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law and by 
statutes and usages relating to banking.  The Uniform Commercial Code makes no radical change in the law 
developed by judicial decision.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 7, with the addition of letters of credit.  The material covered by former §§ 8-
11 is dealt with in the Comments to this Section.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 4-7 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, 
Contracts § 5 (1963).  As to letters of credit, see Murray, Contracts § 5 (2d rev. ed. 1974).
Comment b.  Contracts under seal are discussed at length in 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 205-19A (3d ed. 1957); 
and in 1A Corbin, Contracts §§ 240-57 (1963).  See also Topic 3 of Chapter 4 of this Restatement.
Comment c.  Recognizances are discussed in 1 Williston, Contracts § 220 (3d ed. 1957); and in 1A Corbin, 
Contracts § 258 (1963).
Comment d.  Negotiable instruments as formal contracts are discussed in 1 Williston, Contracts § 221 (3d ed. 
1957).  On the formal requirements of negotiable instruments, see UCC § 3-104 and Comment 2 thereto.
Comment e.  On the formal requirements and effect of documents of title, see UCC §§ 1-201(15) and 7-202 
(warehouse receipts); 49 U.S.C. §§ 83-85, 89-91 (1970) (order bills of lading).
Comment f.  Neither Williston nor Corbin expressly includes letters of credit in his list of formal contracts, but 
they satisfy the element stressed by both writers -- that form rather than the underlying transaction is the key 
element of the contract.  Cf. UCC § 5-105; Comments 1 and 2 to UCC § 5-114; compare, however, UCC § 5-
104.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 30 et seq.
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 7
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 1- Meaning of 
Terms        
§ 7 Voidable Contracts
A voidable contract is one where one or more parties have the power, by a manifestation of election to 
do so, to avoid the legal relations created by the contract, or by ratification of the contract to extinguish 
the power of avoidance.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  "Void contracts."  A promise for breach of which the law neither gives a remedy nor otherwise recognizes a 
duty of performance by the promisor is often called a void contract.  Under § 1, however, such a promise is not 
a contract at all; it is the "promise" or "agreement" that is void of legal effect.  If the term "contract" were defined 
to refer to the acts of the parties without regard to their legal effect, a contract could without inconsistency be 
referred to as "void."
b.  Grounds of avoidance.  Typical instances of voidable contracts are those where one party was an infant, or 
where the contract was induced by fraud, mistake, or duress, or where breach of a warranty or other promise 
justifies the aggrieved party in putting an end to the contract.  Usually the power to avoid is confined to one 
party to the contract, but where, for instance, both parties are infants, or where both parties enter into a contract 
under a mutual mistake, the contract may be voidable by either one of the parties.  Avoidance is often referred 
to as "disaffirmance."
c.  Consequences of avoidance.  The legal relations that exist after avoidance vary with the circumstances.  In 
some cases the party who avoids the contract is entitled to be restored to a position as good as that which he 
occupied immediately before the formation of the contract; in other cases the parties may be left in the same 
condition as at the time of the avoidance.  In many cases the power of avoidance exists only if the original 
situation of the parties can be and is restored at least substantially; but this is not necessarily the case.  An 
infant, for instance, in many jurisdictions is allowed to avoid his contract without this qualification, so that when 
the infant exercises his power the parties frequently are left in a very different situation from that which existed 
when the contract was made.  See § 14; Restatement of Restitution § 62.  As to breach of contract, see 
Chapters 10 and 16 of this Restatement; as to mistake, misrepresentation, duress and undue influence, see 
Chapters 6 and 7.
Illustration:
1.  A, an infant, sells and delivers his watch to B, an adult, in return for B's promise to pay $ 20.  There is a 
contract whereby B becomes owner of the watch and is under an enforceable duty to pay $ 20 to A.  But A has 
the power to extinguish his own right to the money and B's duty to pay it and, as against B, to revest in himself 
the ownership of the watch.
d.  Promptness of election.  Voidable contracts differ with respect to the requirement that the avoiding party 
manifest his election promptly.  In some cases the power of avoidance may be lost by unreasonable delay in 
returning benefits received or in manifesting the election to avoid.  In other cases, particularly where the 
contract is entirely executory on both sides, no manifestation of intention is necessary until an action is brought 
against the party having the power of avoidance.
Illustrations:
2.  A, by fraud, induces B to make a promise to pay A money in consideration of goods delivered by A to B.  
There is a contract, but the fraudulent representations of A give B a power to avoid by tendering back to A 
within a reasonable time the goods received from him.

§ 7 Voidable Contracts
3.  A, an infant, makes an agreement with B, an adult, the infant promising to pay money and the adult 
promising to deliver a chattel.  This is enforceable against B, but not against A.  If A has not previously avoided, 
he will have the power of ratification upon attaining his majority.
e.  Power of ratification.  The propriety of calling a transaction a voidable contract rests primarily on the 
traditional view that the transaction is valid and has its usual legal consequences until the power of avoidance is 
exercised.  Where each party has a power of avoidance, there is no legal duty of performance; but the term 
voidable contract is appropriate if ratification by one of the parties would terminate his power of avoidance and 
make the contract enforceable against him.  See § 85.  Moreover, action may be necessary in order to prevent 
the contract from producing the ordinary legal consequences of a contract; often such action in order to be 
effectual must be taken promptly.
Illustration:
4.  A, by fraud, induces B to promise to pay for certain advice which A gives.  This promise creates no duty in B, 
but is not wholly void, because it can be validated by B after he learns the facts.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 13.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 15 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 6 
(1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  The distinction between void and voidable contracts is discussed in Matter of Rothko, 43 N.Y.2d 
305, 372 N.E.2d 291, 401 N.Y.S.2d 449 (1977); and Yannuzzi v. Commonwealth, 37 Pa. Commw. Ct. 288, 390 
A.2d 331 (1978).
Comment b.  For a striking example of avoidance because of trustees' conflicts of interest, see Matter of 
Rothko, supra. For examples of avoidance because of lack of capacity, see §§ 12-16; because of mistake, §§ 
152-53; because of misrepresentation, § 164; because of duress, § 175; and because of undue influence, § 
177.
Comment c.  In Matter of Rothko, supra, the entering into of a voidable -- and subsequently avoided -- contract 
was held to extinguish a prior valid contract.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 13.
Comments d and e.  Illustrations 2-4 are based on Illustrations 2-4 to former § 13.  As to Illustration 4, see 
Comment c to § 163.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 98
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 8
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 1- Meaning of 
Terms        
§ 8 Unenforceable Contracts
An unenforceable contract is one for the breach of which neither the remedy of damages nor the 
remedy of specific performance is available, but which is recognized in some other way as creating a 
duty of performance, though there has been no ratification.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Distinction between "voidable" and "unenforceable."  Just as a contract may be voidable by one party or by 
either party, so it may be enforceable by one and not by the other or it may be unenforceable by either.  
Similarly, one party to an unenforceable contract may have a power to make the contract enforceable by all the 
usual remedies, and both voidable and unenforceable contracts may have collateral consequences.  Voidable 
contracts might be defined as one type of unenforceable contract.  As defined here, however, the term 
unenforceable contract refers to rules under which the duty of performance does not depend solely on the 
election of one party.  In the transactions here classified as unenforceable, some legal consequences other 
than the creation of a power of ratification follow without further action by either party.
Illustrations:
1.  A, an infant, orally accepts a written offer signed by B, an adult, to sell a tract of land.  A's promise is 
voidable by him because of his infancy and unenforceable under the Statute of Frauds.  Upon attaining his 
majority, A delivers to B a signed writing stating the terms of the contract and manifesting an election to avoid it.  
Under § 133, the Statute of Frauds no longer prevents enforcement; but the contract is avoided.
2.  A is indebted to B, but the statute of limitations has barred a direct remedy.  A has the power to make direct 
remedies available or to make a new contract without consideration by making a new promise or part payment 
of the debt (see § 82).  Even without such further acts, legal consequences may flow from the barred debt.  If 
the creditor has security, he may have a right to apply it towards payment of the debt.
b.  Types of unenforceable contracts.  Some contracts are unenforceable because they arise out of illegal 
bargains which are neither wholly void nor voidable.  See Comments b-d to § 178; §§ 183-84; Comment b to § 
197.  Others are unenforceable because of laws relating primarily to remedies, such as the Statute of Frauds 
(see Chapter 5) or Statute of Limitations.
Illustrations:
3.  A agrees to sell specific goods to B, and B agrees to buy them.  A has previously contracted to sell the same 
goods to C, as B knows.  The bargain between A and B is unenforceable on grounds of public policy (§ 194), 
and neither party can enforce it while executory.  But if either party performs his promise, he can recover what 
he has transferred or its value.  The return promise, though unenforceable, is given legal effect as showing that 
the performance was not gratuitous, and is therefore a contract.
4.  A makes an oral purchase of goods from B for an agreed price of $ 500.  There is no delivery or part 
payment, and the bargain is unenforceable under the Statute of Frauds.  A insures the goods as owner.  The 
insurer cannot defeat a claim under the policy on the ground that A did not own the goods, although A would 
have had no direct remedy against B for failure to deliver.
c.  Government contracts.  Contracts with a government or governmental agency are sometimes unenforceable 
under remnants of the historic English tradition that the sovereign is immune from suit.  Yet the legal 
consequences of such a contract show that what is promised by the government is due as of right and not as a 
favor.  Thus, a claim against the government arising out of the contract may pass to the executor or trustee in 

§ 8 Unenforceable Contracts
bankruptcy of the claimant.  Sometimes such a claim, though not enforceable by action, may be asserted 
defensively in an action by the government.
Increasingly, governments have enacted statutes giving general consent to actions on contracts.  Contracts 
enforceable by judicial proceedings under such statutes fall outside the present definition of unenforceable 
contracts, even though the action may be brought only in a special court, or relief may be limited to money 
damages, or execution cannot be levied on a money judgment.  The critical element is not compulsion by 
physical force, but the availability of judicial machinery to make a final determination of legal obligation.  Thus, 
where the only direct remedy is by legislative approval of a private bill or by unreviewable administrative action, 
the contract is within the present definition of unenforceable contracts.
The question whether a contract is enforceable by direct legal proceedings is quite different from the question 
whether the legal right will be converted into money or its equivalent.  The latter question may depend on 
whether there is a regular practice of making appropriations to pay judgments, or, as in cases of private 
obligors, on the solvency of the government against whom the judgment is rendered.  There is sometimes more 
assurance of payment under an unenforceable contract than under a judgment.
Illustrations:
5.  A, an American citizen, holds notes issued by B, a foreign government.  Because of the sovereign immunity 
of B, the notes are not enforceable against B in the courts of the United States.  In an action by B against A on 
an unrelated claim, however, A may use the notes as an offset to reduce the amount of B's recovery.
6.  A, an American citizen, has a contract with the United States government, and after a breach by the 
government obtains a judgment for damages in the United States Court of Claims.  Under the tax laws, money 
receivable under the contract is taxable as accrued income when there is a reasonable expectancy that the 
right will be converted into money.  The income accrues in the year in which the time for appellate review of the 
judgment expires, even though Congress does not appropriate money to pay the judgment until the following 
year.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 14.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 16 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 8 
(1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  For a good discussion of the differences among "void," "voidable," and "unenforceable" contracts, 
see Daugherty v. Kessler, 264 Md. 281, 286 A.2d 95 (1972). That case also illustrates the rule that interference 
with an unenforceable contract may be a tort.  Illustration 1 is new; see § 14 and Illustration 4 to § 133.  
Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 14.
Comment b.  For an example of a court's refusal to enforce a labor arbitrator's award because the contract 
provision on which it was based was unenforceable as violative of federal labor law, see Botany Indus., Inc. v. 
New York Joint Board, Amalgamated Clothing Workers, 375 F. Supp. 485 (S.D.N.Y.), vacated as moot, 506 
F.2d 1246 (2d Cir. 1974). Illustration 3 follows former § 600; see Illustration 3 to § 197.  Compare Restatement 
of Restitution §§ 107, 108.  On unenforceable contracts arising out of bargains against public policy, see 14 
Williston, Contracts §§ 1630A, 15 id. § 1762 (3d ed. 1957); 6A Corbin, Contracts §§ 1534-41 (1962 & Supp. 
1980).  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 14.
Comment c.  Illustration 5 is based on National City Bank v. Republic of China, 348 U.S. 356 (1955). Illustration 
6 is based on H. Liebes & Co. v. Commissioner, 90 F.2d 932 (9th Cir. 1937); cf.  Irwin v. Commissioner, 238 
F.2d 874 (3d Cir. 1956). As to the rights against the government of the claimant's executor or trustee in 
bankruptcy, see United States v. Shannon, 342 U.S. 288, 292 (1952); McKay v. United States, 27 Ct. Cl. 422 
(1892). See, generally, Note, Developments in the Law -- Remedies Against the United States and Its Officials, 
70 Harv. L. Rev. 827, 884 (1957); Note, Administration of Claims Against the Sovereign -- A Survey of State 
Techniques, 68 Harv. L. Rev. 506 (1955).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 98

§ 8 Unenforceable Contracts
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 9
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 2- Formation of 
Contracts -- Parties and Capacity        
§ 9 Parties Required
There must be at least two parties to a contract, a promisor and a promisee, but there may be any 
greater number.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Promise to oneself.  In one sense a person can make a promise to himself, but the law does not provide 
remedies for breach of such promises.  This rule, which is implicit in the definition of "promise" in § 2, has been 
thought to be a rule of substantive law independent of mere procedural requirements.  But it is unlikely to have 
practical significance unless some other person becomes involved, and in such cases it is an unreliable basis 
for prediction of legal consequences.  Thus a contract may be formed in which the same person is one of 
several on one side of a bargain, and either alone or with others a party on the other side.  See § 11.  Again, 
where one party to a contract becomes both obligor and obligee and there are no other parties to the contract, 
the contract is not necessarily deprived of all legal consequences.  See the provisions on discharge in Chapter 
12; compare Uniform Commercial Code §§ 3-208, 3-601.
b.  Different capacities.  One person may have different capacities, as for instance as trustee, as executor, as 
partner, and as individual.  If he purports to make a promise in one capacity to himself in another capacity, 
there may be legal consequences.  He cannot make a contract by his own undisclosed mental processes; a 
contract requires a manifestation of intention.  Even if his intention is manifested by execution of a formal 
document or by other conduct, it may not be technically accurate to say that in one capacity he holds a claim 
against himself in another capacity, but that may be substantially the effect of his acts.  Thus if a trust company 
holds a sum of money in trust, and in accordance with the terms of the trust deposits the money in its banking 
department, it is under substantially the same duties to the beneficiaries as if it held a claim against a third 
person in trust.  See Restatement, Second, Trusts § 87; compare Restatement, Second, Agency § 24.  Such 
self-dealing by a fiduciary may involve a breach of duty to a beneficiary or principal.  See Restatement, Second, 
Trusts § 170; Restatement, Second, Agency § 387.
c.  Multiple parties.  Under § 1 a contract may be a "set of promises", and there may be multiple promisors and 
multiple promisees in one set.
Illustration:
1.  A, B, C and D enter into a written contract by which A makes certain promises to B, other promises to C, and 
other promises to D.  In return B, C and D promise a single performance to A, or each promises A a separate 
performance.  In either case there is a contract, and numerous variations may be made from this illustration in 
regard to the number of parties and the various promises which they may make.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 15.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 18 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 55 
(1963); 4 id. § 923 (1951).
Comment a.  For statements that one cannot contract with himself, see United States v. Alaska S.S. Co., 491 
F.2d 1147 (9th Cir. 1974); Forest Inv. Corp. v. Chaplin, 55 Ill. App.2d 429, 205 N.E.2d 51 (1965); Robertson v. 
Vandalia Trust Co., 228 Mo. App. 1172, 66 S.W.2d 193 (Mo. Ct. App. 1934); Eastman v. Wright, 23 Mass. (6 
Pick.) 316 (1828); compare Ex parte Schultz, 64 Nev. 264, 181 P.2d 585 (1947) (dissenting opinion); Yosemite 
Portland Cement Corp. v. State Bd. of Equalization, 59 Cal. App.2d 39, 138 P.2d 39 (1943) (agreement 

§ 9 Parties Required
between city and department was "contract" within tax exemption statute, though not as a matter of "general 
contract law"); Federal Trust Co. v. Damron, 124 Neb. 655, 247 N.W. 589 (1933).
Comment b.  A contract between a partner and his firm was enforced in Forsyth v. Butler, 152 Cal. 396, 93 P. 
90 (1907); compare De Martini v. Industrial Accident Comm., 90 Cal. App.2d 139, 202 P.2d 828 (1949) 
(workmen's compensation award to partner working for wages).
Comment c.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 15.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Person who signs contract but is not named in body thereof as party to contract and liable thereunder.  94 
A.L.R.2d 691.
Manner and sufficiency of pleading agency in contract action.  45 A.L.R.2d 583.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 13
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 10
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 2- Formation of 
Contracts -- Parties and Capacity        
§ 10 Multiple Promisors and Promisees of the Same Performance
(1)  Where there are more promisors than one in a contract, some or all of them may promise the same 
performance, whether or not there are also promises of separate performances.
(2)  Where there are more promisees than one in a contract, a promise may be made to some or all of 
them as a unit, whether or not the same or another performance is separately promised to one or more 
of them.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Procedural limitations at common law.  Historically it was said that there could be only two sides to an action 
at law, that of the plaintiff and that of the defendant.  There might be more than one person on each side, but it 
was necessary that all the parties joined as plaintiffs assert a common right and that all the persons joined as 
defendants be charged with a common duty.  In equity, however, there has never been a requirement that the 
parties to a suit must consist of merely two units, one seeking to enforce a right against the other.  On the 
contrary, any number of parties having diverse and conflicting legal relations could be dealt with under equity 
procedure; and the same thing is true where under modern statutes or rules of court legal and equitable 
procedures have been merged in a single form of action.  The extent to which remnants of common-law 
procedure survive in the United States is beyond the scope of the Restatement of this Subject.
b.  Multiple promises; suretyship.  As a matter of substantive law, an indefinite number of persons may contract 
with one another, and there may be three or more individuals or groups, each with distinct rights and duties.  
Promises may be made by individuals or by groups acting together, and they may be made to individuals or to 
groups acting together.
Rules governing multiple promises of the same performance are stated in Chapter 13.  Where promises of the 
same performance are made by two or more promisors, there is necessarily a relation of suretyship among the 
promisors.  Thus, if there are two promisors, either one is the principal obligor and the other his surety, or each 
is a principal obligor as to a part and a surety as to the balance.  Rules of suretyship are stated in the 
Restatement of Security; in general they are beyond the scope of the Restatement of this Subject.
Illustration:
1.  A promises to convey a tract of land to his three sons, B, C and D.  In return B and C promise to build and 
maintain a home for A; D promises to live with A and to support and care for him; B, C and D promise that A will 
receive $ 200 a year.  As to the home, B is the principal obligor for his share and C for his; B is C's surety for 
C's share and C is B's surety for B's share.  Similarly, as to the $ 200, each is principal as to a third and surety 
for each of the others.  D alone is bound to furnish care and support.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is derived from former § 16, but the terminology "joint," "several," and "joint and several" is avoided 
because of its obsolete connotations.  See 4 Corbin, Contracts §§ 923-42 (1951 & Supp. 1980); cf. 2 Williston, 
Contracts § 336 (3d ed. 1959).  The terms are used in Chapter 13 of the Restatement of this Subject, 
particularly §§ 289, 290, 294 and 296-300, but attention should be given to the Introductory and Statutory Notes 
to Chapter 13.

§ 10 Multiple Promisors and Promisees of the Same Performance
Comment a.  Procedural problems at common law are discussed at length in 4 Corbin, Contracts §§ 925, 928-
37 (1951 & Supp. 1980); on modern statutory changes, see 2 Williston, Contracts §§ 336-36A, 344A (3d ed. 
1959), and the Statutory Note to Chapter 13.
Comment b.  In Corbin's words, "the question whether two or more promisors have promised a single undivided 
performance, or have each promised a limited and separate performance, is wholly a problem of interpretation." 
4 Corbin, Contracts § 926 at 704 (1951).  Interpretation of multiple promises is discussed in 4 id. §§ 926-27, 
and in §§ 288, 297 and 301 of this Restatement.  Illustration 1 is based on 4 Corbin, Contracts § 938 (1951), 
citing Krbel v. Krbel, 84 Neb. 160, 120 N.W. 935 (1909).
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 12, 177
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 11
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 2- Formation of 
Contracts -- Parties and Capacity        
§ 11 When a Person May Be Both Promisor and Promisee
A contract may be formed between two or more persons acting as a unit and one or more but fewer 
than all of these persons, acting either singly or with other persons.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  The Section is applicable to contracts in general, including the types enumerated in § 6.  It does not touch 
upon the rightfulness of making such contracts.  Self-dealing may render a contract voidable.  As to persons 
acting in more than one capacity, see Comment b to § 9.
Illustrations:
1.  A becomes a member of an unincorporated society, and by so doing promises to pay dues to the society.  
He is bound by a contract.
2.  A, a trustee of an estate jointly with B, enters into a written agreement by which he individually promises to 
buy and A and B as trustees promise to sell a piece of land belonging to the trust.  This is a contract; and, 
thought it is voidable by the beneficiaries if made without either their consent or the authority of a court, it is 
enforceable unless the beneficiaries elect to avoid it.
b.  Historically contracts falling within the terms of this Section were said not to be enforceable at common law, 
but this difficulty could be obviated by resort to a court of equity.  The extent to which this procedural distinction 
survives in the United States is beyond the scope of the Restatement of this Subject.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section was former § 17.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 18 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 55 (1963); 4 
id. § 923 (1951).
Comment a.  Illustrations 1 and 2 were Illustrations 1 and 2 to former § 17.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 177
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 12
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 2- Formation of 
Contracts -- Parties and Capacity        
§ 12 Capacity to Contract
(1)  No one can be bound by contract who has not legal capacity to incur at least voidable contractual 
duties.  Capacity to contract may be partial and its existence in respect of a particular transaction may 
depend upon the nature of the transaction or upon other circumstances.
(2)  A natural person who manifests assent to a transaction has full legal capacity to incur contractual 
duties thereby unless he is
(a)  under guardianship, or
(b)  an infant, or
(c)  mentally ill or defective, or
(d)  intoxicated.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Total and partial incapacity.  Capacity, as here used, means the legal power which a normal person would 
have under the same circumstances.  See Restatement, Second, Agency § 20; Restatement, Second, Trusts § 
18.  Incapacity may be total, as in cases where extreme physical or mental disability prevents manifestation of 
assent to the transaction, or in cases of mental illness after a guardian has been appointed.  Often, however, 
lack of capacity merely renders contracts voidable.  See § 7.  Incapacity sometimes relates only to particular 
types of transactions; on the other hand, persons whose capacity is limited in most circumstances may be 
bound by particular types of transactions.  In cases of partial disability, the law of mistake or of 
misrepresentation, duress and undue influence may be relevant.  See Chapters 6 and 7, particularly §§ 153, 
157, 161(d), 163, 164, 167, 169(c) and 177, Comment b to § 172 and Comment c to § 175.
b.  Types of incapacity.  Historically, the principal categories of natural persons having no capacity or limited 
capacity to contract were married women, infants, and insane persons.  Those formerly referred to as insane 
are included in the more modern phrase "mentally ill," and mentally defective persons are treated similarly.  
Statutes sometimes authorize the appointment of guardians for habitual drunkards, narcotics addicts, 
spendthrifts, aged persons or convicts as in cases of mental illness.  Even without the appointment of a 
guardian, civil powers of convicts may be suspended in whole or in part during imprisonment; and American 
Indians are for some purposes treated as wards of the United States government.  The contractual powers of 
convicts and Indians are beyond the scope of the Restatement of this Subject.  As to convicts, see Model Penal 
Code § 306.5.
c.  Inability to manifest assent.  In order to incur a contractual duty, a party must make a promise, manifesting 
his intention; in most cases he must manifest assent to a bargain.  See §§ 2, 17, 18.  The conduct of a party is 
not effective as a manifestation of his assent unless he intends to engage in the conduct.  See § 19.  Hence if 
physical disability prevents a person from acting, or if mental disability is so extreme that he cannot form the 
necessary intent, there is no contract.  Similarly, even if he intends to engage in the conduct, there is no 
contract if the other party knows or has reason to know that he does not intend the resulting appearance of 
assent.  See § 20.  In such cases it is proper to say that incapacity prevents the formation of a contract.

§ 12 Capacity to Contract
d.  Married women.  At common law a married woman had no capacity to incur contractual duties, although 
courts of equity recognized a limited power with respect to property conveyed to her separate use.  Modern 
statutes in most States have given married women full power to contract, and they are therefore omitted from 
the list in subsection (2) of persons who may not have full capacity.  In some States, however, capacity is still 
denied with respect to particular types of contracts, such as contracts between husband and wife, contracts of 
suretyship, contracts for the sale of real property, or contracts relating to the management of community 
property.
e.  Artificial persons.  The contractual powers of artificial persons such as corporations and governmental 
agencies are beyond the scope of the Restatement of this Subject.  The tendency of modern legislation is to 
restrict the assertion of the defense of ultra vires by business corporations, and in effect to give them full 
capacity; what was once lack of capacity then resembles lack of authority as used in the law of agency.  See 
Model Business Corporation Act § 6 (1961).  Where partnerships or unincorporated associations have no 
power to contract as such, contracts made in their names bind the members instead.  Compare Restatement, 
Second, Agency § 20; Restatement, Second, Trusts §§ 97, 98.
f.  Necessaries.  Persons having no capacity or limited capacity to contract are often liable for necessaries 
furnished to them or to their wives or children.  Though often treated as contractual, such liabilities are quasi-
contractual: the liability is measured by the value of the necessaries rather than by the terms of the promise.  
The rules governing such liabilities are beyond the scope of the Restatement of this Subject.  See Restatement 
of Restitution §§ 62, 112-17, 139.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is based on former § 18.  Subsection (2) is new.  See 2 Williston, Contracts §§ 222-72 (3d ed. 
1959); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 54 (1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment a.  For suggestions that unconscionability (see § 208) and related doctrines should replace 
incapacity as the major protective device for persons with disabilities, see Navin, The Contracts of Minors 
Viewed from the Perspective of Fair Exchange, 50 N.C.L. Rev. 517, 546-47 (1972); and Alexander & Szasz, 
From Contract to Status Via Psychiatry, 13 Santa Clara Law. 537, 557-59 (1973). Compare Green, Proof of 
Mental Incompetency and the Unexpressed Major Premise, 53 Yale L.J. 272, 311 (1944) (real standard applied 
by courts is "the fairness or unfairness of the transaction").
Comment b.  For examples of statutes authorizing the appointment of a guardian for a spendthrift see Ill. Ann. 
Stat. ch. 3, § 112 (Smith-Hurd 1965); Iowa Code Ann. § 633.552 (West 1971); Me. Rev. Stat. tit. 18., § 3601 
(Supp. 1977); Mass. Ann. Laws. ch. 201, § 1 (Michie/Law. Co-op Supp. 1977); Mich. Comp. Laws § 703.14 
(1970); Minn. Stat. Ann. § 525.54 (West 1973); N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 464:5 (1968); R.I. Gen. Laws § 33-15-8 
(1969); Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 14, § 2682 (1974); Wis. Stat. Ann. § 880.03 (West 1971).
For similar statutes relating to convicts, see Haw. Rev. Stat. § 353-34 (1976 Replacement Vol.); Me. Rev. Stat. 
tit. 18, § 3601 (Supp. 1977); Miss. Code Ann. § 93-13-135 (1972); N.Y. Correc. Law §§ 320, 350 (1968); Ohio 
Rev. Code Ann. § 2111.01 (Page 1976); Va. Code § 53-305 (Supp. 1977); W. Va. Code § 28-5-33 (1976).
The Uniform Probate Code, unlike § 13, makes a distinction between protective proceedings such as 
conservatorships for persons unable to manage their property, and guardianships of persons unable to care for 
their persons.  See Uniform Probate Code, Comments to §§ 5-304 and 5-401.  On the distinction between 
guardianship and conservatorship, see Reporter's Note to § 13.  See also Uniform Probate Code § 5-420 
Comment.
For examples of limitations on the capacity of some American Indians, see 25 U.S.C. § 81 (1976); Price, Law 
and the American Indian 639-42 (1973); Cohen, Felix S. Cohen's Handbook of Federal Indian Law 164-66, 279-
82 (1971 reprint of 1942 ed.).
Comment d.  Even in the absence of the ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment, any treatment of married 
women as having less capacity to contract than either married men or single women would appear to be of very 
doubtful constitutionality, as based upon either an irrational classification (see Reed v. Reed, 404 U.S. 71 
(1971)), or an irrebutable presumption (see Cleveland Bd. of Educ. v. LaFleur, 414 U.S. 632 (1974)). In fact, 
such treatment will probably be tested under a more rigorous standard, and thus is even more likely to be 
struck down.  See Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190 (1976) and Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973).

§ 12 Capacity to Contract
Comment f.  As to the quasi-contractual nature of liability for necessaries, see 2 Williston, Contracts §§ 240, 
255, 262 (3d ed. 1959); Restatement, Restitution §§ 113, 114 (1937) and Comments thereto; Clark, Domestic 
Relations § 6.3 at 189 (1968); Weihofen, Mental Incompetency to Convey or Contract, 39 So. Cal. L. Rev. 211, 
238-39 (1966).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Commitment of grantor to institution for insane as ground for setting aside conveyance in consideration of 
support.  18 A.L.R.2d 906.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 11, 92
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 13
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 2- Formation of 
Contracts -- Parties and Capacity        
§ 13 Persons Affected by Guardianship
A person has no capacity to incur contractual duties if his property is under guardianship by reason of 
an adjudication of mental illness or defect.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  The reason for appointing a guardian of property is to preserve the property from being 
squandered or improvidently used.  The guardianship proceedings are treated as giving public notice of the 
ward's incapacity and establish his status with respect to transactions during guardianship even though the 
other party to a particular transaction may have no knowledge or reason to know of the guardianship: the 
guardian is not required to give personal notice to all persons who may deal with the ward.  The control of the 
ward's property is vested in the guardian, subject to court supervision; that control and supervision are not to be 
impaired or avoided by proof that the ward has regained his reason or has had a lucid interval, unless the 
guardianship is terminated or abandoned.
The rules governing contracts made by a guardian are beyond the scope of the Restatement of this Subject.  A 
contract purporting not to bind the guardian personally but to bind the ward's estate raises problems much like 
those raised by a similar contract made by a trustee.  See Restatement, Second, Trusts §§ 262, 263, 271.  But 
the powers of guardians are usually defined by statute, and are ordinarily much narrower than those of trustees.
b.  Non-contractual obligations.  Property under guardianship may be reached in some circumstances to 
redress the torts of the ward or to satisfy his quasi-contractual obligations.  See Restatement of Restitution § 
139.  The guardian is not required, in order to defend the ward against contractual liability arising out of a 
transaction during guardianship, to restore the other party to his original position, since such a requirement 
might force the guardian to use other property to replace property dissipated by the ward.  Compare 
Restatement of Restitution § 62.  But the other party may be able to reclaim the consideration received by the 
ward if it can be found.  In some cases, as where necessaries have been furnished, the other party, to avoid 
unjust enrichment, may recover the fair value of the consideration received by the ward.  See Comment f to § 
12.
Illustration:
1.  A, under guardianship by reason of mental illness, buys an old car from B for $ 300, giving a promissory 
note for that amount.  A subsequently abandons the car.  A is not liable on the note.  B may reclaim the car or, 
if the car is found to be a necessary, has a claim for having furnished it to A.
c.  Types of guardianship.  The rule of this Section had its origin in cases of insanity.  It does not apply to cases 
where a person is committed or voluntarily admitted to an asylum or hospital without the appointment of a 
guardian, or where a guardian of the person only is appointed.  In such cases the adjudication may have 
evidentiary value under § 15, but there may be a voidable contract notwithstanding mental illness or defect.  
Nor does the rule apply to infants: parents are natural guardians of the person but not the property of an infant, 
and the appointment of a guardian of the infant's property does not prevent the infant from affirming his contract 
when he becomes of age.
Unless a statute provides otherwise, the rule governing insane persons applies also to persons under 
guardianship by reason of mental illness or defect or as habitual drunkards, narcotics addicts, spendthrifts, 
aged persons or convicts.  In some states it makes no difference that the guardian is known as a committee, 
conservator, or curator, or by some other title, but in others, conservatorship is a less drastic procedure not 
conclusive and sometimes not even probative on the issue of incompetency.  Where a statute authorizes the 

§ 13 Persons Affected by Guardianship
appointment of a guardian on the voluntary application of the ward-to-be without any adjudication of disability, 
the ward may retain some capacity to contract, subject to subsequent judicial approval, either where the 
guardian consents or where the guardian's control of the property is not impaired.
Illustration:
2.  Shortly after commitment to a hospital for the insane and while still confined, A conveys land to B, taking 
back a purchase-money mortgage.  Subsequently C is appointed guardian of A's property.  On A's behalf, C 
ratifies the conveyance and sues to enforce the mortgage by foreclosure.  B has no defense: since A was not 
under guardianship, the conveyance and mortgage were voidable, not void.  See § 15.
d.  Termination of guardianship.  When the reason for guardianship ceases, the guardianship should ordinarily 
be terminated by judicial decree.  But when the ward recovers from mental illness, for example, the 
guardianship is sometimes abandoned without any formality.  In such cases, if the guardian dies or is removed 
and no successor is appointed, the guardianship is no longer conclusive of contractual incapacity, and the 
same may be true in other cases if the ward resumes full control of his property without interference over a 
substantial period of time.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  Allen, Ferster and Weihofen, Mental Impairment and Legal Incompetency 260-63 (1968) 
discusses the Tentative Draft of this Section and of § 12, and disagrees with the rule of total incapacity for 
those affected by guardianship.  There is always a tension between certainty and fairness when capacity is 
involved.  When a guardianship proceeding involves a judicial finding of incompetency, there is a stronger 
argument for certainty.  Compare the discussions of conservatorship in the Reporter's Note to Comment c, and 
of informal terminations of guardianships in the Reporter's Note to Comment d.  See also 1 Corbin, Contracts § 
7 (1963); 2 Williston, Contracts § 257 (3d ed. 1959); Madden, Persons and Domestic Relations § 235 (1931); 
Smoot, Insanity § 349 (1929); Weihofen, Mental Incompetency to Contract or Convey, 39 So. Cal. L. Rev. 211-
15, 220-23, 228-33, 236 (1966); Note, Mental Illness and the Law of Contracts, 57 Mich. L. Rev. 1020, 1043-44, 
1060-62 (1959); Green, The Operative Effect of Mental Incompetency on Agreements and Wills, 21 Tex. L. 
Rev. 554, 576-80 (1943); Annots., 7 A.L.R. 568 (1920), 68 A.L.R. 1309 (1930).
Comment b.  Illustration 1 is based on Reeves v. Hunter, 185 Iowa 958, 171 N.W. 567 (1919) (guardianship for 
spendthrift).
Comment c.  On the distinction between guardianship of incompetents and conservatorship without regard to 
competency, see Board of Regents v. Davis, 14 Cal.3d 33, 120 Cal. Rptr. 407, 533 P.2d 1047 (1975); and 
Bankers Trust Co. v. Martin, 51 A.D.2d 411, 381 N.Y.S.2d 1001 (3d Dep't 1976); New York Mental Hyg. Law § 
77.25(b) (appointment of conservator not admissible even as evidence of incompetency); Uniform Probate 
Code, Art. V, esp. §§ 5-101, 5-304 and 5-401 to -432 and Comments thereto.  On the New York conservator 
statute, see Note, 22 Buffalo L. Rev. 487 (1973); on California law, see Kay, Farnham, Karren, Krakel and 
Diamond, Legal Planning for the Mentally Retarded: The California Experience, 60 Calif. L. Rev. 438, 467-77, 
498-508 (1972).
As to spendthrifts, aged persons and others, see 2 Williston, Contracts § 272 (3d ed. 1959); Regan, Protective 
Services for the Elderly: Commitment, Guardianship, and the Alternatives, 13 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 569 (1972); 
President's Committee on Mental Retardation, The Mentally Retarded Citizen and the Law 18-20, 62-87 (1976); 
Stone, Mental Health and Law: A System in Transition 136-44 (guardianship of the mentally retarded), 161-69, 
173-78 (guardianship and competency of the aging) (1975); Effland, Caring for the Elderly Under the Uniform 
Probate Code, 17 Ariz. L. Rev. 373 (1975).
As to voluntary guardianships, see In re Estate of Cline, 250 Iowa 265, 93 N.W.2d 708 (1958); Peters, Iowa 
Guardianships, 45 Iowa L. Rev. 336, 344 (1960); cf.  Normandin v. Kimball, 92 N.H. 62, 25 A.2d 39 (1942). For 
a suggestion that the other party may be bound even though the incompetent is not, see Mason v. National 
Bank of Decatur, 18 Ill. App.2d 395, 152 N.E.2d 478 (1958) (claim for necessary legal services barred by 
contingent fee agreement); see also, Weihofen, supra, 39 So. Cal. L. Rev. at 230.  Illustration 2 is based on 
Finch v. Goldstein, 245 N.Y. 300, 157 N.E. 146 (1927). Acquiescence by guardian and court was denied effect 
in Fixico v. Fixico, 186 Okl. 656, 100 P.2d 260 (1940), where the agreement was made during guardianship.
Comment d.  See Allen, Ferster and Weihofen, supra, at 261 and n. 8; and Weihofen, supra, 39 So. Cal. L. 
Rev. at 212-13 (1966) (both agreeing with Tentative Draft of this Comment).

§ 13 Persons Affected by Guardianship
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Termination of continuing guaranty by appointment of guardian or conservator for guarantor.  55 A.L.R.3d 344.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 11, 92
Mental Health 374
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 14
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 2- Formation of 
Contracts -- Parties and Capacity        
§ 14 Infants
Unless a statute provides otherwise, a natural person has the capacity to incur only voidable 
contractual duties until the beginning of the day before the person's eighteenth birthday.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Who are infants.  The common law fixed the age of twenty-one as the age at which both men and women 
achieve full capacity to contract, and the rule that the critical moment is the beginning of the preceding day was 
established on the ground that the law disregards fractions of a day.  In almost every State these rules have 
been changed by statute.  It appears that 49 States have lowered the age of majority, either generally or for 
contract capacity, to less than twenty-one; usually, the age is eighteen.  See the table in the Reporter's Note to 
this Comment.  The birthday rather than the preceding day is the date of majority in some States; in some both 
men and women have full capacity upon marriage.
b.  Obligations which are not voidable.  Infants' contracts were at one time classified as void, voidable or valid, 
but the modern rule in the absence of statute is that they are voidable by the infant.  See § 7.  Compare 
Restatement, Second, Agency § 20.  An infant may be bound by obligations imposed by law independently of 
contract, such as tort and quasi-contractual obligations.  See Comment f to § 12, Restatement of Restitution § 
139.  In addition, certain contracts are held binding, ordinarily by statute, such as recognizances for appearance 
in court or contracts made with judicial approval.  Modern statutes also sometimes deny the power of 
disaffirmance as to such transactions as withdrawal of bank deposits or payment of life insurance premiums.
c.  Restoration of consideration.  An infant need not take any action to disaffirm his contracts until he comes of 
age.  If sued upon the contract, he may defend on the ground of infancy without returning the consideration 
received.  His disaffirmance revests in the other party the title to any property received by the infant under the 
contract.  If the consideration received by the infant has been dissipated by him, the other party is without 
remedy unless the infant ratifies the contract after coming of age or is under some non-contractual obligation.  
But some states, by statute or decision, have restricted the power of disaffirmance, either generally or under 
particular circumstances, by requiring restoration of the consideration received.  Where the infant seeks to 
enforce the contract, the conditions of the other party's promise must be fulfilled.  The problems arising when an 
infant seeks to disaffirm a conveyance or executed contract are beyond the scope of the Restatement of this 
Subject, whether the disaffirmance is attempted before or after he comes of age.  As to what constitutes 
ratification, see § 85.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  On incapacity due to infancy generally, see 2 Williston, Contracts §§ 222-48 (3d ed. 
1959); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 6 (1963 & Supp. 1980); Madden, Persons and Domestic Relations §§ 189-
229(1931).
Comment a.  The impetus for the lowering of the age of majority probably came from the widespread draft of 
those under twenty-one and from the lowering of the voting age to eighteen; cf.  Oregon v. Mitchell, 400 U.S. 
112 (1970) and U.S. Const. Amend. XXVI.  The following state statutes make the age of majority for purposes 
of contract eighteen unless another age is indicated. 
Alabama *
Ala. Code tit. 27 §
*  Age is 19

§ 14 Infants
  26 (Interim
  Supp. 1975).
Alaska ***
Alaska Stat. §
  25.20.010(1977).
Arizona
Ariz. Rev. Stat. §
  1-215 (1973).
Arkansas
Ark. Stat. Ann. §
  57-103 (Supp.
  1977).
California
Cal. Civ. Code §
  25 (West Supp.
  1978).
Colorado
Colo. Rev. Stat.
  § 13-22-101
  (1973)
Connecticut ***
Conn. Gen. Stat.
  Ann. § 1-1d
  (West Supp.
  1978)
Delaware
Del. Code tit. 6 §
  2705 (Revised
  1974)
Florida ***
Fla. Stat. Ann. §
  743.07 (West
  Supp. 1978)
Georgia
Ga. Code Ann. §
  74-104 (Revi-
  sion 1973)
Hawaii
Haw. Rev. Stat. §
  577-1 (Supp.
  1975)
Idaho
Idaho Code §
  29-101 (1967), §
  32-101 (Supp.
  1978)
Illinois
Ill. Ann. Stat. ch.
  3 § 131 (Smith-
  Hurd 1978)
Indiana
Ind. Code Ann.
  § 34-1-2-5.5
  (Burns Supp.
  1977)
Iowa
Iowa Code Ann. §
***  The age of majority is 18, but the statute contains a clause using the words "unless otherwise provided by statute" or similar 
language.  No statutes were found that made the age of capacity to contract different from the age of majority.

§ 14 Infants
  599.1 (West
  Supp. 1978)
Kansas
Kan. Stat. Ann. §
  38-101 (1973).
Kentucky
Ky. Rev. Stat.
  Ann. § 2.015
  (Baldwin 1975)
Louisiana
La. Civ. Code
  Ann. art. 1782
  (West 1952),
  art. 37 (West
  Supp. 1978)
Maine
Me. Rev. Stat. tit.
  1 § 73 (Supp.
  1973)
Maryland
Md. Com. Law
  Code Ann. §
  1-103(a) (1975)
Massachusetts
Mass. Ann. Laws.
  ch. 4, § 7(48)
  (Michie/Law
  Co-op Supp.
  1978)
Michigan
Mich. Comp.
  Laws Ann. §
  722.52 (Supp.
  1978)
Minnesota ***
Minn. Stat. Ann.
  § 645.45(14)
  (West Supp.
  1978)
Mississippi **
Miss. Code Ann. §
  1-3-27 (1972)
Missouri
Mo. Ann. Stat. §
  431.055 (Vernon
  Supp. 1978)
Montana
Mont. Rev. Codes
  Ann. § 64-101
  (Supp. 1977)
Nebraska *
Neb. Rev. Stat. §
  38-101 (Reissue
  1974)
Nevada
Nev. Rev. Stat. §
**  Age is 21

§ 14 Infants
  129.010 (1977)
New Hampshire
N.H. Rev. Stat.
  Ann. § 21-B:1
  (Supp. 1977)
New Jersey
N.J. Stat. Ann. §
  9:17B-3 (West
  1976)
New Mexico
N.M. Stat. Ann.
  §§ 12-2-2 (K);
  28-6-1 (1978
  Replacement
  Vol.)
New York
N.Y. Gen. Oblig.
  Law § 3-101
  (McKinney
  1978)
North Carolina
N.C. Gen. Stat. §
  48A-2 (1976
  Replacement
  Vol.)
North Dakota
N.D. Cent. Code §
  14-10-01 (1971
  Replacement
  Vol. Supp. 1977)
Ohio
Ohio Rev. Code
  Ann. § 3109.01
  (Page Supp.
  1977)
Oklahoma ***
Okla. Stat. Ann.
  tit. 15 §§ 11, 13
  (West 1972)
Oregon
Or. Rev. Stat. §
  109.510 (1977
  Replacement
  Vol.)
Pennsylvania
73 Pa. Cons. Stat.
  § 2021 (Purdon
  Supp. 1978)
Rhode Island
R.I. Gen. Laws §
  15-12-1 (Supp.
  1977)
South Carolina
S.C. Const. art.
  17 § 14 (1973,
  amended 1975)
South Dakota
S.D. Codified

§ 14 Infants
  Laws Ann.
  26-1-1 (Revi-
  sion 1976)
Tennessee
Tenn. Code Ann. §
  1-313 (Supp.
  1977)
Texas
Tex. Rev. Civ.
  Stat. Ann. art.
  5923b (Vernon
  Supp. 1978)
Utah
Utah Code Ann. §
  15-2-1 (Supp.
  1977)
Vermont
Vt. Stat. Ann. tit.
  1 § 173 (Supp.
  1978)
Virginia ***
Va. Code §
  1-13-42 (1973
  Replacement
  Vol.)
Washington
Wash. Rev. Code
  § 26.28.015
  (1976)
West Virginia
W. Va. Code §
  2-3-1 (Supp.
  1978)
Wisconsin
Wis. Stat. Ann.
  § 990.01(20)
  (West Supp.
  1978)
Wyoming *
Wyo. Stat. §
  8-3-103 (a) (i)
  & (a) (iv), §
  16-3-101 (1977)
 
Comment c.  On return of property purchased as a condition of the minor's recovery of the purchase price, see 
2 Williston, Contracts § 238 (3d ed. 1959); Annots., 16 A.L.R. 1475 (1922), 36 A.L.R. 782 (1925), 124 A.L.R. 
1368 (1940). On the minor's liability for the use or depreciation of the property involved, see 2 Williston, supra § 
238 and Annot., 12 A.L.R.3d 1174 (1964). Cf. Annot., 44 A.L.R.3d 1417 (1970) (liability of infant's surety).
When capacity problems raised by mental illness, mental defect and intoxication are decided, among the 
factors to be considered are the knowledge of the other party and his good faith reliance on the disabled party's 
apparent capacity.  Traditionally, however the infant's misrepresentation of age and the other party's 
reasonable reliance upon it have not been considered.  It is arguable that rather than this conceptual approach, 
the analysis ought to center more on the fairness of the transaction.  Compare §§ 14 and 16.  It would be 
possible to examine transactions involving minors by the rules of unconscionability and fraud, examining the 
transaction more closely if the minor is very young.  This, however, may be deemed too great a departure from 

§ 14 Infants
the traditional reluctance of courts to review the adequacy of consideration, although, as already noted, that 
appears to be the technique used with mental incapacity and intoxication.  There is also an argument for a rigid 
approach because this avoids a factual issue that may lead to extensive litigation, which in turn may discourage 
minors from assertingtheir incapacity against parties better able to bear litigation costs.  Nonetheless, it seems 
reasonable and above all fair, to consider misrepresentations of age by the minor and the reasonableness of 
reliance on them by the other party.  The younger the minor, the less likely it would be that a court would hold 
the minor estopped by his misrepresentation, since the degree of the minor's social responsibility would be 
smaller and since the other party's reliance would be less justifiable.  This is especially true if eighteen is the 
age of majority.  This approach has been followed in a number of states in various procedural contexts, 
although the majority of states appear to retain the traditional rule of no estoppel.
On false representations of age generally, see 2 Williston, Contracts § 245 (3d ed. 1959); Miller, Fraudulent 
Misrepresentations of Age as Affecting the Infant's Contract -- A Comparative Study, 15 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 73 
(1953); Comment, 7 St. Louis U.L.J. 327 (1963). On estoppel due to misrepresentations of age see the above-
cited authorities; Annot., 29 A.L.R.3d 1270 (1967); Haydocy Pontiac, Inc. v. Lee, 19 Ohio App.2d 217, 250 
N.E.2d 898 (1969); Kan. Stat. Ann. § 38-103 (1973).  Estoppel often turns on the procedural posture of the 
case: is the minor plaintiff or defendant; is the action one at law or in equity?  Authorities are grouped in various 
procedural categories in Annot., 29 A.L.R.3d 1270 (1967), supra.  Many jurisdictions that do not permit the 
infant to be estopped allow the other party to recover damages in tort for the minor's misrepresentation.  See 
Miller, supra, 15 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 73 (1953); Comment, 7 St. Louis U.L.J. 327, 329 (1963). Williston appears to 
support the distinction.  2 Williston, supra, § 245 at 67-68; accord, Prosser, Torts § 134 at 998-1000 (4th ed. 
1971) ("The effect of the decisions refusing to recognize tort liability for misrepresentations [of age by minors] is 
to create a privileged class of liars who are a great trouble to the business world.  These decisions seem to rest 
on a failure to distinguish between a shield and a sword . . . .").  One may question the shield-sword distinction 
and argue that to refuse to permit estoppel by misrepresentation as a reply to the affirmative defense of infancy 
while permitting a tort claim for the same misrepresentation is to exalt form over substance.  This analysis led a 
student commentator to call for the abolition of the minor's tort liability, Comment, 7 St. Louis U.L.J. 327 (1963), 
supra.  It seems more sensible to permit the misrepresentation to be used as well for estoppel purposes, 
especially since estoppel brings into play the usual requirement of good faith and reasonable reliance by the 
other party.  See Annot., 29 A.L.R.2d 1270, supra, at 1277-79.  For a well-stated argument that the fairness of 
the transaction and an expanded use of the unconscionability doctrine can often be more useful than a rigid 
age requirement, see Navin, The Contracts of Minors Viewed from the Perspective of Fair Exchange, 50 N.C.L. 
Rev. 517 (1972). Cf. Green, Proof of Mental Incompetency and the Unexpressed Major Premise, 53 Yale L.J. 
272 (1944).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Infants misrepresentation as to his age as estopping him from disaffirming his voidable transaction.  29 
A.L.R.3d 1270.
Enforceability of covenant not to compete in infant's employment contract.  17 A.L.R.3d 863.
Infant's liability for use or depreciation of subject matter, in action to recover purchase price upon his 
disaffirmance of contract to purchase goods.  12 A.L.R.3d 1174.
Measure of infant's recovery for value of chattel traded for another upon his rescission of the transaction.  52 
A.L.R.2d 1114.
Right of infant who repudiates contract for services to recover thereon or in quantum meruit.  35 A.L.R.2d 1302.

§ 14 Infants
Failure to disaffirm as ratification of infant's executory contract.  5 A.L.R.2d 7.
Rights, duties, and liability of corporation in connection with transfer of stock of infant or incompetent.  3 
A.L.R.2d 881.
Validity, construction, and effect of court's approval of contract for minor's services.  3 A.L.R.2d 702.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Infants 46
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 15
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 2- Formation of 
Contracts -- Parties and Capacity        
§ 15 Mental Illness or Defect
(1)  A person incurs only voidable contractual duties by entering into a transaction if by reason of 
mental illness or defect
(a)  he is unable to understand in a reasonable manner the nature and consequences of the transaction, 
or
(b)  he is unable to act in a reasonable manner in relation to the transaction and the other party has 
reason to know of his condition.
(2)  Where the contract is made on fair terms and the other party is without knowledge of the mental 
illness or defect, the power of avoidance under Subsection (1) terminates to the extent that the contract 
has been so performed in whole or in part or the circumstances have so changed that avoidance would 
be unjust.  In such a case a court may grant relief as justice requires.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  A contract made by a person who is mentally incompetent requires the reconciliation of two 
conflicting policies: the protection of justifiable expectations and of the security of transactions, and the 
protection of persons unable to protect themselves against imposition.  Each policy has sometimes prevailed to 
a greater extent than is stated in this Section.  At one extreme, it has been said that a lunatic has no capacity to 
contract because he has no mind; this view has given way to a better understanding of mental phenomena and 
to the doctrine that contractual obligation depends on manifestation of assent rather than on mental assent.  
See §§ 2, 19.  At the other extreme, it has been asserted that mental incompetency has no effect on a contract 
unless other grounds of avoidance are present, such as fraud, undue influence, or gross inadequacy of 
consideration; it is now widely believed that such a rule gives inadequate protection to the incompetent and his 
family, particularly where the contract is entirely executory.
b.  The standard of competency.  It is now recognized that there is a wide variety of types and degrees of 
mental incompetency.  Among them are congenital deficiencies in intelligence, the mental deterioration of old 
age, the effects of brain damage caused by accident or organic disease, and mental illnesses evidenced by 
such symptoms as delusions, hallucinations, delirium, confusion and depression.  Where no guardian has been 
appointed, there is full contractual capacity in any case unless the mental illness or defect has affected the 
particular transaction: a person may be able to understand almost nothing, or only simple or routine 
transactions, or he may be incompetent only with respect to a particular type of transaction.  Even though 
understanding is complete, he may lack the ability to control his acts in the way that the normal individual can 
and does control them; in such cases the inability makes the contract voidable only if the other party has reason 
to know of his condition.  Where a person has some understanding of a particular transaction which is affected 
by mental illness or defect, the controlling consideration is whether the transaction in its result is one which a 
reasonably competent person might have made.
Illustration:
1.  A, a school teacher, is a member of a retirement plan and has elected a lower monthly benefit in order to 
provide a benefit to her husband if she dies first.  At age 60 she suffers a "nervous breakdown," takes a leave 
of absence, and is treated for cerebral arteriosclerosis.  When the leave expires she applies for retirement, 
revokes her previous election, and elects a larger annuity with no death benefit.  In view of her reduced life 

§ 15 Mental Illness or Defect
expectancy, the change is foolhardy, and there are no other circumstances to explain the change.  She fully 
understands the plan, but by reason of mental illness is unable to make a decision based on the prospect of her 
dying before her husband.  The officers of the plan have reason to know of her condition.  Two months after the 
changed election she dies.  The change of election is voidable.
c.  Proof of incompetency.  Where there has been no previous adjudication of incompetency, the burden of 
proof is on the party asserting incompetency.  Proof of irrational or unintelligent behavior is essential; almost 
any conduct of the person may be relevant, as may lay and expert opinions and prior and subsequent 
adjudications of incompetency.  Age, bodily infirmity or disease, use of alcohol or drugs, and illiteracy may 
bolster other evidence of incompetency.  Other facts have significance when there is mental illness or defect 
but some understanding: absence of independent advice, confidential or fiduciary relationship, undue influence, 
fraud, or secrecy; in such cases the critical fact often is departure from the normal pattern of similar 
transactions, and particularly inadequacy of consideration.
d.  Operative effect of incompetency.  Where no guardian has been appointed, the effect on executory 
contracts of incompetency by reason of mental illness or defect is very much like that of infancy.  Regardless of 
the other party's knowledge or good faith and regardless of the fairness of the terms, the incompetent person 
on regaining full capacity may affirm or disaffirm the contract, or the power to affirm or disaffirm may be 
exercised on his behalf by his guardian or after his death by his personal representative.  There may, however, 
be related obligations imposed by law independently of contract which cannot be disaffirmed.  See Comment f 
to § 12, Comment b to § 14.  And if the other party did not know of the incompetency at the time of contracting 
he cannot be compelled to perform unless the contract is effectively affirmed.
Illustration:
2.  A, an incompetent not under guardianship, contracts to sell land to B, who does not know of the 
incompetency.  A continues to be incompetent.  On discovering the incompetency, B may refuse to perform 
until a guardian is appointed, and if none is appointed within a reasonable time may obtain a decree canceling 
the contract.
e.  Effect of performance.  Where the contract has been performed in whole or in part, avoidance is permitted 
only on equitable terms.  In the traditional action at law, the doing of equity by or on behalf of the incompetent 
was accomplished by a tender before suit, but in equity or under modern merged procedure it is provided for in 
the decree.  Any benefits still retained by the incompetent must be restored or paid for, and restitution must be 
made for any necessaries furnished under the contract.  See Comment f to § 12.  If the other party knew of the 
incompetency at the time of contracting, or if he took unfair advantage of the incompetent, consideration not 
received by the incompetent or dissipated without benefit to him need not be restored.
Illustrations:
3.  A, an incompetent not under guardianship, contracts to buy land for a fair price from B, who does not know 
of the incompetency.  Shortly after transfer of title to A and part payment by A, A dies.  A's personal 
representative may recover A's part payment on reconveying the land to B.
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 3, C, with knowledge of A's incompetency, renders legal 
services to A in the transaction; after learning of A's incompetency, B pays $ 500 to C pursuant to the contract.  
A's personal representative need not reimburse B for the payment.
f.  When avoidance is inequitable.  If the contract is made on fair terms and the other party has no reason to 
know of the incompetency, performance in whole or in part may so change the situation that the parties cannot 
be restored to their previous positions or may otherwise render avoidance inequitable.  The contract then 
ceases to be voidable.  Where the other party, though acting in good faith, had reason to know of the 
incompetency at the time of contracting or performance, or where the equities can be partially adjusted by the 
decree, the court may grant or deny relief as the situation requires.  Factors to be taken into account in such 
cases include not only benefits conferred and received on both sides but also the extent to which avoidance will 
benefit the incompetent and the extent to which others who will benefit from avoidance had opportunities to 
prevent the situation from arising.
Illustrations:
5.  A, an incompetent spouse not under guardianship, mortgages land on fair terms to B, a bank which has no 
knowledge or reason to know of the incompetency, for a loan of $ 2,000.  At A's request the money is paid to 
the other spouse, C, who absconds with it.  The contract is not voidable.

§ 15 Mental Illness or Defect
6.  A, a congenital imbecile not under guardianship, has an interest in unimproved land which is contingent on 
his surviving his father B.  A joins B and C, a cousin, in leasing the land on fair terms for 25 years to D, who has 
no reason to know of the incompetency.  Subsequently A assigns his interest in the rent to C in return for C's 
agreement to support A for life, which C duly performs.  Five years later A joins B and C in an outright sale of 
the land to D.  On B's death avoidance of the sale of A's interest may be equitable if D can be assured 
ofrepayment of the price and of retaining improvements made by him after the sale; avoidance of the lease 
would be inequitable.
7.  A, an incompetent not under guardianship, lives on a homestead with his mother B and brother C.  A also 
holds a mortgage on a second tract of land owned by C.  To prevent foreclosure of a mortgage on the 
homestead, A, B and C join in borrowing money from D on a mortgage of both tracts on fair terms.  D acts in 
good faith but has reason to know of A's incompetency.  A dies, leaving B his sole heir.  The mortgage to D is 
not voidable for the benefit of B.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  See 2 Williston, Contracts §§ 249-56 (3d ed. 1959); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 6 (1963 & 
Supp. 1980); Allen, Ferster & Weihofen, Mental Impairment and Legal Incompetency 263-82 (1968); Brakel & 
Rock, The Mentally Disabled and the Law 304-05, 315-21 (rev. ed. 1971); Madden, Persons and Domestic 
Relations §§ 235-40 (1931); Smoot, Insanity §§ 333-49 (1929); Weihofen, Mental Incompetency to Contract or 
Convey, 39 So. Cal. L. Rev. 211 (1966); Green, Public Policies Underlying the Law of Mental Incompetency, 38 
Mich. L. Rev. 1189 (1940); Green, Proof of Mental Incompetency, 6 Mo. L. Rev. 141 (1941); Green, Proof of 
Mental Incompetency and the Unexpressed Major Premise, 53 Yale L.J. 271 (1944); Green, The Operative 
Effect of Mental Incompetency on Agreements and Wills, 21 Tex. L. Rev. 554 (1943); Virtue, Restitution from 
the Mentally Infirm, 26 N.Y.U.L. Rev. 132, 291 (1951); Comment, 45 N.Y.U.L. Rev. 585 (1970); Note, 16 Wayne 
L. Rev. 1188 (1970); Note, Mental Illness and the Law of Contracts, 57 Mich. L. Rev. 1020 (1959); Annots., 46 
A.L.R. 416 (1927), 95 A.L.R. 1442 (1935). Additional readings through 1974 may be found in Brooks, Law, 
Psychiatry and the Mental Health System 999-1000 (1974).
Comment b.  For a discussion of the types of incompetency and analysis of the authorities indicating that the 
cognitive test has been supplanted by the standard of the fairness of the particular transaction, see Green, 
Proof of Mental Incompetency and the Unexpressed Major Premise, 53 Yale L.J. 271 (1944).
An additional and major distinction has been made between the cognitive test and one which also considers the 
impact of psychosis on judgment and control of behavior even though a party understands the nature of an 
"unwise and foolhardy" transaction.  This "affective" or "motivational" approach is found in Ortelere v. Teachers' 
Retirement Bd., 25 N.Y.2d 196, 303 N.Y.S.2d 362, 250 N.E.2d 460 (1969) (Breitel, J.), 45 N.Y.U.L. Rev. 585 
(1970), 16 Wayne L. Rev. 1188 (1970), upon which Illustration 1 is based, and which relied in substantial part 
on the Tentative Draft of Subsection (1) (b).  A contract entered into during the manic phase of manic-
depressive illness was invalidated without a finding of unfairness in the important case of Faber v. Sweet Style 
Mfg. Corp., 40 Misc. 2d 212, 242 N.Y.S.2d 763 (Sup. Ct. 1963), 39 N.Y.U.L. Rev. 356 (1964). The general 
approach of Faber was approved of by the New York Court of Appeals in Ortelere, but Faber was limited by a 
lower court in Fingerhut v. Kralyn Enterprises, 71 Misc. 2d 846, 337 N.Y.S.2d 394 (Sup. Ct. 1971), aff'd, 40 
A.D.2d 595, 335 N.Y.S.2d 926 (1972), to psychotic mania, in accordance with a dictum in Ortelere limiting relief 
to medically classified psychoses.  This psychosis-neurosis distinction is criticized in Note, 16 Wayne L. Rev. 
1188, 1194-96 (1970), and (implicitly) in Danzig, The Capability Problem in Contract Law 202-03 (1978).
The Faber-Ortelere motivational approach was approved of, and the Tentative Draft of this Section quoted in 
support, in Nohra v. Evans, 509 S.W.2d 648 (Tex. Civ. App. 1974). See also Krasner v. Berk, 366 Mass. 464, 
319 N.E.2d 897 (1974), and Gore v. Gadd, 268 Or. 527, 522 P.2d 212 (1974). The approach is criticized in 
Alexander & Szasz, From Contract to Status Via Psychiatry, 13 Santa Clara Law. 537 (1973), and a California 
court refused to follow Faber, relying, however, on the text of a state statute, which the court interpreted as 
mandating a cognitive approach only.  See Smalley v. Baker, 262 Cal. App.2d 824, 69 Cal. Rptr. 521 (1968). 
Compare discussion of the analogous problem of the criminal law in United States v. Brawner, 471 F.2d 969 
(D.C. Cir. 1972); Model Penal Code § 4.01 and Comment.
Comment c.  A substantial excerpt from the trial in Ortelere v. Teachers' Retirement Bd., supra, is reprinted in 
Danzig, The Capability Problem in Contract Law 161-200 (1978).  Procedural and evidentiary problems in 

§ 15 Mental Illness or Defect
mental incapacity cases are discussed in Note, Mental Illness and the Law of Contracts, 57 Mich. L. Rev. 1020, 
1038-58 (1959).
Comments d-f.  Illustrations 2-7 are new.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Termination of continuing guaranty by appointment of guardian or conservator for guarantor.  55 A.L.R.3d 344.
Commitment of grantor to institution for insane as ground for setting aside conveyance in consideration of 
support.  18 A.L.R.2d 906.
Rights, duties, and liability of corporation in connection with transfer of stock of infant or incompetent.  3 
A.L.R.2d 881.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 92
Mental Health 372
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 16
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 2- Formation of 
Contracts -- Parties and Capacity        
§ 16 Intoxicated Persons
A person incurs only voidable contractual duties by entering into a transaction if the other party has 
reason to know that by reason of intoxication
(a)  he is unable to understand in a reasonable manner the nature and consequences of the transaction, 
or
(b)  he is unable to act in a reasonable manner in relation to the transaction.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Rationale.  Compulsive alcoholism may be a form of mental illness; and when a guardian is appointed for 
the property of a habitual drunkard, his transactions are treated like those of a person under guardianship by 
reason of mental illness.  See §§ 13, 15.  If drunkenness is so extreme as to prevent any manifestation of 
assent, there is no capacity to contract.  See §§ 2, 12, 19.  It would be possible to treat voluntary intoxication as 
a temporary mental disorder in all cases, but voluntary intoxication not accompanied by any other disability has 
been thought less excusable than mental illness.  Compare Model Penal Code § 2.08 and Comment.  Hence a 
contract made by an intoxicated person is enforceable by the other party even though entirely executory, unless 
the other person has reason to know that the intoxicated person lacks capacity.  Elements of overreaching or 
other unfair advantage may be relevant on the issues of competency, of the other party's reason to know, and 
of the appropriate remedy.  Compare Comments c, e and f to § 15.  Use of drugs may raise similar problems.
b.  What contracts are voidable.  The standard of competency in intoxication cases is the same as that in cases 
of mental illness.  If the intoxication is so extreme as to prevent any manifestation of assent, there is no 
contract.  Otherwise the other party is affected only by intoxication of which he has reason to know.  A contract 
made by a person who is so drunk he does not know what he is doing is voidable if the other party has reason 
to know of the intoxication.  Where there is some understanding of the transaction despite intoxication, 
avoidance depends on a showing that the other party induced the drunkenness or that the consideration was 
inadequate or that the transaction departed from the normal pattern of similar transactions; if the particular 
transaction in its result is one which a reasonably competent person might have made, it cannot be avoided 
even though entirely executory.
Illustrations:
1.  A, while in a state of extreme intoxication, signs and mails a written offer on fair terms to B, who has no 
reason to know of the intoxication.  B accepts the offer.  A has no right to avoid the contract.
2.  A is ill and confined to his bed.  B, knowing that the illness is incurable, plies A with intoxicating liquor for a 
week and then purports to treat him by rubbing him with oil.  While intoxicated, A executes by mark a contract 
to sell land to B for a grossly inadequate consideration.  Six days later A dies.  A's heirs may avoid the contract.
3.  A has been drinking heavily.  B, who has also been drinking, meets A, offers to buy A's farm for $ 50,000, a 
fair price, and offers A a drink which A accepts.  In drunken exhilaration A, as a joke, writes out and signs a 
memorandum of agreement to sell, gets his wife to sign it, and delivers it to B, who understands the transaction 
as a serious one.  A's intoxication is no defense to B's suit for specific performance.
c.  Ratification and avoidance.  Where a contract is voidable on the ground of intoxication, the rules as to 
ratification and avoidance are much the same as in cases of misrepresentation.  See Chapter 7.  On becoming 
sober, the intoxicated person must act promptly to disaffirm and must offer to restore consideration received.  

§ 16 Intoxicated Persons
Such an offer may be excused, however, if the consideration has been dissipated during the period of 
drunkenness.
Illustration:
4.  A buys a barber shop from B for $ 650.  Shortly afterward, A, helplessly drunk and evidently not aware of 
what he is doing, sells the shop back to B for $ 200.  On recovering his senses, A cannot remember the 
transaction and cannot find out what happened to the $ 200.  On prompt disaffirmance, A may recover the shop 
without repaying the $ 200.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new.  See 2 Williston, Contracts §§ 258-63 (3d ed. 1959); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 6 (1963 & 
Supp. 1980); Madden, Persons and Domestic Relations § 274 ff. (1931); Annot., 36 A.L.R. 619 (1925); cf. 
Annot., 6 A.L.R. 331 (1920) (deeds).
Comment a.  Because drunkenness has both voluntary and compulsive aspects, the courts have been 
ambivalent toward it as an incapacity defense.  A way of avoiding the problem is to focus on the conduct of the 
other party and the fairness of the contract.  This was the approach taken in Lucy v. Zehmer, 196 Va. 493, 84 
S.E.2d 516 (1954). If one party takes advantage of the other's drunkenness and an unfair contract is entered 
into, a stronger case is made under the fraud, overreaching and unconscionability concepts than under capacity 
concepts, because the critical factor appears to be the conduct of the sober party, rather than the inability of the 
drunkard.  In extreme cases, no manifestation of assent may occur, but otherwise, the problem seems closer to 
that of persons of mild mental retardation or dull normal intelligence where extra protection should be given 
rather than capacity denied.  See 2 Williston, Contracts § 263 (3d ed. 1957); cf. Alexander & Szasz, From 
Contract to Status Via Psychiatry, 13 Santa Clara Law 573, 557-59 (1973).
Comment b.  As to Illustration 1, see 2 Williston, Contracts § 259 (3d ed. 1959); Annot., 36 A.L.R. 619, 633-34 
(1925). Illustration 2 is based on Ealy v. Tolbert, 209 Ga. 575, 74 S.E.2d 867 (1953). Illustration 3 is based on 
Lucy v. Zehmer, 196 Va. 493, 84 S.E.2d 516 (1954); cf.  Christensen v. Larson, 77 N.W.2d 441 (N.D. 1956).
Comment c.  Illustration 4 is based on Van Horn v. Persinger, 202 Mo. App. 236, 215 S.W. 930 (1919); 
compare Thackrah v. Haas, 119 U.S. 499 (1886). In an appropriate case, a court may provide for restitution of 
the consideration on appropriate terms.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Admissibility of oral evidence to show that a writing was a sham agreement not intended to create legal 
relations.  71 A.L.R.2d 382.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 92
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 17
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 1- In General        
§ 17 Requirement of a Bargain
(1)  Except as stated in Subsection (2), the formation of a contract requires a bargain in which there is a 
manifestation of mutual assent to the exchange and a consideration.
(2)  Whether or not there is a bargain a contract may be formed under special rules applicable to formal 
contracts or under the rules stated in §§ 82-94.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Formal contracts.  The types of contracts listed in § 6 are not necessarily subject to the requirements of 
manifestation of assent and consideration.  Where contracts under seal still have their common-law effect, 
neither manifestation of assent by the promisee nor consideration is essential.  See §§ 95, 104(1).  Under 
Uniform Commercial Code § 3-408, a negotiable instrument may be binding without consideration in some 
cases.  Under Uniform Commercial Code §§ 5-105, 5-106, neither manifestation of assent by the customer or 
the beneficiary nor consideration is necessary to the establishment of a letter of credit.
b.  Bargains.  Contracts of types enumerated in § 6 can be used in many of the transactions essential to 
civilized life: e.g., sale or lease of land, goods, or intangible property; the rendering of services for hire; the 
lending of money.  But in modern times less formal contracts are far more important.  The typical contract is a 
bargain, and is binding without regard to form.  The governing principle in the typical case is that bargains are 
enforceable unless some other principle conflicts.  This chapter and the next deal with the two essential 
elements of a bargain: agreement and exchange.
c.  "Meeting of the minds."  The element of agreement is sometimes referred to as a "meeting of the minds." 
The parties to most contracts give actual as well as apparent assent, but it is clear that a mental reservation of 
a party to a bargain does not impair the obligation he purports to undertake.  The phrase used here, therefore, 
is "manifestation of mutual assent," as in the definition of "agreement" in § 3.  See also Comment b to § 2.  
Topics 2-5, §§ 18-70, explain this requirement.
d.  "Sufficient consideration."  The element of exchange is embodied in the concept of consideration.  In some 
cases a promise is not binding for want of consideration, despite the presence of an element of exchange.  
"Consideration" has sometimes been used to refer to the element of exchange, without regard to whether it is 
sufficient to make an informal promise legally binding; the consideration which satisfies the legal requirement 
has then been called "sufficient consideration." As the term "consideration" is used here, however, it refers to 
an element of exchange which is legally sufficient, and the word "sufficient" would therefore be redundant.  The 
requirement of consideration is the subject of §§ 71-81.
Illustration:
1.  A owes B $ 50.  In exchange for A's payment of the debt B makes a promise.  Under the rule stated in § 73, 
B's promise is without consideration.
e.  Informal contract without bargain.  There are numerous atypical cases where informal promises are binding 
though not made as part of a bargain.  In such cases it is often said that there is consideration by virtue of 
reliance on the promise or by virtue of some circumstance, such as a "past consideration," which does not 
involve the element of exchange.  In this Restatement, however, "consideration" is used only to refer to the 
element of exchange, and contracts not involving that element are described as promises binding without 
consideration.  There is no requirement of agreement for such contracts.  They are the subject of §§ 82-94.
REPORTER'S NOTES

§ 17 Requirement of a Bargain
This Section is based on former § 19(b).  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 2, 2A (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts 
§ 10 (1963).
Comment a.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 4, 109, 205, 217 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 5 (1963).
Comment c.  On the history of the "subjective" or "will" theory, and its eventual displacement, see Horwitz, The 
Transformation of American Law 1780-1860, 180-88 (1977); Williston, Mutual Assent in the Formation of 
Informal Contracts, 14 Ill. L. Rev. 85 (1919); Ricketts v. Pennsylvania R.R., 153 F.2d 757, 760 (2d Cir. 1946) 
(Frank, J., concurring); Gilmore, The Death of Contract (1974).  See generally 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 21, 22 
(3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts §§ 9, 107 (1963 & Supp. 1980).  On the origin of the term "meeting of the 
minds," see Farnsworth, "Meaning" in the Law of Contracts, 76 Yale L.J. 939, 943-44 (1967). The classic 
statement of the objective view is that of Learned Hand in Hotchkiss v. National City Bank, 200 F. 287, 293 
(S.D.N.Y. 1911).
Comment d.  Compare the somewhat different approaches in 1 Williston, Contracts § 101 (3d ed. 1957); and 1 
Corbin, Contracts §§ 109, 116-17 (1963).  Illustration 1 is new.
Comment e.  See generally, 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 138-204A (3d ed. 1957); 1A Corbin §§ 171-239 (1963 & 
Supp. 1980).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Construction and application of agreement by medical or social work student to work in particular position or at 
particular location in exchange for financial aid in meeting costs of education.  83 A.L.R.3d 1273.
What constitutes a contract for sale under uniform commercial code § 2-314.  78 A.L.R.3d 696.
Validity and construction of preincorporation agreement between promoters as to future employment.  66 
A.L.R.3d 1138.
Master and servant: Regular payment of bonus to employee, without express contract to do so, as raising 
implication of contract for bonus.  66 A.L.R.3d 1075.
Admissibility of oral evidence to show that a writing was a sham agreement not intended to create legal 
relations.  71 A.L.R.2d 382.
Comment Note. -- Mutuality of remedy as essential to granting of specific performance.  22 A.L.R.2d 508.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 14, 15
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 18
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 2- Manifestation of Assent in General        
§ 18 Manifestation of Mutual Assent
Manifestation of mutual assent to an exchange requires that each party either make a promise or begin 
or render a performance.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Manifestation of assent.  Assent to the formation of an informal contract is operative only to the extent that it 
is manifested.  Compare § 3 and Comment b to § 2.  As to the manifestation of assent by conduct other than 
words, see §§ 4 and 19.  Rules for cases where one party could reasonably draw more than one inference as 
to the intention of another are stated in the following sections, in connection with the scope of contractual 
obligations (see §§ 201, 219), and in connection with mistake (see § 151-58).
b.  Assent by promise or performance.  Where a bargain has been fully performed on one side, there is 
commonly no need to determine the moment of making of the contract or whether the performing party made a 
promise before he performed.  Those issues ordinarily become important only when a dispute arises at an 
earlier stage.  In the typical case such a dispute involves an exchange of promises before any performance 
takes place; there is an offer containing a promise and made binding by an acceptance containing a return 
promise.  Section 50.  The beginning or tender of performance may operate as such a return promise under § 
63.  In less common cases, acceptance may be made by a performance under § 54, and the beginning of 
performance may have an intermediate effect of making the offer irrevocable under § 45.
c.  Sham or jest.  Where all the parties to what would otherwise be a bargain manifest an intention that the 
transaction is not to be taken seriously, there is no such manifestation of assent to the exchange as is required 
by this Section.  In some cases the setting makes it clear that there is no contract, as where a business 
transaction is simulated on a stage during a dramatic performance.  In other cases, there may be doubt as to 
whether there is a joke, or one of the parties may take the joke seriously.  If one party is deceived and has no 
reason to know of the joke the law takes the joker at his word.  Even if the deceived party had reason to know 
of the joke, there may be a claim for fraud or unjust enrichment by virtue of the promise made.  Where the 
parties to a sham transaction intend to deceive third parties, considerations of public policy may sometimes 
preclude a defense of sham.  Cf. Illustration 1 to § 21.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new; compare former § 20.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 22 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 
107 (1963 & Supp. 1980).  The requirement of a voluntary act is dealt with in § 19.  The effect of a 
manifestation of assent when the party does not in fact assent is stated in §§ 19, 20, and subsequent sections.  
Intention to be or not to be legally bound is the subject of § 21.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
What constitutes a contract for sale under uniform commercial code § 2-314.  78 A.L.R.3d 696.
Validity and construction of preincorporation agreement between promoters as to future employment.  66 
A.L.R.3d 1138.

§ 18 Manifestation of Mutual Assent
Variance between offer and acceptance in regard to title as affecting consummation of contract for sale of real 
property.  16 A.L.R.3d 1424.
Person who signs contract but is not named in body thereof as party to contract and liable thereunder.  94 
A.L.R.2d 691.
Validity, construction, and effect of contract between grower of vegetable or fruit crops, and purchasing 
processor, packer, or canner.  87 A.L.R.2d 732.
What constitutes acceptance or ratification of, or acquiescence in, services rendered by attorney so as to raise 
implied promise to pay reasonable value thereof.  78 A.L.R.2d 318.
Conditions printed on confirmation slips as binding on customers of stock or commodity broker.  71 A.L.R.2d 
1089.
Admissibility of oral evidence to show that a writing was a sham agreement not intended to create legal 
relations.  71 A.L.R.2d 382.
Comment Note. -- Mutuality of remedy as essential to granting of specific performance.  22 A.L.R.2d 508.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 14, 15
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 19
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 2- Manifestation of Assent in General        
§ 19 Conduct as Manifestation of Assent
(1)  The manifestation of assent may be made wholly or partly by written or spoken words or by other 
acts or by failure to act.
(2)  The conduct of a party is not effective as a manifestation of his assent unless he intends to engage 
in the conduct and knows or has reason to know that the other party may infer from his conduct that he 
assents.
(3)  The conduct of a party may manifest assent even though he does not in fact assent.  In such cases 
a resulting contract may be voidable because of fraud, duress, mistake, or other invalidating cause.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Conduct other than words.  Words are not the only medium of expression.  Conduct may often convey as 
clearly as words a promise or an assent to a proposed promise.  See Comment a to § 4 and Illustrations.  
Where no particular requirement of form is made by the law a condition of the validity or enforceability of a 
contract, there is no distinction in the effect of the promise whether it is expressed in writing, or orally, or in acts, 
or partly in one of these ways and partly in others.  Purely negative conduct is sometimes, though not usually, a 
sufficient manifestation of assent.  See § 69.
Like words, non-verbal conduct often has different meanings to different people.  Indeed, the meaning of 
conduct not used as a conventional symbol is more uncertain and more dependent on its setting than are 
words.  A wide variety of elements of the total situation may be relevant to the interpretation of such conduct.  
The problem is illustrated in cases of claims against a decedent's estate for services rendered.  In such cases 
the line between a contractual claim based on agreement and a quasi-contractual claim based on unjust 
enrichment is often indistinct; on either basis a major question may be whether the services were rendered 
gratuitously, and the circumstances are often critical.
Illustration:
1.  A lives in B's home and renders services to B over a period of years, and after B's death claims the value of 
the services.  By statute A is incompetent to testify to transactions with B, and there is no evidence of a verbal 
promise.  Among the factors relevant to a determination whether the services were gratuitous are the following: 
a request by B that A render the services, the relation between A and B, the value of the services to B, the 
alternatives foregone and hardship suffered by A, the financial circumstances of the parties, the relation 
between B and his legatees or distributees, and their connection with A's services.
b.  "Reason to know."  A person has reason to know a fact, present or future, if he has information from which a 
person of ordinary intelligence would infer that the fact in question does or will exist.  A person of superior 
intelligence has reason to know a fact if he has information from which a person of his intelligence would draw 
the inference.  There is also reason to know if the inference would be thatthere is such a substantial chance of 
the existence of the fact that, if exercising reasonable care with reference to the matter in question, the person 
would predicate his action upon the assumption of its possible existence.
Reason to know is to be distinguished from knowledge and from "should know." Knowledge means conscious 
belief in the truth of a fact; reason to know need not be conscious.  "Should know" imports a duty to others to 
ascertain facts; thewords " reason to know" are used both where the actor has a duty to another and where he 
would not be acting adequately in the protection of his own interests were he not acting with reference to the 

§ 19 Conduct as Manifestation of Assent
facts which he has reason to know.  See Restatement, Second, Agency § 9; Restatement, Second, Torts § 12; 
Uniform Commercial Code § 1-201(25).
c.  Responsibility for unintended appearance of assent.  A "manifestation" of assent is not a mere appearance; 
the party must in some way be responsible for the appearance.  There must be conduct and a conscious will to 
engage in that conduct.  Thus, when a party is used as a mere mechanical instrument, his apparent assent 
does not affect his contractual relations.  See the rules on duress in §§ 174-77.  This is true even though the 
other party reasonably believes that the assent is genuine.
Similarly, even though the intentional conduct of a party creates an appearance of assent on his part, he is not 
responsible for that appearance unless he knows or has reason to know that his conduct may cause the other 
party to understand that he assents.  In effect there must be either intentional or negligent creation of an 
appearance of assent.  Compare § 20 and the rules on mistake, misrepresentation, duress and undue influence 
in Chapters 6 and 7.  The other party must also manifest assent, but no further change of position on his part is 
necessary to the formation of a bargain.  Change of position may of course be relevant to the existence of a 
power of avoidance, but the law must take account of the fact that in a society largely founded on credit 
bargains will be relied on in subtle ways, difficult or incapable of proof.
Illustrations:
2.  A offers to sell B his library at a stated price, forgetting that his favorite Shakespeare, which he did not intend 
to sell, is in the library.  B accepts the offer.  There is a contract including the Shakespeare, unless B knows or 
has reason to know of A's temporary forgetfulness.  Whether the contract is voidable for mistake depends on 
the rules stated in Chapter 6.
3.  A writes an offer to B, which he encloses in an envelope, addresses and stamps.  Shortly afterwards, he 
decides not to send the offer, but by mistake he deposits it in the mail.  It is delivered to B, who accepts the 
offer.  There is a contract unless B knows or has reason to know of A's error.  Whether the contract is voidable 
for mistake is governed by the rules stated in Chapter 6.
d.  Voidable manifestations distinguished.  Actual mental assent is not essential to the formation of an informal 
contract enforceable as a bargain.  This is made clear by the definitions of "bargain" and "agreement" in terms 
of "manifestation" of mutual assent.  See §§ 3, 17, 18; compare Comment b to § 2.  But the fact that apparent 
assent is not genuine may have legal significance in rendering the contract voidable or unenforceable for 
mistake, misrepresentation, duress, or undue influence.  See Chapters 6 and 7.  In such cases it is often 
necessary to inquire whether the power of avoidance has been exercised with sufficient promptness, or 
whether the other party has so changed his position that avoidance would be inequitable.  Where there is no 
manifestation of mutual assent, on the other hand, the contractual relations of the parties are not affected, and 
such inquiries are unnecessary.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is based on former § 21.  Subsections (2) and (3) are new but are derived in part from former § 
20 and Comment a thereto.  See generally, 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 21-23, (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts 
§ 62 at n.35 (1963).
Comment a.  The distinctions between an actual agreement inferred from the parties' conduct and a quasi-
contract implied as a matter of law to avoid unjust enrichment are nicely made in Baltimore & O. R.R. v. United 
States, 261 U.S. 592 (1923); and Bailey v. West, 105 R.I. 61, 249 A.2d 414 (1969). See also Comment b to § 4.  
Much confusion could be avoided if "imply" were not used when "infer" is meant.  Corbin makes this point in his 
chapter entitled "Interpretation -- The Process Called Implication," 3 Corbin, Contracts, ch. 25 and §§ 534 and 
561 (1960 & Supp. 1980); see also 1 Williston, Contracts § 36A (3d ed. 1957); but even Corbin and Williston 
use the familiar term "implied in fact" for actual contracts inferred from facts.  Perhaps it is too late to abandon 
so common a term, but its use blurs an important distinction.  For an example, see Steva v. Steva, 332 S.W.2d 
924 (Mo. 1960).
The issue of assent partly by conduct and partly by words may come up when negotiations are inconclusive, 
but the parties continue to deal with one another.  See, e.g., Thomson v. United States, 357 F.2d 683 (Ct. Cl. 
1966); and § 22, Comment b.  On inference of assent from conduct, see 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 22A, 36 and 
36A (3d ed. 1957); 3 Corbin, Contracts § 566 (1960).

§ 19 Conduct as Manifestation of Assent
As to disputes over family services, and Illustration 1, see Havighurst, Services in the Home -- A Study of 
Contract Concepts in Domestic Relations, 41 Yale L.J. 386 (1932). See also Marvin v. Marvin, 18 Cal.3d 660, 
134 Cal. Rptr. 815, 557 P.2d 106 (1976); Kay & Amyx, Marvin v. Marvin: Preserving the Options, 65 Calif. L. 
Rev. 937 (1977); Bruch, Property Rights of DeFacto Spouses Including Thoughts on Homemakers' Services, 
10 Fam. L.Q. 101 (1976); Weitzman, Legal Regulation of Marriage: Tradition and Change, 62 Calif. L. Rev. 
1169 (1974).
Comment b.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 35 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 106 (1963 & Supp. 1980); cf. 
3 id. §§ 534-35 (1960 & Supp. 1980).  See also Swanson v. Holmquist, 13 Wash. App. 939, 539 P.2d 104 
(1975).
Comment c.  See Whittier, The Restatement of Contracts and Mutual Assent, 17 Calif. L. Rev. 441, 442 (1929); 
1 Williston, Contracts §§ 35, 66-67A, 94-95A (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts §§ 103-04 (1963 & Supp. 
1980), 3 id. § 599 (1960 & Supp. 1980); cf.  In re Estate of Lyman, 7 Wash. App. 945, 503 P.2d 1127 (1972), 
aff'd on opinion below, 82 Wash. 2d 693, 512 P.2d 1093 (1973). Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 1 to former 
§ 20.  Illustration 3 is based on Illustration 4 to former § 20.  Cf. Sulzbach v. Town of Jefferson, 83 S.D. 156, 
155 N.W.2d 921 (1968). In both Illustration 2 and Illustration 3, the clauses beginning "unless B knows" are 
added in light of Subsection (2) of § 20.
Comment d.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 20 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts §§ 106-07 (1963 & Supp. 
1980), 3 id. §§ 597-98 (1960 & Supp. 1980).  Cf.  Oliver v. Henley, 21 S.W.2d 576, 578 (Tex. Civ. App. 1929).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Knowledge of reward as condition of right thereto.  86 A.L.R.3d 1142.
Construction and application of agreement by medical or social work student to work in particular position or at 
particular location in exchange for financial aid in meeting costs of education.  83 A.L.R.3d 1273.
Master and servant: Regular payment of bonus to employee, without express contract to do so, as raising 
implication of contract for bonus.  66 A.L.R.3d 1075.
What constitutes acceptance or ratification of, or acquiescence in, services rendered by attorney so as to raise 
implied promise to pay reasonable value thereof.  78 A.L.R.2d 318.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 14, 15, 22
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 20
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 2- Manifestation of Assent in General        
§ 20 Effect of Misunderstanding
(1)  There is no manifestation of mutual assent to an exchange if the parties attach materially different 
meanings to their manifestations and
(a)  neither party knows or has reason to know the meaning attached by the other; or
(b)  each party knows or each party has reason to know the meaning attached by the other.
(2)  The manifestations of the parties are operative in accordance with the meaning attached to them by 
one of the parties if
(a)  that party does not know of any different meaning attached by the other, and the other knows the 
meaning attached by the first party; or
(b)  that party has no reason to know of any different meaning attached by the other, and the other has 
reason to know the meaning attached by the first party.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Scope.  Subsection (1) states the implications of the rule of § 19(2) as to the meaning of "manifestation of 
mutual assent" in cases of mistake in the expression of assent.  The subject-matter of this Section is more fully 
treated in Chapter 9 on the scope of contractual obligations.  Rules are stated here only for two-party 
transactions; multi-party transactions are more complex, but are governed by the same principles.  As to the 
meaning of "reason to know," see Comment b to § 19.
b.  The need for interpretation.  The meaning given to words or other conduct depends to a varying extent on 
the context and on the prior experience of the parties.  Almost never are all the connotations of a bargain 
exactly identical for both parties; it is enough that there is a core of common meaning sufficient to determine 
their performances with reasonable certainty or to give a reasonably certain basis for an appropriate legal 
remedy.  See § 33.  But material differences of meaning are a standard cause of contract disputes, and the 
decision of such disputes necessarily requires interpretation of the language and other conduct of the parties in 
the light of the circumstances.
c.  Interpretation and agreement.  There is a problem of interpretation in determining whether a contract has 
been made as well as in determining what obligations a contract imposes.  Where one party makes a precise 
and detailed offer and the other accepts it, or where both parties sign the same written agreement, there may 
be an "integrated" agreement (see § 209) and the problem is then one of interpreting the offer or written 
agreement.  In other cases agreement may be found in a jumble of letters, telegrams, acts and spoken words.  
In either type of case, the parties may have different understandings, intentions and meanings.  Even though 
the parties manifest mutual assent to the same words of agreement, there may be no contract because of a 
material difference of understanding as to the terms of the exchange.  Where there is no integration, the parties 
may also differ as to whether there was an offer of any kind, or whether there was an acceptance.  Rules of 
interpretation governing various situations are stated in Chapter 9 on the scope of contractual obligations; those 
rules are applicable in the determination of what each party "knows or has reason to know."
d.  Error in expression.  The basic principle governing material misunderstanding is stated in Subsection (1): no 
contract is formed if neither party is at fault or if both parties are equally at fault.  Subsection (2) deals with 

§ 20 Effect of Misunderstanding
cases where both parties are not equally at fault.  If one party knows the other's meaning and manifests assent 
intending to insist on a different meaning, he may be guilty of misrepresentation.  Whether or not there is such 
misrepresentation as would give the other party a power of avoidance, there is a contract under Subsection (2) 
(a), and the mere negligence of the other party is immaterial.  See § 166 as to reformation of a written contract 
in such a case.  Under Subsection (2) (b) a party may be bound by a merely negligent manifestation of assent, 
if the other party is not negligent.  The question whether such a contract is voidable for mistake is dealt with in 
§§ 151-58.
Illustrations:
1.  A offers to sell B goods shipped from Bombay ex steamer "Peerless".  B accepts.  There are two steamers 
of the name "Peerless", sailing from Bombay at materially different times.  If both parties intend the same 
Peerless, there is a contract, and it is immaterial whether they know or have reason to know that two ships are 
named Peerless.
2.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A means Peerless No. 1 and B means Peerless No. 2.  
If neither A nor B knows or has reason to know that they mean different ships, or if they both know or if they 
both have reason to know, there is no contract.
3.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, A knows that B means Peerless No. 2 and B does not 
know that there are two ships named Peerless.  There is a contract for the sale of the goods from Peerless No. 
2, and it is immaterial whether B has reason to know that A means Peerless No. 1.  If A makes the contract with 
the undisclosed intention of not performing it, it is voidable by B for misrepresentation (see §§ 159-64).  
Conversely, if B knows that A means Peerless No. 1 and A does not know that there are two ships named 
Peerless, there is a contract for the sale of the goods from Peerless No. 1, and it is immaterial whether A has 
reason to know that B means Peerless No. 2,but the contract may be voidable by A for misrepresentation.
4.  The facts being otherwise as stated in Illustration 1, neither party knows that there are two ships Peerless.  
A has reason to know that B means Peerless No. 2 and B has no reason to know that A means Peerless No. 1.  
There is a contract for the sale of goods from Peerless No. 2.  In the converse case, where B has reason to 
know and A does not, there is a contract for sale from Peerless No. 1.  In either case the question whether the 
contract is voidable for mistake is governed by the rules stated in §§ 151-58.
5.  A says to B, "I offer to sell you my horse for $ 100." B, knowing that A intends to offer to sell his cow for that 
price, not his horse, and that the word "horse" is a slip of the tongue, replies, "I accept." The price is a fair one 
for either the horse or the cow.  There is a contract for the sale of the cow and not of the horse.  If B makes the 
contract with the undisclosed intention of not performing it, it is voidable by A for misrepresentation.  See §§ 
159-64.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 71.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 94-95 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 
104 (1963 & Supp. 1980), 3 id. § 599 (1960 & Supp. 1980); Palmer, The Effect of Misunderstanding on 
Contract Formation and Reformation Under the Restatement of Contracts Second, 65 Mich. L. Rev 33 (1966); 
Young, Equivocation in the Making of Agreements, 64 Colum. L. Rev. 619 (1964). Compare former § 71.
Comments b and c.  See 3 Corbin, Contracts §§ 532-39 (1960 & Supp. 1980).  It is important to distinguish 
between the common problem of interpretation of key terms of a contract and the much less common question 
whether a material difference of understanding has prevented the manifestation of mutual assent necessary to 
create a contract at all.  Compare Iowa-Des Moines Nat'l Bank v. Insurance Co. of North America, 459 F.2d 650 
(8th Cir. 1972), with Oswald v. Allen, 417 F.2d 43 (2d Cir. 1969). See also 3 Corbin § 599 (1960 & Supp. 1980).
Comment d.  Illustrations 1-4 are based on Illustration 1 to former § 71; that Illustration is based on Raffles v. 
Wichelhaus, 2 Hurl. & C. 906, 159 Eng. Rep. 375 (Ex. 1864); see also Kyle v. Kavanagh, 103 Mass. 356 
(1869). Because the Raffles report is notoriously cryptic, the extent of its holding, which appears to be closest 
to Illustration 2, has been much debated.  Some of the commentaries may be found in Holmes, The Common 
Law 242 (1881, Howe ed. 1963); Holmes, The Theory of Legal Interpretation, 12 Harv. L. Rev. 417 (1899); 1 
Williston, Contracts § 95 at 346 n.3 (3d ed. 1957); 3 Corbin, Contracts § 599 (1960 & Supp. 1980); Young, 
Equivocation in the Making of Agreements, 64 Colum. L. Rev. 619 (1964); Gilmore, The Death of Contract 35-
44 (1974).  Many other authorities relating to the subject matter of this Section are cited in the Young article.

§ 20 Effect of Misunderstanding
There has been much debate over the extent of the circumstances in which a mutual misunderstanding should 
prevent the formation of a contract.  Some of the circumstances proposed are: only when the name of a 
particular thing is misunderstood, Holmes, supra, 12 Harv. L. Rev. at 418-19; "roughly speaking," when the 
misunderstanding has its source "in the ambivalence or 'double meaning' [as opposed to the inherent 
vagueness] of an expression," Young, supra, 64 Colum. L. Rev. at 646; and whenever the misunderstood term 
is "vital enough to justify upsetting the entire arrangement," Palmer, supra, 65 Mich. L. Rev. at 57 n.77 
(semble).  See also Gilmore, supra, 123 n.99.  While Young's distinction between ambiguity (or equivocation) 
and vagueness has been criticized as much too sharp by Palmer, and his reading of Raffles as too narrow by 
Gilmore, it is submitted that it states a workable rule, especially if read in light of Young's own disclaimers of a 
bright line between equivocation and vagueness.  If a term is so vague that the court cannot interpret it, the 
court should decide enforceability as an issue of the requirement of reasonable certainty in contracts.  See 
Comment b to this Section and §§ 33 and 34; cf. Palmer, supra, at 57-58.  A contract should be held 
nonexistent under this Section only when the misunderstanding goes to conflicting and irreconcilable meanings 
of a material term that could have either but not both meanings.  In National By-Prods., Inc. v. United States, 
405 F.2d 1256 (Ct. Cl. 1969), the issue was whether a document signed by one party, when read together with 
a separate agreement and oral negotiations, had created an additional contract by the United States to 
construct a levee on the right bank of a creek which later flooded.  The Court of Claims, in finding no additional 
contract, cited the Tentative Drafts of both this Section and § 2, but appears to have decided the question on 
the ground of lack of certainty.
Illustration 5 is based upon Illustration 2 former § 71.  The Comment in former § 71 concluded that there was no 
contract for either the cow or the horse; the conclusion here is based upon Subsection (2), which holds B to his 
knowledge that A means the cow.  This rule is criticized by Palmer, supra, 65 Mich. L. Rev. at 47-56.  If the 
price is excessive for the cow, the court may refuse to enforce the contract against B on grounds analogous to 
those applicable in a suit for reformation.  See Comment a to § 166.
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Variance between offer and acceptance in regard to title as affecting consummation of contract for sale of real 
property.  16 A.L.R.3d 1424.
Admissibility of oral evidence to show that a writing was a sham agreement not intended to create legal 
relations.  71 A.L.R.2d 382.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 93
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 21
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 2- Manifestation of Assent in General        
§ 21 Intention to Be Legally Bound
Neither real nor apparent intention that a promise be legally binding is essential to the formation of a 
contract, but a manifestation of intention that a promise shall not affect legal relations may prevent the 
formation of a contract.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Intent to be legally bound.  Most persons are now aware of the existence of courts and rules oflaw and of the 
fact that some promises are binding.  The parties to a transaction often have a reasonably accurate 
understanding of the applicable law, and an intention to affect legal relations.  Such facts may be important in 
interpreting their manifestations of intention and in determining legal consequences, but they are not essential 
to the formation of a contract.  The parties are often quite mistaken about particular rules of law, but such 
mistakes do not necessarily deprive their acts of legal effect.
Illustrations:
1.  A draws a check for $ 300 payable to B and delivers it to B in return for an old silver watch worth about $ 15.  
Both A and B understand the transaction as a frolic and a banter, but each believes that he would be legally 
bound if the other dishonestly so asserted.  There is no contract.
2.  A orally promises to sell B a book in return for B's promise to pay $ 5.  A and B both think such promises are 
not binding unless in writing.  Nevertheless there is a contract, unless one of them intends not to be legally 
bound and the other knows or has reason to know of that intention.
b.  Agreement not to be legally bound.  Parties to what would otherwise be a bargain and a contract sometimes 
agree that their legal relations are not to be affected.  In the absence of any invalidating cause, such a term is 
respected by the law like any other term, but such an agreement may present difficult questions of 
interpretation: it may mean that no bargain has been reached, or that a particular manifestation of intention is 
not a promise; it may reserve a power to revoke or terminate a promise under certain circumstances but not 
others.  In a written document prepared by one party it may raise a question of misrepresentation or mistake or 
overreaching; to avoid such questions it may be read against the party who prepared it.
The parties to such an agreement may intend to deny legal effect to their subsequent acts.  But where a 
bargain has been fully or partly performed on one side, a failure to perform on the other side may result in 
unjust enrichment, and the term may then be unenforceable as a provision for a penalty or forfeiture.  See §§ 
185, 229, 356.  In other cases the term may be unenforceable as against public policy because it unreasonably 
limits recourse to the courts or as unconscionably limiting the remedies for breach of contract.  See §§ 178-79, 
208; Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-302, 2-719 and Comment 1.
Illustrations:
3.  A, an employer, issues to B, an employee, a "certificate of benefit", promising stated sums increasing yearly, 
payable to a named beneficiary if B dies while still in A's employ.  The certificate provides that it "constitutes no 
contract" and "confers no legal right." The quoted language may be read as reserving a power of revocation 
only until B dies.
4.  A and B, two business corporations, have a contract by which B is the exclusive distributor in a certain 
territory of goods made by A.  By a detailed written agreement they agree to continue the distributorship for 
three years.  The writing provides that it is not to be a legal agreement or subject to legal jurisdiction in the law 
courts.  The written agreement may be read and given effect to terminate the prior contract and to prevent any 

§ 21 Intention to Be Legally Bound
legal duty arising from the making of the agreement or from the acceptance of orders under it; but it does not 
excuse B from paying for goods delivered under it.
c.  Social engagements and domestic arrangements.  In some situations the normal understanding is that no 
legal obligation arises, and some unusual manifestation of intention is necessary to create a contract.  
Traditional examples are social engagements and agreements within a family group.  See §§ 189-91.  Where 
the family relation is not close, valuable services rendered in the home may make binding an express or implied 
promise to pay for the services; but even in such cases it would often be understood that there is no legal 
obligation while the agreement is entirely executory on both sides.  See Comment a to § 19, Comment b to § 
32.
Illustrations:
5.  A invites his friend B to dinner in his home, and B accepts.  There is no contract.  If A promised B a fee for 
attending and entertaining other guests, and B did so, there would be a contract to pay the fee.
6.  A, a husband, is living in harmony with his wife, B.  Before A leaves on a trip, A and B assess B's financial 
needs and agree that A will remit a fixed sum per month to support her.  There is no contract.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is new; compare former § 20.  See 1 Williston, Contracts § 21 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 
34 (1963).
Comment a.  See Sulzbach v. Town of Jefferson, 83 S.D. 156, 155 N.W.2d 921 (1968); Wyoming Farm Bureau 
v. Smith, 259 F. Supp. 870, 873 (D. Mont. 1966), aff'd, 377 F.2d 918 (9th Cir. 1967); Bailey v. West, 105 R.I. 
61, 249 A.2d 414 (1969). The relationship of this Section to §§ 18-20 is illustrated by Sulzbach v. Town of 
Jefferson, supra, in which a third party testified that the defendant said to him: "would I contract [the plaintiffs] 
and ask if they would take care of the work for him." This was held to be a sufficient manifestation of assent to 
constitute an offer that could be (and was) accepted by plaintiffs' performance without notice of acceptance, 
and regardless of whether defendant was "conscious of the legal relationship which [his] words or acts [gave] 
rise to." Illustration 1 is based on Keller v. Holderman, 11 Mich. 248, 83 Am. Dec. 737 (1863); see also 
Kilpatrick Bros. v. International Business Mach. Corp., 464 F.2d 1080 (10th Cir. 1972), and cases there cited.  
Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 20.
Comment b.  Illustration 3 is based on Tilbert v. Eagle Lock Co., 116 Conn. 357, 165 A. 205 (1933); see also 
Mabley & Carew Co. v. Borden, 129 Ohio St. 375, 195 N.E. 697 (1935), 49 Harv. L. Rev. 148 (1935). A 
wellknown case holding that there is no contract is Meyerson v. New Idea Hosiery Co., 217 Ala. 153, 115 So. 
94 (1927); compare Spooner v. Reserve Life Ins. Co., 47 Wash.2d 454, 287 P.2d 735 (1955), involving a claim 
for an annual bonus by a living employee, where the court distinguished cases of death benefits.  Illustration 4 
is based on Rose & Frank Co. v. J. R. Crompton & Bros., [1923] 2 K.B. 261 (C.A.).  As Comment b indicates, 
most of the arguments against enforcing a "not binding" clause are based on unfairness to one party.  This 
argument is especially strong in pension plan disputes, see discussion of Illustration 3; cf.  42 A.L.R.2d 461 
(1955). It is less strong in business transactions involving parties of roughly equal bargaining power, but in one 
such case a court found a duty to bargain in good faith despite language in a letter of intent that "[i]f the parties 
fail to agree . . . they shall be under no obligation to one another." Itek Corp. v. Chicago Aerial Indus., 248 A.2d 
625 (Del. 1968), on remand, 257 A.2d 232 (1969); see Knapp, Enforcing the Contract to Bargain, 44 N.Y.U.L. 
Rev. 673 (1969).
Comment c.  Illustration 6 is based on Balfour v. Balfour, [1919] 2 K.B. 571 (C.A.); contracts within the family 
present problems more of family law than of the law of contracts, and legal attitudes toward matrimonial 
contracts are currently in flux.  See authorities cited in Reporter's Note to § 19, Comment a, and Edmiston, How 
to Write Your Own Marriage Contract, The First MS Reader 91 (1973).  See also Havighurst, Services in the 
Home -- A Study of Contract Concepts in Domestic Relations, 41 Yale L.J. 386, 397-405 (1932).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:

§ 21 Intention to Be Legally Bound
Master and servant: Regular payment of bonus to employee, without express contract to do so, as raising 
implication of contract for bonus.  66 A.L.R.3d 1075.
Contractual waiver of after-acquired homestead exemption.  82 A.L.R.2d 982.
Admissibility of oral evidence to show that a writing was a sham agreement not intended to create legal 
relations.  71 A.L.R.2d 382.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 14, 15
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 22
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 2- Manifestation of Assent in General        
§ 22 Mode of Assent: Offer and Acceptance
(1)  The manifestation of mutual assent to an exchange ordinarily takes the form of an offer or proposal 
by one party followed by an acceptance by the other party or parties.
(2)  A manifestation of mutual assent may be made even though neither offer nor acceptance can be 
identified and even though the moment of formation cannot be determined.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  The usual practice.  Subsection (1) states the usual practice in the making of bargains.  One party ordinarily 
first announces what he will do and what he requires in exchange, and the other then agrees.  Where there are 
more than two parties, the second party to agree may be regarded as accepting the offer made by the first party 
and as making a similar offer to subsequent parties, and so on.  It is theoretically possible for a third person to 
state a suggested contract to the parties and for them to say simultaneously that they assent.  Or two parties 
may sign separate duplicates of the same agreement, each manifesting assent whether the other signs before 
or after him.  Compare Illustration 5 to § 23.
b.  Assent by course of conduct.  Problems of offer and acceptance are important primarily in cases where 
advance commitment serves to shift a risk from one party to the other, as in sales of goods which are subject to 
rapid price fluctuations, in sales of land, and in insurance contracts.  Controversies as to whether and when the 
commitment is made are less likely to be important even in such cases once performance is well under way.  
Offer and acceptance become still less important after there have been repeated occasions for performance by 
one party where the other knows the nature of the performance and has an opportunity for objection to it.  See 
Uniform Commercial Code § 2-208 (1); compare Comment a to § 19.  In such cases it is unnecessary to 
determine the moment of making of the contract, or which party made the offer and which the acceptance.  
Thus, Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-204 and 2-207(3), relating to contracts for the sale of goods, provide that 
conduct by both parties which recognizes the existence of a contract is sufficient to establish it although the 
writings of the parties do not otherwise establish a contract.  The principle has also been applied in non-sales 
contexts.
Illustration:
1.  A, a general contractor preparing a bid on a government construction contract, receives a bid by a proposed 
subcontractor, B, in a given amount.  A names B as a subcontractor in A's bid, but after A receives the 
government contract, A unsuccessfully asks B to reduce its bid, and also unsuccessfully seeks permission from 
the Government to replace B as a subcontractor.
Pursuant to A's instructions, B proceeds with the work, but refuses to accept a work order from A which recites 
that A is still seeking permission to replace B.  No new work order is issued.  A does issue "change orders" 
using B's bid as the base "contract amount." B completes the job, but A refuses to pay the full amount, 
contending that B is entitled only to restitutionary damages because there never was a contract.  There is an 
enforceable contract based upon A's assent to B's bid, as manifested by A's conduct, and B is entitled to the 
amount it bid, as modified by the change orders.
REPORTER'S NOTES
Subsection (1) is based on former § 22.  Subsection (2) is new; see Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-204(2), 2-
207(3) and Comment 2 to § 2-206.

§ 22 Mode of Assent: Offer and Acceptance
Comment a.  See 1 Williston, Contracts, § 23 (3d ed. 1957).  1 Corbin, Contracts § 11 (1963 & Supp. 1980).
Comment b.  See 1 Corbin, Contracts § 31 (1963 & Supp. 1980).  Illustration 1 is based upon United States v. 
O. Frank Heinz Constr. Co., 300 F.Supp. 396 (S.D. Ill. 1969). On the Uniform Commercial Code, see Edwards, 
Contract Formulation Under Article 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code, 61 Marq. L. Rev. 215 (1977).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Private rights and remedies growing out of prize-winning contests.  87 A.L.R.2d 649.
Conditions printed on confirmation slips as binding on customers of stock or commodity broker.  71 A.L.R.2d 
1089.
Admissibility of oral evidence to show that a writing was a sham agreement not intended to create legal 
relations.  71 A.L.R.2d 382.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 16-24
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 23
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 2- Manifestation of Assent in General        
§ 23 Necessity That Manifestations Have Reference to Each Other
It is essential to a bargain that each party manifest assent with reference to the manifestation of the 
other.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Mutuality of assent.  Two manifestations of willingness to make a bargain, though having the same terms, do 
not constitute a bargain unless each is made with reference to the other.  Ordinarily one party, by making an 
offer, assents in advance; the other, upon learning of the offer, assents by accepting it and thereby forms the 
contract.  The offer may be communicated directly or through an agent; but information received by one party 
that another is willing to enter into a bargain is not necessarily an offer.  The test is whether the offer is so made 
as to justify the accepting party in a belief that the offer is made to him.
Illustration:
1.  A advertises in a large New York newspaper that he will pay a specified reward to anyone who will give him 
certain information within one year.  B sees a copy of this advertisement in a Tokyo newspaper, correctly 
translated into Japanese, and sends A the information within the year.  There is a contract.
b.  Unintended appearance of mutual assent.  Either the offeror or the offeree may be bound by an unintended 
appearance of assent created by his intentional conduct.  See § 19.  The mutual reference required by this 
Section is ordinarily intended by both parties to a contract, but if one party believes that there is such reference 
and the other knows that his conduct creates that appearance, the requirement is satisfied.  Similarly, if one 
party believes that there is such reference and has no reason to know that the other has a different 
understanding, the requirement is satisfied if the other has reason to know that his conduct creates the 
unintended appearance.  Section 20.  Thus where an offer is contained in a writing either the offeror or the 
offeree may, without reading the writing, manifest assent to it and bind himself without knowing its terms.  
Again, where goods are sent by a seller as an offer to a buyer, the buyer, without examining them or knowing 
precisely what they are or that a bargain is proposed, can bind himself by accepting the goods.  So in many 
cases usages of business or of local exchanges are annexed as terms to an offer, and an offeror or offeree who 
should be aware of those terms may be bound in accordance with them if he manifests assent.  See §§ 219-23; 
Uniform Commercial Code §§ 1-205, 2-104.
c.  Unknown offers of rewards.  Obligations arising from unintended manifestations of assent by an offeree are 
imposed in order to protect the offeror in justifiable reliance on the offeree's promise.  If the offer clearly 
contemplates no commitment by the offeree, so that no binding return promise can be made and justifiable 
reliance by the offeror is impossible, this reason disappears.  Thus if a general offer of reward to anyone who 
does a certain act or achieves a certain result is treated as contemplating a bargain, the only expectations to be 
fulfilled are those of the offeree, and he may have none unless he knows of the offer.
Such an offer is commonly interpreted as intended to induce action by people who know of the reward.  A 
person who acts without such knowledge is then not within the terms of the offer, even though he intends to 
accept any offer which may be outstanding and thus does not act gratuitously.  Standing offers of rewards 
made by governmental bodies, however, may be regarded as intended to create a climate in which people do 
certain acts in the hope of earning unknown rewards.  Theoretically, an act so done might create a bargain, but 
recovery of the reward can be justified just as well by treating the offer as a promise binding without mutual 
assent or consideration or as creating a non-contractual obligation.
Illustrations:

§ 23 Necessity That Manifestations Have Reference to Each Other
2.  A advertises that he will give a specified reward for certain information, or writes B a similar proposal.  B 
gives the information in ignorance of the advertisement, or without having received the letter.  There is no 
contract enforceable as a bargain.
3.  A city ordinance provides that a standing reward of $ 1000 will be paid for information leading to the arrest 
and conviction of anyone guilty of arson within the city limits.  A furnishes such information.  A is entitled to the 
reward whether or not he knew of the reward or was motivated by hope of reward.
d.  Cross offers.  Cases have occurred in which identical offers have crossed in the mails.  Such an event is 
unusual, and the ordinary offer does not manifest assent to the formation of a contract in this way.  Hence, 
neither offer accepts the other, and there is no contract unless one of the parties accepts the offer he has 
received.  This is a matter of interpretation; theoretically, just as the offeror may assent in advance to an 
acceptance, so each of two offerors could assent in advance to a cross-offer.  Such assent is rare, but it may 
be inferred where both parties think a contract has already been made.  The use of a cross-offer to assist in the 
interpretation of a previous offer should be distinguished.
Illustrations:
4.  A sends B an offer through the mail to sell A's horse for $ 500.  While this offer is in the mail, B, in ignorance 
thereof, mails to A an offer to pay $ 500 for the horse.  There is no contract.
5.  After negotiations through a broker, A writes B a letter purporting to confirm a contract for the sale of cloth.  
A's letter crosses in the mail a similar letter from B, which differs as to quantity and time of payment.  A replies 
insisting on the quantity stated in his first letter but otherwise agreeing; B replies insisting on the time of 
payment stated in his first letter but otherwise agreeing.  The two replies cross in the mail.  There is a contract.
6.  A offers by letter to sell goods to B, stating no definite time limit for acceptance.  B accepts by letter after 
what might or might not be more than a reasonable time.  The acceptance crosses a letter from A stating that 
he has not heard from B and that A's offer will terminate if B does not reply by return mail.  There is a contract.
e.  Acceptance of unknown terms.  An offeree, knowing that an offer has been made to him, need not know all 
its terms.  Knowing that an offer has been made, he can accept without investigation of the exact terms, either 
intentionally or by words or conduct creating an unintended appearance of intention to accept.  The governing 
principles are the same as those for unrecognized offers, explained in Comment b.
Illustration:
7.  A sends to B an offer to sell a specified lot for $ 5,000, also stating terms as to time of payment, mortgage 
security, taxes and insurance.  B is so anxious to buy the lot that, without reading any of these additional terms, 
he sends to A an unconditional acceptance.  There is a contract on the terms stated in A's offer.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is based on former § 23.  See 1 Williston §§ 23, 34, 35 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, Contracts § 59 
(1963 & Supp. 1980); Ferson, The Formation of Simple Contracts, 9 Cornell L.Q. 402, 416-19 (1924).
Comment c.  On Illustration 2, see 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 33, 33A (3d ed. 1957); Gadsden Times v. Doe, 345 
So.2d 1361, 1363-64 (Ala. Civ. App. 1977) (dictum); Sumeral v. Pinder, 83 So.2d 692 (Fla. 1955); Broadnax v. 
Ledbetter, 100 Tex. 375, 99 S.W. 1111 (1907); there is a minority view that does not require knowledge of the 
reward by the claimant at the time the requested services are performed.  See Annot., 53 A.L.R. 542 (1928). 
Illustration 3 is based on Choice v. City of Dallas, 210 S.W. 753 (Tex. Civ. App. 1919). In State v. Malm, 143 
Conn. 462, 123 A.2d 276 (1956), a statute permitted the Governor to offer specific rewards; plaintiff, who 
communicated key information before the reward was announced, was not permitted to recover.  The Malm 
opinion cites authorities both ways on whether rewards offered by government agencies should be analyzed by 
the rules governing contract formation.
Comment d.  Illustration 4 is based on Illustration 2 to former § 23.  Illustration 5 is based on Morris Asinof & 
Sons v. Freudenthal, 195 A.D. 79, 186 N.Y.S. 383 (1921), aff'd mem., 233 N.Y. 564, 135 N.E. 919 (1922). 
Illustration 6 is based on Mactier's Adm'rs v. Frith, 6 Wend. 102, 21 Am. Dec. 262 (N.Y. 1830).
Comment e.  On Illustration 7, see 1 Williston, Contracts § 35 (3d ed. 1957), where the basic rule is stated.  The 
rationale is that the offeree has led the offeror to believe that the offeree assents to the terms of the offer.  
However, many exceptions to the rule exist.  For extensive discussions of the "duty" to read, see Calamari, 
Duty to Read -- A Changing Concept, 43 Ford. L. Rev. 341 (1974); Calamari and Perillo, Contracts, §§ 9-41 to 
9-46 (2d ed. 1977) (based on preceding article); Macaulay, Private Legislation and the Duty to Read -- 

§ 23 Necessity That Manifestations Have Reference to Each Other
Business Run by IBM Machine, the Law of Contracts and Credit Cards, 19 Vand. L. Rev. 1051 (1966). In 
Hohfeldian terms, the "duty" to read is really the absence of a right to be excused because one failed to read 
the terms of an offer.  In assessing the rule, one must balance against the rationale mentioned at the beginning 
of this paragraph considerations of fairness such as the legibility and prominence of the provision, possible 
misrepresentation or overreaching by one party in describing the document to the other and the relative 
bargaining power of the parties.  See §§ 205, 208, and 211.
Even among merchants, courts have refused to enforce "inconspicuous" terms because of lack of "knowing" 
consent, particularly, it would seem, with respect to arbitration clauses.  See, e.g., Windsor Mills v. Collins & 
Aikman Corp., 25 Cal. App.3d 987, 101 Cal. Rptr. 347 (1972) and authorities cited there; contra: Joseph 
Wilmotte & Co. v. Rosenman Bros., 258 N.W.2d 317 (Iowa 1977). It is possible that these decisions are 
attributable to a reluctance to permit the right of access to courts to be waived inadvertently.  This would give 
them less importance as matters of general contract law.  Where a consumer has agreed to a contract of 
adhesion, there is even greater reason to scrutinize the assent allegedly involved.  See § 211(3) and 
Comments.
Cross Reference
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 16-24
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document

Restat 2d of Contracts, § 24
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 3- Formation of 
Contracts -- Mutual Assent          >            Topic 3- Making of Offers        
§ 24 Offer Defined
An offer is the manifestation of willingness to enter into a bargain, so made as to justify another person 
in understanding that his assent to that bargain is invited and will conclude it.
COMMENTS & ILLUSTRATIONS 
Comment:
a.  Offer as promise.  An offer may propose an executed sale or barter rather than a contract, or it may propose 
the exchange of a promise for a performance or an exchange of promises, or it may propose two or more such 
transactions in combination or in the alternative.  In the normal case of an offer of an exchange of promises, or 
in the case of an offer of a promise for an act, the offer itself is a promise, revocable until accepted.  There may 
also be an offer of a performance, to be exchanged either for a return promise (§ 55) or for a return 
performance; in such cases the offer is not necessarily a promise, but there are often warranties or other 
incidental promises.
Illustration:
1.  A says to B, "That book you are holding is yours if you promise to pay me $ 5 for it." This is an offer 
empowering B, by making the requested promise, to make himself owner of the book and thus complete A's 
performance.  In that event there is also an implied warranty of title made by A.  See Uniform Commercial Code 
§§ 2-312, 2-401.
b.  Proposal of contingent gift.  A proposal of a gift is not an offer within the present definition; there must be an 
element of exchange.  Whether or not a proposal is a promise, it is not an offer unless it specifies a promise or 
performance by the offeree as the price or consideration to be given by him.  It is not enough that there is a 
promise performable on a certain contingency.
Illustration:
2.  A promises B $ 100 if B goes to college.  If the circumstances give B reason to know that A is not 
undertaking to pay B to go to college but is promising a gratuity, there is no offer.
c.  Offer as contract.  A promise made by the offeror as part of his offer may itself be a contract.  Such a 
contract is commonly called an "option".  See § 25.
REPORTER'S NOTES
This Section is rewritten from former § 24.  See 1 Williston, Contracts §§ 24-25 (3d ed. 1957); 1 Corbin, 
Contracts § 11 (1963 & Supp. 1980); Murray, Contracts § 24 (1977).  See also Goble, The Non-Promissory 
Offer, 48 Nw. U.L. Rev. 590 (1953).
Comment a.  That the key concept involves giving the addressee the apparent power to conclude a contract 
without further action by the other party, see Maryland Supreme Corp. v. Blake Co., 279 Md. 531, 369 A.2d 
1017 (1977); Coffman Indus. v. Gorman-Taber Co., 521 S.W.2d 763 (Mo. Ct. App. 1975). A proposal of a 
contract made subject to the approval of the proposer's husband was held not an offer in Dillon v. AFBIC Dev. 
Corp., 420 F. Supp. 572 (S.D. Ala. 1976), aff'd in part, reversed in part, 597 F.2d 556 (5th Cir. 1979). In 
Steinberg v. Chicago Medical School, 69 Ill.2d 320, 13 Ill. Dec. 699, 371 N.E.2d 634 (1977), a medical school's 
brochure was held not an offer, but an application for admission was, with the terms of the offer adopted by 
implication from the brochure.  For a close case on the borderline between an offer and an invitation to 
negotiate, see Southworth v. Oliver, 284 Or. 361, 587 P.2d 994 (1978), citing this Section in Tentative Draft.  
See also cases cited in § 26.  Illustration 1 is based on Illustration 1 to former § 24.
Comment b.  Illustration 2 is based on Illustration 3 to former § 24.

§ 24 Offer Defined
Comment c.  For an unsuccessful attempt to turn an offer into an option contract because a seal followed the 
offeror's signature, see Humble Oil & Ref. Co. v. Cox, 207 Va. 197, 148 S.E.2d 756 (1966).
Cross Reference
ALR Annotations:
Tenant's rights under unexercised option to purchase as affected by landlord's breach of lease or lease 
agreement.  12 A.L.R.3d 1128.
Digest System Key Numbers:
Contracts 16
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document