CHAPTER 6
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RESULTING HARM
A. CAUSATION

Where a crime is defined without regard to any result of the defendant's conduct (for example, an attempt), there is no need to face the issue of causation. But where a particular result is a necessary element of the crime, the defen-
dant'’s act or culpable omission must cause the result. And the prosecution must prove that causal link (like any other required element) beyond a reasonable doubt.

Homicide cases are the most frequent source of causation problems. When actors kill the people they meant to kill, in precisely the way they intended, no causation difficulty arises. Nor is there difficulty when an unintended death
occurs in precisely the way that the defendant's risky conduct made likely. But when the intended death occurs in an unintended way or the unintended death occurs in an unlikely way, the law must distinguish variations (between the actual result
and the result intended or risked) that preclude liability from variations that do not preclude liability. The following hypotheticals suggest the scope of the problem.

1. Accused places poison by the bedside of their spouse intending that the spouse drink it. During the night, the spouse dies of a heart attack without having consumed the drink.

2. Same as above, except that the spouse sips the poison and is repelled by the taste; to wash it away, the spouse goes to the bathroom for water, slips, and is fatally injured.

3. Accused shoots at an enemy, intending to kill, but misses. In response, the enemy flees to a relative’s home and boards a train to get there but then is killed in a train wreck.

4. Accused shoots at an enemy, intending to kill. The bullet misses but the enemy dies of fright.

5. While thoroughly intoxicated, accused No. 1 drives a car containing sleeping children at a speed far above the speed limit. The car crashes into the rear of a truck stalled in the middle of the road around a bend; the truck's driver, accused No.
2, had failed to leave the headlights on or otherwise warn approaching cars. The children of accused No. 1 are killed in the crash.

6. Accused viciously hits someone over the head with a blackjack. The victim is taken to a hospital for treatment where (a) due to negligent medical
treatment the victim dies of meningitis, (b) the victim dies of scarlet fever communicated by a nurse, (c) the victim is mortally wounded by a knife-wielding maniac, (d) the victim is decapitated by a maniac, (e) the victim takes a fatal dose of
sleeping pills to end the misery of the injuries from the blow, or (f) the victim suffers an attack of appendicitis and dies as a result.

7. Accused No. 1 throws a live hand grenade into the room of accused No. 2, intending to kill No. 2. The latter throws it out the window; it falls to the crowded street below, exploding and killing several persons.

8. Accused and a co-felon engage in an armed robbery. The co-felon is killed in a shoot-out with the police.

1. Foreseeability and Coincidence

People v. Acosta
Court of Appeal of California, Fourth District
284 Cal. Rptr. 117 (1991)

WaLun, J. Vincent William Acosta appeals his conviction on three counts of second degree murder . . . contending: (1) there was insufficient evidence his conduct was the proximate cause of the deaths; (2) there was insufficient
evidence of malice. . . . At 10 p.m. on March 10, 1987, Officers Salceda and Francis . . . saw Acosta in [a] stolen Nissan Pulsar parked on the street. The officers approached Acosta and identified themselves. Acosta inched the Pulsar forward, then
accelerated rapidly. He led Salceda, Francis and officers from other agencies on a 48-mile chase along numerous surface streets and freeways throughout Orange County. The chase ended near Acosta’s residence in Anaheim.

During the chase, Acosta engaged in some of the most egregious driving tactics imaginable. He ran stop signs and red lights, and drove on the wrong side of streets, causing oncoming traffic to scatter or swerve to avoid colliding with
him... .

Police helicopters from Anaheim, Costa Mesa, Huntington Beach, and Newport Beach assisted in the chase by tracking Acosta. During the early part of the pursuit, the Costa Mesa and Newport Beach craft were used, pinpointing
Acosta’s location with their high beam spotlights. The Costa Mesa helicopter was leading the pursuit, in front of and below the Newport Beach helicopter. As they flew into Newport Beach, the pilots agreed the Newport Beach craft should take the
lead. ...

At the direction of the Costa Mesa pilot, the Newport Beach helicopter moved forward and descended while the Costa Mesa helicopter banked to the right. Shortly after commencing this procedure, the Costa Mesa helicopter, having
terminated radio communication, came up under the Newport Beach helicopter from the right rear and collided with it. Both helicopters fell to the ground. Three occupants in the Costa Mesa helicopter died as a result of the crash.

Menzies Turner, a retired Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) investigator, testified as an expert and concluded the accident occurred because the Costa Mesa helicopter, the faster of the two aircraft, made a 360-degree turn and
closed too rapidly on the Newport Beach helicopter. He opined the Costa Mesa helicopter’s

p. 568

p. 569
pilot violated an FAA regulation prohibiting careless and reckless operation of an aircraft by failing to properly clear the area, not maintaining communication with the Newport Beach helicopter, failing to keep the other aircraft in view at all times,
and not changing his altitude. He also testified the Costa Mesa pilot violated another FAA regulation prohibiting operation of one aircraft so close to another as to create a collision hazard.

Turner could not think of any reason for the Costa Mesa helicopter’s erratic movement. The maneuver was not a difficult one, and was not affected by the ground activity at the time. He had never heard of a midair collision between two
police helicopters involved in tracking a ground pursuit, and had never investigated a midair collision involving helicopters.° . . .

Acosta claims there was insufficient evidence . . . that he proximately caused the deaths of the victims. [He] argues that although a collision between ground vehicles was a foreseeable result of his conduct, one between airborne
helicopters was not, noting his expert had never heard of a similar incident. He also contends the Costa Mesa helicopter pilot’s violation of FAA regulations was a superseding cause. Because the deaths here were unusual, to say the least, the
issue deserves special scrutiny... .

“Proximate cause” is the term historically used® to separate those results for which an actor will be held responsible from those not carrying such responsibility. The term is, in a sense, artificial, serving matters of policy surrounding
tort and criminal law and based partly on expediency and partly on concerns of fairness and justice. Because such concerns are sometimes more a matter of “common sense” than pure logic, the line of demarcation is flexible, and attempts to lay
down uniform tests which apply evenly in alll situations have failed. That does not mean general guidelines and approaches to analysis cannot be constructed.

The threshold question in examining causation is whether the defendant's act was an “actual cause” of the victim’s injury. It is a sine qua non test: But for the defendant's act would the injury have occurred? Unless an act is an actual
cause of the injury, it will not be considered a proximate cause.

[The court then reviewed the various tests used by courts to determine “proximate” cause and concluded that in this case, the issue was whether the death of the helicopter pilots was foreseeable]

Prosser and Keeton, in an in-depth discussion of the dynamics of foresight, conclude that although it is desirable to exclude extremely remarkable and unusual results from the purview of proximate cause, it is virtually impossible to
express a logical verbal formula which will produce uniform results. (Prosser & Keeton, [Torts] 300 [(Sth ed. 1984)],) | agree. The standard should be simply stated, exclude extraordinary results, and allow the trier of fact to determine the issue on
the particular facts of the case using “the common sense of the common man as to common things.” As with other ultimate issues, appellate courts must review that determination, giving due deference to the trier of fact. The “highly extraordinary

p.569
p.570
result” standard serves that purpose. It is consistent with the definition of foreseeability used in California. It does not involve the defendant's state of mind, but focuses upon the objective conditions present when he acts.!2.. .

Here, but for Acosta’s conduct of fleeing the police, the helicopters would never have been in position for the crash. . . .

The result was not highly extraordinary. Although a two-helicopter collision was unknown to expert witness Tumer and no reported cases describe one, it was “a possible consequence which reasonably might have been contem-
plated.” Given the emotional dynamics of any police pursuit, there is an “appreciable probability” that one of the pursuers, in the heat of the chase, may act negligently or recklessly to catch the quarry. That no pursuits have ever before resulted in
ahelicopter crash or midair collision is more a comment on police flying skill and technology than upon the innate probabilities involved. . . . Given these circumstances, a finding of proximate cause is appropriate. . .

[On the other issue in the case — mens rea — the court found insufficient proof of the malice required for a murder conviction, because the evidence did not show that Acosta consciously disregarded the risk to the helicopter pilots: “In
the absence of more evidence, no reasonable juror could find a conscious disregard for a risk which is barely objectively cognizable.”]

The judgment is reversed. . ..

Crosay, J... . Whether the defendant may be held criminally culpable for the tragic deaths in this case is the key issue before us. Justice Wallin says yes, but not for murder. . . | disagree . . . because the law does not assign blame to
an otherwise blameworthy actor when neither the intervening negligent conduct nor the risk of harm was foreseeable.

Or, as Justice Cardozo put it,

We are told that one who drives at reckless speed through a crowded city street is guilty of a negligent act and, therefore, of a wrongful one irrespective of the consequences. Negligent the act is, and wrongful in the

sense that it is unsocial, but wrongful and unsocial in relation to other travelers, only because the eye of vigilance perceives the risk of damage. . . . [Rlisk imports relation; it is risk to another or to others within the range of

apprehension.

(Palsgraf v. Long Island R. Co. (1928) 248 N.Y. 339.) The occupants of these helicopters were surely not “within the range of apprehension” of a fleeing criminal on the ground.

To be sure, defendant represented a threat to everyone traveling the same roads and would have been responsible for any injury directly or indirectly caused by his actions in those environs; but to extend that responsibility to persons
in the air, whose role was merely to observe his movements, a simple enough task in far speedier helicopters, defies common sense. . . . They were not in the zone of danger

p.570

pert
in this case by any stretch of the imagination, and the manner and circumstances of the collision could hardly have reasonably been foreseen. . . . Although less remote than a dispatcher suffering a coronary, perhaps, this was a “highly extraordi-
nary result” by any measure and, properly viewed, beyond the long arm of the criminal law. ..

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. QUESTIONS: (a) On the mens rea issue, the court holds that the risk of a helicopter crash was “barely objectively cognizable.” If that is so, how can the court find that this risk was sufficiently foreseeable to support a finding of
proximate causation?

() If Acosta caused the crash but was not guilty of murder, what crime did he commit? Since the court holds that the risk to the helicopter pilots was “barely objectively cognizable,” was his mens rea sufficient to support a conviction
for involuntary manslaughter?

2. People v. Brady, 29 Cal. Rptr. 3d 286 (Ct. App. 2005), involved the mid-air collision of two firefighting planes that were attempting to extinguish a fire in a remote wooded area. Defendant had recklessly started the fire, which quickly
spread to his clandestine methamphetamine lab nearby, setting off an intense blaze. When fire control aircraft arrived on the scene, one pilot deviated from the customary flight pattern, approached from the wrong direction, and crashed into an-
other plane, killing himself and the other pilot. Defendant was convicted of causing both deaths. The appellate court upheld the jury's finding that the deaths were reasonably foreseeable, in part because — given the location of the fire — an effort
to control it was bound to require a number of aircraft flying at low altitude. Was there a comparable degree of foreseeability in Acosta? If not, was the helicopter crash in Acosta nonetheless sufficiently foreseeable? What criteria determine when
the likelihood of a given outcome is too remote?

3. People v. Skiff, 59 Cal. App. 5th 571, 581 (Ct. App. 2021), dealt with a situation of lax supervision of an elderly care facility. The chief administrator of the facility permitted one of its residents to wander around the grounds unsuper-
vised, despite increasing evidence that the patient had dementia. On a December afternoon in 2014, the resident managed to exit the facility and run through traffic. Though the first several cars were able to avoid him, once night fell the visibility
worsened, and a driver eventually struck and killed the resident. A jury convicted the administrator of involuntary manslaughter, and the appellate court upheld the conviction because “the fatal traffic collision was a foreseeable consequence of
allowing a resident with dementia to run on public streets and highways without supervision. The failure to supervise . . . ‘set[] in motion a chain of events’ that culminated in his running in front of a moving car. This outcome was tragic but neither
‘extraordinary’ nor ‘abnormal.”” Is the result in Skiff sufficiently foreseeable? Does it depend on how close the facility was to traffic? What if the patient had not been struck by a car but by a drone that fell on him after he left the facility?

4. In People v. Ryan, 77 N.Y.S.3d 411 (App. Div. 2018), the defendant Ryan drunkenly swerved through traffic on an expressway. After sideswiping one car, cutting off several others, and getting into a second collision, the car spun to a
stop in

pert

p.572
the high-occupancy vehicle lane on the left side of the expressway. A police officer arrived on the scene, and several other cars stopped on the right side of the road to offer assistance to the defendant. As the officer was talking with Ryan on the
left side of the road, another driver drove past the scene, while looking at cars (including the police officer's car) that were parked on the right side of the road. As a result, the other driver struck the police officer, and the officer died from his injuries
shortly thereafter. The New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division, upheld the trial court's finding that Ryan's dangerous driving set in motion the subsequent events that caused the officer’s death, ruling that “[i]t was reasonably foreseeable that
[Ryan]'s conduct, including driving while intoxicated, causing the initial collision, failing to stop after the initial collision, and causing a second collision, would cause a dangerous condition on the roadway that would pose a danger to police or other
first responders, particularly in the immediate aftermath of the incidents and prior to the securing of the accident scene.”

Do you agree that the officer's death was a reasonably foreseeable result of Ryan’s dangerous driving? What result if the driver of the other car was texting and distracted when driving past the scene?

NOTES ON “FACTUAL” AND “PROXIMATE” CAUSE

The causation requirement has two components: The defendant's wrongful act must be both the factual cause and the proximate cause of the relevant harm. Factual cause, sometimes called the “but-for” or “sine qua non” require-
ment, is straightforward; it simply means that the harm would not have occurred in the absence of the defendant's act. Proximate cause is more complicated; the act, in addition to being a but-for cause, must have a close relationship to the
resulting harm. But how close is close enough? The answers are elusive. As the Supreme Court has explained (Paroline v. United States, 572 U.S. 434, 444-445 (2014)): “[PJroximate cause, as distinct from actual cause or cause in fact, defies easy

summary. It is a flexible concept, . . . often explicated in terms of foreseeability or the scope of the risk created by the predicate conduct. A requirement of proximate cause thus serves, inter alia, to preclude liability in situations where the causal
link between conduct and result is so attenuated that the consequence is more aptly described as mere fortuity.”

Most causation problems present only this second set of issues. Note, for example, the eight hypotheticals presented at the outset of this section, pp. 567-568 supra. Nearly all of them easily meet the factual cause requirement. (Which
of them does not?) Similarly in Acosta, only the second set of issues is debatable; there is no doubt that, as the court states, “but for Acosta’s conduct . . . , the helicopters would never have been in position for the crash.”

By comparison to the elusive concept of proximate cause, factual causation seems an uncontroversial requirement. Suppose, for example, that one of the pilots pursuing Acosta had a heart attack and died, not because of the stress
of the events

p.s72

p.578
but solely because of a blood clot that would have produced fatal results at that moment no matter what the pilot was doing. In such a case, there is no reason to hold Acosta responsible for the death; indeed statutes and case law typically treat
factual causation as an invariable prerequisite to liability. See, e.g., MPC §2.03(1)(a).

Would it ever make sense to treat conduct as a legal cause even though it is not a factual cause? Consider these cases:

1. State v. Montoya, 61 P.3d 793 (N.M. 2002). A private bodyguard shot and severely wounded Lowery. Montoya, one of the shooter's associates, then drove the victim to a secluded location and left him there to die. Montoya was
convicted of murder on the theory that he had caused the death by preventing Lowery from getting help. The testimony, however, established only that immediate medical attention “could have” saved Lowery’s life. Should the conviction be up-
held on appeal? Since a necessary element of a murder case is proof that the defendant's conduct caused death, the prosecution had to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that, but for Montoya’s actions, Lowery would have survived. The evidence
could not support that conclusion, and the appellate court reversed the conviction. But does it make sense for Montoya — who wanted Lowery to die — to escape a murder conviction simply by showing that his victim might have died anyway?

2. State v. Muro, 695 N.W.2d 425 (Neb. 2005). The defendant came home to discover that her husband had beaten their daughter, fracturing her skull. She waited four hours before summoning medical attention, and the daughter
died later that night. The Nebraska Supreme Court held that because the state had proved “only the possibility of survival with earlier treatment,” it had failed to prove but-for causation beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. at 432. Note the clash
between the requirements of mens rea and those of causation. If early treatment would have given the child a 90 percent chance of survival, the mother's failure to summon help would show a high level of culpability — extreme recklessness or
negligence. But the same probability (a 90 percent chance of survival) would defeat causation, because of the 10 percent chance that the child would have died just as quickly anyway. For criticism of courts’ insistence on proof of but-for causation
in cases where the defendant deprives the victim of a chance of survival, see Eric A. Johnson, Criminal Liability for Loss of a Chance, 91 lowa L. Rev. 59 (2005).

3. Burrage v. United States, 571 U.S. 204 (2014). A federal statute imposes a 20-year mandatory minimum sentence on a defendant who unlawfully distributes a controlled substance, when “death or serious bodily injury results.”
Joshua Banka died following an extended drug binge. Drugs present in his system at the time of death included heroin metabolites, codeine, alprazolam, clonazepam metabolites, and oxycodone. Experts testified that heroin supplied by the
defendant “was a contributing factor” in Banka’s death, since it interacted with the other drugs to stop Banka’s breathing. If Banka had not taken the heroin, his death would still have been possible but much less likely. The jury convicted on the
mandatory minimum count, after being instructed that to do so it would have to find that the heroin was a “contributing cause of Banka’s death.” The Supreme Court reversed the conviction, holding that the statute's “results” element reflected the
traditional requirement of but-for causation, which was not satisfied on these facts. The prosecution, noting that “at least 46 percent of overdose deaths in 2010 involved more than one drug” argued that strict but-for causation should not be re-
quired, so long as a drug

p.878
p.574
distributed by the defendant was a “substantial” or “contributing” factor in producing the result. Rejecting that approach, the Court explained (id. at 215-219):
Several state courts have adopted such a rule, but the American Law Institute declined to do so in its Model Penal Code [§2.03(1)(a)]. . . . Especially in the interpretation of a criminal statute subject to the rule of lenity, we
cannot give the text a meaning that is different from its ordinary, accepted meaning, and that disfavors the defendant. . . . We doubt that the requirement of but-for causation for this incremental punishment will prove a policy

disaster. . .. Indeed, it is more likely the Government's proposal that “cannot be reconciled with sound policy,” given the need for clarity and certainty in the criminal law. . . . Unsurprisingly, [the Government] could not specify

how important or how substantial a cause must be to qualify. . . . Is it sufficient that use of a drug made the victim's death 50 percent more likely? Fifteen percent? Five? . . . Uncertainty of that kind cannot be squared with

the beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard applicable in criminal trials or with the need to express criminal laws in terms ordinary persons can comprehend. . . . We hold that, at least where use of the drug distributed by the

defendant is not an independently sufficient cause of the victim's death or serious bodily injury, a defendant cannot be liable under the penalty enhancement provision . . . unless such use is a but-for cause of the death or

injury.

QUESTIONS: Does Burrage's insistence on a strict but-for connection bring reasonable certainty to the causation analysis? For a critique of Burrage's strict but-for requirement and an endorsement of state courts that have created exceptions
to it when the defendant's conduct accelerates “even by a moment” the fruition of the harm and when the defendant “contributes” to the cause of the harm, see Eric A. Johnson, Cause-in-Fact After Burrage v. United States, 68 Fla. L. Rev. 1727,
1729-1730 (2016). Note that even if Burrage’s approach to but-for causation brings clarity to that prong of causation, liability will also require a defendant's conduct to be the proximate cause of the resulting harm. Is that requirement clear and pre-
dictable? Consider the material that follows.
People v. Arzon

‘Supreme Court, New York County

92 Misc. 2d 739, 401 N.Y.S.2d 156 (1978)

Mitonas, J. The defendant was indicted on September 28, 1977 for two counts of murder in the second degree and arson in the third degree after he allegedly intentionally set fire to a couch, thus causing a serious fire on the fifth floor
of an abandoned building at 358 East 8th Street in New York County. The New York City Fire Department, in responding to the conflagration, arrived to find the rear portion of the fifth and sixth floors burning. The firemen attempted to bring the sit-
uation under control, but making no progress and there being no additional assistance available, they decided to withdraw from the building.

p.574
p.576
At that point, they were suddenly enveloped by a dense smoke, which was later discovered to have arisen from another independent fire that had broken out on the second floor.

Although this fire was also determined to have originated in arson, there is virtually no evidence implicating the defendant in its responsibility. However, the combination of the thick smoke and the fifth floor fire made evacuation from the
premises extremely hazardous, and, in the process, Fireman Martin Celic sustained injuries from which he subsequently died. Accordingly, the defendant was accused [in the first count] of murder in the second degree for having, “Under circum-
stances evincing a depraved indifference to human life, recklessly engaged in conduct which created a grave risk of death to another person,” thereby causing the death of Martin Celic, and alternatively, in the second count] with felony murder.
The third charge of the indictment, arson, is not at issue for purposes of the instant application.

Itis the defendant's contention that the evidence before the grand jury is insufficient to support the first two counts. He argues that . . . murder requires a causal link between the underlying crime and the death, a connection which, in
the defendant's view, is here lacking.

[In] People v. Kibbe, 321 N.E.2d 773 (N.Y. 1974), the Court of Appeals affirmed the [murder] conviction of defendants who had abandoned their helplessly intoxicated robbery victim by the side of a dark road in subfreezing temperature,
one-half mile from the nearest structure, without shoes or eyeglasses, with his trousers at his ankles, his shirt pulled up and his outer clothing removed. The court held that while the deceased was actually killed by a passing truck, the defendants’
conduct was a sufficiently direct cause of the ensuing death to warrant criminal liability and that “it is not necessary that the ultimate harm be intended by the actor. It will suffice if it can be said beyond a reasonable doubt, as indeed it can here be
said, that the ultimate harm is something which should have been foreseen as being reasonably related to the acts of the accused.”

Clearly, an obscure or merely probable connection between the defendant's conduct and another person's death is not enough to support a charge of homicide. People v. Stewart, [358 N.E.2d 487 (N.Y. 1976)]. In Stewart, the victim had
been operated upon for a stab wound in the stomach inflicted by the defendant. Afterwards, the surgeon performed an entirely unrelated hernia procedure on him, and he died. According to the court, “the prosecutor must, at least, prove that the

defendant's conduct was an actual cause of death, in the sense that it forged a link in the chain of causes which actually brought about the death. . . .” In this instance, the possibility that death resulted from a factor not attributable to the defen-
dant could not be ruled out beyond a reasonable doubt, since the patient would, in all likelihood, have survived except for the hernia operation. . ..

[The defendant's conduct need not be the sole and exclusive factor in the victim's death. In the standard established by People v. Kibbe, supra, and People v. Stewart, supra, an individual is criminally liable if his conduct was a suffi-
ciently direct cause of the death, and the ultimate harm is something which should have been foreseen as being reasonably related to his acts. It is irrelevant that, in this instance, the fire which had erupted on the second floor intervened, thus

p.576

p.576
contributing to the conditions that culminated in the death of Fireman Celic. In Kibbe, the victim was killed when he was struck by a truck. This did not relieve the defendants in that case from criminal responsibility for his murder, as it does not
absolve the defendant here. Certainly, it was foreseeable that firemen would respond to the situation, thus exposing them, along with the persons already present in the vicinity, to a life-threatening danger. The fire set by the defendant was an
indispensable link in the chain of events that resulted in the death. It continued to burn out of control, greatly adding to the problem of evacuating the building by blocking off one of the access routes. At the very least, the defendant's act, as was
the case in Kibbe, placed the deceased in a position where he was particularly vulnerable to the separate and independent force, in this instance, the fire on the second floor.

Consequently, the defendant's motion to dismiss the [murder counts] of the indictment is denied.

PEOPLE v. WARNER-LAMBERT CO., 414 N.E.2d 660 (NY. 1980): [Defendant corporation and several of its officers and employees were indicted for second-degree manslaughter (N.Y. Penal Law §125.15, p. 467 supra) and criminally negligent homi-
cide (N.Y. Penal Law §125.10, p. 467 supra). Several of the corporation's employees were killed and many more were injured in a massive explosion at one of its chewing-gum factories. Evidence before the grand jury showed that the corporation
used magnesium stearate (MS), a potentially explosive substance, in its manufacturing process; that defendants had been warmed by their insurance carrier that the high concentrations of MS dust created an explosion hazard; and that the hazard
had not been eliminated by the time of the accident. On the issue of what triggered the explosion, there was no hard proof; experts speculated that it could have been caused by sparking in the machinery or by a concentration of MS igniting under
the impact of a moving metal part. The court held the evidence before the grand jury insufficient to establish the foreseeability of the immediate, triggering cause of the explosion and therefore dismissed the indictment. The court stated:]

Ithas been the position of the People that but-for causation is all that is required for the imposition of criminal liability. [T]heir submission, reduced to its simplest form, [is] that there was evidence of a foreseeable and indeed foreseen
risk of explosion of MS dust and that in consequence of defendants’ failure to remove the dust a fatal explosion occurred. The chain of physical events by which the explosion was set off, i., its particular cause, is to them a matter of total indiffer-
ence. [T]he People contended that liability could be imposed if the cause of the explosion were the lighting of a match by an uninvited intruder or the striking of a bolt of lightning. In effect they would hold defendants to the status of guarantors until
the ambient dust was removed. It thus appears that the People would invoke an expanded application of proximate cause principles lifted from the civil law of torts.

We have rejected the application of any such sweeping theory of culpability under our criminal law. . . . [In People v. Kibbe (discussed in the Arzon case, supra)] the critical issue was whether the defendants should be held criminally
liable for murder when the particular cause of death was vehicular impact rather than freezing. Under the theory now advanced by the People it would have been irrelevant

p.576

p.si7
that death had been the consequence of one particular chain of causation rather than another; it would have been enough that the defendants exposed their victim to the risk of death and that he died. That, of course, was not the analysis of
culpability that we adopted. [W]e held that . . . “the defendants’ actions must be a sufficiently direct cause of the ensuing death before there can be any imposition of criminal liability, and recognize[d], of course, that this standard is greater than
that required [for] tort liability.” Thus, we were concered for the nature of the chain of particularized events which in fact led to the victim's death; it was not enough that death had occurred as the result of the defendants’ abandonment of their
helpless victim. To analogize the factual situation in the case now before us to that in Kibbe it might be hypothesized that the abandoned victim in Kibbe instead of being either frozen to death or killed when struck by a passing motor vehicle was
killed when struck by an airplane making an emergency landing on the highway or when hit by a stray bullet from a hunter's rifle — occasions of death not reasonably to have been foreseen when the defendants abandoned their victim.
NOTES ON FORESEEABILITY AND RISK

1, Statutory standards. Most state codes include no explicit rules for determining causation. In these jurisdictions, the courts are left to decide the question on the basis of evolving common-law principles. MPC §2.03 seeks to
articulate an appropriate standard, and roughly a dozen states have adopted causation provisions based on it. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.03 at 264-265 (1985). Does the MPC standard clarify the issues? What re-
sult would it produce in Acosta, Arzon, and Warner-Lambert?

2. The specific causal mechanism. Is Warner-Lambert sound in requiring that the defendant reasonably foresee the specific triggering cause of the explosion? In recent decisions, the New York courts have limited the “specific-
causal-mechanism” requirement to contexts that involve “a commercial or manufacturing process.” For example, the New York Court of Appeals held it inapplicable to a physician running a “pill mill” who was accused of prescribing unnecessarily
high amounts of opioids to patients who shortly thereafter died of an overdose. People v. Li, 140 N.E.3d 965 (N.Y. 2019). Warner-Lambert was also deemed inapplicable when a fire led to fatalities in a residential setting. See People v. Rios, 907
N.Y.S.2d 440 n.9 (Sup. Ct. 2010). Do you agree Warner-Lambert should be limited in this way? If so, was Warner-Lambert itself correctly decided? If the specific-causal-mechanism requirement is sound, shouldn't it apply in residential situations
and when it involves physical services as well as those involving commercial or manufacturing processes? If we can’t determine how a fire started, should the person who creates a hazardous condition be liable anyway, because it is plausible to
assume that the fatal spark was produced in some ordinary way? Or should that person escape liability, because the prosecution has not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the fatal spark was not produced in some bizarre, unforeseeable
way?

3. Questioning the foreseeability test. Professor Michael Moore argues that the concept of foreseeabilty is inherently manipulable, because “there are many equally accurate ways to describe any particular [harm-causing event,”
and thus

p.si7
nnn 878
conclusions about foreseeability inevitably depend on the level of generality at which we choose to describe what occurred.? If Professor Moore is right, how should causation issues be decided?

An alternative approach would focus less on the degree of foreseeability or risk than on the relationship between the defendant's conduct and that risk. Consider United States v. Hatfield, 591 F.3d 945, 948-949 (7th Cir. 2010) (Posner,
J):

Suppose a defendant sells an illegal drug to a person who, not wanting to be seen ingesting it, takes it into his bathroom, and while he is there the bathroom ceiling collapses and kills him. Had he not ingested the drug, he

would not have been killed. But it would be strange to think that the seller of the drug was punishable [for that death]. “Cause” in law [ordinarily is] the name we attach to a but-for cause . . . that we're particularly interested

in, often because we want to eliminate it. We want to eliminate arson, but we don’t want to eliminate oxygen, so we call arson the cause of a fire set for an improper purpose rather than calling the presence of oxygen in the

atmosphere the cause, though it is a but-for cause just as the arsonist’s setting the fire is. We say that the cause of the death of the drug taker in the bathroom was the improper design or construction of the ceiling rather

than the sale of the drug. The reason is that the sale of the drug . . . did not increase the risk that this sort of mishap would occur. Punishing a drug seller does not reduce building accidents. Punishing him more severely be-

cause of the buyer's death in the bathroom would not cause drug dealers to take care to prevent their sales of drugs from leading by so indirect a route to the death of a buyer.

QUESTIONS: Does this approach help clarify the analysis? What result would it produce in Acosta, Arzon, and Warner-Lambert? For helpful discussion of the “scope of risk” approach, see Eric A. Johnson, Wrongful-Aspect Overdetermination:
The Scope-of-the-Risk Requirement in Drunk-Driving Homicide, 46 Conn. L. Rev. 601 (2013).

4, The vulnerable victim. In People v. Stamp, p. 534 supra, a robbery victim who suffered from coronary disease died of a heart attack triggered by fright experienced during the offense. The court held the defendant guilty of felony
murder, stating that liability was “not limited to those deaths which are foreseeable. [T]he robber takes his victim as he finds him.” Yet if death results from an unusual disease unforeseeably contracted by the victim after an assault, the defendant
presumably is relieved of liability. This remains true even when the victim would not have contracted the disease but for the situation created by the injuries.

QUESTIONS: Why should the result be different when the disease producing death was contracted by the victim before the defendant's assault? Why should the defendant always “take his victim as he finds him”?
p.s78
Tee 8878

Consider State v. Lane, 444 S.E.2d 233 (N.C. Ct. App. 1994). Lane argued with Linton and punched him once in the face. Linton, who was extremely drunk, fell to the street. A city rescue squad arrived but concluded that Linton had not
suffered any serious injury. He died two days later from brain swelling caused by the punch. A medical examiner testified that because Linton was a chronic alcoholic, he was especially susceptible to injury from any blow to the head. At trial, Lane
was convicted of misdemeanor manslaughter under the unlawful-act doctrine. What result on appeal? Is it unfair to apply the vulnerable-victim rule against Lane when the victim himself is responsible for his preexisting condition? Or is it inappro-
priate to permit conclusions about causation to turn on the perceived blameworthiness of the victim?

5. Is medical malpractice foreseeable? (a) Consider the following efforts to summarize the applicable principle:
1M. HALE, PLEAS OF THE CROWN 428 (1736): [If a] man receives a wound, which is not in itself mortal, but either for want of helpful applications, or neglect thereof, it turns to a gangrene, or a fever, and that gangrene or fever be the immediate
cause of his death, yet, this is murder or manslaughter in him that gave the stroke or wound, for that wound, tho it were not the immediate cause of his death, yet, if it were the mediate cause thereof, and the fever or gangrene was the immediate
cause of his death, yet the wound was the cause of the gangrene or fever, and so consequently is causa causati.

REGINA v. CHESHIRE, [1991] 3 ALLE.R. 670: [[}f at the time of death the original wound is still an operating cause and a substantial cause, then the death can properly be said to be the result of the wound, albeit that some other cause of death is
also operating. Only if it can be said that the original wounding is merely the setting in which another cause operates can it be said that the death does not result from the wound.

(b) Many courts find the initial assailant liable for the victim's death even when significant medical error contributes to the result. But courts disagree about the extent to which subsequent medical mistakes affect the initial assailant’s
liability. Consider the following cases:

STATE v. SHABAZZ, 719 A.2d 440, 444-445 (1998): [The defendant allegedly stabbed the victim in the abdomen, lung, and liver. The victim was taken to the hospital, where he underwent surgery, followed by a period in the postoperative recovery
room. Thereafter he was placed in a regular hospital room. He died the following morning, due to heavy bleeding that resulted from the liver surgery. The trial judge barred the defense from introducing the testimony of two medical experts who
would have testified that the hospital had been grossly negligent (1) by giving the victim an anticoagulant drug after surgery, when the medical objective at that point was to encourage rather than prevent clotting of the blood; and (2) by transferring
the victim to a regular room, rather than placing him in the intensive care unit, where his vital signs could have been closely monitored. The appellate court held that the defense testimony was properly excluded:] [T]here was no evidence from
which the jury rationally could have inferred that the hospital's gross negligence was the sole cause of the victim's death. Both [defense experts] acknowledged that the stab wounds . . . would have been fatal in the absence of any

p.579

p. 560
medical treatment. At the most, the purported gross negligence would have been a contributing factor, not the sole cause. . .. We see no sound reason of policy why a defendant who has committed a homicidal act should escape criminal liability
simply because the hospital . . . contributed to the death. [GJross negligence may permit the defendant to escape liability [only] when it was the sole cause of the death. .. .
UNITED STATES v. MAIN, 113 F.3d 1046 (9th Cir. 1997): [Fleeing a traffic stop at high speed, defendant's truck veered off the road and collided with an obstacle. Defendant was thrown clear, but his passenger was trapped inside the wreckage. The
pursuing officer reached the scene and noticed that the passenger was still breathing. The officer decided not to move him, because of fear that head or neck injuries might be aggravated by movement. When another officer arrived seven minutes
later, the passenger was dead, apparently because he had been left in a position in which he could not breathe properly. Defendant argued that the first officer's failure to move the victim or summon assistance more promptly was an intervening
cause. The trial judge refused to instruct the jury that it could find that the defendant's actions were not the proximate cause of death, and defendant was convicted of involuntary manslaughter. The court of appeals reversed|] It will be said that a
failure to get prompt medical attention is not an unlikely hazard for the victim of an automobile accident. Agreed. But that judgment remains a judgment [for] the jury. When the jury is not told that it must find that the victim's death was within the
risk created by the defendant's conduct, an element of the crime has been erroneously withdrawn from the jury.

(c) Is the result in Main reconcilable with the result in Shabazz? When should subsequent treatment errors relieve the initial wrongdoer of liability for the ultimate harm?

NOTE ON OMISSIONS AS CAUSES

Suppose that an intruder pushes a small child into a pool; the child’s babysitter deliberately refuses to come to its aid, and the child then drowns. The babysitter clearly had a duty to save the child, but can we say that the babysitter
caused the child to drown? It is sometimes argued that only the intruder, not the babysitter, can be considered the cause of the child's death. See Michael Moore, Act and Crime 78 et seq. (1993).

Is the argument convincing? A result rarely has only one but-for cause. A number of conditions may be necessary for an event to occur (in the case of a fire — wood, paper, a breeze, the striking of a match). The babysitter’s omission is
necessary condition in the same sense: But for the sitter’s failure to aid, the child would not have died. Does it follow that every passer-by who failed to rescue the child also must be considered the cause of its death? One solution is to say that
omissions by the passers-by are indeed necessary conditions, and thus causes — but nonculpable causes — of the result, because they have no duty to aid the child. Whatever we think of these conceptual difficulties, courts are uniformly willing
to treat an omission as the legal cause of a result in situations where there is a duty to act. See, e.g., Jones v. United States, p. 261 supra.

p. 560
p.581
NOTE ON THE RATIONALE OF THE CAUSATION REQUIREMENT

In evaluating any causation standard that might be proposed, consider two questions. First, what difference will it make, in terms of whether the defendant's conduct is punishable at all or in terms of the severity of the punishment, if
the defendant's conduct is held to be the “cause” of the result? This question should be asked with respect to each of the cases and hypotheticals in this chapter. Second, what is the reason for that difference in liability or in the severity of pun-
ishment? One answer, of course, is simply statutory — people cannot be convicted of murder unless they have caused a death. But what is the rationale for treating conduct that “causes” death differently from identical conduct that does not? In
other words, why should the result of conduct ever make a difference? Consider Meir Dan-Cohen, Causation, in 1 Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice 165-166 (1983):

[here is considerable difficulty in establishing the relevance of the occurrence of actual harm to criminal liability or severity of punishment. . . . That the actual death of the victim is somehow relevant to determining the

accused's criminal liability is nonetheless a widely shared and deeply entrenched intuition. . . . The legal concept of causation may . . . be seen as a corollary of this intuition. Although the intuition itself resists rationalization

by reference to the goals of the criminal law, . .. it is hard to deny both the pervasiveness of that underlying sentiment and the influence it actually exerts on the criminal law, even in the absence of compelling rational argu-

ments to support it. . .. Posed in connection with the retributive goal of punishment, the question of causation (namely, “Is there a causal relation between A’s conduct and B's death?”) amounts to asking whether punishing

A is necessary to satisfy the retributive urge aroused by the fact of B’s death.

[Yet t]he statement that A caused B's death may, in ordinary speech, be as much a conclusory statement, based on the prior tacit judgment that A deserves to be punished for B’s death, as it is an independent

statement of fact. . . . Put differently, in ordinary usage the concepts of causation and blame or deserts often reverse the idealized roles usually assigned to them in moral and legal theory. [O]ne would expect the conclusion

that A should be punished for B’s death to be based, in part, on the judgment that A caused B's death. In fact, the conclusion that A deserves to be punished may be directly and intuitively generated by the retributive urge,

preceding and merely rationalized by the finding of a sufficient causal relationship between 4’s acts and B’s death.

In contrast, Michael Moore rejects policy-based approaches to defining legal cause and argues that “causation of harm increase[s] moral blameworthiness.” Moore, Causation and Responsibility 23 (2009). See also Michael S. Moore, Causation
and Responsibility, 16 Soc. Phil. & Pol. 1, 4-5 (1999):
[Llegal liability tracks moral responsibility. . . . If the point of criminal law were [the] utilitarian point of deterring crime, then a [functional definition] of legal cause perhaps could be justified; such a functional definition would
take into account the incentive effects of various liability rules.
p.581
p. 562

But the function of criminal law is not utilitarian; it is retributive. . . . This requires that its liability rules track closely the moral criteria for blameworthiness. One of those criteria is causation of morally prohibited states of af-

fairs. Thus, again, “cause” as used in criminal law must mean what it means in morality, and what it means in morality is to name a relation that is natural and not of the law's creation.2

Compare Larry Alexander & Kimberly Kessler Ferzan (with Stephen Morse), Crime and Culpability 186, 188 (2009):

We cannot know whether results are “too remote or accidental” until we know why results should matter at all. ... No one has come up with a satisfactory test for determining whether an injury caused by the actor's act was

“proximately caused” by it. Moreover, no one will. The reason no one will is that the upshot of the proximate cause inquiry — what the actor deserves — is not related to what the actor caused, “proximately” or otherwise.

[Rather it depends on the actor's intent and the risks he knowingly created, not on outcomes that were beyond his control.] When the causal chain seems too deviant, then the ordinary person's rough sense of justice might

be offended by attributing the result to the actor, but this is just a sociological observation and not a rational argument. [W]e should recognize that any test is rationally arbitrary... . Causation and results should not matter to.

the criminal law.

NOTES ON TRANSFERRED INTENT

1. Apuzzle. Defendant shoots at Lucky, intending to kill him. The bullet misses but strikes and kills Unlucky, perhaps because the bullet ricocheted in an odd way. Is Defendant guilty of murdering Unlucky, regardless of how unforesee-
able that killing may have been? The answer in all jurisdictions is yes. The conceptual justification is the doctrine of transferred intent, according to which Defendant's intent to kill Lucky is “transferred” to the action that killed Unlucky.

Does this approach make sense? Isn't it a pure fiction to say that Defendant intended to kill Unlucky, when in fact Defendant killed Unlucky by accident? Absent the notion of “transferring” intent, we might say that Defendant is guilty of
the attempted murder of Lucky and (perhaps) the involuntary manslaughter of Unlucky — if the required level of criminal negligence could be shown. Why should we punish Defendant much more severely than other would-be murderers whose at-
tempts miscarry?

Consider Justice Stanley Mosk, concurring in People v. Scott, 14 Cal. 4th 544, 556 (1996):

p. 562
p. 588

[One cannot reasonably distinguish between A, who unlawfully kills B unlawfully intending to kill B, and X, who unlawfully kills Y unlawfully intending to kill Z. Both A and X harbor the same blameworthy mental state, an

unlawful intent to kill. Both A and X cause the same blameworthy result, an untawful killing.

Ifa theory of transferred intent is used in Judge Mosk’s hypothetical against X in the killing of Y, can X also be convicted of the attempted killing of Z? Although some courts have upheld convictions in such a situation, Nancy Ehrenreich disagrees
with this approach. She points out that, under the merger theory, an attempt to kill merges into the completed murder when there is a single intended victim who is killed. See p. 609 infra. She argues the same merger logic should apply when trans-
ferred intent is used to pursue a murder charge against an unintended victim. Ehrenreich, Attempt, Merger, and Transferred Intent, 82 Brook. L. Rev. 49, 66-67, 80, 84 (2016). She argues that this limit is necessary to keep punishment proportionate
to the defendant's culpability. Is she correct or is the transferred intent situation distinguishable because two different victims are involved? Is there a theory of punishment that would support bringing both the intentional homicide charge against
the unintended victim and the attempted homicide charge against the intended victim?

2. The MPC solution. The MPC would likewise convict the defendant of murder in these scenarios; §2.03(2)(a) provides that where the crime requires that a defendant intentionally cause a particular result (e.g. killing someone), that
element of the crime is satisfied if the defendant accidentally inflicts that injury on one person while intentionally trying to injure another.

3. Testing “transferred intent.” Is there a principled justification for the traditional approach, which the MPC also endorses? Consider these situations:

(a) Pat shoots at an enemy, intending to kill, then hops in a car and speeds away. The enemy recovers from the wounds, but a pedestrian hit by Pat’s speeding car is accidentally killed. Did Pat murder the pedestrian? The normal an-
wer would be “no,” barring an unusual application of the felony-murder rule. But is there a logically relevant difference between this situation and the case in Note 1, supra, in which Defendant's shot accidentally killed Unlucky?

(b) Suppose that when Pat shoots at the enemy, intending to kill, the bullet hits and then passes through the enemy’s body, goes through the floor, and kills a tenant in the apartment below. If Pat’s enemy survives, the doctrine of
transferred intent makes Pat guilty of murdering the tenant. But if Pat’s enemy dies, is the doctrine of transferred intent still available, so that Pat is guilty of murdering the enemy and the tenant? Or is the intent “used up,” so that in the case of the
tenant Pat is guilty only of involuntary manslaughter? The cases are divided.3 Which is the better view? Is there any good reason to hold Pat responsible for two murders? But if Pat has not intentionally killed the tenant when the enemy dies, why
should that conclusion change in the event that the enemy recovers from the wounds?

p. 583,
p. 584

For useful criticism of the transferred-intent doctrine, see Kaitlin R. O’Donnell, The Problematic Use of the Kill Zone Theory, 11 U.C. Irvine L. Rev. 583, 602 (2020); Shachar Eldar, The Limits of Transferred Malice, 32 Oxford J. Legal Stud.
633 (2012); Douglas Husak, Transferred Intent, 10 Notre Dame J.L. Ethics & Pub. Pol’y 65 (1996).

4, Transferring nonhomicidal intent. The problem of transferred intent is not confined to homicidal crimes. In State v. Elmi, 207 P.3d 439, 442-443 (Wash. 2009), the defendant had fired a weapon into the living room, where his wife
and three children were present. On the basis of proof that he had intended to kill his wife, he was convicted of attempted murder. In addition, transferring that intent, the court upheld a conviction on three counts of first-degree assault, requiring
proof of “intent to inflict great bodily harm” on each of the children — even though they were uninjured. Is this result sound?

2. Subsequent Human Actions

a. Subsequent Actions Intended to Produce the Result
People v. Campbell

Court of Appeals of Michigan

124 Mich. App. 333, 335 N.W.2d 27 (1983)

Hoenn, J. [Campbell and Basnaw were drinking heavily. Campbell, who was angry with Basnaw for having had sex with Campbell's wife, encouraged Basnaw to kill himself. When Basnaw said he had no weapon, Campbell first offered
to sell Basnaw his own gun for any price; ultimately he gave Basnaw his gun with five shells for free and then left. Shortly thereafter, Basnaw shot and killed himself. Charged with murder, Campbell moved to dismiss the information, on the ground
that a homicide charge cannot be based on the act of providing a weapon to a person who subsequently uses it to commit suicide. The circuit court denied the motion and the court of appeals granted leave to appeal.]

The prosecutor argues that inciting to suicide, coupled with the overt act of furnishing a gun to an intoxicated person, in a state of depression, falls within the prohibition, “or other wilful, deliberate and premeditated killing.” There exists
no statutory definition of the term “murder.” That crime is defined in the common law. “Homicide is the killing of one human being by another.”. . . The term suicide excludes by definition a homicide. Simply put, the defendant here did not kill an-
other person.

Asecond ground militates against requiring the defendant to stand trial for murder. Defendant had no present intention to kill. He provided the weapon and departed. Defendant hoped Basnaw would kill himself but hope alone is not the
degree of intention requisite to a charge of murder. . ..

While we find the conduct of the defendant morally reprehensible, we do not find it to be criminal under the present state of the law. The remedy for this situation is in the Legislature. The trial court is reversed and the case is remanded
with instructions to quash the information and warrant and discharge the defendant.

p. 584
p. 585
People v. Kevorkian
‘Supreme Court of Michigan
447 Mich. 436, 527 N.W.2d 714 (1994)

CavANAGH, C.J., and BRICKLEY and GriFFiN, JJ. [Defendant Kevorkian allegedly assisted in the deaths of Sherry Miller and Marjorie Wantz on October 23, 1991, roughly a year before Michigan enacted a statute that prohibited assisting
a suicide. He was indicted on two counts of murder. The circuit judge dismissed the charges, concluding that assisting in suicide does not fall within the crime of murder. On appeal, the court of appeals concluded that the circuit court erred in
quashing the information. Kevorkian appealed that ruling to the Michigan Supreme Court]

Each woman was said to be suffering from a condition that caused her great pain or was severely disabling. Each separately had sought defendant Kevorkian’s assistance in ending her life. The women and several friends and relatives
met the defendant at a cabin in Oakland County on October 23, 1991.

According to the testimony presented at the defendant's preliminary examination, the plan was to use his “suicide machine.” The device consisted of a board to which one’s arm is strapped to prevent movement, a needle to be inserted
into a blood vessel and attached to IV tubing, and containers of various chemicals that are to be released through the needle into the bloodstream. Strings are tied to two of the fingers of the person who intends to die. The strings are attached to
clips on the IV tubing that control the flow of the chemicals. [T]he person raises that hand, releasing . . . anesthesia rapidly. When the person falls asleep, the hand drops, pulling the other string, which [allows] potassium chloride to flow into the
body in concentrations sufficient to cause death.

The defendant tried several times, without success, to insert the suicide-machine needle into Ms. Miller's arm and hand. He then left the cabin, returning several hours later with a cylinder of carbon monoxide gas and a mask apparatus.
He attached a screw driver to the cylinder, and showed Ms. Miller how to use the tool as a lever to open the gas valve. The defendant then turned his attention to Ms. Wantz. He was successful in inserting the suicide-machine needle into her arm.
The defendant explained to Ms. Wantz how to activate the device. . . . The device was activated, and Ms. Wantz died.

The defendant then placed the mask apparatus on Ms. Miller. The only witness at the preliminary examination who was present at the time said that Ms. Miller opened the gas valve by pulling on the screw driver. The cause of her death
was determined to be carbon-monoxide poisoning. . . .

The Court of Appeals majority [in reinstating the murder charges] relied principally on People v. Roberts, 178 N.W. 690 (1920). . . . In Roberts, the defendant's wife was suffering from advanced multiple sclerosis and in great pain. She
previously had attempted suicide and, according to the defendant's statements at the plea proceeding, requested that he provide her with poison. He agreed, and placed a glass of poison within her reach. She drank the mixture and died. The de-
fendant was charged with murder. He pleaded guilty, and the trial court determined the crime to be murder in the first degree.

p. 585
p. 586

The defendant [argued on appeal] that because suicide is not a crime in Michigan, and his wife thus committed no offense, he committed none in acting as an accessory before the fact. The Court rejected that argument, explaining:

[DJefendant is not charged with [being an accessory to the offense of suicide]. He is charged with murder. [W]hen defendant mixed the paris green with water and placed it within reach of his wife to enable her to put an

end .. . to her life, he was guilty of murder by means of poison within the meaning of the statute, even though she requested him to do so.

[DJefendant Kevorkian [argues] that the discussion of this issue in Roberts was dicta because the defendant in that case had pleaded guilty of murder, and thus the controlling authority was People v. Campbell, 335 N.W.2d 27 (1983). . ..
We must [therefore] determine whether Roberts remains viable.

[Flew jurisdictions, if any, have retained the early common-law view that assisting in a suicide is murder. The modern statutory scheme in the majority of states treats assisted suicide as a separate crime, with penalties less onerous than
those for murder.

Recent decisions draw a distinction between active participation in a suicide and involvement in the events leading up to the suicide, such as providing the means. [I]n State v. Sexson, 869 P.2d 301 (N.M. App. 1994), the defendant was
charged with first-degree murder in connection with the fatal shooting of his wife. . .. It was not disputed that there was a suicide agreement between the two. . . . The defendant claimed simply to have held the rifle in position while the decedent
pulled the trigger, and that he had failed to then kill himself because he “freaked out.”. . . The appellate court rejected the defendant's argument that he could not be prosecuted under the more general murder statute because of the specific as-
sisted suicide statute... :

Itis well accepted that “aiding,” in the context of determining whether one is criminally liable for their involvement in the suicide of another, is intended to mean providing the means to commit suicide, not actively performing

the act which results in death. . . . [Sexson’s] action transcends merely providing Victim a means to kill herself and becomes active participation in the death of another.

[This] distinction [is] consistent with the overwhelming trend of modern authority. [A] conviction of murder is proper if a defendant participates in the final overt act that causes death, such as firing a gun or pushing the plunger on a
hypodermic needle [but not] where a defendant is involved merely “in the events leading up to the commission of the final overt act, such as furnishing the means. . . .”

[We would overrule Roberts to the extent that it can be read to support the view that the common-law definition of murder encompasses the act of intentionally providing the means by which a person commits suicide. Only where there
is probable cause to believe that death was the direct and natural result of a defendant's act can the defendant be properly bound over on a charge of murder.72

p. 586
587

[The lower courts did not have the benefit of the analysis set forth in this opinion for evaluating the degree of participation by defendant Kevorkian in the events leading to the deaths of Ms. Wantz and Ms. Miller. Accordingly, we remand
this matter to the circuit court for reconsideration of the defendant's motion to quash in light of the principles discussed in this opinion.

BoyLe, J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part). .. . | disagree with the conclusion that one who provides the means for suicides and participates in the acts leading up to death may not be charged with murder as long as the final
act is that of the decedent. . .. Absent standards established to distinguish between those who are in fact terminally ill or suffering in agony and rationally wish to die and those who are not, there is no principled vehicle in the judicial arsenal to pro-
tect against abuse. . . .

The lead opinion [distinguishes] between acts of participation that are merely “the events leading up to” the deaths of the decedents and “the final overt act that causes death.”. .. Such a “test” [is] an invitation to [let results turn on
whether] the defendant intended to kill [for] impure reasons. . . . To the extent that this Court reduces culpability for those who actively participate in acts that produce death, we do so at the risk of the most vulnerable members of our society —
the elderly, the ill, the chronically depressed, those suffering from a panoply of stressful situations. . . . Sexson did not pull the trigger, he held up the gun. . . . Likewise, defendant Kevorkian did not pull the trigger for Ms. Miller, but he assisted Ms.
Miller in completing the act. In Ms. Wantz’s case, his involvement was even more direct. . . . There is no principled method by which the Court can amend the common-law definition of murder. . . .

NOTES ON ASSISTED SUICIDE

1, Subsequent Kevorkian cases. Kevorkian allegedly continued to help others commit suicide after the enactment of Michigan's assisted-suicide statute, and accordingly he was charged under the new statute as well. Meanwhile, in
an effort to help another patient, he personally injected lethal drugs into a 52-year-old man who had Lou Gehrig's disease. He also made a videotape of his actions, gave the tape to CBS News (which aired it on prime-time television), and dared
prosecutors to file charges against him. They did so, and in March 1999, Kevorkian was convicted of murder, not assisted suicide, because he himself had administered the fatal injection. He was sentenced to 10 to 25 years in prison, served eight

years, and was paroled in 2007, after assuring officials that he would never again participate in other people's efforts to end their life.4 For a discussion of how Kevorkian’s actions fit within a larger framework endorsing a “right to die,” see Madison
Frank, Dignity in Death: Why the Fundamental Right of the Individual to Choose Their Final Moments Outweighs the Government's Societal Interests to Preserve Life, 49 U. Balt. L. Rev. 137 (2020).
2. Current law. The Campbell and Kevorkian cases reflect generally prevailing American law: One who successfully urges or assists another to commit suicide is
p.567
p. 568
not guilty of murder, at least so long as the deceased was mentally responsible and was not forced or deceived. Most states also reject the possibility of a manslaughter or negligent homicide conviction, provided again that the deceased's actions
were fully voluntary.® In accord, MPC §210.5(1) permits convicting a person of criminal homicide for causing another to take his life, but “only if he purposely causes such suicide by force, duress or deception.”

Most states that follow this approach do not permit defendants like Campbell and Kevorkian to act with impunity, however. A majority of the states now have statutes that define a separate offense for assisting a suicide. Many are
similar to MPC §210.5(2), which makes the offense a felony (punishable at the same level as manslaughter).

Under this statutory scheme, what should be the result on the facts of People v. Minor, 898 N.Y.S.2d 440 (Sup. Ct. 2010)? Seeking to commit suicide, the decedent, sitting in the driver's seat of his car, convinced the defendant to hold
a knife against the steering wheel while the decedent repeatedly lunged into the knife, causing fatal wounds. Did the defendant murder the decedent or merely assist him in committing suicide?

Statutes that punish those who assist another to commit suicide are controversial. Many argue that there should be a constitutional right, statutory right, or criminal law justification defense for doctors who help terminally ill patients or
others in extreme pain to commit suicide. In Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702 (1997), the Supreme Court held that individuals who wish to commit suicide have no constitutional right to obtain assistance in doing so. But jurisdictions remain
free to permit such assistance by statute; the Netherlands and at least two American states (Washington and Oregon) have done so. That aspect of the subject is explored in the material on justifications, Chapter 8.B, infra. Other jurisdictions, like
Nebraska, continue to maintain assisted suicide as a criminal offense but tend to not enforce it. For example, as of 2020, only one defendant has actually been convicted for such a crime in the state. See State v. Stubbendieck, 924 N.W.2d 711,
716 (Neb. 2019).

3. An exception for reckless or negligent aid? In footnote 70, the Kevorkian opinion draws an important distinction: One who intentionally provides another person with the means to commit suicide cannot be convicted of murder,
but the court suggests that one who recklessly or negligently makes such means available to a person who is “intoxicated and despondent or agitated” can sometimes be convicted of a lesser degree of homicide, such as involuntary manslaughter.
What is the logic of this position? The court's footnote focuses on whether the person providing aid has a sufficiently reckless mens rea, but isn’t this the wrong question? If the decedent is sufficiently rational for his actions to constitute a super-
seding cause, how can the defendant be convicted of causing any homicide at all?

Perhaps the court meant to imply that intoxication or despondency can render the suicide victim's act insufficiently voluntary to constitute a superseding cause. But recall that Campbell was not considered responsible for Basnaw’s
suicide, even though Basnaw was heavily intoxicated and Campbell, though he realized this, still gave Basnaw a gun and encouraged him to use it. At what point does

p. 568
p. 569
suicide victims’ intoxication or despondency become sufficient to render the person who helps them guilty of homicide?
NOTES ON INTERVENING HUMAN ACTION

1. Foreseeability versus autonomy. Basnaw’s suicide was a readily foreseeable result of Campbell's actions. Likewise, the death of Kevorkian’s patients was readily foreseeable. Indeed, both Campbell and Kevorkian wanted their
actions to have precisely the effects they had. If the applicable doctrine is the foreseeability test reflected in cases like Acosta, p. 568, Campbell and Kevorkian would surely be seen as causing the death of others. Why doesn't the foreseeability
test of causation apply in cases like theirs?

A leading explanation points to a strain in our culture that treats human action as different from physical events.° We tend to regard a person’s acts as the product of choice, not as events governed by physical laws. This view (roughly,
the hypothesis of free will) is of course hotly contested in philosophical literature. But whether accurate or not, the assumption of free will reflects the way most people in our culture respond to human action, and it reflects the premise on which no-
tions of blame in the criminal law ultimately rest. Naturally, the rules of causation in the law tend to embody the same premise.

As a result, the law of causation treats physical events produced by a person's actions as “caused” by that person, but it ordinarily does not treat human action produced by an initial actor's conduct as “caused” by the initial actor, even
when the subsequent human action is entirely foreseeable.? The second person's actions are chosen and caused by the second person alone. As it is sometimes put, there has been a novus actus interveniens — a later action by another person
that displaces the relevance of prior conduct and provides a new foundation for causal responsibility. Glanville Williams explains:°

The legal attitude, in general, rests on what is known to philosophers as the principle of autonomy, which enters deeply into our traditional moral perceptions, reinforced by language. . . . The autonomy doctrine, expressing

itself through its corollary, the doctrine of novus actus interveniens, teaches that the individuals will is the autonomous (self-regulating) prime cause of behavior.

This conception of human action creates the need for special rules to govern the responsibility of one person for the acts of another. The law of causation is not

p. 569

. 590
available to ground the responsibility of the first actor, so other doctrines must be created to hold responsible those who instigate or help another to commit a crime. These doctrines, principally those of complicity and conspiracy, are explored in
Chapter 7, infra.

2. Qualifications and exceptions. Not all subsequent human actions are treated as independent — only those that were chosen freely. Involuntary acts (e.g., a spasm in person B produced by drugs that person A administered) are
of course caused by the prior actor A. Similarly, if A asks B to use a cell phone to call a certain number, and B does so, not knowing that the call will trigger an explosion, A caused B's act (and thus caused the explosion) because B acted without
knowledge of the relevant circumstances. See MPC §2.06(2)(a). Other acts that we view as caused by a prior actor include those constrained by compulsion of duty, by duress, or by an emergency precipitated by the prior actor. Examples include
the firefighter who enters a burning building (Arzon, supra p. 574) and the police officer who kills in the performance of their duty, “for it is a reasonable response to the dilemma thrust upon the victim or the policeman by the intentional act of the
defendant.”12 These limitations mean that it becomes crucial to determine whether subsequent actions were freely chosen by the second actor.

3. Encouraging the reluctant actor. Consider the case against a Massachusetts teenager who sent her boyfriend dozens of text messages urging him to commit suicide. Ultimately, he sat in a truck filled with carbon monoxide fumes,
planning to take his own life. When he got out of the truck, uncertain whether to go through with the plan, the young woman texted him to “get back in,” fully aware of his fragile mental state. After his death, she texted another friend that “his death
is my fault like honestly | could have stopped him | was on the phone with him and he got out of the car because it was working and he got scared and | fucking told him to get back in.”

Massachusetts does not have a law against encouraging or assisting suicide, but the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court affirmed a conviction for involuntary manslaughter. Commonwealth v. Carter, 115 N.E.3d 559 (Mass. 2019).
The trial judge concluded that the victim was responsible for his actions up until the point when he exited the truck, which broke “that chain of self-causation.” Id. at 568. “[O]nce the victim left the truck, the defendant overpowered the victim's will.”
The Supreme Judicial Court affirmed the decision because

[T]he judge could have properly found, based on this evidence, that the vulnerable, confused, mentally ill, eighteen year old victim had managed to save himself once again in the midst of his latest suicide attempt, removing

himself from the truck as it filled with carbon monoxide. But then in this weakened state he was badgered back into the gas-infused truck by the defendant, his girlfriend and closest, if not only, confidant in this suicidal plan-

ning, the person who had been constantly pressuring him to complete their often discussed plan, fulfill his promise to her, and finally commit suicide. And then after she convinced him to get back into

p. 590
p59
the carbon monoxide filled truck, she did absolutely nothing to help him: she did not call for help or tell him to get out of the truck as she listened to him choke and die.

Id. at 568-569. For a longer discussion of the case, see Guyora Binder & Luis Chiesa, The Puzzle of Inciting Suicide, 56 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 65 (2019). Was the court correct to conclude that the defendant “caused” the victim's death? Why was the
victim's departure from the truck a critical break in the causal chain? The court referenced prior suicide attempts where the victim walked away and did not go through with killing himself. If there was no such prior history of suicide attempts, would
the departure from the truck be as significant? Or is the critical evidence the victim's vulnerable mental state when the defendant urges him to return to the truck?

The problem of responsibility for suicides precipitated by bullying has become increasingly important. See Ari E. Waldman, Tormented: Antigay Bullying in Schools, 84 Temp. L. Rev. 385 (2012); Dan T. Coenen, Freedom of Speech and
the Criminal Law, 97 B.U. L. Rev. 1533 (2017). Should it matter whether the defendant is aware of the victim's mental state? What if the defendant is partially responsible for that mental state? Consider the next note.

4. The source of the trauma. In February 1993, Garcia was indicted for sexually assaulting a 79-year-old woman. When the woman died of heart failure a month after the attack, he was also indicted for murder. Prosecutors argued
that the woman died because Garcia “destroyed her will to live,” and pointed to testimony that the deceased cried daily after the incident and ceased talking about her future. Prosecutors analogized this case to one where a victim collapses of a
heart attack during or shortly after the crime. A rape prosecutor expressed doubts about this theory: “I think they'll have a huge causation problem. | mean, how many of my victims, down the road, either commit suicide or die of drug or alcohol
abuse because of rape?” Junda Woo, Murder Charge in a Case of Rape Stretches Limits of Legal Theory, Wall St. J., Aug. 23, 1993, at B4. Does the fact that many victims of sexual assault and other crimes suffer trauma that leads to suicide or
premature death undermine causation in the way the rape prosecutor suggests? Or does the prevalence of such trauma strengthen the causal link?

What if the victim does not commit suicide, but the defendant's crime causes injuries that lead to premature death? If the death occurs shortly after the crime is committed, there are few questions about causation. But does the causal
link become too attenuated after a certain amount of time? The babysitter of a five-month-old baby, Benjamin Dowling, served five months for shaking him so forcefully that it caused permanent brain damage. Prosecutors allege that Benjamin died
prematurely at age 35 from those injuries and charged the former babysitter with first-degree murder. Neil Vigdor, Woman Faces Murder Charge After Man Shaken as Baby Dies at 35, N.Y. Times, July 27, 2021. Can prosecutors prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the babysitter is the cause of death, or do the victim’s intervening actions over 35 years make the causal link too speculative? What if the victim died five years after the initial injuries? How can courts draw meaningful lines
in this context?

5. Removing life support. In an automobile collision caused by the defendant's negligent driving, Carol Suprenant suffered severe injuries and was kept alive

p.591

p.592
for several days by a ventilator that allowed her to breathe. As her breathing difficulties and other discomfort increased, she demanded to be taken off the ventilator, even though she understood that without it “her death was probable . . . and that
conversely, her injuries were potentially survivable if she remained on the ventilator.” See Commonwealth v. Carlson, 849 N.E.2d 790, 793 (Mass. 2006). The doctors complied with her wishes, and she died a few hours later. Defendant was con-
victed of negligent homicide. What should be the result on appeal? Did the defendant cause Suprenant's death, or did she voluntarily choose to end her own life?

6. The victim's religious beliefs. In Regina v. Blaue, [1975] 3 All E.R. 446, defendant had stabbed a girl. With proper treatment and a blood transfusion, her wounds would not have proved fatal. But as a Jehovah's Witness, she
refused a transfusion and died. In a situation like that in the previous Note, many would argue that Ms. Suprenant’s response, in refusing treatment, was not voluntary because that treatment could only prolong her pain and discomfort. But in Blaue
the treatment apparently would have restored the stabbing victim to health. Should that fact make a difference? Or do the victim's religious beliefs make the blood transfusion an unacceptable alternative? Does the stabbing victim's religious com-
mitment make Blaue a preexisting-condition case (thus liability for homicide) or an intervening-actor case (thus no liability for homicide)?

NOTES ON SUBSEQUENT ACTS OF THIRD PARTIES

1. Exposing the victim to homicidal third parties. Consider the story of Uriah the Hittite, as told in the Bible, 2 Samuel 11, 12. Uriah was a captain in King David's army. David ordered his general to place Uriah in the “forefront of
the hardest fighting, and then draw back from him, that he may be struck down and die.” David's motive was to be rid of Uriah so he could marry Uriah's wife, Bathsheba. The plan worked: Uriah was killed in battle with the Ammonites, and David
martied Bathsheba. The judgment of the Lord upon King David: “You have struck down Uriah the Hittite with a sword, the man himself you murdered by the sword of the Ammonites.” Would it be proper for a court to so hold under American law?

If so, would King David's liability depend on the prosecution's ability to prove that he had ordered his own troops to draw back, leaving Uriah exposed? What should be the result if King David had ordered his army to fight in the usual way but had
nonetheless selected Uriah to lead the troops from the most dangerous position because he hoped that Uriah would be killed? Consider Glanville Williams, Finis for Novus Actus?, 48 Cambridge LJ. 391 (1989):
A distinguished writer [Sanford Kadish] recently raised the question whether a general who orders his troops to battle intentionally kills those of his men who fall in action. He was considering this as a problem [of] intention.
There may be some argument on intentionality, but none on the subject of killing. Obviously, it is the enemy, not the general, who kills the men. The reason why the general cannot be said to kill them is . . . not because he
does not expect the deaths of many of them to follow from obedience to his command; and not because he is justified in issuing the command; it is simply that he has not committed or helped the act of killing, or influenced
anybody to do the deed.
p.592
p. 599
A person is primarily responsible for what he himself does. He is not responsible, not blameworthy, for what other people do. The fact that his own conduct, rightful or wrongful, provided the background for a
subsequent voluntary and wrong act by another does not make him responsible for it. What he does may be a but-for cause of the injurious act, but he did not do it. . .. Only the later actor, the doer of the act that intervenes
between the first act and the result, the final wielder of human autonomy in the matter, bears responsibility (along with his accomplices) for the result that ensues.
QUESTIONS: How cogent is this analysis? Recall an analogous problem considered in connection with felony murder, p. 564 supra: A and B had committed a felony and are holed up in a house, fighting off the police. A tells B to run out the back
door where, A says, the coast is clear. A says that, knowing police have the door well covered, because A wants B dead. B dashes out the back door and is shot dead by police. The police, of course, are duty-bound to shoot, so their actions are
not fully “voluntary.” But the same is true of the enemy soldiers who kill opposing troops in Williams's example. Is it “[obvious that] it is the enemy, not the general, who kills the men”?
2. Who was “the hoss that caused the loss”? In Bailey v. Commonwealth, 329 S.E.2d 37 (Va. 1985), an appeal from a conviction of involuntary manslaughter, the court summarized the facts as follows:
Bailey and Murdock lived about two miles apart. [Murdock] was “legally blind,” with vision of only 3/200 in the right eye and 2/200 in the left. Bailey knew [this and] also knew that Murdock owned a handgun and had boasted
“about how he would use it and shoot it and scare people off with it.” Bailey knew further that Murdock was easily agitated and that he became especially angry if anyone disparaged his war hero, General George S. Patton.
[On the evening in question, Bailey knew that Murdock was intoxicated. During a heated conversation by two-way radio,] Bailey implied that General Patton and Murdock himself were homosexuals [and] de-
manded that Murdock arm himself. . . and wait on his front porch for Bailey to come and injure or kill him. Murdock responded by saying he would be waiting on his front porch, and he told Bailey to “kiss [his] mother or [his]
wife and children good-bye because [he would] never go back home.”
Bailey then made two anonymous telephone calls to the Roanoke City Police Department. In the first, Bailey reported “a man . . . out on the porch [at Murdock’s address] waving a gun around.” A police car was
dispatched to the address, but the officers reported they did not “see anything.”
Bailey called Murdock back on the radio and chided him for not “going out on the porch.” More epithets and threats were exchanged. Bailey told Murdock he was “going to come up there in a blue and white
car” [both Bailey and the police drove blue and white cars] and demanded that Murdock “step out there on the . . . porch” with his gun “in [his] hands” because he, Bailey, would “be there in just a minute.”
p. 599
p. 594
Bailey telephoned the police again. This time, Bailey . . . told the dispatcher that Murdock had “a gun on the porch” [and] had “threatened to shoot up the neighborhood.” . . Bailey insisted that the police “come
out here and straighten this man out.”. . .
Three uniformed police officers . . . were dispatched to Murdock’s home. None of the officers knew that Murdock was intoxicated or that he was in an agitated state of mind. Only Officer Beavers knew that Mur-
dock’s eyesight was bad, and he did not know “exactly how bad it was.” When the officers arrived, [they] observed Murdock come out of his house with “something shiny in his hand.”. . .

Officer Chambers approached Murdock . . . and told him to “Jeave the gun alone and walk down the stairs away from it.” Murdock “just sat there.” When Chambers repeated his command, Murdock cursed him.

Murdock then reached for the gun, stood up, advanced in Chambers’ direction, and opened fire. Chambers retreated and was not struck.

All three officers returned fire, and Murdock was struck. Lying wounded on the porch, he said several times, “I didn’t know you was the police.” He died from [the gunshot wounds,] In the investigation which fol-
lowed, Bailey stated that he was “the hoss that caused the loss.”
QUESTIONS: Was he? How would you analyze the liability of Bailey? Did he kill Murdock?
b. Subsequent Actions That Recklessly Risk the Result
INTRODUCTORY NOTES

1. The distinction between intentional and reckless choices by the subsequent actor. As the preceding section indicates, the voluntary-intervening-actor doctrine means that the first actor in a sequence of events usually cannot
be considered responsible for subsequent human action when the subsequent action is entirely voluntary. As a result, the first actor cannot be said to “cause” resulting harm, even when that harm is perfectly foreseeable. In the situations of this
kind that we have seen so far, the subsequent actor intended to cause the harm in question. However, in many situations (drag races are one recurring example), the subsequent actor — though arguably reckless — did not intend to cause the re-
sulting harm. Should this difference in the second actor's intent affect the liability of the first actor? The material in this section addresses that problem.

2. The exception for involuntary choices by the subsequent actor. As in the cases involving subsequent actions intended to cause harm, the voluntary-intervening-actor doctrine in the setting of reckless subsequent conduct can
be invoked only when the subsequent action reflects a voluntary choice. Courts therefore readily hold that a subsequent actor's risky choices do not negate the liability of the first actor, when those choices result from a predicament created by the
first actor. Consider these examples:

(a) People v. Kern, 545 NY.S.2d 4 (App. Div. 1989). [This case arose from the infamous “Howard Beach incident,” in which a group of white teenagers assaulted several Black men who were walking in the neighborhood after their car

p.594

p.595
had broken down. The teenagers chased the men, while wielding bats, screaming racial epithets, and threatening to kill them. One of the men, Griffith, tried to escape by running across a highway; he was struck by a car and killed. The defendants
were convicted of manslaughter and appealed, arguing that there was insufficient evidence of causation. Upholding the convictions, the court stated:] [U]nder these circumstances, the defendants’ actions were a “sufficiently direct cause” of
Griffith's ensuing death so as to warrant the imposition of criminal liability. . . . [T]he only reasonable alternative left open to Griffith while being persistently chased and threatened by the defendants and their friends, several of whom were carrying
weapons, was to seek safety by crossing the parkway where he unfortunately met his death. [I]t cannot be said that the defendants’ despicable conduct was not a sufficiently direct cause of Griffith's death. The defendants will not be heard to
complain that, in desperately fleeing their murderous assault, Griffith chose the wrong escape route.

(b) People v. Matos, 83 N-Y.2d 509 (1994). The defendant, running from the scene of a robbery he had just committed, climbed a ladder to the roof of a building and fled in the dark across the Manhattan rooftops. The police officer
chasing him fell down an air shaft and plunged 25 feet to his death. The New York Court of Appeals upheld a conviction for felony murder on the ground that the officer's risky pursuit was in the performance of his duty and that his death was a
foreseeable result of the defendant's crime and subsequent flight.

3. The puzzle about the subsequent actor's voluntary choices. It might seem irrelevant whether the subsequent conduct is intentional or merely reckless. After all, so long as the second actor is making a voluntary choice, we
cannot easily say that this choice was “caused” by the first actor. Nonetheless, judicial intuitions sometimes change when the subsequent actor was merely reckless or negligent. In thinking through the cases that follow, consider whether there is
good reason to apply the voluntary-intervening-actor doctrine only when the subsequent actor intends to cause harm.

Commonwealth v. Root
‘Supreme Court of Pennsylvania
403 Pa. 571, 170 A.2d 310 (1961)

Jones, C.J. The appellant was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter for the death of his competitor in the course of an automobile race between them on a highway. . . .

The testimony . . . discloses that, on the night of the fatal accident, the defendant accepted the deceased's challenge to engage in an automobile race; that the racing took place on a rural 3-lane highway; that the night was clear and
dry, and traffic light; that the speed limit on the highway was 50 miles per hour; that, immediately prior to the accident, the two automobiles were being operated at varying speeds of from 70 to 90 miles per hour; that the accident occurred in a no-
passing zone on the approach to a bridge where the highway narrowed to two directionally opposite lanes; that, at the time of the accident, the defendant was in the lead and was proceeding in his right hand lane of travel; that the deceased, in an
attempt to

p.595

p. 596
pass the defendant's automobile, when a truck was closely approaching from the opposite direction, swerved his car to the left, crossed the highway's white dividing line and drove his automobile on the wrong side of the highway head-on into the
oncoming truck with resultant fatal effect to himself.

This evidence would of course amply support a conviction of the defendant for speeding, reckless driving and, perhaps, other violations of The Vehicle Code. [But] unlawful or reckless conduct is only one ingredient of the crime of
involuntary manslaughter. Another essential and distinctly separate element of the crime is that the unlawful or reckless conduct . . . was the direct cause of [death]. The first ingredient is obviously present in this case but, just as plainly, the sec-
ond is not.

While precedent is to be found for application of the tort law concept of “proximate cause” in fixing responsibility for criminal homicide, the want of any rational basis for its use in determining criminal liability can no longer be properly
disregarded. When proximate cause was first borrowed from the field of tort law and applied to homicide prosecutions in Pennsylvania, the concept connoted a much more direct causal relation in producing the alleged culpable result than it does
today. Proximate cause, as an essential element of a tort founded in negligence, has undergone in recent times, and is still undergoing, a marked extension. More specifically, this area of civil law has been progressively liberalized in favor of claims
for damages for personal injuries to which careless conduct of others can in some way be associated. To persist in applying the tort liability concept of proximate cause to prosecutions for criminal homicide after the marked expansion of civil lia-
bility of defendants in tort actions for negligence would be to extend possible criminal liability to persons chargeable with unlawful or reckless conduct in circumstances not generally considered to present the likelihood of a resultant death. . . .

Here, the action of the deceased driver in recklessly and suicidally swerving his car to the left lane of a 2-lane highway into the path of an oncoming truck was not forced upon him by any act of the defendant; it was done by the de-
ceased and by him alone, who thus directly brought about his own demise. . .

Legal theory which makes guilt or innocence of criminal homicide depend upon such accidental and fortuitous circumstances as are now embraced by modern tort law's encompassing concept of proximate cause is too harsh to be
just... .

In the case now before us, the deceased was aware of the dangerous condition created by the defendant's reckless conduct in driving his automobile at an excessive rate of speed along the highway but, despite such knowledge, he
recklessly chose to swerve his car to the left and into the path of an oncoming truck, thereby bringing about the head-on collision which caused his own death. [T]he defendant's reckless conduct was not a sufficiently direct cause of the compet-
ing driver's death to make him criminally liable therefor.

[Reversed]

Eacen, J., dissenting. . .. If the defendant did not engage in the unlawful race and so operate his automobile in such a reckless manner, this accident would never have occurred. He helped create the dangerous event. He was a vital
part of it. The victim's acts were a natural reaction to the stimulus of the situation. The race, the attempt to pass the other car and forge ahead, the reckless speed, all of these factors the defendant himself helped create. . .. That the victim's re-
sponse was normal under the circumstances, that his reaction should have been expected and was

p. 596
p.597
clearly foreseeable, is to me beyond argument. That the defendant's recklessness was a substantial factor is obvious. All of this, in my opinion, makes his unlawful conduct a direct cause of the resulting collision. .. .
PROBLEMS

1. In a highly publicized auto accident, Princess Diana and a friend were killed, along with the driver of their car, when he crashed into the pillar of a tunnel in Paris.1! “Paparazzi” were pursuing her car at high speed in order to take
pictures of her with her companion, and her driver, who was heavily intoxicated, apparently accelerated to evade the paparazzi and then lost control of the car. The attempt to take her picture in public was not illegal, but during their chase, the
paparazzi apparently reached speeds that were dangerous and possibly unlawful. French authorities considered holding some of the photographers responsible for the crash, but ultimately decided not to charge any of them.12 What would be the
result under American law? If the accident had occurred in an American city, could the paparazzi be convicted of manslaughter for the deaths of Diana and her companion? For the death of her driver? Is this situation controlled by Root or by cases
like Kern and Matos, discussed at pp. 594-595 supra?

2. Perez-Cervantes stabbed Thomas in the back and side. Thomas was treated at a hospital and released in stable condition. After his release, he resumed his prior consumption of cocaine. The drug raised his blood pressure and
caused his internal wounds to bleed again; within a week he died from internal bleeding. Is Perez-Cervantes responsible for Thomas's death? As we have seen, Note 4, p. 578 supra, when a defendant's act proves fatal because of the victim's
unforeseeable but preexisting condition, the defendant can be held responsible for homicide, under the doctrine that “he takes his victim as he finds him.” Is Perez-Cervantes therefore guilty of homicide? Or is he not guilty, because Thomas's act
of taking cocaine after his release from the hospital constitutes an intervening cause? Should the answer depend on whether Thomas's preexisting condition was simply prior experience with cocaine, or whether instead he was addicted, so that
his actions after the offense could be considered “involuntary”? See State v. Perez-Cervantes, 6 P.3d 1160 (Wash. 2000).

Recall that in State v. Lane, p. 579 supra, the defendant was found guilty of manslaughter after he punched a drunk, who then died from brain swelling attributable to the impact of the punch on a brain affected by chronic alcoholism.
Thus, the upshot of the vulnerable-victim and intervening-actor doctrines seems to be that Lane is liable, because his victim's substance abuse occurred before the illegal blow, but that Perez-Cervantes may not be liable because his victim's sub-
stance abuse occurred, in part, after the illegal blow. Does this difference in results make sense? Is there any sound policy reason for treating the two cases differently?

p.597
p. 598
State v. McFadden
‘Supreme Court of lowa
320 N.W.2d 608 (1982)

ALLBEE, J. This case stems from a drag race between defendant Michael Dwayne McFadden and another driver, Matthew Sulgrove. . . . Sulgrove lost control of his automobile and swerved into a lane of oncoming traffic, where he struck

a lawfully operated northbound vehicle. This third vehicle contained a six-year-old passenger, Faith Ellis, who was killed in the collision along with Sulgrove. Defendant's automobile did not physically contact either of the two colliding vehicles.

Defendant was charged with two counts of involuntary manslaughter. . .. Having waived a jury, defendant was tried to the court and convicted and sentenced on both counts. In this appeal, . . . defendant's main contention is that proof
of the causation element . . . was lacking.

[In the deaths of both Ellis and Sulgrove, the trial court found the defendant guilty under two distinct theories. One was that he had aided and abetted Sulgrove in Sulgrove's commission of involuntary manslaughter and was therefore
vicariously responsible for Sulgrove's crimes. This kind of vicarious liability and the aiding-and-abetting doctrine are examined beginning at p. 651 infra. The trial court's other theory was] that defendant himself committed the crime of involuntary
manslaughter by recklessly engaging in a drag race so as to proximately cause the Sulgrove-Ellis collision.

. . Although a vicarious liability theory may be sufficient to convict defendant for the death of Faith Ellis, the same is not true with regard to the death of Sulgrove. This is because the involuntary manslaughter statute requires proof that
the perpetrator caused the death of “another person.” Obviously, Sulgrove could not have committed involuntary manslaughter with respect to his own death. Therefore, a theory under which defendant is only vicariously liable for Sulgrove's crime
would be inadequate to convict defendant for Sulgrove's death. We turn, then, to consideration of the [other] theory of liability, i.e., that defendant's reckless commission of the public offense of drag racing was a proximate cause of the Sulgrove
and Ellis deaths. . ..

Defendant asserts that because Sulgrove was a competitor in the drag race, he assumed the risk of his own death, and therefore defendant could not be convicted or sentenced for that death. . .. [We disagree,] “The acts and omissions
of two or more persons may work concurrently as the efficient cause of an injury and in such case each of the participating acts or omissions is regarded in law as a proximate cause.” [Commonwealth v. Peak, 12 Pa. D. & C. 379, 382 (1961),]

Next, defendant contends [that the] trial court erred in applying the civil standard of proximate cause in a criminal prosecution, rather than adopting the more stringent standard of “direct causal connection” used by the Pennsylvania
court in Commonwealth v. Root, 170 A.2d 310, 314 (Pa. 1961). In Root, the court held that “the tort liability concept of proximate cause has no proper place in prosecutions for criminal homicide and more direct causal connection is required for
conviction,”. . . We had occasion to consider a similar standard-of-causation issue in State v. Marti, 290 N.W.2d 570, 584-585 (lowa 1980). [Wle said in Marti that we were “unwilling to hold as a blanket rule of law that instructions used in civil trials

p. 598
Tenn 599
regarding proximate cause are inappropriate for criminal trials.” [Defendant has suggested no specific policy differences, nor can we think of any, that would justify a different standard of proximate causation under our involuntary manslaughter
statute than under our tort law. The Root court opined that “Jegal theory which makes guilt or innocence of criminal homicide depend upon such accidental and fortuitous circumstances as are now embraced by modern tort law's encompassing
concept of proximate cause is too harsh to be just.” We do not agree. . . . We believe the foreseeability requirement, coupled with the requirement of recklessness . . . will prevent the possibility of harsh or unjust results in involuntary manslaugh-
ter cases...

Accordingly, we hold that trial court did not err in applying ordinary proximate cause principles to determine whether the causation element . . . had been met, and in declining to adopt the more stringent “direct causal connection”
standard of Root.

[Convictions affirmed]

Commonwealth v. Atencio
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts
345 Mass. 627, 189 N.E.2d 323 (1963)

Witkins, C.J. Each defendant has been convicted upon an indictment for manslaughter in the death of Stewart E. Britch. ...

On Sunday, October 22, 1961, the deceased, his brother Ronald, and the defendants spent the day drinking wine in the deceased's room in a rooming house in Boston. At some time in the afternoon, with reference to nothing specific
so far as the record discloses, Marshall said, “I will settle this,” went out, and in a few minutes returned clicking a gun, from which he removed one bullet. Early in the evening Ronald left, and the conversation turned to “Russian roulette.”

[The “game” was played. The deceased and Atencio were seated on a bed, and Marshall was seated on a couch. First, Marshall examined the gun, saw that it contained one cartridge, and after spinning it on his arm, pointed it at his
head, and pulled the trigger. Nothing happened. He handed the gun to Atencio, who repeated the process, again without result. Atencio passed the gun to the deceased, who spun it, put it to his head, then pulled the trigger. The cartridge ex-
ploded, and he fell over dead. . ..

We are of opinion that the defendants could properly have been found guilty of manslaughter. This is not a civil action against the defendants by the personal representatives of Stewart Britch. In such a case his voluntary act, we
assume, would be a bar. Here the Commonwealth had an interest that the deceased should not be killed by the wanton or reckless conduct of himself and others. .. . Such conduct could be found in the concerted action and cooperation of the de-
fendants in helping to bring about the deceased's foolish act... .

The defendants argue . . . that there were three “games” of solitaire and not one “game” of “Russian roulette.” [But it] is not correct to say that his act could not be found to have been caused by anything which Marshall and Atencio did,
nor that he would have died when the gun went off in his hand no matter whether

p.599

. 600
they had done the same. The testimony does not require a ruling that when the deceased took the gun from Atencio it was an independent or intervening act. . . . In the abstract, there may have been no duty on the defendants to prevent the
deceased from playing. But there was a duty on their part not to cooperate or join with him in the “game.”. . . The defendants were much more than merely present at a crime. It would not be necessary that the defendants force the deceased to
play or suggest that he play.

We are referred in both briefs to cases of manslaughter arising out of automobiles racing upon the public highway. . . . Whatever may be thought of those . . . decisions, there is a very real distinction between drag racing and “Russian
roulette.” In the former much is left to the skill, or lack of it, on the competitor. In “Russian roulette” it is a matter of luck as to the location of the one bullet, and except for a misfire (of which there was evidence in the case at bar) the outcome is a
certainty if the chamber under the hammer happens to be the one containing the bullet. ..

The judgments on the indictments for manslaughter are affirmed. . . .

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. The drug provider. Suppose Lee gives Tyler a gun, knowing or even hoping that Tyler will use it to commit suicide. As we have seen in Campbell (p. 584 supra), if Tyler uses the gun to commit suicide, Lee cannot be held for
homicide; at most Lee might be guilty of assisting a suicide. But suppose Lee provides Tyler with cocaine or heroin, not expecting Tyler to die from it, but just to facilitate Tyler's desire to get high. If Tyler dies of a drug overdose, a court would often
ignore the intervening-act doctrine (just as the courts did in the McFadden and Atencio cases); courts are typically willing to hold the drug supplier responsible for the foreseeable, though freely chosen, acts of the purchaser. E.g., Pena v. State, 901
So. 2d 781 (Fla. 2005). How can we explain the paradox that if Lee intends to help Tyler enjoy the drug, Lee can be held liable for killing Tyler, but if Lee intends for Tyler to die, there is no liability? For discussion, see Lisa Cherkassky, Kennedy and
Unlawful Act Manslaughter: An Unorthodox Application of the Doctrine of Causation, 72 J. Crim. L. 387 (2008).

2. Statutory formulations. MPC §2.03 holds an actor responsible for a result when the action is a but-for antecedent, if it involves the same kind of harm the actor intended or risked and is “not too remote or accidental in its occur-
rence to have a [just] bearing on the actor's liability or on the gravity of his offense.” In Causation in the Law 398 (2d ed. 1985), H.L.A. Hart and Tony Honoré criticize this formulation:

[It] does not provide specifically for those cases where . . . another human action . . . is involved in the production of the proscribed harm. These are treated merely as one kind of case where harm may or may not be “too

accidental” in its manner or occurrence. This is surely a weakness in a scheme which is designed to reproduce . . . the convictions of common sense that, even if harm would not have occurred without the act of accused, it

is still necessary to distinguish, for purposes of punishment, one manner of upshot from another. For whatever else may be vague or disputable about common sense in regard to causation and responsibility,

p.600

p.601

it is surely clear that the primary case where it is reluctant to treat a person as having caused harm which would not have occurred without his act is that where another voluntary human action has intervened.

Is this criticism persuasive? Would it be an improvement to provide, as several states have, that the result must be “not . . . too dependent on another's volitional conduct to have a bearing on the defendant's liability”? See Haw. Rev.
Stat. §702-215(2) (2021); N.J. Stat. Ann. §2C:2-3 (2021).

B. ATTEMPT

1. Introduction

Statutory definitions of the crime of attempt are usually minimal. Consider some representative examples: “A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime when, with intent to commit a crime, he engages in conduct which tends to
effect the commission of such crime” (N.Y. Penal Law §110.00 (2021)); “Every person who attempts to commit any crime, but fails, or is prevented or intercepted in its perpetration shall be punished . . . ” (Cal. Penal Code §664) (2021)); “A person
commits the offense of attempt when, with intent to commit a specific offense, he or she does any act which constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense” (720 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/8-4(a) (2021).

At common law, attempts were misdemeanors. Today, the usual punishment for attempt is a reduced factor of the punishment for the completed crime. In California (Cal. Penal Code §664 (2021)), attempt carries a maximum term of
not more than one-half of the maximum term authorized for the completed offense.12 Under New York Penal Law, which uses punishment classification of offenses, the sentence for an attempt is generally one classification below that for the
completed crime (§110.05 (2021), except for certain offenses, notably drug offenses, where the punishment is the same. Since the MPC proposals, however, many states have departed from the predominant scheme by making the punishment the
same for the attempt as for the crime attempted, except for crimes punishable by death or life imprisonment, such as murder, kidnapping, and aggravated rape. See, e.g., Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. §53a-51 (2021).

What is the justification for the traditional approach of punishing attempt less severely than the completed crime? The relationship of harm to the proper degree of punishment is a pervasive problem in criminal law. The issue is implicit
in several topics we have already considered. Thus, causation cases require us to consider why conduct that causes harm should ever be treated differently from identical conduct that does not. A similar issue is implicit in the Chapter 5 materials
dealing with homicidal risk. An actor whose recklessness or criminal negligence creates a substantial risk of death can be convicted of manslaughter and sometimes even of

p.601

p.602
murder when death results. But what crime has the actor committed if the person the actor endangers suffers only nonlethal injuries or escapes with no injuries at all? Because such an actor is not “attempting” to kill anyone, the actor normally
cannot be convicted of any form of attempted homicide. (We explore this point in connection with the mens rea of attempt at p. 604 infra.) Absent some statutory risk-creation offense (such as MPC §211.2), such an actor may have committed no
crime at all. But even if a criminal offense applies to the conduct, its penalties will be far lower than those applicable when a death occurs.

The law of attempts poses the same issue in its starkest form. The actor who intentionally seeks to cause harm (the death of another person, for example) is traditionally punished much less severely if the attempt proves unsuccessful.
Is it justified to attribute importance in punishment to the actual result of a defendant's conduct? Consider the following comments.

3 JAMES FITZJAMES STEPHEN, A HISTORY OF THE CRIMINAL LAW 311 (1883): If two persons are guilty of the very same act of negligence, and if one of them causes thereby a railway accident, involving the death and mutilation of many persons,
whereas the other does no injury to anyone, it seems to me that it would be rather pedantic than rational to say that each had committed the same offence, and should be subjected to the same punishment. In one sense, each has committed an

offence, but the one has had the bad luck to cause a horrible misfortune, and to attract public attention to it, and the other the good fortune to do no harm. Both certainly deserve punishment, but it gratifies a natural public feeling to choose out for
punishment the one who actually has caused great harm, and the effect in the way of preventing a repetition of the offence is much the same as if both were punished.

HLL.A. HART, THE MORALITY OF THE CRIMINAL LAW 52-53 (1965): [Professor Hart, after quoting the above extract from Stephen, observes!] This doctrine allocating to “public feeling” so important a place in the determination of punishment
reflects the element of populism which, as we have seen, is often prominent in English judicial conceptions of the morality of punishment. But it conflicts with important principles of justice as between different offenders which would prima facie
preclude treating two persons, guilty of “the very same act” of negligence, differently because of a fortuitous difference in the outcome of these acts. No doubt there is often an inclination to treat punishment like compensation and measure it
by the outcome alone. There may even be at times a public demand that this should be done. And no doubt if the machinery of justice were nullified or could not proceed unless the demand were gratified we might have to gratify it and hope to
educate people out of this misassimilation of the principles of punishment to those of compensation. But there seems no good reason for adopting this misassimilation as a principle or to stigmatise as pedantic the refusal to recognise that the dif-
ference made by “bad fortune” and “good luck” to the outcome of the very same acts justifies punishing the one and not the other.
JOEL FEINBERG, EQUAL PUNISHMENT FOR FAILED ATTEMPTS, 37 ARIZ. L. REV. 117, 131(1995): The principle of proportionality . . . does not decree that the severity of the punishment be proportionate to the offender's good or bad luck, but rather
to his good or bad deserts, or blameworthiness.
p.602
p.603
AYA GRUBER, A DISTRIBUTIVE THEORY OF CRIMINAL LAW, 52 WM. & MARY L. REV. 1, 38 (2010): [T]he remedial requirements attendant to actual victimhood simply do not exist when the attempter has not produced harm . . . and a different judi-
cial response is warranted.
STEPHEN J. SCHULHOFER, ATTEMPT, in 1 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF CRIME AND JUSTICE 97 (1983): [T]he most plausible explanation for more lenient treatment of attempts is that the community's resentment and demand for punishment are not aroused
to the same degree when serious harm has been averted. This explanation, however, raises further questions. Can severe punishment (in the case of completed crime, for example) be justified simply by reference to the fact that society “demands”
or at least desires this? To what extent should the structure of penalties serve to express intuitive societal judgments that cannot be rationalized in terms of such instrumental goals as deterrence, isolation, rehabilitation, and even retribution — that
is, condemnation reflecting the moral culpability of the act? Conversely, to what extent should the criminal justice system see its mission as one not of expressing the intuitive social demand for punishment, but rather as one of restraining that de-
mand and of protecting from punishment the offender who, rationally speaking, deserves a less severe penalty?
MODEL PENAL CODE $5.05(1): Except as otherwise provided in this Section, attempt, solicitation and conspiracy are crimes of the same grade and degree as the most serious offense which is attempted or solicited or is an object of the conspir-
acy. An attempt, solicitation or conspiracy to commit a [capital crime or a] felony of the first degree [for example, murder and aggravated offenses of kidnapping, rape, and robbery] is a felony of the second degree. [Under §6.06, a felony of the first
degree is punishable by imprisonment for a term whose minimum is between one and ten years and whose maximum is life. A felony of the second degree is punishable by imprisonment for a term whose minimum is between one and three years
and whose maximum is ten years.]
MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT to $5.05 at 490 (1985): The theory of this grading system may be stated simply. To the extent that sentencing depends upon the antisocial disposition of the actor and the demonstrated need
for a corrective sanction, there is likely to be little difference in the gravity of the required measures depending on the consummation or the failure of the plan. It is only when and insofar as the severity of sentence is designed for general deterrent
purposes that a distinction on this ground is likely to have reasonable force. It is doubtful, however, that the threat of punishment for the inchoate crime can add significantly to the net deterrent efficacy of the sanction threatened for the substan-
tive offense that is the actor's object, which he, by hypothesis, ignores. Hence, there is a basis for economizing in use of the heaviest and most afflictive sanctions by removing them from the inchoate crimes.
NOTE
Supporting lighter punishment for unsuccessful attempts, Professor Theodore Y. Blumoff maintains (A Jurisprudence for Punishing Attempts Asymmetrically, 6 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 951, 958, 973 (2003) that “most criminals [have] been
p.603
p60

‘profoundly disadvantaged by unjust social institutions,” and “often have suffered from bad luck which we can hardly imagine”; thus, he argues, less severe punishment for attempts that miscarry does not really reward good luck but instead
serves as a partial “counterweight” to the overall bad luck of the defendant's social circumstances. For another defense of lesser punishment when the harm does not occur, see Michael Moore, The Independent Moral Significance of Wrongdoing,
1 J. Contemp. Legal Issues 1 (1994); for a critique of Professor Moore’s argument, see Kimberly D. Kessler, The Role of Luck in the Criminal Law, 142 U. Pa. L. Rev. 2183 (1994). For further discussion, see Sanford H. Kadish, The Criminal Law and
the Luck of the Draw, 84 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 679 (1994); Stephen J. Schulhofer, Harm and Punishment: A Critique of Emphasis on the Results of Conduct in the Criminal Law, 122 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1497 (1974).

2. Mens Rea
Smallwood v. State

Court of Appeals, Maryland

680 A.2d 512 (Md. 1996)

Murpny, Chief Judge. [Smallwood was convicted in a non-jury trial of assault with intent to murder and three counts of attempted second-degree murder, based on evidence that despite his awareness that he was HIV positive and that
he had been warned by a social worker of the need to practice “safe sex,” he committed three rapes and did not use a condom in any of the attacks.]

Smallwood argues that the fact that he engaged in unprotected sexual intercourse, even though he knew that he carried HIV, is insufficient to infer an intent to kill. The most that can reasonably be inferred, Smallwood contends, is that
he is guilty of recklessly endangering his victims by exposing them to the risk that they would become infected themselves. The State disagrees, arguing that the facts of this case are sufficient to infer an intent to kill. The State likens Smallwood’s
HIV-positive status to a deadly weapon and argues that engaging in unprotected sex when one is knowingly infected with HIV is equivalent to firing a loaded firearm at that person.

..- HIV [is] a retrovirus that attacks the human immune system, weakening it, and ultimately destroying the body's capacity to ward off disease:

[t]he virus may reside latently in the body for periods as long as ten years or more, during which time the infected person will manifest no symptoms of illness and function normally. ... Medical studies have indicated that

most people who carry the virus will progress to AIDS. . . .

In this case, we must determine what legal inferences may be drawn when an individual infected with the HIV virus knowingly exposes another to the risk of HIV infection, and the resulting risk of death by AIDS. . . .

“[T]he required intent in the crimes of assault with intent to murder and attempted murder is the specific intent to murder, i.e., the specific intent to kill

p. 604

p. 605
under circumstances that would not legally justify or excuse the killing or mitigate it to manslaughter.” State v. Earp, 319 Md. 156, 167 (1990). [Smallwood] was properly found guilty of attempted murder and assault with intent to murder only if there
was sufficient evidence from which the trier of fact could reasonably have concluded that Smallwood possessed a specific intent to kill at the time he assaulted each of the three women. . . .

An intent to kill may be proved by circumstantial evidence. . . . As we have repeatedly stated, “under the proper circumstances, an intent to kill may be inferred from the use of a deadly weapon directed at a vital part of the human
body.” [In State v. Raines, 326 Md. 582 (1992),] we upheld the use of such an inference. In that case, Raines and a friend were traveling on a highway when the defendant fired a pistol into the driver's side window of a tractor trailer in an adja-
cent lane. The shot killed the driver of the tractor trailer, and Raines was convicted of first-degree murder. . . . Raines shot at the driver’s window of the truck, knowing that the truck driver was immediately behind the window. We concluded that
“Raines's actions in directing the gun at the window, and therefore at the driver's head on the other side of the window, permitted an inference that Raines shot the gun with the intent to kill.”

The State argues that our analysis in Raines rested upon two elements: (1) Raines knew that his weapon was deadly, and (2) Raines knew that he was firing it at someone's head. The State argues that Smallwood similarly knew that HIV
infection ultimately leads to death, and that he knew that he would be exposing his victims to the risk of HIV transmission by engaging in unprotected sex with them. Therefore, the State argues, a permissible inference can be drawn that Small-
wood intended to kill each of his three victims. The State's analysis, however, ignores several factors.

First, we must consider the magnitude of the risk to which the victim is knowingly exposed. The inference drawn in Raines, supra, rests upon the rule that “[ijt is permissible to infer that ‘one intends the natural and probable conse-
quences of his act.’”. .. When a deadly weapon has been fired at a vital part of a victim's body, the risk of killing the victim is so high that it becomes reasonable to assume that the defendant intended the victim to die as a natural and probable
consequence of the defendant's actions.

. .. While the risk to which Smallwood exposed his victims when he forced them to engage in unprotected sexual activity must not be minimized, the State has presented no evidence from which it can reasonably be concluded that
death by AIDS is a probable result of Smallwood’s actions to the same extent that death is the probable result of firing a deadly weapon at a vital part of someone's body. Without such evidence, it cannot fairly be concluded that death by AIDS was
sufficiently probable to support an inference that Smallwood intended to kill his victims in the absence of other evidence indicative of an intent to kill.

In this case, we find no additional evidence from which to infer an intent to kill. Smallwood’s actions are wholly explained by an intent to commit rape and armed robbery, the crimes for which he has already pled guilty. . . .

The cases cited by the State demonstrate the sort of additional evidence needed to support an inference that Smallwood intended to kill his victims. The defendants in these cases have either made explicit statements demonstrating an

p. 605

. 606
intent to infect their victims or have taken specific actions demonstrating such an intent and tending to exclude other possible intents. In State v. Hinkhouse, 912 P.2d 921 (Or. App. 1996), for example, the defendant engaged in unprotected sex
with a number of women while knowing that he was HIV positive. The defendant had also actively concealed his HIV-positive status from these women, had lied to several of them by stating that he was not HIV-positive, and had refused the
women’s requests that he wear condoms. There was also evidence that he had told at least one of his sexual partners that “if he were (HIV-positive, he would spread the virus to other people.”. . . The Oregon Court of Appeals found this evidence
to be sufficient to demonstrate an intent to kill. .. . In State v. Caine, 652 So. 2d 611 (La. App. 1995), a conviction for attempted second-degree murder was upheld where the defendant had jabbed a used syringe into a victim's arm while shouting
“tl give you AIDS.”. ..

In contrast with these cases, the State in this case would allow the trier of fact to infer an intent to kill based solely upon the fact that Smallwood exposed his victims to the risk that they might contract HIV. Without evidence showing
that such a result is sufficiently probable to support this inference, we conclude that Smallwood’s convictions for attempted murder and assault with intent to murder must be reversed.
NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. The intent requirement. Both the common law and most American statutes are in accord with the holding in Smallwood that an attempt requires a purpose (or “specific intent”) to produce the proscribed result, even when
recklessness or some lesser mens rea would suffice for conviction of the completed offense. See, e.g., People v. Beck, 24 Cal. Rptr. 3d 228, 230 (2005) (“[E]very attempt requires specific intent to commit the target crime even if the completed
crime does not require specific intent.”); People v. Aponte, 944 N.E.2d 204 (N.Y. 2011). In Jones v. State, 689 N.E.2d 722 (Ind. 1997), the defendant shot at a house full of people, wounding several and killing one. He was convicted of murder of the
person he killed but acquitted of attempted murder of those he wounded. The court rejected defendant's claim that this was an inconsistent verdict. Attempted murder requires a specific intent to kill, but it is sufficient for murder that defendant en-
gages in conduct knowing of a high probability that in doing so he will kill someone.

2. Why specific intent? Why should an attempt conviction require a “specific intent” or “purpose” if defendants, though they lacked “purpose,” had the mental state sufficient for conviction of the substantive offense? Since an at-
tempt is generally punished less severely, why should it require a more culpable mens rea? Consider three possible explanations. One is linguistic: To attempt something is to try to

p. 606
p.607

accomplish it, and one cannot be said to try if one does not intend to succeed. Another explanation is moral: One who intends to commit a criminal harm does a greater moral wrong than one who does so recklessly or negligently. The third is
utilitarian: As Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. put it in The Common Law 68 (1881): “The importance of the intent is not to show that the act was wicked but that it was likely to be followed by hurtful consequences.”

Does Justice Holmes's explanation for the intent requirement apply in a case like Thacker v. Commonwealth, 114 S.E. 504 (Va. 1922)? A man who was drunk, angered by the refusal of a woman who was camping ina tent to admit him,
walked down the road, turned, and shot at the light shining through the canvas. If the bullet had accidentally killed the woman, the defendant could be convicted of murder. But in Thacker, the bullet fortunately missed the woman. The court held
that the defendant, lacking intent to kill, could not be convicted of attempted murder. But why do we need the bullet to hit the woman to be assured that the action “was likely to be followed by hurtful consequences”? Moreover, if the defendant is
not guilty of attempt, for what crime (if any) could he be convicted? Do the penalties provided for an offense such as MPC §211.2 (reckless endangerment) afford adequate punishment for a case of this kind? Consider another observation of Jus-
tice Holmes in The Common Law at 66:

It may be true in the region of attempts, as elsewhere, the law began with cases of actual intent, as those cases are the most obvious ones. But it cannot stop with them, unless it attaches more importance to the etymolog-

ical meaning of the word attempt than to the general principles of punishment.

Consider People v. Thomas, 729 P.2d 972 (Colo. 1986). The defendant fired three shots at a man he believed to be a fleeing rapist. Two of the shots struck the man. The defendant claimed that one of the shots had been fired acciden-
tally and that the other two were warming shots. At trial, he was convicted of attempted reckless manslaughter under Colo. Rev. Stat. §18-2-101(1), which provides:

A person commits criminal attempt if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for commission of an offense, he engages in conduct constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the offense.

Noting that the statute differed from MPC §5.01, the Colorado Supreme Court upheld a conviction for attempted reckless manslaughter, but the court declined to rest that result solely on the language of the attempt statute. Instead, the
court reasoned that the traditional requirement of intent served to identify cases where conduct was likely to produce harmful consequences. The court found that the necessary potential for future harm is present not only in cases of intentional
conduct but also when the defendant knows that the prohibited result is

p.607
p. 608
practically certain to occur or when he recklessly disregards a substantial risk. And where a defendant used an AK-47 to shoot wildly at an unoccupied parked vehicle and wounded two girls in a nearby home, the Colorado courts upheld a convic-
tion for attempted murder on the basis of “malice manifesting extreme indifference to human life.” People v. Rubio, 222 P.3d 355, 359 (Colo. Ct. App. 2009).15
QUESTION: Under Colorado's statute, is the crime of attempted negligent homicide committed every time that a Colorado motorist substantially exceeds the speed limit or drives while intoxicated? Should such conduct be punishable as an
attempt? For an argument in favor of creating an offense of attempted homicide on the basis of recklessness — and careful analysis of the difficulties of relying solely on an offense like MPC §211.2 (reckless endangerment) as a gap-filler — see
Michael T. Cahill, Attempt, Reckless Homicide, and the Design of the Criminal Law, 78 U. Colo. L. Rev. 879 (2007).

3. Attempted manslaughter? Where, as in nearly all jurisdictions, an attempt requires specific intent, there clearly can be no crime of attempted involuntary manslaughter: The attempt charge requires proof of intent to kill, and the
essence of involuntary manslaughter is unintentional killing, so such a charge is a contradiction in terms. See State v. Holbron, 904 P.2d 912 (Haw. 1995). But can there be a crime of attempted voluntary manslaughter? Suppose that a defendant,
acting under extreme provocation, shoots at a provoker, trying to kill that person. Is the defendant attempting to commit murder or manslaughter? In Holbron, the court stated (id. at 922) that “the overwhelming weight of the case law” recognizes
the offense of attempted voluntary manslaughter. See, e.g., State v. Brown, 464 P.3d 938 (Kan. 2020).

4, Attempted felony-murder? Two defendants fire at a guard in the course of their escape from a bank holdup, a felony. The guard is wounded but survives. The defendants intended to frighten the guard but did not intend to kill him.
Can they be convicted of attempted felony-murder on the ground that they had a specific intent to commit the felony? Most courts that have considered the issue have rejected the concept of attempted felony-murder. See, e.g., State v. Sanders,
827 S.E.2d 214 (W. Va. 2019). Arkansas is a rare exception. See White v. State, 585 S.W.2d 952 (Ark. 1979). Florida also recognizes attempted felony-murder, but it did so through a statute passed in 2017, not through a court decision. In order to

distinguish those felonies that amount to attempted felony-murder from all felonies, the Act specifies that the person must commit “an intentional act that is not an essential element of the felony and that could, but does not, cause the death of
another.” Fla. Stat. §782.051 (2021). Does Florida's approach draw a meaningful line? Why the virtual unanimity against such a concept? After all, a robber can be held for felony murder when a wounded victim dies, so shouldn't the robber be held
for attempted felony-murder if the wounded victim survives? Note the
p.608
p.609
implications of that view: A robber is guilty of felony murder if the victim dies from a heart attack, so should it follow that a robber is guilty of attempted felony-murder if the victim has a nonfatal heart attack? Should every robber and burglar be
guilty of attempted felony-murder, even if shots are never fired and none of the victims suffers any physical injury?

5. Transferred intent? Typically, an attempt is a lesser included offense of the completed crime, meaning that one cannot be convicted of both an attempted and completed crime. See, e.g., Lee v. State, 15 N.E.3d 670, 677 (Ind. Ct.
App. 2014) ("{I]t should go without saying that attempted murder is an inherently lesser included offense to murder.”); Cal. Penal Code §1159 (2021).1° But recall that under the transferred intent doctrine one can be convicted of murder for killing an
unintended victim. See pp. 582-584 supra. Some jurisdictions uphold the possibility of convicting such a defendant with both murder of the unintended victim and attempted murder of the intended victim. See, e.g., People v. Scott, 927 P.2d 288
(Cal. 1996). Is this a violation of the rule that one cannot be convicted of both attempt and the completed crime?

6. The meaning of specific intent. While the specific intent requirement is broadly accepted, its meaning in practice is not always clear. When a harmful result does not materialize, what precisely is the difference between intent,
belief that the result will occur, and recklessness? For example, in Smallwood, p. 604 supra, how much additional evidence would have been required to support an inference that Smallwood intended to kill? The court discussed several cases as.
examples. In Hinkhouse, the defendant, like Smallwood, knew he had HIV, both defendants failed to use condoms, and both failed to disclose their HIV status to their sexual partners. But Smallwood did not affirmatively misrepresent his HIV status
(instead he secured his victims’ submission by force), while Hinkhouse lied to his otherwise consenting sexual partners. Why should that difference make Hinkhouse (but not Smallwood) guilty of attempted murder? Taking account of his deliberate
deception, was Hinkhouse’s mens rea (with respect to the risk of killing his partners) one of intention, belief, or mere recklessness?

Another difference between the cases may have been important: Hinkhouse told one of his partners that he believed intercourse by an HIV-positive person “would” transmit the virus. But does that additional fact establish an intent to
kill or only his belief? Under MPC §2.02(2)(a)(i), a person is deemed to act purposely with respect to a harmful result only when it is his “conscious object . . . to cause such a result” (emphasis added). Does this requirement mean that Hinkhouse
could not be convicted of attempted murder under the Code? Consider this hypothetical: Defendant, in order to destroy a competitor's experimental aircraft, plants a bomb on the plane and sets it to explode in midair, having no particular wish to
injure the test pilot but knowing that if the bomb goes off as intended, the pilot will be killed. The bomb fails to explode. May the defendant be convicted of attempted murder? Does the defendant have a “purpose” or “specific intent” to kill? Note
the solution to this problem in MPC §5.01(1)(b): The required mens rea is satisfied

p.609
p.610
if the defendant acts “with the purpose of causing or with the belief that [his conduct] will cause” the prohibited result.

7. Attendant circumstances. Does the specific intent requirement extend to attendant circumstances that are necessary elements of the crime attempted? The issue can arise, for example, when a defendant is charged with at-
tempted rape, in situations where the act of penetration was not completed. If the defendant claims a mistake of fact about the victim's age or lack of consent, should an attempt conviction require only the mens rea required to convict for rape in
cases where the act of penetration has been completed (a mens rea that often is recklessness or only negligence with respect to lack of consent and may only be strict liability with respect to age)? Or should an attempt conviction require proof
that the defendant knew that valid consent was lacking? Consider the following efforts to address the issue:

(a) In Regina v. Khan, [1990] 1 W.L.R. 813, the judge instructed the jury that the completed offense of rape requires proof that the defendant had intercourse and either knew that the woman did not consent or “was reckless as to
whether [she] was consenting or not.” The judge then explained that when a defendant unsuccessfully seeks to have intercourse with the victim, “the principles relevant to consent apply in exactly the same way in attempted rape.” The defendant
was convicted of attempted rape. The court of appeal affirmed, stating:

[Thhe intent of the defendant is precisely the same in rape and in attempted rape and the mens reais identical, namely, an intention to have intercourse plus a knowledge of or recklessness as to the woman’s absence of con-

sent. . .. We believe this to be a desirable result which in the instant case did not require the jury to be burdened with different directions as to the accused’s state of mind, dependent upon whether the individual achieved or

failed to achieve sexual intercourse.

(b) In Commonwealth v. Dunne, 474 N.E.2d 538 (Mass. 1985), the defendant was convicted of assault with intent to commit statutory rape, an offense that the court referred to as “attempted statutory rape.” The statutory age of consent
was 16, and the victim was 15 years and 4 months old on the date of the offense. The defendant unsuccessfully sought to have intercourse with the victim and there was no allegation that he knew (or should have known) that the victim was under-
age. Affirming the conviction, the court said:

[In Massachusetts,] in a prosecution for statutory rape “it is immaterial that the defendant reasonably believed that the victim was sixteen years of age or older.” This is the rule in most jurisdictions. Similarly, in a prosecution

for an assault with intent to commit statutory rape, this court has held that whether or not the defendant is aware of the victim’s age is irrelevant. . . . Indeed, it would be incongruous for us to posit one rule for the completed

act and another for the attempt.

Are these cases sound? How can people be convicted of attempting (trying) to do what they don’t realize they are doing?

(c) How the text of the MPC (§5.01) would handle these cases is less than clear, but the Commentary states that §5.01(1) is meant to reach the same conclusion as

p.610
p.6tt
these cases. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comments to §5.01 at 301-304 (1985):

In the statutory rape example, the actor must have a purpose to engage in sexual intercourse with a female in order to be charged with the attempt, and must engage in a substantial step in a course of conduct planned to

culminate in his commission of that act [§5.01(1)(c)]. With respect to the age of the victim, however, it is sufficient if he acts “with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the commission of the crime” [§5.01(1)], which in

the case supposed is none at all. Since, therefore, mistake as to age is irrelevant with respect to the substantive offense, it is likewise irrelevant with respect to the attempt.

QUESTION: Is this a persuasive reading of §5.01(1)? Is it a desirable result, or does it cast the net of criminality too widely in situations where a defendant has neither caused nor intended to cause the harm of rape?
(d) For a probing analysis of the mens rea issues as to attendant circumstances required for attempt, see Larry Alexander & Kimberley D. Kessler, Mens Rea and Inchoate Crimes, 87 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1139, 1157 (1997). Con-
cerning the difficulties of distinguishing circumstance elements from conduct or consequence elements, see R.A. Duff, The Circumstances of an Attempt, 50 Cambridge L.J. 104-111 (1991).

3. Preparation versus Attempt
KING v. BARKER [1924] N.Z.L.R. 865: That the common law has recognized the distinction between acts of attempt and acts of preparation — between acts which are, and acts which are not, too remote to constitute a criminal attempt — is
undoubted. . . . If, however, we proceed to inquire as to the precise nature of the distinction thus recognised and indicated, we find that the common law authorities are almost as silent as the Crimes Act itself. . . . The rule . .. suggested [by Baron
Parke] in R. v. Eagleton [169 E.R. 826 (1855)] was that in order to constitute a criminal attempt, as opposed to mere preparation, the accused must have taken the last step which he was able to take along the road of his criminal intent. He must
have done all that he intended to do and was able to do for the purpose of effectuating his criminal purpose. When he has stopped short of this, whether because he has repented, or because he has been prevented, or because the time or occa-
sion for going further has not arrived, or for any other reason, he still has a locus penitentiae® and still remains within the region of innocent preparation. . . . On this principle the act of firing a pistol at a man would be attempted murder, although the

bullet missed him. . . . But the prior and preliminary acts of procuring and loading the pistol, and of going with it to look for his enemy, and of lying in wait for him, and even of presenting the pistol at him, would not constitute criminal attempts, none
of these being the proximate and final step towards the fulfillment of his criminal purpose. . . .
pert
p.612

Subsequent authorities make it clear that the [Eagleton] test is not the true one. [l]n R. v. White, [1910] 2 K.B. 124 it was held that the first administration of poison in a case of intended slow poisoning by repeated doses amounted in
itself to attempted murder. It is said by the Court: “The completion [or attempted completion] of one of a series of acts intended by a man to result in killing is an attempt to murder, even though the completed act would not, unless followed by
other acts, result in killing.” It might be the beginning of an attempt but would none the less be an attempt.

Although the [Eagleton] test has been rejected, no definite substitute for it has been formulated. Alll that can be definitely gathered from the authorities is that to constitute a criminal attempt, the first step along the way of criminal intent
is not necessarily sufficient and the final step is not necessarily required. The dividing line between preparation and attempt is to be found somewhere between these two extremes; but as to the method by which it is to be determined the author-
ities give no clear guidance.

People v. Rizzo
Court of Appeals of New York
246 N.Y. 334, 158 N.E. 888 (1927)

Crane, J. The police of the city of New York did excellent work in this case by preventing the commission of a serious crime. It is a great satisfaction to realize that we have such wide-awake guardians of our peace. Whether or not the
steps which the defendant had taken up to the time of his arrest amounted to the commission of a crime, as defined by our law, is, however, another matter. He has been convicted of an attempt to commit the crime of robbery in the first degree,
and sentenced to state’s prison. There is no doubt that he had the intention to commit robbery, if he got the chance. An examination, however, of the facts is necessary to determine whether his acts were in preparation to commit the crime if the
opportunity offered, or constituted a crime in itself, known to our law as an attempt to commit robbery in the first degree. Charles Rizzo, the defendant, appellant, with three others, . .. on January 14th planned to rob one Charles Rao of a pay roll
valued at about $1,200 which he was to carry from the bank for the United Lathing Company. These defendants, two of whom had firearms, started out in an automobile, looking for Rao or the man who had the pay roll on that day. Rizzo claimed
to be able to identify the man, and was to point him out to the others, who were to do the actual holding up. The four rode about in their car looking for Rao. They went to the bank from which he was supposed to get the money and to various
buildings

p61

p.619
being constructed by the United Lathing Company. At last they came to One Hundred and Eightieth street and Morris Park avenue. By this time they were watched and followed by two police officers. As Rizzo jumped out of the car and ran into the
building, all four were arrested. The defendant was taken out from the building in which he was hiding. Neither Rao nor a man named Previti, who was also supposed to carry a pay roll, were at the place at the time of the arrest. The defendants had
not found or seen the man they intended to rob. . . . The four men intended to rob the pay roll man, whoever he was. They were looking for him, but they had not seen or discovered him up to the time they were arrested.

Does this constitute the crime of an attempt to commit robbery . . . ? The Penal Law prescribes, “An act, done with intent to commit a crime, and tending but failing to effect its commission, is an attempt to commit that crime.” The word
“tending” is very indefinite. It is perfectly evident that there will arise differences of opinion as to whether an act in a given case is one tending to commit a crime. “Tending” means to exert activity in a particular direction. Any act in preparation to
commit a crime may be said to have a tendency towards its accomplishment. The procuring of the automobile, searching the streets looking for the desired victim, were in reality acts tending toward the commission of the proposed crime. The law,
however, has recognized that many acts in the way of preparation are too remote to constitute the crime of attempt. The line has been drawn between those acts which are remote and those which are proximate and near to the consummation.
The law must be practical, and therefore considers those acts only as tending to the commission of the crime which are so near to its accomplishment that in all reasonable probability the crime itself would have been committed, but for timely

interference. The cases which have been before the courts express this idea in different language, but the idea remains the same. The act or acts must come or advance very near to the accomplishment of the intended crime. [As said by Justice
Holmes, dissenting in Hyde v. United States, 225 U.S. 347, 387 (1912):] “There must be dangerous proximity to success.”. ..

How shall we apply this rule of immediate nearness to this case? The defendants were looking for the pay roll man to rob him of his money. . . . To constitute the crime of robbery, the money must have been taken from Rao by means of
force or violence, or through fear. . . . Did the acts above described come dangerously near to the taking of Rao’s property? Did the acts come so near the commission of robbery that there was reasonable likelihood of its accomplishment but for
the interference? Rao was not found; the defendants were still looking for him; no attempt to rob him could be made, at least until he came in sight; he was not in the building at One Hundred and Eightieth street and Morris Park avenue. There was
no man there with the pay roll for the United Lathing Company whom these defendants could rob. Apparently no money had been drawn from the bank for the pay roll by anybody at the time of the arrest. In a word, these defendants had planned
to commit a crime, and were looking around the city for an opportunity to commit it, but the opportunity fortunately never came. Men would not be guilty of an attempt at burglary if they had planned to break into a building and were arrested while
they were hunting about the streets for the building not knowing where it was. Neither would a man be guilty of an attempt to commit murder if he armed himself and started out to find the person whom he had planned to kill but

p.613
p61
could not find him. So here these defendants were not guilty of an attempt to commit robbery . . . when they had not found or reached the presence of the person they intended to rob.
NOTES

1. The dangerous proximity test. The New York attempt statute now requires that the defendant engage in conduct “which tends to effect the commission” of the crime. N.Y. Penal Law §110.00 (2021). The court of appeals has
held that this language makes no change in the law, which continues to be as stated in Rizzo. People v. Acosta, 609 N.E.2d 518, 521 (N.Y. 1993). Many jurisdictions continue to apply Rizzo's dangerous-proximity approach. E.g., Commonwealth v.
Buswell, 9 N.E.3d 276 (Mass. 2014). In Commonwealth v. Bell, 917 N.E.2d 740 (Mass. 2009), an undercover police officer met the defendant in a parking lot and agreed that for $200, she would take him to a nearby park, one mile away, where she
would allow him to have sexual intercourse with her (fictitious) four-year-old child. After telling the defendant to follow her in his car, she drove out of the parking lot, with the defendant close behind. As he turned out of the lot, he was arrested and
subsequently convicted of two offenses: soliciting an act of prostitution and attempted rape. The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court upheld his solicitation conviction but reversed the conviction for attempted rape because “he had yet to see
a child and did not know the exact location of the child. He . . . had not yet paid for the child.” Relying on Justice Holmes's formulation of the proximity requirement (quoted in Rizzo), the court explained: “[W]e look to the actions left to be taken, or
the ‘distance or gap between the defendant's actions and the (unachieved) goal of the consummated crime — the distance must be relatively short, the gap narrow, if the defendant is to be held guilty of a criminal attempt.’ ” Id. at 748. A dissent-
ing opinion observed (id. at 760):

Even if an actual, potential child victim did exist, the Commonwealth, for all practical purposes, would not be able to prosecute any defendant for attempted rape because the police would not (and should not) endanger the

psychological health of the child by permitting the defendant to reach the place where the defendant could commit the sexual crime. [T]he Commonwealth will need to make a perilous choice between allowing a suspect to.

reach the time and place of the commission of his intended crime . . . or intervening earlier and thereby forfeiting any possibility of ever convicting him of the crime of attempt. On television and in the movies, the police al-

ways arrive in the nick of time; in real life, waiting so long does not always work out so well.

2. Proximity evaluated. Are the results in Rizzo and Bell justifiable? What are their implications for effective law enforcement? Consider Glanville Williams, Police Control of Intending Criminals, [1955] Crim. L. Rev. 66, 69:

In a rational system of justice the police would be given every encouragement to intervene early where a suspect is clearly bent on crime. Yet in England, if the police come on the scene too early they may find that they can

do nothing with the intending offender except admonish him.

p61

p61

This is largely because of the rule that an attempt, to be indictable, must be sufficiently “proximate” to the crime intended. . . . One is led to ask whether there is any real need for the requirement of proximity in the law of

attempt. Quite apart from this requirement, it must be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused intended to commit the crime . . . and that he did some act towards committing it. If only a remote act of preparation

is alleged against him, that will weigh with the court in deciding whether he had the firm criminal intention alleged against him. If, however, the court finds that this intention existed, is there any reason why the would-be crim-

inal should not be dealt with by the police and by the criminal courts?

NOTE ON THE INTERACTION BETWEEN ACTUS REUS AND ABANDONMENT

One reason for judicial reluctance to move the threshold of criminality to an earlier point in time has been the desire to preserve for the defendant a “locus penitentiae” — an opportunity to repent, to change one’s mind. It is important to
see how that opportunity to desist could be lost once the defendant crosses the threshold of criminality. First, defendants who have crossed that threshold, but still must do several things in order to complete the crime, may be arrested before they
have the chance to take the necessary steps. Such defendants would be liable for attempt even though we cannot be sure they would have taken those steps. Second, defendants may fully abandon the criminal plan and be arrested later. Here the
defendants could be held liable for committing an attempt (by crossing the threshold of criminality), even though they subsequently did everything in their power to prevent any actual harm.

Should the abandoning of defendants’ criminal purpose afford them a defense to liability? For most offenses, the answer is no: If defendants steal cash from their employer but later return it, their remorse and restitution may affect the
sentence, but they cannot erase liability once the elements necessary for conviction are complete. See Alec Walen, Criminalizing Statements of Terrorist Intent, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 803 (2011). Applying this reasoning, the law traditionally
denied any defense of abandonment, and many courts adhere to that view. See, e.g., United States v. Young, 613 F.3d 735 (8th Cir. 2010) (“[A] defendant cannot abandon an attempt once it has been completed”); State v. Sawyer, 187 A.3d 377,
384 (Vt. 2018) (“[O]ur law on attempt does not permit an abandonment defense.”). To minimize the resulting potential for unfairness, many courts therefore insist that the threshold of criminality be placed very close to the last act, even when this
approach means freeing some defendants who almost certainly would not have repented. Recall the facts of Rizzo and Bell.

Away to avoid this dilemma is to recognize abandonment (sometimes called renunciation) as a complete defense. A number of states have done so, either by statute or judicial decision. A typical requirement is that the abandonment
occur “under circumstances manifesting a voluntary and complete renunciation of [the] criminal purpose.” N.Y. Penal Code §40.10(3) (2021). MPC §5.01(4) is similar. For the definition of when the renunciation is considered “voluntary” and
“complete,”

p61
p.616
see §5.01(4). Most of the revised codes adopt a renunciation defense substantially similar to that of the MPC. See Daniel G. Moriarty, Extending the Defense of Renunciation, 62 Temp. L. Rev. 1, 7-11 (1989).

Consider these cases:

(a) In People v. Johnston, 448 N.Y.S.2d 902, 902-903 (App. Div. 1982), defendant entered a gas station, pulled a gun, and demanded money. When the station attendant produced only $50 and said that this was all the cash available,
defendant departed, stating, “I was just kidding, forget it ever happened.” The court denied a renunciation defense, but several commentators favor a defense in these circumstances. See, e.g., George P. Fletcher, Rethinking Criminal Law 191-192
(1978). Which is the better view?

(b) In People v. McNeal, 393 N.W.2d 907 (Mich. Ct. App. 1986), defendant accosted a young woman who had been waiting at a bus stop and forced her at knife point to accompany him to a house, with the intent to rape her. After an
extended conversation in which the young woman pleaded with him to let her go, defendant released her, saying that he was sorry and would never engage in such behavior again. The court affirmed a conviction for attempted sexual assault,
upholding a finding that because of the victim's “unexpected resistance,” the defendant's renunciation was not voluntary. On similar facts, the court in Ross v. State, 601 So. 2d 872, 875 (Miss. 1992), found abandonment as a matter of law and
reversed a conviction for attempted rape, stating: “[Defendant] did not fail in his attack. No one prevented him from completing it. [The victim] did not sound an alarm. She successfully persuaded Ross, of his own free will, to abandon his attempt.”

(©) Dale plans to kill Val. Dale aims a gun at the back of Val's head and puts a finger on the trigger. Suddenly, Dale feels compassion and mercy and decides not to shoot, leaving the scene without firing a shot and without Val’s ever
realizing the danger. Is Dale guilty of attempted murder? Does Dale have a renunciation defense under the MPC? Would it (or should it) make a difference if Val was aware of being Dale's target?

(d) Imagine a variation on the preceding example. Dale fires one shot at the back of Val's head, intending to kill, but the bullet just barely misses its target. When Val, in shock and surprise, turns to face Dale, Dale is overcome with regret,
and rather than firing another shot, Dale puts down the gun and immediately says “I don't know what came over me. You've always been my best friend. I'll never again try to hurt you.” Is Dale guilty of attempted murder under these facts, or is
there a renunciation defense under the MPC? Should Dale have a defense? Would allowing a renunciation defense give Dale a greater incentive not to pull the trigger in the first place? See Murat C. Mungan, Abandoned Criminal Attempts: An Eco-
nomic Analysis, 67 Ala. L. Rev. 1 (2015).

McQuirter v. State
Alabama Court of Appeals
36 Ala. App. 707, 63 So. 2d 388 (1953)

Price, J. Appellant, a Negro man, was found guilty of an attempt to commit an assault with intent to rape, under an indictment charging an assault with intent to rape. The jury assessed a fine of $500.

p.616
p.6i7

About 8:00 o'clock on the night of June 29, 1951, Mrs. Ted Allen, a white woman, with her two children and a neighbor's little girl, were drinking Coca-Cola at the “Tiny Diner” in Atmore. When they started in the direction of Mrs. Allen’s
home she noticed appellant sitting in the cab of a parked truck. As she passed the truck appellant said something unintelligible, opened the truck door and placed his foot on the running board.

Mrs. Allen testified appellant followed her down the street and when she reached Suell Lufkin’s house she stopped. As she turned into the Lufkin house appellant was within two or three feet of her. She waited ten minutes for appellant
to pass. When she proceeded on her way, appellant came toward her from behind a telephone pole. She told the children to run to Mr. Simmons’ house and tell him to come and meet her. When appellant saw Mr. Simmons he turned and went
back down the street to the intersection and leaned on a stop sign just across the street from Mrs. Allen's home. Mrs. Allen watched him at the sign from Mr. Simmons’ porch for about thirty minutes, after which time he came back down the street
and appellant went on home. ..

Mr. W.E. Strickland, Chief of Police of Atmore, testified that appellant stated in the Atmore jail he didn’t know what was the matter with him; that he was drinking a little; that he and his partner had been to Pensacola; that his partner
went to the “Front” to see a colored woman; that he didn’t have any money and he sat in the truck and made up his mind he was going to get the first woman that came by and that this was the first woman that came by. He said he got out of the
truck, came around the gas tank and watched the lady and when she started off he started off behind her; that he was going to carry her in the cotton patch and if she hollered he was going to kill her. He testified appellant made the same state-
ment in the Brewton jail... .

Appellant, as a witness in his own behalf, testified he and Bill Page, another Negro, cartied a load of junk-iron from Monroeville to Pensacola; on their way back to Monroeville they stopped in Atmore. They parked the truck near the
“Tiny Diner” and rode to the “Front,” the colored section, in a cab. Appellant came back to the truck around 8:00 o'clock and sat in the truck cab for about thirty minutes. He decided to go back to the “Front” to look for Bill Page. As he started up
the street he saw prosecutrix and her children. He turned around and waited until he decided they had gone, then he walked up the street toward the “Front.” When he reached the intersection at the street telegraph pole he decided he didn’t want
to go to the “Front” and sat around there a few minutes, then went on to the “Front” and stayed about 25 to 30 minutes, and came back to the truck.

He denied that he followed Mrs. Allen or made any gesture toward molesting her or the children. He denied making the statements testified to by the officers. . . . Appellant insists the trial court erred in refusing the general affirmative
charge and in denying the motion for a new trial on the ground the verdict was contrary to the evidence. . ..

Under the authorities in this state, to justify a conviction for an attempt to commit an assault with intent to rape the jury must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant intended to have sexual intercourse with prosecutrix
against her will, by force or by putting her in fear. Intent is a question to be determined by the jury from the facts and circumstances adduced on the trial, and if there is evidence from which it may be inferred that at the time of the attempt

p.6t7

pete
defendant intended to gratify his lustful desires against the resistance of the female a jury question is presented. In determining the question of intention the jury may consider social conditions and customs founded upon racial differences, such as
that the prosecutrix was a white woman and defendant was a Negro man.

After considering the evidence in this case we are of the opinion it was sufficient to warrant the submission of the question of defendant's guilt to the jury, and was ample to sustain the judgment of conviction. . . .

Affirmed.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. McQuirter and race. What is troublesome about the conviction in this case? The context of racial bigotry certainly is — Black man, white woman, small town in the South in the 1950s. Indeed, the opinion cites, among other authori-
ties, a case involving a slave charged with the attempted rape of a white woman, in which the Alabama Supreme Court held that “the jury should be instructed to give due consideration to the manner of the slave.” See Bernard E. Harcourt, Imagery
and Adjudication in the Criminal Law: The Relationship Between Images of Criminal Defendants and Ideologies of Criminal Law in Southern Antebellum and Modern Appellate Decisions, 61 Brook. L. Rev. 1165, 1244 (1995) (explaining the slavery-
era origins of McQuirter). Consider also Bennett Capers, The Unintentional Rapist, 87 Wash. U. L. Rev. 1345, 1385 (2010):

When | first read McQuirter, what troubled me as much as McQuirter's conviction was the appellate court's ruling that, “In determining the question of intention the jury may consider social conditions and customs founded

upon racial differences, such as that the prosecutrix was a white woman and the defendant was a negro man.” Now, . . .| appreciate the court’s honesty, though faced with the court's instruction, I might have applied the

instruction differently. The court suggested that McQuirter’s intent was inferable from racial mores. But would not the mores of the time have supported a finding of the absence of intent? Is it really likely that McQuirter, alone

in the white part of town in Alabama in 1951, and observing Mrs. Ted Allen walking along a residential street with two children, intended to assault her, let alone rape her? With neighbors on either side of the street? With

Suell Lufkin’s house right there and with Mr. Simmons watching him? With Mrs. Allen watching him from Mrs. Simmons’ porch? In the state . .. that had a history of lynching black men, and where two black men had been

lynched just the year before? But then again, . . . perhaps the “social conditions and customs” that allowed the jury to infer guilt trumped the “social conditions and customs” that suggested the absence of intent.

Luis Chiesa argues that McQuirter “is troublesome not only because of the way its outcome was infected by race, but also because it is one of the first examples of how the evolving law of attempts gave judges and juries increased opportunities
for racial discrimination.” The increased opportunity came about, in Chiesa’s view, because of a “turn to subjective criminality.” He argues that because of “its
pete
p.619
emphasis on punishing actors for their wicked will rather than for their harmful acts, the pattern of subjective criminality is particularly susceptible to generating a racist and repressive kind of criminal law.” The Model Penal Code, Mass Incarcera-
tion, and the Racialization of American Criminal Law, 25 Geo. Mason L. Rev. 605, 606-607 (2018). Ifa test that focuses on subjective intent instead of on harmful acts allows the government to intervene earlier to stop harmful conduct, could that
test be protective of racial minorities and other vulnerable groups if they are more likely to be the targets of harmful conduct? Or is the risk of biased enforcement not worth the tradeoff?

2. McQuirter and confessions. Whatever weight the jury may have given to the “social conditions,” notice that the only direct evidence of culpable intent came from the sheriff's testimony about what the defendant said in jail. Reliance
on confessions allegedly given in police custody continues to be common in criminal cases, even though defendants often deny making such statements. So long as police have complied with the Miranda requirements, and so long as a defen-
dant's statement is not found to have been coerced, our system leaves the trier of fact to sort out the relative credibility of the police (who may have a strong incentive to exaggerate the incriminating character of the defendant's statements) and
the defendant (who usually will have a strong incentive to understate or deny the incriminating character of any statements he may have made). Under these circumstances, even if the context involved no racial element, wouldn't the conviction still
be troublesome? Recall the criticism that the dangerous-proximity test makes justified convictions too difficult to obtain. Does a case like McQuirter redeem that test?

3. The equivocality test. Another approach that would foreclose conviction in a case like McQuirter is the equivocality test. Unlike the dangerous proximity test for determining what acts suffice for attempt (once intent is proven), the
equivocality test looks not to how far the defendant has gone but to how clearly the acts bespeak the defendant's intent. The principle was formulated as follows in The King v. Barker, [1924] N.Z.L.R. 865, 874-875:

A.ctiminal attempt is an act which shows criminal intent on the face of it. The case must be one in which Res ipsa loquitur. An act, on the other hand, which is . . . on the face of it innocent . . . cannot be brought within the

scope of criminal attempt by [admission or confession] as to the criminal purpose with which it is done. . . . The law does not punish men for their guilty intentions or resolutions in themselves. Nor does it commonly punish

them even for the expression, declaration, or confession of such intentions. . . . That a man’s unfulfilled criminal purposes should be punishable they must be manifested not by his words merely, or by acts which are in them-

selves of innocent or ambiguous significance, but by overt acts which are sufficient in themselves to declare and proclaim [his] guilty purpose. . . . The reason for thus holding a man innocent who does an act with intent to

commit a crime is the danger involved in the admission of evidence upon which he may be punished for acts which in themselves and in appearance are perfectly innocent.

. ..To buy a box of matches with intent to use them in burning a haystack is not an attempt to commit arson, for it is in itself and in appearance an innocent act, there being many other reasons than arson for
buying matches. . . . But he who takes matches to a haystack and there lights one
p.619
p.620

of them and blows it out on finding that he is observed, has done an act which speaks for itself, and he is guilty of criminal attempt accordingly. . . . The purchaser of matches would not be guilty of attempted arson even if he

declared to the vendor or to any other person the guilty purpose with which he bought them. Such evidence is relevant for the purpose of satisfying the jury that the requisite criminal intent existed, but it is not relevant in de-

termining the prior question of law whether the act charged amounts in law to an attempt or is too remote for that purpose.

In jurisdictions that follow this approach, the defendant need not commit the last act necessary to complete the crime, but “[t]he unequivocal act toward the commission of the offense must demonstrate that a crime is about to be
committed unless frustrated by intervening circumstances.” State v. Disanto, 668 N.W.2d 201, 207 (S.D. 2004). In People v. Miller, 2 Cal. 2d 527, 531-532 (1935), the defendant, who had threatened to kill Jeans, entered a field where Jeans and the
local constable were planting hops. The defendant was carrying a rifle, and he walked straight toward them. He stopped once to load his rifle, but at no time did he lift it to take aim. Jeans fled, and the constable disarmed the defendant. The court
reversed a conviction of attempted murder, stating:

The reason for requiring evidence of a direct act, however slight, toward consummation of the intended crime, is . . . that in the majority of cases up to that time the conduct of the defendant . . . has never ceased to be

equivocal; and this is necessarily so, irrespective of his declared intent. It is that quality of being equivocal that must be lacking before the act becomes one which may be said to be a commencement of the commission of

the crime, . . . and this is so for the reason that, so long as the equivocal quality remains, no one can say with certainty what the intent of the defendant is. . . . In the present case, up to the moment the gun was taken from de-

fendant, no one could say with certainty whether defendant had come into the field to carry out his threat to kill Jeans or merely to demand his arrest by the constable.

See also Wis. Stat. §939.32(3) (2021):

An attempt to commit a crime requires that the actor have an intent to perform acts and attain a result which, if accomplished, would constitute such crime and that the actor does acts toward the commission of the crime

which demonstrate unequivocally, under all the circumstances, that the actor formed that intent and would commit the crime except for the intervention of another person or some other extraneous factor.
The test is criticized in Glanville Williams, Criminal Law: The General Part 630 (2d ed. 1961):

D goes up to a haystack, fills his pipe, and lights a match. The act of lighting the match, even to a suspicious-minded person, is ambiguous. It may indicate only that D is going to light his pipe; but perhaps, on the other hand,

the pipe is only a “blind” and D is really bent on setting fire to the stack. We do not know. Therefore, on the equivocality test, the act is not proximate. But suppose that as a matter of actual fact D, after his arrest,

p.620
p.62t

confesses to the guilty intent, and suppose that that confession is believed. We are now certain of the intent and the only question is as to proximity. . . . Since it is practically the last act that D intended to do in order to.

commit the crime (the very last being setting the match to the stack), it is almost necessarily proximate. That the act is ambiguous, which in itself might have created a doubt as to the mens rea, no longer matters, for the

mens rea has been proved by the confession.

NOTES ON SUBSTANTIVE CRIMES OF PREPARATION

Many inchoate substantive crimes do not require resort to the law of attempt with its various restrictions. Several come from the common law. These include the crimes of solicitation (or incitement) and conspiracy, both of which we
deal with later in this book. Two other important common-law crimes that consist solely of preparatory behavior are burglary and assault.

1. Burglary. Common-law burglary was defined as breaking and entering a dwelling of another at night with the intent to commit some felony inside. Under the common law of attempt, people apprehended while breaking into a
dwelling with intent to commit a felony (for example, theft) would not be guilty of attempting that felony because they would not be ready to commit it — for example, they would not yet have seen specific property worth stealing. The offense of
burglary helped solve this problem.

Today, cases and statutes have greatly enlarged the offense. See Mathis v. United States, 136 S. Ct. 2243 (2016); id. at 2263-2264 (Breyer, J., dissenting). Some burglary statutes still apply only to entries at night but no longer require
a physical “breaking”; the entry can simply be without permission or under false pretenses. See, e.g., Wagner v. State, 864 A.2d 1037, 1055-1056 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2005). Other statutes extend the offense to include any entry, in day as well
as at night, into any structure, with intent to commit any crime. For example, in People v. Salemme, 3 Cal. Rptr. 2d 398 (Ct. App. 1992), the court held that the defendant had committed burglary when he entered a person’s home with the intent
to perpetrate a fraudulent sale of securities. lowa Code §713.1 (2021) appears somewhat narrower, limiting burglary to unauthorized entry into an “occupied structure” with intent to commit a felony or theft, but §702.12 (2021) defines “occupied
structure” to include “appurtenances to buildings” and any “land, water or air vehicle”; moreover a structure is deemed occupied “whether or not a person is actually present.” Accordingly, in lowa a person commits burglary by stepping into an
unoccupied rowboat with intent to steal its fishing tackle, and because a homeowner's driveway is an “appurtenance” to the building, lowa courts have also held that entry onto the driveway with felonious intent qualifies as burglary. See State v.
Rooney, 862 N.W.2d 367, 376 (2015). Are too many disparate situations being lumped together under one offense labeled burglary? Should punishment be greater in situations where a structure is occupied than when it is unoccupied? Or does it
depend on whether the defendant was aware of the risk of people being present? Do the various extensions in the definition of burglary undermine claims that burglary is an inherently a violent offense?

p.62t
p.622

2. Assault. Assault is sometimes defined as a completed substantive offense — the infliction of harm upon another person (often called a battery). See, e.g., MPC §2.11(1)(a). But in addition, the same term (assault) typically includes an
attempt to commit a battery. See, e.g., Cal. Penal Code §240 (2021): “An assault is an unlawful attempt, coupled with a present ability, to commit a violent injury on the person of another.”

Note that under this traditional definition, the crime of assault is narrower than the tort of assault: A person who deliberately places another in fear of a battery, but does not actually intend to carry out the attack, would not be guilty of
a criminal assault under statutes like Californias, although there may be liability for damages in tort. Today, most jurisdictions extend the crime of assault to include conduct that deliberately places another in fear of a battery, even in the absence
of intent to carry out the attack. See, e.g., Carter v. Commonwealth, 606 S.E.2d 839, 841 (Va. 2005); Wayne R. LaFave, Criminal Law §16.3, at 823 (4th ed. 2003). The MPC extends the crime of assault to cover such conduct, but only under limited
circumstances. See MPC §211.1(1)(c).

QUESTIONS: Is it appropriate for conduct that arouses fear (without an intent to inflict physical harm) to be subject to criminal penalties? Under that definition, could McQuirter have been convicted of simple assault?

3. Mere preparation as an offense. The law today contains many instances of merely preparatory behavior defined as a substantive crime. See State v. Young, 271 A.2d 569 (N.J. 1970):

There is nothing necessarily wrong in teaching or demonstrating the use, application or making of a firearm . .. , but 18 U.S.C. §231(a)(1) makes it a crime to do so “intending that the same will be unlawfully employed for

use in, or in furtherance of, a civil disorder which may . . . adversely affect commerce.” [A number of statutes] make possession criminal if there is an intent to do some hostile act[, for example, laws] relating to possession of

burglar tools. [These statutes punish] an act only because of the evil purpose it pursues, without regard to whether the act would constitute an attempt to commit the offense the statutes seek to head off, and even though

the act, absent such purpose, may be one protected by the Constitution.

Another offense that gets at preliminary behavior is the law against knowingly providing material support to terrorist organizations. See pp. 669-671 infra. Material support can include providing personnel, including oneself, to a terrorist organiza-
tion. The law also allows charges to be brought in cases of attempted material support, which can include situations where an individual tries to join a terrorist organization. Heidi R. Gilchrist observes the following pattern in the attempted material
support cases:

The person is observed on social media making a comment in favor of ISIS. They are then contacted by an FBI online covert employee . . . to see if they would like to go to Syria to join ISIS and, if the person seems amenable,

they make a plan to do so. When the person either buys a plane ticket or goes to the airport, they are then arrested and can subsequently be sentenced up to twenty years for attempted material support. In many of these

cases, there are themes of an isolated, and often mentally ill, individual.

p.622

p.628
The Vast Gulf Between Attempted Mass Shootings and Attempted Material Support, 81 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 63, 72 (2019). Gilchrist argues the defendants in these cases are being inappropriately labeled as “terrorists” and getting disproportionately
long sentences. And because the FBI is focusing on Muslims in its enforcement efforts, she argues that “it fuels the narrative of ISIS and other extremist groups of ‘us’ against ‘them.” Id. at 81. Is Gilchrist correct that these cases of attempted
material support go too far in terms of enforcement efforts and sentencing? Or is this kind of proactive government intervention at an early stage necessary to stop the recruitment efforts of these groups? What is an appropriate sentence for some-
‘one who demonstrates a willingness to travel abroad to join a known terrorist group?

4, Policing measures. Other approaches that avoid the restrictions of the law of attempt include measures for dealing with persons who engage in suspicious activity not amounting to an attempt to commit a crime. One approach is
procedural, allowing police to stop and detain a suspect in circumstances short of those sufficient under the Fourth Amendment to justify an arrest. See Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). The other approach is substantive, for example, making it a
crime to loiter in circumstances giving rise to apprehension that a crime may be afoot, see City of Chicago v. Morales, p. 216 supra, or criminalizing “disorderly conduct” and covering a huge range of behaviors. See Jamelia N. Morgan, Rethinking
Disorderly Conduct, 109 Calif. L. Rev. 1637 (2021).

NOTES ON STALKING

1. Legislative responses. Anti-stalking statutes criminalize harassing conduct that terrorizes or torments another person, or which may be the prelude to a violent attack. These statutes were prompted by widely reported incidents
of persons, primarily women, suffering harassment and sometimes violent injury perpetrated by “obsessed fans, divorced or separated spouses, ex-lovers, rejected suitors, neighbors, coworkers, classmates, gang members, [or] former employ-
ees, . . . as well as complete strangers.”!7 One news report noted:12

For more than a month, a young woman in Stratford, N.J., was hounded by a man she had briefly dated. He followed her to work and to the hairdresser. He left repeated messages on her answering machine. She talked to

the police several times and filed a harassment complaint, but there was little the police could do except ask the man to stop. “Our hands were tied,” said Jay Wilkins, a detective in the Stratford Police Department. “We were

in the position of waiting for a crime to happen.”

In 1990, California became the first state to enact an anti-stalking law; since then virtually all states have followed. There is general agreement that legislation of this kind is desirable. The chief difficulty has been drafting a law that
criminalizes
p.628
p.624
the targeted misconduct without excessive vagueness and without sweeping in constitutionally protected activity, like speech. Cal. Penal Code §646.9 (2021) defines stalking, a potential felony, as involving:
[alny person who willfully, maliciously, and repeatedly follows or willfully and maliciously harasses another person and who makes a credible threat with the intent to place that person in reasonable fear for his or her safety,
or the safety of his or her immediate family. ..
The term “harasses” is defined as:
a knowing and willful course of conduct directed at a specific person that seriously alarms, annoys, torments, or terrorizes the person, and that serves no legitimate purpose. This course of conduct must be such as would
cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress, and must actually cause substantial emotional distress to the person.
“Credible threat” is defined to mean:
a verbal or written threat, including [threats transmitted electronically], or a threat implied by a pattern of conduct . . ., made with the intent to place the person that is the target of the threat in reasonable fear. .., and made
with the apparent ability to carry out the threat so as to cause the person who is the target of the threat to reasonably fear for his or her safety or the safety of his or her family. It is not necessary to prove that the defendant
had the intent to actually carry out the threat. . . . Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the meaning of “credible threat.”
QUESTION: Do anti-stalking laws cast the net of criminal punishment too widely, or is their reach too limited, so that the problem of stalking remains unsolved? Consider the following issues:
2. Overbroad? Are statutes like California's too vague to give adequate notice of what is prohibited and to confine the discretion of prosecutors and judges?2 Most courts have rejected constitutional challenges, finding that the crucial
element of “harassment” is not overly vague when defined objectively (for example, California's requirement of conduct that “would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress”). See, e.g., State v. Bernhardt, 338 S.W.3d 830
(Mo. Ct. App. 2011); People v. Ashley, 162 N.E.3d 200 (Ill. 2020). The Kansas Supreme Court found its anti-stalking statute unconstitutionally vague because that statute, unlike California's, made liability depend on the personal sensibilities of the
victim. After the legislature limited the statute to conduct that would cause “a reasonable person” to suffer emotional distress, the Kansas Supreme Court rejected a new vagueness challenge and upheld the amended statute. State v. Rucker, 987
P.2d 1080 (Kan. 1999).
3. Underinclusive? As limited by the requirements of harassment and a “credible threat,” both defined objectively, is the California statute too narrow to
p.624
p. 626
deal effectively with the problem of stalking? Consider “cyber-stalking.” The ease and reach of e-communication exponentially expands the frequency and potential impact of stalking behavior. In a number of cases, individuals have used e-mail
and social media to harass and frighten their estranged spouses or others. E-mail messages containing threats of rape or assault easily meet the requirements of traditional stalking statutes, and nearly all state statutes explicitly apply to electronic
transmission of threats. See Ashley N.B. Beagle, Modern Stalking Laws: A Survey of State Anti-Stalking Statutes, 14 Chap. L. Rev. 457, 482 (2011). Intimidating comments posted on a defendant's public Facebook page were held sufficient when
they addressed the victim by name, even though he did not send them directly to her. State v. Craig, 112 A.3d 559 (N.H. 2015).

Nonetheless, existing regimes are often unable to reach many common forms of cyber-stalking. See Naomi Harlin Goodno, Cyberstalking, a New Crime, 72 Mo. L. Rev. 125 (2007). In Elonis v. United States, 575 U.S. 723 (2015), the
Supreme Court held that Facebook posts in which the defendant repeatedly talked about wanting to kill his wife, fire mortars at her house, and commit other violent acts did not qualify as a “threat” unless the defendant himself was aware that the
statements would be considered threatening. See p. 294 supra. Moreover, endlessly repeated sexual proposals or requests for dates often are difficult to classify as implied threats.

Another concer is the problem of “stalking apps” — software secretly implanted in a victim’s cell phone and then used to track the victim's location 24 hours a day. The Fourth Amendment prohibits GPS tracking by the government (at
least when the tracking device is attached to a person's car without their consent). United States v. Jones, 565 U.S. 400 (2012). But the Constitution does not prohibit such conduct by private parties, and current statutes do not necessarily make
such conduct a crime, absent the extra elements required under anti-stalking statutes.21 And since “stalking apps” are clandestine, the victim is typically unaware of the stalker’s attention, and the statutory requirements of “threat” or “harassment”
may be missing until the stalker attempts some other offense. Some observers propose legislation to curtail the manufacture and sale of spyware and other stealth surveillance equipment. Danielle Keats Citron, Spying, Inc., 72 Wash. & Lee L. Rev.
1243 (2015). Another hard-to-reach form of cyber-stalking was illustrated in a case where a man deluged his former girlfriend with messages filled with obscenities and demands for attention.22 Does such conduct amount to “stalking” under a
statute like California's? If not, should a law be crafted to cover it? If so, how?

In a New York case, the defendant approached a young woman in his neighborhood, offered her a Valentine's Day gift, repeatedly asked her for dates, and often followed her, even after she emphatically told him to leave her alone.
Would such conduct constitute stalking in California? If not, should stalking laws be amended to cover it? In the New York case, a stalking conviction was upheld

p.626

p.626
under a statute that, unlike California's, does not require a “credible threat” to the victim's safety but instead extends to any course of conduct that “causes material harm to the victim's mental or emotional health,” after the defendant has been
“clearly told to stop.” See People v. Stuart, 100 N.Y.2d 412, 426 (2003). Is this an appropriate way to address the problem, or does it extend criminal liability too widely? Would it criminalize the actions of tenants who persist in calling and e-mailing
their landlord because the leaky faucet in their apartment has not been repaired?22

Another way to reach conduct like that of the New York defendant is the offense of harassment, defined in MPC §250.4 and classified as a petty misdemeanor. Does the New York case qualify as harassment under the MPC?

What should be done about situations where an individual does not personally stalk a victim but encourages others to do so? For example, should there be criminal consequences if former romantic partners tweet or write blog posts
detailing cheating or other misconduct by their former partners that encourages others to harass or threaten them? Should the person who writes the post have to be subjectively aware of the risk that the writing would lead to such harassment
by others? Or should an objective standard be used that would require the government to show only that a reasonable person would recognize the risk of such harassment? For an argument that an objective standard is preferable, see A. Meena
Seralathan, Note, Making the Time Fit the Crime: Clearly Defining Online Harassment Crimes and Providing Incentives for Investigating Online Threats in the Digital Age, 42 Brook. J. Int'l L. 425 (2016). Is the need for a subjective standard stronger
ina context like this one, where the harmful behavior is carried out by others, than in cases like Elonis where the defendant was personally making threats? Or is the risk of harm greater in this context because others are involved, thus supporting
the need for an objective test to minimize that harm?

4, Problem. On the evidence presented in the McQuirter case, would it be possible to convict the defendant of “stalking,” as defined in California? If so, is that troublesome or reassuring? Consider another observation of Professor
Capers, supra, 87 Wash. U. L. Rev. at 1393:

In these interactions, where the black male is perceived as a sexual threat, it is the black male whose individuality . . . is denied. It is the black male who becomes a projection of someone else’s fears. It is the black man who

is reduced . . . to a dangerous body. [I] wonder who was in greater fear: Mrs. Ted Allen, surrounded by three children, on her own street securely on the white side of town, with Suell Lufkin’s house nearby, with Mr. Simmons

at her side . . . ? Or was it McQuirter, a black man alone on the white side of town in 1950s Alabama . . . ?

p.626
p.627

United States v. Jackson
United States Court of Appeals, Second Circuit
560 F.2d 112 (1977)

FREDERICK VAN PeLT BRYAN, J.: Robert Jackson, William Scott, and Martin Allen appeal from judgments of conviction entered . . . after a trial before Chief Judge Jacob Mishler without a jury.

Count one of the indictment alleged that between June 11 and June 21, 1976, the appellants conspired to commit an armed robbery of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust. . .. Counts two and three each charged appellants with an at-
tempted robbery of the branch on June 14 and on June 21, 1976, respectively. . . . Chief Judge Mishler filed a memorandum of decision finding each defendant guilty on all . . . counts.

Appellants’ principal contention is that the court below erred in finding them guilty on counts two and three. While they concede that the evidence supported the conspiracy convictions on count one, they assert that, as a matter of law,
their conduct never crossed the elusive line which separates “mere preparation” from “attempt.”2 The Government's evidence at trial consisted largely of the testimony of Vanessa Hodges, an unindicted co-conspirator, and of various FBI agents
who surveilled the Manufacturers Hanover branch on June 21, 1976.

[On June 11, 1976, Hodges recruited Allen to rob the Manufacturers Hanover branch. Allen agreed, proposed the date of June 14, and told her he had guns and a car. On June 14, Allen arrived with a confederate, Jackson, in a car
containing a sawed-off shotgun, shells, materials intended as masks, and handcuffs to bind the bank manager. After picking up another confederate, Scott, they drove to the bank, where Allen entered to check the surveillance cameras, while
Jackson installed a false cardboard license plate on the car. Scott then entered the bank too, but returned with the news that the tellers were separating the weekend deposits and many patrons were still there. They then rescheduled the robbery
for June 21.

[On June 18, Hodges was arrested on an unrelated offense and decided to cooperate with the police. She told FBI agents of the robbery planned for June 21, and early on that date FBI agents took surveillance positions around the
bank. They saw a brown Lincoln with a New York license on the front and a cardboard facsimile of a license plate on the rear. It stopped near the bank and was occupied by three men fitting the description Hodges had provided. One of the men
got out, stood for a while in front of the bank, and returned to the car. The Lincoln drove up and down the streets near the bank and then stopped for several minutes a few

p.627
p.628
blocks away. When it returned and parked near the bank, agents noticed that its front license plate was now missing. After parking for 30 minutes, the car began moving in the direction of the bank.]

At some point near the bank . . ., the appellants detected the presence of the surveillance agents. The Lincoln . . . was overtaken by FBI agents who ordered the appellants out of the car and arrested them. The agents then observed a
black and red plaid suitcase in the rear of the car [and in it they found] two loaded sawed-off shotguns, a toy nickel-plated revolver, a pair of handcuffs, and masks. . . . Chief Judge Mishler concluded that the evidence against Jackson, Scott, and
Allen was “overwhelming” on [the conspiracy count]. In contrast, he characterized the question of whether the defendants had attempted a bank robbery as charged in counts two and three or were merely engaged in preparations as “a close one.”
After canvassing the authorities . . . Chief Judge Mishler applied the following two-tiered inquiry formulated in United States v. Mandujano, 499 F.2d 370, 376 (Sth Cir. 1974):

First, the defendant must have been acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the commission of the crime which he is charged with attempting. . .. Second, the defendant must have engaged in conduct which

constitutes a substantial step toward commission of the crime. A substantial step must be conduct strongly corroborative of the firmness of the defendant's criminal intent.

He concluded that on June 14 and again on June 21, the defendants took substantial steps, strongly corroborative of the firmness of their criminal intent, toward commission of the crime of bank robbery and found the defendants guilty
on each of the two attempt counts. These appeals followed.

[here is no comprehensive statutory definition of attempt in federal law. [Our court has] selected the two-tiered inquiry of United States v. Mandujano, supra, as stating the proper test for determining whether . . . conduct constituted
an attempt. [That] analysis “conforms closely to the sensible definition of an attempt proffered by the American Law Institute's Model Penal Code [§5.01].”

The draftsmen of the Model Penal Code recognized the difficulty of arriving at a general standard for distinguishing acts of preparation from acts constituting an attempt... . The formulation upon which the draftsmen ultimately agreed
required, in addition to criminal purpose, that an act be a substantial step in a course of conduct designed to accomplish a criminal result, and that it be strongly corroborative of criminal purpose in order for it to constitute such a substantial step.
The following differences between this test and previous approaches to the preparation-attempt problem were noted:

First, this formulation shifts the emphasis from what remains to be done — the chief concern of the proximity tests — to what the actor has already done. The fact that further major steps must be taken before the crime can

be completed does not preclude a finding that the steps already undertaken are substantial. It is expected, in the normal case, that this approach will broaden the scope of attempt liability.

Second, although it is intended that the requirement of a substantial step will result in the imposition of attempt liability only in those
p.628
p.629

instances in which some firmness of criminal purpose is shown, no finding is required as to whether the actor would probably have desisted prior to completing the crime. .. .

Finally, the requirement of proving a substantial step generally will prove less of a hurdle for the prosecution than the res ipsa loquitur approach, which requires that the actor's conduct must itself manifest the

criminal purpose. . . .

Model Penal Code §5.01, Comment at 47 (Tent. Draft No. 10, 1960).

The draftsmen concluded that, in addition to assuring firmness of criminal design, the requirement of a substantial step would preclude attempt liability, with its accompanying harsh penalties, for relatively remote preparatory acts. At
the same time, however, by not requiring a “last proximate act” or one of its various analogues it would permit the apprehension of dangerous persons at an earlier stage than the other approaches without immunizing them from attempt liability. . . .

Chief Judge Mishler [concluded that on both June 14 and June 21,] these men were seriously dedicated to the commission of a crime, had passed beyond the stage of preparation, and would have assaulted the bank had they not been
dissuaded by certain external factors, viz., the breaking up of the weekend deposits and crowd of patrons in the bank on June 14 and the detection of the FBI surveillance on June 21.

We cannot say that these conclusions . . . were erroneous. On two separate occasions, appellants reconnoitered the place contemplated for the commission of the crime and possessed the paraphernalia . .. — loaded sawed-off shot-
guns, extra shells, a toy revolver, hand-cuffs, and masks — which was specially designed for such unlawful use and which could serve no lawful purpose under the circumstances. Under the Model Penal Code formulation, either type of conduct,
standing alone, was sufficient as a matter of law to constitute a “substantial step” if it strongly corroborated their criminal purpose. Here both types of conduct coincided on both June 14 and June 21, along with numerous other elements strongly
corroborative of the firmness of appellants’ criminal intent. [We] thus affirm the convictions for attempted bank robbery on counts two and three.

NOTE ON STATUTORY REFORM

The Model Penal Code draws on elements of both the proximity and the equivocality tests. Its approach has proved influential with many jurisdictions. Altogether, roughly half the states and two-thirds of the federal circuits now use a
“substantial step” test comparable to that of the MPC. See Robert Batey, Book Review (Paul Robinson's Criminal Law), 73 Notre Dame L. Rev. 781, 794 (1998). Some states have adopted the Code’s substantial step formula without the require-
ment that the actor's conduct strongly corroborate the intent. E.g., Ga. Code §16-4-1 (2021); 720 Il. Comp. Stat. 5/8-4 (2021). Several of the statutes include significant variations on the MPC approach. Colo. Rev. Stat. §18-2-101 (2021) defines a
“substantial step” as one that is “strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor’s purpose.”

The MPC expressly aimed to relax the actus reus requirement for attempt and place more emphasis on subjective intent. Luis Chiesa argues that this approach

p.629
p. 630

paved the way for more racially biased enforcement. Chiesa, The Model Penal Code, Mass Incarceration, and the Racialization of American Criminal Law, 25 Geo. Mason L. Rev. 605 (2018).

In contrast, one experimental study on jury behavior found participant “jurors” were more likely to find the actus reus of attempt satisfied under the proximity test than the substantial step test and that the proximity test was “more
vulnerable to biased applications based on legally irrelevant factors.” Avani Mehta Sood, Attempted Justice: Misunderstanding and Bias in Psychological Constructions of Critical Attempt, 71 Stan. L. Rev. 593, 639 (2019). The experimental study
does not necessarily indicate these same dynamics are taking place in actual cases, but Professor Sood posits that one reason the proximity test might be prone to more bias is its language:

Given that jurors are generally not equipped with a comprehensive understanding of the legislative intent and policy rationales underlying the legal standard they are asked to apply, terms such as “tending toward,” “dan-

gerously close,” and “very near” in jury instructions for the proximity test could act as anchors that skew judgments toward guilt by priming decisionmakers to see the defendant's actions as coming closer to completing a

crime.

Id. at 643-644. In contrast, even though the MPC drafters “intended the term ‘substantial’ to establish a de minimis standard, Professor Sood’s experiment found “a number of the lay decisionmakers in the studies construed the use of ‘substantial’
to mean not just any step but ‘a major step’ or ‘more investment’ toward committing the intended crime than called for by the proximity test.” Id. at 661-662. If Professor Sood’s findings translate to real world cases — and that is always a major
question with any experimental setting — they apply only to jurors. Judges might not share these tendencies, so if they are policing the substantive limits of these tests, as the court did in Rizzo, that would negate the implications of Sood’s findings
and the MPC test would, as its drafters intended, allow the government to intervene earlier.

QUESTION: Is there a way to enable the government to intervene early to prevent harmful criminal behavior without creating more opportunities for discriminatory enforcement? Or does any relaxation of the actus reus for attempt inevitably lead
to such a result, given embedded biases in America?

PROBLEMS

1. In United States v. Harper, 33 F.3d 1143 (Sth Cir. 1994), the defendants were found in a car parked in a lot adjacent to a branch of the Bank of America. Under a bush six feet from their car, police discovered two handguns, and in the
car they found a stun gun, surgical gloves, and ammunition for the two hand guns. An ATM camera showed that one of the defendants, Harper, had used a stolen ATM card to withdraw $20 from the ATM, but had not removed the cash. As Harper
knew, this created a “bill trap,” causing the ATM to shut down and summon technicians to repair it, their response time being between 45 and 90 minutes. The prosecution

630

p63
obtained a conviction for conspiracy and attempted bank robbery, the latter on the theory that Harper had deliberately set the “bill trap” in order to rob the technicians of the money in the machine when they arrived to repair it. The court of appeals
affirmed the conspiracy conviction but reversed the attempt conviction, stating:

True, Harper had [caused] a bill trap that would eventually bring service personnel to the ATM. That act, however, is equivocal in itself. The robbery was in the future and . . . the defendants never made a move toward the

victims or the Bank to accomplish the criminal portion of their intended mission. They had not taken a step of “such substantiality that, unless frustrated, the crime would have occurred.” Their situation is therefore distin-

guishable from that of the defendant in United States v. Moore, 921 F.2d 207 (Sth Cir. 1990). . . . In Moore, the defendant was apprehended “walking toward the bank, wearing a ski mask, and carrying gloves, pillowcases and

concealed, loaded gun.” These actions were a true commitment toward the robbery, which would be in progress the moment the would-be robber entered the bank. . . . That stage of the crime had not been reached by [the

defendants]; their actual embarkation on the robbery lay as much as 90 minutes away from the time when Harper left money in the ATM, and that time had not expired when they were apprehended... .

When criminal intent is clear, identifying the point at which the defendants’ activities ripen into an attempt is not an analytically satisfying enterprise. There is, however, a substantial difference between causing a
bill trap, which will result in the appearance of potential victims, and moving toward such victims with gun and mask, as in [Moore]. Making an appointment with a potential victim is not of itself such a commitment to an in-
tended crime as to constitute an attempt, even though it may make a later attempt possible. Little more happened here. . . . Accordingly, we reverse the appellants’ convictions for attempted bank robbery.

QUESTION: Would the MPC produce the same result?

2. In United States v. Joyce, 693 F.2d 838 (8th Cir. 1982), informant Gebbie told Joyce that cocaine was available for purchase in St. Louis. Joyce agreed to travel there from Oklahoma City, bringing with him $22,000 in cash, the agreed
price for purchasing a pound of cocaine. The next day he flew to St. Louis and met both Gebbie and undercover officer Jones, who was posing as a cocaine seller. Ina hotel room, after discussing prices for various quantities of cocaine, Jones
produced a wrapped package said to contain a kilogram of cocaine. Without unwrapping it, Joyce returned the package, stating that he could not see the cocaine. Jones then unwrapped about half of the tape covering the package and handed it
back to Joyce, but Joyce again returned the package and asked Jones to open it up so that Joyce could examine the cocaine more closely. Jones answered that he would only open the package when Joyce showed the money he had brought for
the purchase.24 Joyce insisted that he would not produce his money until Jones opened the

p63

p. 632
package and would not deal with Jones no matter how good the cocaine was. Realizing that Joyce was not going to show his money or purchase the cocaine, Jones told Joyce to leave, and Joyce then left, with no apparent intention of returning
later to purchase drugs.

As Joyce left the hotel, he was arrested by DEA agents, and a subsequent search found $22,000 in cash in his luggage. He was convicted of attempting to purchase cocaine with intent to distribute, but the Eighth Circuit, applying the
MPC test, reversed:

Whatever intention Joyce had to procure cocaine was abandoned prior to the commission of a necessary and substantial step to effectuate the purchase. [He] never attempted to carry through with that [intention] by produc-

ing the money necessary to purchase. [All] we have here is a preliminary discussion regarding the purchase of cocaine which broke down. . . .

We also find unpersuasive the government's claim that Joyce would have purchased the cocaine had it not been for Jones's refusal to open the package. . . . We simply fail to see why Joyce's motive for refusing

to commit a “substantial step” toward possession of the cocaine is particularly relevant. Joyce’s motive for refusing to purchase the cocaine here is no different than had he refused to purchase because he disagreed with

Jones as to the price for which the cocaine was offered. And, while we may agree with the government's suggestion that Joyce, who was presumably “street-wise,” may have been tipped off that Jones was a DEA under-

cover agent when Jones refused to open the package, we fail to see how an increased awareness of the risk of apprehension converts what would otherwise be “mere preparation” into an attempt.

QUESTION: Is this a correct application of the MPC test?

3. In United States v. Howard, 766 F.3d 414 (6th Cir. 2014), the defendant conversed several times over the course of three weeks with a government agent who impersonated a mother offering her two minor daughters for sex. Howard
sent the agent sexually explicit photographs of himself and asked that she show the photographs to the girls. He also suggested that the “mother” get birth control for the daughters and perform sex acts on them to get them ready for him. He
discussed various possible arrangements for his travel from California to Corpus Christi, Texas, where the fictitious mother and daughters lived, but he did not commit to any specific plan. When the government agent tried to get Howard to book
a flight, instructing him to “take it or leave it,” he responded, “Okay, I'll leave it.” They had no subsequent contact.

Three months later, Howard was arrested. He was convicted of attempting to induce a minor to engage in sexual activity with him. Applying the MPC test, the Fifth Circuit affirmed the conviction, holding that “a definite plan to travel is
not necessary to constitute a ‘substantial step” toward committing that offense. Howard had approached the line of attempt through “sexually explicit conversations, transmission of sexual photographs, and discussion of specific travel details,”
and crossed it when “he instructed the undercover police officer to perform sex acts on and procure birth control for the girls to get them ready for him.” Id. at 426.

p.632

p. 633,
QUESTIONS: (a) Is this a correct application of the MPC test? Or does it risk “criminalizing improper thoughts rather than dangerous acts” (Michal Buchhandler-Raphael, Overcriminalizing Speech, 36 Cardozo L. Rev. 1667, 1693 (2015))?

(b) Suppose that Howard had bought a plane ticket to Corpus Christi and made plans to have the fictitious mother meet him at the airport. On those facts, a conviction would easily be sustained under the MPC test. See United States
v. Roman, 795 F.3d 511 (6th Cir. 2015). How would such a case be decided under the Rizzo (proximity) test? Which approach offers the better way to analyze such cases?

4, Omissions. Note that under MPC §5.01(1)(c), the actus reus of attempt can include “an act or omission constituting a substantial step. . . .” How (or when) can an omission constitute a substantial step? Suppose that a nursing
home attendant who has a duty to care for an elderly patient chooses not to bring the patient medicine because the attendant can no longer tolerate the patient's complaints and wants to see the patient dead. A few hours later, another attendant
discovers the patient in distress because of the missed medications but manages to rectify the situation. Has the first attendant taken “a substantial step” sufficient to make him guilty of attempted murder? See Michael T. Cahill, Attempt by Omis-
sion, 94 lowa L. Rev. 1208 (2009).

4. Solicitation
State v. Davis

‘Supreme Court of Missouri
319 Mo. 1222, 6 S.W.2d 609 (1928)

Dawuis, C. [Defendant and Alberdina Lourie planned to have the latter’s husband, Edmon Lourie, killed in order to collect the insurance and live together. He asked Leverton to help him find an ex-convict to do the job, but Leverton
disclosed the plot to Dill, a police officer, who decided to pose as the ex-convict. Defendant paid Dill $600 to carry out plans he had devised for killing Lourie. A scheme was arranged whereby Dill was to appear at the Lourie home, kill Edmon, and
feign a robbery by “mussing up” Alberdina and taking her jewels. At the appointed hour Dill appeared at the Lourie home but at that point revealed his identity. He then proceeded to defendant's home where he made an arrest. On these facts, de-
fendant was convicted of attempted first-degree murder.]

The sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the conviction is raised. . . .

[The great weight of authority warrants the assertion that mere solicitation, unaccompanied by an act moving directly toward the commission of the intended crime, is not an overt act constituting an element of the crime of attempt.
[T]he state contends that the arrangement of a plan for the accomplishment of the murder of Lourie and the selecting and hiring of the means or instrumentality by which the murder was to be consummated were demonstrated. We take it that
the state means by the foregoing declarations that overt acts were shown. To that we do not agree. The evidence goes no further than developing a verbal arrangement with Dill, the selection of Dill as the one to kill Lourie, the delivery of a certain
drawing and two photographs of Lourie to Dill, and the payment of a portion of the agreed

p. 633,
p. 634
consideration. These things were mere acts of preparation, failing to lead directly or proximately to the consummation of the intended crime. . . .

The employment of Dill as agent to murder Lourie was not tantamount to an attempt. Dill not only had no intention of carrying out the expressed purpose of defendant, but was guilty of no act directly or indirectly moving toward the
consummation of the intended crime. He did nothing more than listen to the plans and solicitations of defendant without intending to act upon them. It was not shown that Dill committed an act that could be construed as an attempt. . . .

It follows from what we have said that the judgment must be reversed, and the defendant discharged.

UNITED STATES v. CHURCH, 29 M.J. 679 (A.C.M.R. 1989): [Church, an airman stationed in North Dakota, had separated from his wife after two years of marriage. The wife won custody of their son and moved with the child to Michigan. He hoped to
regain custody of his son but realized that he was unlikely to succeed in doing so through the courts. At that point he began talking about finding a “hit man” to kill her. Some of his associates took him seriously and reported the matter to the Of-
fice of Special Investigations (OSI). Shortly thereafter, an undercover OSI agent was presented as a “hit man.”

[Ina motel room meeting, Church provided the agent with a partial payment, expense money for the round trip flight to Michigan, street maps of Mrs. Church's neighborhood, photographs of Mrs. Church and their son, and descriptions
of all the people in the house, including where they slept and what their work schedules were. Church also approved use of the weapon the agent presented, a .22-caliber pistol with silencer and expressed a preference for where on the victim he
wanted the shots placed. The job was to be done while Church was conspicuously on duty in North Dakota. Unbeknownst to him, the entire conversation was videotaped. Several days later, Church was notified that his wife had been murdered.
He put on “a Class A act” of grief. The same day, the undercover agent told him to meet at the North Dakota motel. Church arrived, expressed satisfaction with the job done, paid the agent, and identified his wife's “body” from a staged photo-
graph. This meeting also was videotaped. Church was then arrested, and he was subsequently convicted of attempted murder.]

[On appeal] defense counsel conceded that the appellant is guilty of soliciting another to commit murder, but argued forcefully that he was not guilty of attempted murder because no act beyond mere preparation was proven... . In
various factual situations involving “contracting out” for crimes, [many courts have] held that the evidence only established mere acts of preparation not leading directly or proximately to consummation of the intended crime. . . . Typical [is State v.
Davis, supra].

Not all authority favors the defense position. A few state courts have upheld attempt convictions in cases involving crimes for hire. . .. We are not convinced [that] a factual situation such as that present in the Davis [case] [should] not
constitute an attempt to commit a crime. . . . The appellant's conduct in obtaining the services of Nicholas Karnezis [the purported “hit man”] to murder his wife, his

p. 635
detailed participation in planning the intended crime, up to advising the agent exactly how he wanted his wife shot, and his payment of the agreed upon consideration, . . . constitutes “a substantial step toward commission of the crime,” and
establishes the requisite overt act amounting to more than mere preparation. We can envision nothing else the appellant could possibly have done to effect what he believed would be his wife's murder, short of committing the act himself (which is
precisely what he did not want to do). As characterized by appellate government counsel during oral argument, the appellant armed a missile (Nick) and fired it off, fully believing it was aimed directly at his intended victim.

NOTE

On review of the decision in Church, the U.S. Court of Military Appeals noted (32 M.J. 70, 70-71 n.1, 74 n.7 (1991)):

The real stake in this appeal is the sentence. [See footnote 3 of the lower court’s opinion.] Of course, if the facts stood as appellant believed and hoped them to be, he would be guilty as a principal to premeditated murder

— and conspiracy as well. Under those circumstances, the minimum term he could have received would have been confinement for life. Fortuitously for all concerned, appellant's efforts were frustrated by law enforcement

personnel. Thus, murder is not applicable because the intended victim is not dead. Conspiracy is also arguably not available because the agent did not actually agree to kill Mrs. Church. . ..2

These vast distinctions in punishment ceilings among solicitations, attempts, and completed offenses . . . reflect the traditional view that the punishment should be commensurate with the resulting harm,

irrespective of the badness of the actor or the seriousness of the threat. The modern approach, on the other hand, . . . is to make the punishment levels generally the same or nearly the same for solicitations, attempts, and

completed offenses — based upon the badness of the actor, not upon the fortuitousness of the results. See, e.g., [MPC] §5.05; §2X1.1, Federal Sentencing Guidelines. Narrowing these vast discrepancies in punishment

ceilings would lessen the premium put on factfinder hair-splitting as the evidence proceeds down the continuum of solicitation, conspiratorial agreement, [attempt], etc. It would also remove the illogical consequence that the

punishment for soliciting premeditated murder can be no greater than that for soliciting the making of a check of $101 without sufficient funds.
Affirming the conviction, the court held:

It is clear that appellant did everything he thought not only necessary but possible to make the enterprise successful. . . . Looking to his conduct only, we agree the evidence was sufficient for a rational factfinder to find,

beyond a reasonable doubt, that his actions exceeded mere preparation.

p. 635
p. 636
NOTES ON SOLICITATION

1. Solicitation as an attempt. Near the end of its opinion in Davis, the court states: “It was not shown that Dill committed an act that could be construed as an attempt.” Would it matter if Dill had gone further? Would the prosecution's
problem have been solved if Dill had been instructed to play the scene to the hilt, for example, by aiming his pistol at the husband's chest? Since Dill was only a feigned participant, traditional common-law doctrines would not permit him to be
treated as Davis's accomplice, and therefore Davis could not be held accountable for the steps taken by Dill, no matter how far those steps went. Davis's liability would have to rest on his own actions. See State v. Hayes, p. 692 infra.

Courts differ over the question whether the solicitation itself constitutes an attempt by the person making it. In accord with Church, many courts hold that solicitation can constitute a punishable attempt if it represents a “substantial
step” under the circumstances. See State v. Daniel B., 201 A.3d 989 (Conn. 2019). MPC §5.01(2)(g) is in accord. But many states adhere to the view that “no matter what acts the solicitor commits, he cannot be guilty of an attempt because it is not
his purpose to commit the offense personally.” Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §5.02 at 369 (1985).

2. Solicitation as an independent crime. At common law, inciting or soliciting another to commit a crime was a crime itself, independent of any other offense that either party might commit. Most American codes originally did not
incorporate this offense, but instead made criminal the solicitation of particular crimes. However, a substantial number of states now have general solicitation statutes. They are usually patterned after MPC §5.02. The Commentary defends that for-
mulation as follows (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §5.02 at 365-366, 375-378 (1985):

Ithas been argued [that the solicitor’s] conduct is not dangerous because the resisting will of an independent moral agent is interposed between the solicitor and the commission of the crime. . . . By the same token it is

urged that the solicitor, manifesting his reluctance to commit the crime himself, is not a significant menace. The opposing view is that a solicitation is, if anything, more dangerous than a direct attempt, because it may give

rise to the special hazard of cooperation among criminals. ..

There should be no doubt on this issue. Purposeful solicitation presents dangers calling for preventive intervention and is sufficiently indicative of a disposition towards criminal activity to call for liability. More-

over, the fortuity that the person solicited does not agree to commit or attempt to commit the incited crime plainly should not relieve the solicitor of liability, when otherwise he would be a conspirator or an accomplice.

3. Free speech. Suppose the speaker at a political rally harshly attacks the party in power and says, “These bums deserve to die.” Is the speaker guilty of solicitation to commit murder? Could a prosecutor satisfy the requirements for
conviction under MPC §5.02? In United States v. Williams, 553 U.S. 285, 297-299 (2008), the Court held that “offers to engage in illegal transactions are categorically excluded from First Amendment protection.” But advocacy that might implicitly
encourage violence raises complex issues, and in some circumstances, solicitation

p. 636

697
of crime may be protected speech under the First Amendment. Consider in this regard the Anti-Riot Act, which proscribes inciting a riot and is limited to speech that advocates acts of violence. 18 U.S.C. §§2101, 2102(b). Even with this limitation,
courts have found the provision to be overbroad. See United States v. Miselis, 972 F.3d 518 (4th Cir. 2020); United States v. Rundo, 990 F.3d 709 (9th Cir. 2021). For a sustained discussion of these issues, see Kent Greenawalt, Speech, Crime, and
the Uses of Language (1989). On the line between punishable and protected speech, see Rice v. Paladin Enterprises, 128 F.3d 233 (4th Cir. 1997), where the publisher of a how-to-do-it murder manual was held civilly liable for the murder of three
people committed by a person who had used the manual.

5. Impossibility

People v. Jaffe
New York Court of Appeals
185 N.Y. 497, 78 N.E. 169 (1906)

BaarTLetT, J. The indictment charged that the defendant on the 6th day of October, 1902, in the county of New York, feloniously received 20 yards of cloth, of the value of 25 cents a yard, belonging to the copartnership of J.W. Goddard
& Son, knowing that the said property had been feloniously stolen, taken, and carried away from the owners. It was found under section 550 of the Penal Code, which provides that a person who buys or receives any stolen property knowing the
same to have been stolen is guilty of criminally receiving such property. The defendant was convicted of an attempt to commit the crime charged in the indictment. The proof clearly showed, and the district attorney conceded upon the trial, that
the goods which the defendant attempted to purchase on October 6, 1902, had lost their character as stolen goods at the time when they were offered to the defendant and when he sought to buy them. In fact the property had been restored to the
‘owners and was wholly within their control and was offered to the defendant by their authority and through their agency. The question presented by this appeal, therefore, is whether upon an indictment for receiving goods, knowing them to have
been stolen, the defendant may be convicted of an attempt to commit the crime where it appears without dispute that the property which he sought to receive was not in fact stolen property.

The conviction was sustained by the Appellate Division chiefly upon the authority of the numerous cases in which it has been held that one may be convicted of an attempt to commit a crime notwithstanding the existence of facts
unknown to him which would have rendered the complete perpetration of the crime itself impossible. Notably among these are what may be called the “Pickpocket Cases,” where, in prosecutions for attempts to commit larceny from the person
by pocketpicking, it is held not to be necessary to allege or prove that there was anything in the pocket which could be the subject of larceny. [Similarly,] a conviction of an attempt to commit the crime of extortion was upheld, although the woman
from whom the defendant sought to obtain money by a threat to accuse her of a crime

p.637
p. 638
was not induced to pay the money by fear, but was acting at the time as a decoy for the police, and hence could not have been subjected to the influence of fear.

[It is important to bear in mind precisely what it was that the defendant attempted to do. He simply made an effort to purchase certain specific pieces of cloth. He believed the cloth to be stolen property, but it was not such in fact. The
purchase, therefore, if it had been completely effected, could not constitute the crime of receiving stolen property, knowing it to be stolen, since there could be no such thing as knowledge on the part of the defendant of a nonexistent fact, al-
though there might be a belief on his part that the fact existed. .. .

The crucial distinction between the case before us and the pickpocket cases, and others involving the same principle, lies not in the possibility or impossibility of the commission of the crime, but in the fact that, in the present case,
the act, which it was doubtless the intent of the defendant to commit, would not have been a crime if it had been consummated. If he had actually paid for the goods which he desired to buy and received them into his possession, he would have
committed no offense under section 550 of the Penal Code, because [it is] an essential element of the crime that the accused shall have known the property to have been stolen. . . . No man can know that to be so which is not so in truth and in fact.
He may believe it to be so but belief is not enough under this statute. In the present case . . . the goods which the defendant intended to purchase had lost their character as stolen goods at the time of the proposed transaction. Hence, no matter
what was the motive of the defendant, and no matter what he supposed, he could do no act which was intrinsically adapted to the then present successful perpetration of the crime . . . , because neither he nor any one in the world could know that
the property was stolen property inasmuch as it was not, in fact, stolen property. In the pickpocket cases the immediate act which the defendant had in contemplation was an act which, if it could have been carried out, would have been criminal,
whereas in the present case the immediate act which the defendant had in contemplation (to wit, the purchase of the goods which were brought to his place for sale) could not have been criminal under the statute even if the purchase had been
‘completed. . ..

Ifall which an accused person intends to do would, if done, constitute no crime, it cannot be a crime to attempt to do with the same purpose a part of the thing intended. The crime of which the defendant was convicted necessarily
consists of three elements: First, the act; second, the intent; and third, the knowledge of an existing condition. There was proof tending to establish two of these elements, the first and second, but none to establish the existence of the third... .
The defendant could not know that the property possessed the character of stolen property when it had not in fact been acquired by theft. . . . A particular belief cannot make that a crime which is not so in the absence of such belief. Take, for
example, . . . the case of a prosecution under the statute of this state, which makes it rape in the second degree for a man to perpetrate an act of sexual intercourse with a female not his wife under the age of 18 years. There could be no conviction
if it was established upon the trial that the female was in fact over the age of 18 years, although the defendant believed her to be younger and intended to commit the crime. No matter how reprehensible would be his act in morals, it would not be
the act forbidden by this particular statute. “If what a man contemplates doing would not be in law a crime, he could not be said, in point of law, to intend to commit the crime. If he thinks his act will be a crime, this is a mere mistake of his
p. 638
639
understanding where the law holds it not to be such, his real intent being to do a particular thing. If the thing is not a crime, he does not intend to commit one whatever he may erroneously suppose.” 1 Bishop's Crim. Law (7th Ed.) §742.
The judgment of the Appellate Division and of the Court of General Sessions must be reversed, and the defendant discharged upon this indictment. . . .
People v. Dlugash
New York Court of Appeals
41 N.Y.2d 725, 363 N.E.2d 1155 (1977)
Jasen, J. ... The 1967 revision of the Penal Law approached the impossibility defense to the inchoate crime of attempt in a novel fashion. The statute provides that, if a person engaged in conduct which would otherwise constitute an
attempt to commit a crime,
it is no defense to a prosecution for such attempt that the crime charged to have been attempted was, under the attendant circumstances, factually or legally impossible of commission, if such crime could have been com-
mitted had the attendant circumstances been as such person believed them to be.
(Penal Law, §110.10.) This appeal presents to us, for the first time, a case involving the application of the modern statute. We hold that, under the proof presented by the People at trial, defendant Melvin Dlugash may be held for attempted murder
[of Michael Geller], though the target of the attempt may have already been slain, by the hand of another [Bush], when Dlugash made his felonious attempt. . . .
Defendant stated [to police] that, on the night of December 21, 1973, he, Bush and Geller had been out drinking. Bush had been staying at Geller’s apartment and, during the course of the evening, Geller several times demanded that
Bush pay $100 towards the rent on the apartment. According to defendant, Bush rejected these demands, telling Geller that “you better shut up or you're going to get a bullet.” All three returned to Geller’s apartment at approximately midnight,
took seats in the bedroom, and continued to drink until sometime between 3:00 and 3:30 in the morning. When Geller again pressed his demand for rent money, Bush drew his .38 caliber pistol, aimed it at Geller and fired three times. Geller fell to
the floor. After the passage of a few minutes, perhaps two, perhaps as much as five, defendant walked over to the fallen Geller, drew his .25 caliber pistol, and fired approximately five shots in the victim's head and face. Defendant contended that,
by the time he fired the shots, “it looked like Mike Geller was already dead.”.. .
After [Officer] Carrasquillo had taken the bulk of the statement, he asked the defendant why he would do such a thing. According to Carrasquillo, the defendant said, “gee, | really don’t know.” After a while, Carrasquillo asked the ques-
tion [again] and defendant replied, “well, gee, | guess it must have been because | was afraid of Joe Bush.”
[Alt the trial . . . the prosecution sought to establish that Geller was still alive at the time defendant shot at him. Both physicians testified that each of the two chest wounds, for which defendant alleged Bush to be responsible, would
have
p.639

p. 640
caused death without prompt medical attention. Moreover, the victim would have remained alive until such time as his chest cavity became fully filled with blood. Depending on the circumstances, it might take 5 to 10 minutes for the chest cavity
to fill. Neither prosecution witness could state, with medical certainty, that the victim was still alive when, perhaps five minutes after the initial chest wounds were inflicted, the defendant fired at the victim's head.

The defense produced but a single witness, the former Chief Medical Examiner of New York City. This expert said that, in his view, Geller might have died of the chest wounds “very rapidly” since, in addition to the bleeding, a large
bullet going through a lung and the heart would have other adverse medical effects... .

The trial court declined to charge the jury, as requested by the prosecution, that defendant could be guilty of murder on the theory that he had aided and abetted the killing of Geller by Bush. Instead, the court submitted only two theo-
ries to the jury: that defendant had either intentionally murdered Geller or had attempted to murder Geller. The jury found the defendant guilty of murder. . . .

On appeal, the Appellate Division . . . ruled that “the People failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Geller had been alive at the time he was shot by defendant; defendant's conviction of murder thus cannot stand.”. . . Further,
the court held that the judgment could not be modified to reflect a conviction for attempted murder because “the uncontradicted evidence is that the defendant, at the time that he fired the five shots into the body of the decedent, believed him to
be dead.”.. .

[Alll three medical expert witnesses testified that they could not, with any degree of medical certainty, state whether the victim had been alive at the time . . . shots were fired by the defendant. Thus, the People failed to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the victim had been alive at the time he was shot by the defendant. Whatever else it may be, it is not murder to shoot a dead body. . ..

[W]e must now decide whether, under the evidence presented, the defendant may be held for attempted murder. . . .

A general rule developed in most American jurisdictions that legal impossibility is a good defense but factual impossibility is not. . . . Thus, for example, it was held that defendants who shot at a stuffed deer did not attempt to take a
deer out of season, even though they believed the dummy to be a live animal. The court stated that there was no criminal attempt because it was no crime to “take” a stuffed deer, and it is no crime to attempt to do that which is legal. (State v. Guf-
fey, 262 S.W.2d 152 [Mo. Ct. ApJ; see, also, State v. Taylor, 345 Mo. 325, 133 S.W.2d 336 [no liability for attempt to bribe a juror where person bribed was not, in fact, a juror].) These cases are illustrative of legal impossibility. .. .

On the other hand, factual impossibility was no defense. For example, a man was held liable for attempted murder when he shot into the room in which his target usually slept and, fortuitously, the target was sleeping elsewhere in the
house that night. Although one bullet struck the target's customary pillow, attainment of the criminal objective was factually impossible. . . .

The New York cases can be parsed out along similar lines. One of the leading cases on legal impossibility is People v. Jaffe, 185 N.Y. 497, in which we held that there was no liability for the attempted receipt of stolen property when the
property received by the defendant in the belief that it was stolen was, in fact, under the control of the true owner. . . . Factual impossibility, however, was no defense.

p. 640

p64
Thus, a man could be held for attempted grand larceny when he picked an empty pocket. . . .

As can be seen from even this abbreviated discussion, the distinction between “factual” and “legal” impossibility was a nice one indeed and the courts tended to place a greater value on legal form than on any substantive danger the
defendant's actions posed for society. The approach of the draftsmen of the Model Penal Code was to eliminate the defense of impossibility in virtually all situations. [See §5.01(1).] Under the code provision, to constitute an attempt, it is still nec
essary that the result intended or desired by the actor constitute a crime. However, the code suggested a fundamental change to shift the locus of analysis to the actor's mental frame of reference and away from undue dependence upon external
considerations. The basic premise of the code provision is that what was in the actor’s own mind should be the standard for determining his dangerousness to society and, hence, his liability for attempted criminal conduct. . . . In the belief that
neither of the two branches of the traditional impossibility arguments detracts from the offender's moral culpability . . . the Legislature substantially carried the [MPC] treatment of impossibility into the 1967 revision of the Penal Law. . . . Thus, a
person is guilty of an attempt when, with intent to commit a crime, he engages in conduct which tends to effect the commission of such crime. (Penal Law, §110.00,) It is no defense that, under the attendant circumstances, the crime was factually
or legally impossible of commission, “if such crime could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as such person believed them to be.” Thus, if defendant believed the victim to be alive at the time of the shooting, it is no de-
fense to the charge of attempted murder that the victim may have been dead. . . .

Turning to the facts of the case before us, we believe that there is sufficient evidence in the record from which the jury could conclude that the defendant believed Geller to be alive at the time defendant fired shots into Geller's head. ...

The jury convicted the defendant of murder. Necessarily, they found that defendant intended to kill a live human being. Subsumed within this finding is the conclusion that defendant acted in the belief that Geller was alive. Thus, there
is no need for additional fact findings by a jury. Although it was not established beyond a reasonable doubt that Geller was, in fact, alive, such is no defense to attempted murder since a murder would have been committed “had the attendant cir-
cumstances been as [defendant] believed them to be.”. ..

The Appellate Division erred in not modifying the judgment to reflect a conviction for the lesser included offense of attempted murder. . ..

NOTES ON IMPOSSIBILITY

1. Factual impossibility. When attempts misfire because of poor aim or the use of an inadequate weapon, such as an unloaded gun, courts have traditionally classified the situation as one of factual impossibility and denied a defense.
In State v. Smith, 621 A.2d 493 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1993), the defendant was incarcerated in a county jail and had tested positive for HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. During an altercation with several guards, defendant spat in one officer's
face, bit the officer’s hand, and said, “[NJow die you pig, die from what I have.” On trial for attempted murder of the officer, defendant offered evidence that it was medically

peat
p.642
impossible to transmit HIV by spitting or biting, but the court held, affirming the conviction, that such evidence was irrelevant so long as the defendant believed it possible to infect the officer and intended to kill him.

2. Legal impossibility. Prior to the enactment of statutes addressed to the issue of impossibility, courts had used the term “legal impossibility” to apply to two distinct situations. The first, best described as true legal impossibility,
arises when people engage in conduct that they believe to be prohibited, but it turns out that no such crime exists. For example, a person might secretly carry $9,000 in cash out of the country, thinking that this is a crime and not realizing that it is
permissible to do so. All courts agreed that this kind of legal impossibility was a complete defense.

A second situation was often treated as a kind of legal impossibility, but it involves a distinct problem that should not be confused with the first situation. In this second situation, the actor hopes or expects to achieve a result that the
legislature has indeed prohibited (such as receiving stolen property), but success is impossible because the circumstances are not what the actor thinks (for example, because the property has not actually been stolen). Courts disagreed about
whether this sort of impossibility (often mislabeled as “legal impossibility”) could be a defense, and if so, how it was distinguished from “factual impossibility,” which was not a defense. For example, in People v. Rojas, 358 P.2d 921 (Cal. 1961), a
case virtually identical to Jaffe, the California Supreme Court reached the opposite result, quoting this criticism of Jaffe in Jerome Hall, General Principles of Criminal Law 127 (1947):

Intent is in the mind; it is not the external realities to which intention refers. The fact that defendant was mistaken regarding the external realities did not alter his intention, but simply made it impossible to effectuate it.

The MPC has had a major influence on this debate. About two-thirds of the states have revised their codes since the MPC proposals were formulated. Nearly all of them have rejected defenses both for factual impossibility and for
mislabeled “legal impossibility” situations like Jaffe; true legal impossibility, in contrast, is always a defense. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §5.01 at 317 (1985). Another factor driving recent resistance to the Jaffe view
has been the perceived importance of police use of undercover officers who impersonate minors, as a way to catch adults who use the Internet to arrange encounters in which they can victimize underage children. See Audrey Rogers, Protecting
Children on the Internet: Mission Impossible?, 61 Baylor L. Rev. 323 (2009). Where the mislabeled defense of legal impossibility is recognized, the suspect in such a situation could have a defense if the intended victim turned out to be an adult. But
in King v. State, 921 N.E.2d 1288 (Ind. 2010), the court upheld an attempt conviction in this situation, overruling prior decisions that had permitted this kind of impossibility defense.

Most of the federal courts of appeals now follow the MPC approach. See United States v. Yang, 281 F.3d 534, 542 (6th Cir. 2002). But a few have resisted it. The following cases illustrate two approaches that differ from that of the MPC.
UNITED STATES v. BERRIGAN, 482 F.2d 171 (3d Cir. 1973): [Father Berrigan, an imprisoned Vietnam War resister, was convicted of an attempt to violate a federal statute making it criminal to take anything into or out of a federal prison contrary to
regulations of the attorney general. The latter had promulgated a regulation prohibiting such traffic “without the knowledge and consent” of the prison warden.

p.642

The conviction was based on evidence that Berrigan had smuggled letters into and out of a prison through a courier, believing that the warden was ignorant of what was going on. In fact, the warden had prior knowledge of the arrangement and
had agreed to let the courier pretend cooperation in the plan. The court reversed the conviction: Generally speaking factual impossibility is said to occur when extraneous circumstances unknown to the actor or beyond his control prevent con
summation of the intended crime. The classic example is the man who puts his hand in the coat pocket of another with the intent to steal his wallet and finds the pocket empty. . . . Legal impossibility is said to occur where the intended acts, even if
completed, would not amount to a crime. Thus, legal impossibility would apply to those circumstances where (1) the motive, desire and expectation is to perform an act in violation of the law; (2) there is intention to perform a physical act; (3) there
is a performance of the intended physical act; and (4) the consequence resulting from the intended act does not amount to a crime.25

Were intent to break the law the sole criterion to be considered in determining criminal responsibility . . . we could sustain the conviction. . . . Clearly, it can be said that Father Berrigan intended to send letters to Sister McAlister. .. .
Normally, of course, the exchange of letters is not a federal offense. Where one of the senders is in prison, however, the sending may or may not be a criminal offense. If the letter is sent within normal channels with the consent and knowledge of
the warden it is not a criminal offense. . . . If the letter is sent without the knowledge and consent of the warden, it is a criminal offense and so is the attempt because both the intended consequence and the actual consequence are in fact criminal.
Here, we are faced with a third situation where there is a motivation, desire and expectation of sending a letter without the knowledge and consent, and the intended act is performed, but unknown to the sender, the transmittal is accomplished
with the knowledge and consent of the warden.

Applying the principles of the law of attempt to the instant case, the writing of the letters, and their copying and transmittal by the courier . . . constituted the Act. . .. What the government did not prove — and could not prove because
it was a legal impossibility — was the “external, objective situation which the substantive law may require to be present,” to-wit, absence of knowledge and consent of the warden. . . . Without such proof, the Consequence or Result did not consti-
tute an offense that violated the federal statute. .. . Simply stated, attempting to do that which is not a crime is not attempting to commit a crime.2
UNITED STATES v. OVIEDO, 525 F.2d 881 (5th Cir. 1976): An undercover agent contacted defendant and asked to buy heroin. Defendant agreed and appeared at an arranged time and place with what he claimed was heroin. The agent then
performed a field test with positive result and arrested defendant. However, a later laboratory test of the substance revealed it was not in fact heroin but procaine hydrochloride (not a controlled substance), which happens to give a positive reaction
to the usual field test. The prosecution therefore charged defendant with attempted distribution of heroin, and a jury convicted, apparently rejecting defendant's testimony that he knew the substance was not heroin and was only trying to “rip off”
the agent. On appeal, the Fifth Circuit reversed the conviction.

[The court rejected the traditional distinction between legal and factual impossibility, saying:] These definitions are not particularly helpful here. . . . In one sense, the impossibility involved here might be deemed legal, for those acts
which Oviedo set in motion, the transfer of the substance in his possession, were not a crime. In another sense, the impossibility is factual, for the objective of Oviedo, the sale of heroin, was proscribed by law, and failed only because of a circum-
stance unknown to Oviedo.

[However, the court also rejected an approach that would base an attempt conviction on the fact that the defendant's objective was criminal, since “jt would allow us to punish one’s thoughts, desires, or motives, through indirect
evidence, without reference to any objective fact.” The court concluded: We reject the notion . . . , adopted by the district court, that the conviction in the present case can be sustained since there is sufficient proof of intent, not because of any
doubt as to the sufficiency of the evidence in that regard, but because of the inherent dangers such a precedent would pose in the future. .. .

When the defendant sells a substance which is actually heroin, it is reasonable to infer that he knew the physical nature of the substance, and to place on him the burden of dispelling that inference. . . . However, if we convict the
defendant of attempting to sell heroin for the sale of a non-narcotic substance, we eliminate an objective element that has major evidentiary significance and we increase the risk of mistaken conclusions that the defendant believed the goods were
narcotics.

Thus, we demand that in order for a defendant to be guilty of a criminal attempt, the objective acts performed, without any reliance on the accompanying mens rea, mark the defendant's conduct as criminal in nature. ... We cannot
conclude that the objective acts of Oviedo apart from any indirect evidence of intent mark his conduct as criminal in nature. Rather, those acts are consistent with a noncriminal enterprise. Therefore, we will not allow the jury's determination of
Oviedo's intent to form the sole basis of a criminal offense.

The Case of Lady Eldon’s French Lace
A hypothetical decision on a hypothetical state of facts, by the editors
A perennial in the crop of attempt hypotheticals was suggested by Dr. Wharton.! “Lady Eldon, when traveling with her husband on the Continent,
p. 644
p. 646
bought what she supposed to be a quantity of French lace, which she hid, concealing it from Lord Eldon in one of the pockets of the coach. The package was brought to light by a customs officer at Dover. The lace turned out to be an English
manufactured article, of little value, and of course, not subject to duty. Lady Eldon had bought it at a price vastly above its value, believing it to be genuine, intending to smuggle it into England.” Dr. Wharton, supra, and Professor Sayre? conclude
that she could be found guilty of an attempt since she intended to smuggle dutiable lace into England. Professor Keedy disagrees, finding the fallacy of their argument in their failure to recognize “that the particular lace which Lady Eldon intended
to bring into England was not subject to duty and therefore, although there was the wish to smuggle, there was not the intent to do so.”2
Keedy was distinguishing between intent, on the one hand, and motive, desire, and expectation, on the other, a distinction that served as the linchpin of the decision in People v. Jaffe, supra, and United States v. Berrigan, supra. AS
Keedy sees it, what people intend to do is determined by what they do in fact, rather than by what they thought they were doing. The lace was in fact not dutiable; thus, Lady Eldon did not intend to smuggle dutiable French lace and could not be
convicted of attempt to do so, since what she intended to do (on this view) was not a crime — in Keedy's view a case of legal impossibility. Professor Perkins has advocated a similar approach.°
We concur with Wharton and Sayre. We submit that Keedy and Perkins, and the courts that follow their reasoning, have been guilty of some plain silliness in supporting their position. Their conclusion that Lady Eldon must be acquitted
rests on the premise that what people intend to do is what they actually do, even if that was the furthest thing from their mind:
“You're eating my salad.”
“Sorry, | didn’t mean to; | thought it was mine.”
“You might have thought it was yours. But in fact it was mine. So it was my salad you intended to eat. You should be ashamed!”
Surely this is an extraordinary way of describing what a person intended, quite at odds with common sense and common language. Where a circumstance is not known to the actor, there is no way consistent with straight thought that
the actor can be regarded as intending that circumstance.
Of course, it is hardly unknown for courts to adopt strained and artificial reasoning to support a sound result. Is that the case here? Is it sound to conclude that the type of conduct engaged in by Lady Eldon should not be punishable?
Let us consider if it is.
Suppose Lady Eldon believed she had purchased an inexpensive English lace but in fact had purchased an expensive French lace. Certainly she could not be found guilty of smuggling if she got past the customs inspector; nor could
she be convicted of attempt if she had tried but failed to do so. The reason is that the
p. 646
p. 646
intent to smuggle French lace, necessary to establish either offense, does not exist. (We are assuming this is not a crime of strict liability.) And that intent does not exist because her intent is judged by what she believed she was doing and not by
what she in fact did. Now why should it make any more difference in Wharton's hypothetical that her act was objectively lawful than it does in our variation that her act was objectively unlawful? In both cases intent should be judged by the same
standard — what she believed she was doing, not what she did in fact.

It may be argued that while an innocent mind can exculpate, a criminal mind by itself cannot inculpate. The reasoning might be that although a purpose could be served by punishing a person who decides to commit a crime, it is unde-
sirable to do so, because merely thinking evil is not a reliable indication that a person will do evil; the criminal law may properly concer itself only with acts. See pp. 260-261 supra.

But has Lady Eldon merely thought to smuggle French lace? No. She has done everything she thought necessary to smuggle French lace. Has she shown herself to be less eligible for the imposition of criminal sanctions merely because
she failed? Surely not.

Perhaps it may be argued that there is a different policy supporting exculpation in cases like Lady Eldon's — namely, that in real cases, as opposed to hypotheticals, it is too dangerous to permit juries to speculate on a defendant's
intent in the absence of actions that strongly evidence that intent. One may fully agree with this point, however, without concluding that Lady Eldon should be acquitted. Even if the lace found at the border had been dutiable French lace, that,
fact would only be evidence of the intent to smuggle — after all, she might have thought it was English lace, or someone might have been put it in her luggage without her knowledge. So in the reverse situation, where the lace turned out not to be
dutiable, why should it be held (as it was in United States v. Oviedo, supra) that a finding of intent will necessarily be suspect, regardless of the strength of the evidence that Lady Eldon believed otherwise? Suppose, for example, that the lace were
carefully hidden in a specially tailored, concealed pocket of the coach; that a letter from Lady Eldon to sister friend described the newly bought “French lace” in exquisite detail. There would seem little danger to the innocent in allowing a jury to find
an attempt to smuggle French lace on these facts. Indeed, in cases like Jaffe and Berrigan, “attempt” is charged only because of the involvement of an undercover agent, whose participation prevents completion of the intended crime. Whatever
else one may say about such investigatory tactics, they do not necessarily render suspect the evidence of the defendant's intent; indeed, in practice, they usually render that evidence less speculative than it otherwise would be. The proper remedy
for speculative and unreliable jury findings of intent is a court alert to preclude such findings in particular cases where the evidence is insufficient.

In the end, then, the arguments in favor of Lady Eldon (and those which have been used to reverse convictions in cases like Jaffe, Oviedo, and Berrigan) rest on unpersuasive policy considerations rationalized by a peculiar interpretation
of what it means to intend an act, one that is utterly at odds both with the common usage of our language and its usage elsewhere in the criminal law. We conclude that the apparently innocuous character of the action actually done (innocuous
in the sense that it could not constitute a crime under the actual circumstances) will not save her from an attempt conviction if she believed that the facts were otherwise, and if, had her belief been correct, what she set out to do would constitute a
crime. This is the principle that has found favor in virtually

p.647
every serious statutory effort to deal with the problem, and in numerous decisions reached without benefit of a specific statute to tell the court that people intend to do what they think they are doing.

We must say a few words more about the final qualification to the principle just asserted; namely, that “had her belief [in the circumstances] been correct, what she set out to do would constitute a crime.” The point can best be made by
altering the hypothetical. Suppose the lace that Lady Eldon had purchased was in fact the expensive French lace she meant to buy. The customs officer at Dover brings it to light. He then says to Lady Eldon: “Lucky you returned to England today
rather than yesterday. | just received word this morning that the government has removed French lace from the duty list.” Could Lady Eldon be held for attempt to smuggle French lace in these circumstances? Certainly what she did and what she
intended to do were not different simply because she acted one day later, when French lace was removed from the duty list. But there is this important difference: At the time she acted, what she intended to do (always judged, of course, from her
‘own perspective) was not a violation of the criminal law, even though she thought it was.

It is true that Lady Eldon’s action showed her to be a person who would break some law under some circumstances. But what law? The law against smuggling French lace? There no longer was such a law. The criminal laws generally?
Our law does not hold that any antisocial attitude is sufficient to justify criminal punishment. That a person was willing to violate what she thought was the law raises the odds of her violating an actual law in the future. But as Professor Williams
has pointed out, “if the legislature has not seen fit to prohibit the consummated act, a mere approach to consummation should a fortiori be guiltless. Any other view would offend against the principle of legality; in effect the law of attempt would be
used to manufacture a new crime, when the legislature has left the situation outside the ambit of the law.” Glanville Williams, Criminal Law: The General Part 633-634 (2d ed. 1961). Had the customs-duty list been changed as supposed, therefore, it
would be just as wrong to convict her as to convict a person of marijuana possession where the defendant purchased the drug without realizing that the marijuana-possession law had been repealed. These are the cases of true legal impossibility.

But these cases of true legal impossibility are totally different from cases like Jaffe and Berrigan, even though the courts in each case made it seem otherwise, by asserting that what the defendants intended to do could not have
constituted a crime. What the drug purchaser intended to do (and did) could not constitute a crime because there was no such crime. What Jaffe and Berrigan intended to do (and thought they did) was indeed a crime. It is only through a perverse
use of intent that we can say that Jaffe intended to receive honestly obtained property or that Berrigan intended to send out a letter the warden knew about, and therefore that what they intended to do was not a crime.

Lady Eldon, in the initial hypothetical, in contrast to the modified hypothetical, presents no more a case of genuine legal impossibility than do Jaffe and Berrigan. She will be convicted of attempt to smuggle French lace.
COMMENT, 11 HYPOTHETICAL L. REV. 1, 3-4 (1962-2021): The hypothetical Lady Eldon decision is a good effort, but it doesn’t quite work.
First: Consider a safecracker who tries to open a safe with magic incantations. Under the Lady Eldon analysis, the safecracker would merely have made a mistake
p.647
p. 648
of fact, and he could be convicted of attempt. Or consider the case of Leroy Ivy and John Henry Ivy, two brothers who tried to use voodoo to kill a judge who had sentenced one of them to prison for robbery.! The brothers paid the judge’s house-
keeper $100 for his photo and a lock of his hair, which they planned to mail to a voodoo practitioner in Jamaica. Police officers in Tupelo, Mississippi, foiled the plot by arresting Leroy Ivy before he could send off the items needed to cast the spell.
Charged with attempting to kill the judge, the brothers pleaded guilty and were sentenced to five and ten years respectively. But these defendants, like the safecracker, are more pathetic than dangerous.

The MPC, recognizing this problem, gives a court the power to dismiss a prosecution or decrease the penalty if the alleged attempt “is so inherently unlikely to result or culminate in the commission of a crime that neither such conduct
nor the actor presents a public danger.” Section 5.05(2). But this solution leaves the matter to the discretion of the judge; it is not a rule of law. A better approach is that developed by Professor Robbins, who proposes that a person be guilty of
attempt only when the person “purposely does or omits to do anything that, under the circumstances as a reasonable person would believe them to be,” is a substantial step in a course of conduct planned to culminate in commission of the crime.
Yet this proposal arguably goes too far in the opposite direction. It succeeds in excluding the voodoo case from attempt liability, but it could run into difficulty in the case of an actor who, intending to kill, fires a gun that the actor incorrectly be-
lieves to be loaded with live bullets. Should people be able to avoid liability, even though they think their shot will be lethal, by arguing that a reasonable person would have realized that in fact the gun was loaded with blanks?

Second: The effort to deal with the so-called true legal impossibility problem is not convincing. Consider the following case. Two friends, Mr. Fact and Mr. Law, go hunting in the morning of October 15 in the fields of the state of Dakota,
whose law allows hunting on that date but makes it a misdemeanor to hunt before October 1. Both men kill deer on their first day out. Mr. Fact thinks he has committed a crime because he is under the erroneous belief that the date is September
15 (when hunting is illegal). Mr. Law thinks he has committed a crime because he is under the erroneous belief that hunting is permitted only in November (as it was the previous year). Under the principle proposed by the editors to deal with Lady
Eldon's case, Mr. Fact could be convicted of an attempt to hunt out of season, but Mr. Law could not be. We fail to see how any rational system of criminal law could justify convicting one and acquitting the other on the fragile and unpersuasive
distinction that one made a mistake of fact, while the other made a mistake of law. If the ultimate test is the dangerousness of the actor (i.e., readiness to violate the

p. 648
p. 649
law), as the Lady Eldon analysis argues, no distinction is warranted — Mr. Law has shown himself to be no less “dangerous” than Mr. Fact.2

The same point can be made with the very example that the editors use to support their Lady Eldon analysis — the case in which, unbeknownst to Lady Eldon, French lace has just been removed from the duty list. The editors ask, in
effect, What law is she likely to break? Not smuggling French lace, they say, because there's no longer such a law. Correct. Not criminal laws generally, they say, because that would rest criminality on mere speculation. Correct again. But how
about the law against smuggling? Has she shown herself to be less a smuggler, just because she arrived right after French lace had been removed from the duty list? The editors err in treating the case as if duties had been repealed on all goods,
whereas only one item had been removed from the duty list.

Third: The opinion overlooks the strong case for retaining the defense in one class of factual impossibility cases. These are the cases in which the acts done by the defendant are consistent with an innocent state of mind. Take, for
example, the old saw about the professor who takes his own umbrella thinking it belongs to a colleague. The act is utterly neutral. A man taking his own umbrella conveys no evidence of guilt. Of course, the matter changes if it can be proved that
he believed it was his colleague's umbrella. But proof of state of mind is inherently unreliable where there are only ambiguous acts to support the inference.

Consider how the MPC deals with this very concern when it addresses itself to a different problem, i.e., drawing the line between preparation and attempt. This is typically the situation in which the actor has not yet completed all the
actor set out to do. In §5.01, the MPC requires that the acts be “strongly corroborative of the actor's criminal purpose.” The primary function of this requirement is to avoid the risk of false convictions. Where the evidence of intent falls below a cer-
tain level we are not willing to allow the jury to speculate.

Both the Lady Eldon opinion and the MPC are short-sighted for not seeing that the same concern exists in the class of impossibility cases under discussion. In this respect the court in Oviedo, p. 644 supra, and cases that have followed
its lead, are on solid ground. If concern about false convictions calls for the requirement that the acts strongly corroborate the intent when the actor had to do further acts to achieve the desired objective, then the same concern calls for the same
p.649
p.650
requirement where people believe they have done all they needed to do. The professor taking his own umbrella is just such a case.
To put the suggestion in statutory form, we propose the following amendment to MPC §5.01:
An actor is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for commission of the crime, the actor: (a) purposely engages in conduct that strongly corroborates the required cul-
pability and would constitute the crime if the attendant circumstances were as the actor believes them to be. . . 4
NOTE
For an insightful effort to untangle the knots presented by the Lady Eldon case, see Larry Alexander, Inculpatory and Exculpatory Mistakes and the Fact/Law Distinction, 12 Law & Phil. 33, 43-70 (1993). For a general discussion of
mistakes, see Daniel Yeager, Decoding the Impossibility Defense, 56 U. Louisville L. Rev. 359 (2018). In a rare effort to support a defense for the kind of (so-called) legal impossibility present in Jaffe and Berrigan, Professor John Hasnas argues that
the “common law impossibility defense . . . does not go far enough. [Alttempts, whether impossible or not, should be punished when and only when the defendant, acting with the specific intent to commit an offense known to the law, engages in
conduct sufficient to cause public alarm if observed by an average citizen.” Hasnas, Once More unto the Breach: The Inherent Liberalism of the Criminal Law and Liability for Attempting the Impossible, 54 Hastings L.J. 1, 75 (2002).
3, Our research yielded no published civil or criminal case nationwide which involved a two-helicopter collision.
6, The American Law Institute has urged the use of “Iegal cause” instead. Although there Is some merit to its arguments, | abide with the traditional term, “proximate cause.”
119, The Model Penal Code takes a similar approach, focusing on whether the resutt is “too remote or accidental in its occurrence to have a ust] bearing on the actor's liability or on the gravity of his offense.” (Model Pen. Code, §2.05(2)(b)) ...
11, The court nonetheless reversed, on other grounds, Ryan's convictions for manstaughter and criminally negligent homicide.
2, Moore, Foreseeing Harm Opaquely, in Action and Value in Criminal Law 125, 126-127 (S. Shute et al. eds., 1995).
For a careful ertique of Moore's position, see Jeffrey Brand-Ballard, Moral Emotions and Culpabilty for Resultant Harm, 42 Rutgers L.J. $15 (2011). For further exploration of the question whether lower punishment is justified when harm is not “proximately caused!” (or not caused at al), see the
material on the grading of attempts, pp. 601-604 infra. — EDs.
3, Compare People v. Smith, 47 Cal. 4th 735 (Cal. 2005) (upholding convictions for multiple counts of attempted murder); State v. Rodrigues-Gonzales, 790 P.2d 287 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1990) (multiple murders), with People v. Birreuta, 208 Cal. Rpt. 635 (Ct. App. 1984) (only one murder).
‘70, However, there may be circumstances where one who recklessly or negligently provides the means by which another commits suicide could be found guity ofa lesser offense, such as involuntary manslaughter. There are a number of cases in which providing a gun to a person known to the
defendant to be intoxicated and despondent or agitated has constituted sufficient recklessness to support such a conviction. ...
4, See Ellen Pligian & Monica Davey, Kevorkian Is Released trom Prison, N.Y. Times, June 1, 2007,
5. Eg, State v. Melchert-Dinkel, 844 N.W.2d 13 (Minn. 2014).
6, See Sanford H. Kadish, Blame and Punishment: Essays in the Criminal Law 140-145 (1987).
‘7. The MPC terminology partly reflects and partly departs from this causal conception. It provides that one who assists a voluntary suicide ordinarily cannot be convicted of homicide (§210.5(1)), but it also creates a separate offense for a person who aids or encourages a suicide, with felony penal-
ties applicable when “his conduct causes such suicide” to occur (§210.5(2)). The latter provision appears to presuppose that one can “cause” the entirely voluntary suicide of another person. (When a suicide is not fully voluntary, a person who causes it can be prosecuted for homicide under §210.5(1),)
8. Finis for Novus Actus?, 48 Cambridge LJ. 391, 392 (1989).

9. H.LA. Hart & Tony Honoré, Causation in the Law (2d ed. 1985).

10. People v. Gilbert, 408 P.2d 365, 374 (Cal. 1965). See People v. Gonzalez, 54 Cal. 4th 643 (2012).

111. See Roger Cohen, Diana and the Paparazzi: A Morality Tale, N.Y. Times, Sept. 6, 1997, at A1.

+12, Anne Swardson, Probe Points to Diana's Driver; French Prosecutors Clear Paparazzi in Fatal Accident, Wash. Post, Aug. 18, 1999, at C1

11S. In the case of crimes punishable by death or life imprisonment, the California punishment for attempt is a prison term of five, seven, or nine years (or life with possibility of parole in the case of murder).

1a. In response to the problems of an attempted murder prosecution in the context of HIV transmission, many states have passed legislation making ita criminal offense for persons who are HIV-positive to engage in unprotected sex, or to do so without disclosing their HIV status to thelr partner. For
a critical analysis of criminalization in this context, see Margo Kaplan, Rethinking HIV-Exposure Crimes, 87 Ind. Ll. 1517 (2012). — Eos.

114, For an approach to the law of attempts premised on the assumption that its purpose Is to punish “the act of trying,” see Gideon Yaffe, Criminal Attempts, 124 Yale LJ. 92, 115 (2014). For criticism that this approach Is simultaneously over- and underinclusive, see R.A. Duff, Guiding Commit-
ments and Criminal Liability for Attempts, 6 Crim. L. & Phil. 411 (2012)

115. As indicated in Note 1, supra, nearly all American jurisdictions reject this view. For an exception, upholding an attempted murder conviction in the absence of intent to kil, based on an act that was “imminently dangerous to another and demonstrated a depraved mind without regard for human
lite,” see Brown v. State, 790 So. 2d 389, 390 (Fla. 2001). The dissent (id. at 393, 397) described the majority's holding as “contrary to the overwhelming majority of jurisdictions. [In most jurisdictions] the crime of attempted depraved mind or reckless murder does not exist.”

16. But see People v. Braslaw, 183 Cal. Rptr. 3d 575, 583 (Ct. App. 2015) (holding that when an attempt requires a heightened mental state from the completed crime, as is the case with many general intent crimes, the attempt is not a lesser included offense).

‘a. An opportunity to repent, change one’s mind. — Eos.

b. For a contrasting approach, which would restrict the law of attempts much more narrowly than any currently accepted test, see Larry Alexander & Kimberly Kessler Ferzan (with Stephen Morse), Crime and Culpabilty 216 (2009): “[WJe believe itis only when the actor has committed the ‘last
act’... [J only when the actor does something that she believes increases the risk of harm to the victim in a way that she no longer can control that she has engaged in a culpable act... itis at this moment that the law calls upon the actor to refrain from acting, and she acts culpably when she ignores the
law's commands.” — EDs.

117. Kathleen G. McAnaney et al., Note, From Imprudence to Crime: Anti-Stalking Laws, 68 Notre Dame L. Rev. 819, 821-823 (1993).

118. Tamar Lewin, New Laws Address Old Problem, N.Y. Times, Feb. 8, 1993, at A1.

19. See George L. Blum, Validity of State Stalking Statutes, 6 A.L.R.7th art. 6 (2015).

20. For examination of U.S. Supreme Court doctrine governing the constitutional prohibition of vagueness, see City of Chicago v. Morales and the Notes following, p. 216 supra.

21, See Alexei Alexis, Bipartisan Senate Group Urges FTC, DOJ to Investigate, Prosecute “Stalking Apps,” 90 Crim. L. Rep. 169 (Nov. 2, 2011).

22, See Mary L. Boland, Taking Aim at the High-Tech Stalker, Criminal Justice (ABA Criminal Justice Section), pp. 40, 42 (Spring 2005).

23. In support of anti-stalking statutes, see Marion Buckley, Stalking Laws — Problem or Solution?, 9 Wis. Women’s LJ. 23 (1994). For criticism, suggesting that statutes like that of California's violate constitutional prohibitions against vagueness and overbreadth, see Robert P. Faulkner & Douglas
H. Hsiao, And Where You Go I'll Follow: The Constitutionality of Antistalking Laws and Proposed Model Legisiation, 31 Harv. J. Legis. 1 (1994).

1a, Since the defendants conceded the validity of their conspiracy convictions, why did it matter whether they could also be convicted of attempt? The answer is that the federal conspiracy statute, 18 U.S.C. §371, carries a maximum sentence of five years’ Imprisonment, while attempted bank
robbery (18 U.S.C. §2113(a)) is punishable by up to 20 years’ imprisonment. In the present case, defendant Jackson received a two-year sentence on the conspiracy count and a suspended sentence on the other counts; Scott received a five-year sentence on the conspiracy count and concurrent seven-year
terms on the attempt counts; Allen recelved a five-year sentence on the conspiracy count and concurrent ten-year terms on the attempt counts. — EDs.

24, Jones apparently was acting in compliance with DEA guidelines that prohibit illegal drugs trom going into the physical possession of persons under investigation.

3. [Clonfinement for 20 years is authorized for attempted murder, whereas the period of confinement authorized for soliciting another to commit murder is 5 years. . .

1. For a discussion of why conspiracy is not satisfied in this situation, see pp. 757-756 infra.

‘35, Intent as used in this connection must be distinguished from motive, desire and expectation. If C by reason of his hatred of 4 plans to kill him, but mistaking B for A shoots B, his motive, desire and expectation are to kill A but his intent is to killB.... If A takes an umbrella which he believes to
belong to B, but which in fact is his own, he does not have the intent to steal, his intent being to take the umbrella he grasps in his hand, which is his own umbrella. ... Ifa man mistakes a stump for his enemy and shoots at it, notwithstanding his desire and expectation to shoot his enemy, his intent is to shoot
the object aimed at, which is the stump. Keedy, Criminal Attempts at Common Law, 102 U. of Pa. L. Rev. 464, 466-467 (1954)...

1. In a subsequent decision, the Third Circuit limited Berrigan to its facts and instead adopted an approach comparable to that of the MPC. United States v. Hsu, 155 F.3d 189 (3d Cir. 1998). Berrigan nonetheless illustrates an analysis that continues to have some influence and intuitive appeal. —
Eps,

11. Criminal Law 304 n.9 (12th ed. 1932).

2. Criminal Attempts, 41 Harv. L. Rev. 821, 852 (1928).

3. Criminal Attempts at Common Law, 102 U. Pa. L. Rev. 464, 477 n.85 (1954).

41d, at 466-468.

5, Rollin M. Perkins, Criminal Attempt and Related Problems, 2 UCLA L. Rev. 319, 330-332 (1955).

11, For accounts of the case, see Fred Grimm, Man Charged in Plot to Kill Judge by Hex, Miami Herald, Mar. 31, 1989, at 1, 10; R.J. Smith, Conspiracy to Commit Voodoo, Village Voice, Sept. 26, 1989, at 37-41.

2. ra P. Robbins, Attempting the Impossible: The Emerging Consensus, 23 Harv. J. Legis. 377, 441 (1986) (emphasis added). See also N.J. Stat. Ann. §20:5-1(a)(1) (2021), stating that attempt is committed when actor “[p]urposely engages in conduct which would constitute the crime ifthe atten-
dant circumstances were as a reasonable person would believe them to be.”

3. For discussion of the problems posed by this hypothetical, see Ken Levy, It's Not Too Difficult: A Plea to Resurrect the Impossibility Defense, 45 N.M. L. Rev. 225 (2014); Kenneth W. Simons, Mistake of Fact or Mistake of Criminal Law? Explaining and Defending the Distinction, $ Grim. L. & Phil.
218, 280-232 (2009); Fernand N. Dutile & Harold F. Moore, Mistake and Impossibility: Arranging a Marriage Between Two Difficult Partners, 74 Nw. U. L. Rev. 166, 166-167 (1979). The last article disagrees with the reasoning of the Hypothetical Law Review comment on this point:

Mr. Law in the Kadish and [Schulhofer] example would be acquitted . .., while Mr. Fact would not. From the standpoint of ... the dangerous propensities of the defendant, there is no way to justify the result. From a “moral” standpoint they are equally culpable. [But] itis totally unclear

how any system based on liability for intending to violate the law, as opposed to intending conduct that is in violation of the law, could function. . .. Such a system provides neither appropriate deterrence to crime nor proper retribution for crime.

4. For discussion of this proposal, see Robbins, supra, at 400-412. n a related proposal, Professor Fletcher suggests that attempts be punishable only when two conditions are met: “[T]he actor must attempt an act punishable under the law, and, further, this attempt must be dangerous on its
face.” George P. Fletcher, Constructing a Theory of Impossible Attempts, 5 Crim. J. Ethics §3, 67 (1986).

p..650
