
CHAPTER 1
FOUNDATIONS
A. THE SWEEP OF CRIMINAL LAW IN AMERICA
NOTES
1. Anoverview. The structures for administering criminal law in the United States have produced the largest penal system in the world. Before the 1970s, America’s approach to crime and incarceration had much in common with other
Western democracies as each “shared a relatively sparing use of imprisonment.”! Then all this changed dramatically. At its peak in 2008, the American penal system reached 2.3 million people, and by late 2020 it incarcerated 1.8 million people,2 a
situation that is both “historically unprecedented and internationally unique.”? The U.S. incarceration rate of 830 per 100,000 is more than five times what it was in 1972 when it began its record climb upward,‘ and is a rate 5 to 10 times higher than
that of other industrialized countries.2 America has less than 5 percent of the world’s population but almost a quarter of the world’s prisoners.£ In addition to this, one out of every 38 people in the United States is under some other form of criminal
justice supervision (such as probation or parole).2 In some states, the rate is even higher. In Georgia, for example, one out of every 18 people is on probation or parole.8 One out of every

three adults in America now has a criminal record.? For every 17 people born in 2001, one is expected to go to prison or jail. So while the mark of a criminal conviction was unusual throughout most of American history, today it is commonplace.12
2. Social and racial concentration. The effects of criminal law in America are not spread equally among the population. African Americans make up about a third of the people incarcerated, even though they are 13.4 percent of the
U.S. population.1! One third of Black men have at least one felony conviction.12 Black adults are 5.9 times more likely to be incarcerated than white adults.1 In some communities, these effects are even more pronounced. In the District of Co-
lumbia, for example, more than 75 percent of Black men can expect to be incarcerated at some point during their lives.14 At our current pace, almost one out of three Black men in the country can expect to be incarcerated during their lifetimes,
compared to 6 percent of white men.1® One in six Hispanic males born in 2001 are also expected to serve time in prison at some point in their lives.18 A United States Sentencing Commission study found Black men receive sentences that are an
average of 19.1 percent longer than those received by similarly situated white men.!7 The National Research Council, a broad-based and prestigious arm of the National Academy of Sciences, concludes:!®
Those who are incarcerated in U.S. prisons come largely from the most disadvantaged segments of the population. They comprise mainly minority men under age 40, poorly educated, and often carrying additional deficits



of drug and alcohol addiction, mental and physical illness, and a lack of work preparation or experience. Their criminal responsibility is real, but it is embedded in a context of social and economic disadvantage. More than

half the prison population is black or Hispanic. In 2010, blacks were incarcerated at six times and Hispanics at three times the rate for non-Hispanic whites. . .. The meaning and consequences of this new reality cannot be

separated from issues of social inequality and the quality of citizenship of the nation’s racial and ethnic minorities.

David Garland points out that “[imprisonment becomes mass imprisonment when it ceases to be the incarceration of individual offenders and becomes the systematic imprisonment of whole groups of the population.” Garland, Intro-
duction: The Meaning of Mass Imprisonment, 3 Punishment & Soc'y 5, 6 (2001). The current reach of criminal law in the United States is thus notable for both its overall sweep and its heavy concentration on specific groups, particularly the poor
and Black and brown people.

3. Causes. How did the American penal landscape change so dramatically in the few short decades since the early 1970s? One instinct may be to assume that the fault lies not in our laws or institutions but instead in our high volume
of serious crime. Yet the relationship between crime rates and incarceration rates does not follow a clear pattern. It is true that a dramatic increase in crime in the 1970s and 1980s corresponded with rising incarceration rates. But incarceration
continued to rise in the 1990s, even though crime rates declined steeply throughout that period and stabilized in the early 2000s to “the lowest levels recorded” since the Justice Department started conducting surveys in 1973.12 Some researchers
argue that mass incarceration is primarily a result of the prevalence of increasingly high rates of arrest for known crimes, more punitive attitudes in American culture that are reflected in longer sentences, and more aggressive policies in the en-
forcement of our drug laws.2° The National Research Council concludes:21

The best single proximate explanation of the rise in incarceration is not rising crime rates, but the policy choices made by legislators to greatly increase the use of imprisonment as a response to crime. [These choices]

contributed not only to overall high rates of incarceration, but also especially to extraordinary rates of incarceration in black and Latino communities. Intensified enforcement of drug laws subjected blacks, more than whites,

to new mandatory minimum sentences — despite lower


levels of drug use and no higher demonstrated levels of trafficking among the black than the white population. Blacks had long been more likely than whites to be arrested for violence. But [changes in sentencing policies,

such as three-strikes laws and the elimination of or restrictions on parole] have likely increased sentences and time served for blacks more than whites. As a consequence, the absolute disparities in incarceration increased,

and imprisonment became common for young minority men, particularly those with little schooling. [AJn increasingly punitive political climate surrounding criminal justice policy . . . provided the context for a series of policy

choices — across all branches and levels of government — that significantly increased sentence lengths, required prison time for minor offenses, and intensified punishment for drug crimes.

4, Consequences: public safety and social welfare. Criminal law has traditionally been society's primary mechanism for protecting the safety and security of individuals and the community. But many now worry that the deployment
of criminal sanctions, especially imprisonment, has expanded far beyond what's needed to serve those purposes and may have become counterproductive. As we explore in more detail at pp. 18-20 infra, there is at most only a small incremental
deterrent effect from adding more time to already-long prison sentences — for example through “three strikes” laws and mandatory minimum sentences. And because the risk of recidivism declines sharply as people age, using long prison sen-
tences for incapacitation makes sense only when those sentences can be reserved for exceptionally dangerous individuals or those who can be identified in advance as very likely to re-offend. Moreover, long sentences can themselves become
criminogenic because it is more difficult for those released from prison after long periods of time to successfully reenter society.

A full assessment of America's incarceration policies also must consider not only direct crime-control benefits and costs but broader social consequences. Again, the National Research Council has sketched a daunting picture:22

[Prison admission and return have become commonplace in [neighborhoods that are] characterized by high levels of crime, poverty, family instability, poor health, and residential segregation. .. . Incarceration is strongly

correlated with negative social and economic outcomes for former prisoners and their families. Men with a criminal record often experience reduced earnings and employment after prison. Fathers’ incarceration and family

hardship . . . are strongly related. From 1980 to 2000, the number of children with incarcerated fathers increased from about 350,000 to 2.1 million — about 3 percent of all U.S. children. . . . The rise in incarceration rates


marked a massive expansion of the role of the justice system in the nation’s poorest communities. Many of those entering prison come from and will return to these communities. When they return, their lives often continue
to be characterized by violence, joblessness, substance abuse, family breakdown, and neighborhood disadvantage. . . . The vast

expansion of the criminal justice system has created a large population whose access to public benefits, occupations, vocational licenses, and the franchise is limited by a criminal conviction. . ..
We are concerned that the United States has gone past the point where the numbers of people in prison can be justified by social benefits. Indeed, we believe that the high rates of incarceration themselves con-

stitute a source of injustice and, possibly, social harm.

Compounding these difficulties, the prominence of criminal law responses in the public policy toolbox has meant that when new social problems emerge, criminal law is often viewed not as a last resort but as the preferred course of
action. In the absence of a well-functioning mental health system, criminal law often is called upon to fill the void. More than half of the people in prisons and jails suffer from mental illness.2° About 70 percent of those in California's prisons are
former foster-care youth.2# While some argue that drug and alcohol dependency should be approached as a public health problem, the United States gives primacy to criminal law responses. Jonathan Simon points out that the United States has
also turned to criminal law as its favored method for addressing disorder in workplaces, families, and schools.25 Even where regulatory agencies have powerful civil sanctions at their disposal, criminal law often assumes a leading role; prosecu-
tors seek to change corporate behavior through threats of prosecution and may have added incentives to do so when civil agencies — often subject to “capture” by the industries they regulate — are perceived to be insufficiently aggressive. See
Chapter 7 infra.

5. Abolition as a solution? The shockingly large number of people who are subject to penal systems around the country (because they are incarcerated or under some form of supervision or surveillance), the glaring racial disparities,
and the poor results for public safety have led many to question the entire enterprise. There is a growing group of activists and scholars advocating for the abolition of policing, jails, and prisons. We discuss abolition at pp. 53-63 infra. But in the
absence of a complete reordering of our responses to crime through abolition, which is not foreseeable on any short-term horizon, there remain questions of what should or could be done now to address mass incarceration and to improve the cur-
rent response to behaviors like murder, rape, burglary, theft, and other actions that harm others.

6. Substantive-law reforms. If America’s response to crime is indeed deeply flawed, substantive criminal law by itself clearly cannot solve all that is wrong. But what can reform of substantive criminal law contribute to addressing
America’s problems of overcriminalization and mass incarceration? Do our written laws sweep too broadly? Do we fail to account for economic and structural deprivation in assessing blame and/or punishment? More narrowly drafted offenses and
greater allowance for justifications or excuses offer ways to restrain the reach of criminal law, which should, in turn, reduce the number of people who fall under a

criminalization umbrella. The appropriate role and scope of criminal sanctions in maintaining social order and promoting social welfare is thus a bedrock question for criminal justice and for public policy generally, one we examine throughout this
book.2° But even when violent behavior, interference with property rights, and dealing in hard drugs are properly defined as crimes, the punitive impact of the system still depends crucially on policy choices embedded in substantive criminal law,
especially the extent to which the law affords discretion and how that discretion is exercised — whether the right crime was charged and whether the right sentence was imposed. These topics are taken up systematically in Chapters 2 and 10.

7. Do we ever have too little law enforcement? The preceding concerns might suggest a strong presumption in favor of lenity — that we should resolve close questions by narrowing the reach of criminal statutes, reducing punish-
ments, and granting officials greater discretion to treat potentially criminal conduct more leniently. Given the broad consensus that America is too quick to resort to criminal law solutions and that we have far too many people in prison, a clear
preference for lenity might seem the right way to frame our thinking about problems throughout the criminal law. But matters are not so simple. There are also many situations where the penal system fails to do enough. In the wake of the financial
crisis of 2008, few individuals were prosecuted, leading many to question why prosecutors failed to pursue criminal cases. See Brandon L. Garrett, Too Big to Jail (2014); Jed S. Rakoff, The Financial Crisis: Why Have No High-Level Executives
Been Prosecuted?, N.Y. Rev. Books, Jan. 9, 2014. Many lament what they see as unjustified impunity for police officers and civilians who use deadly force against unarmed African-American youth. See Aya Gruber, Leniency as a Miscarriage of


Race and Gender Justice, 76 Alb. L. Rev. 1571 (2013). Critics often argue that inner-city minority neighborhoods receive too little police protection and that sexual assault and domestic violence laws are woefully underenforced. See Chapters 3.B,
4.A, and 8.B.2, infra. Deborah Tuerkheimer writes:22
[Often] the criminal justice system withholds its protective resources from groups deemed unworthy of protection. Evidence of this dynamic can be found across a range of law enforcement responses, including black-on-
black homicide, hate crime, and unlawful police violence against civilians. . . . Unremedied injuries suffered by women, in particular, have

historically been the norm. . . . Across the spectrum of violence — domestic and sexual — substantive law reform has not readily translated into law enforcement. Instead, to this day, the same biases reflected in repudiated
legal regimes continue to influence the implementation of more progressive laws that have emerged in their stead.
How can we reconcile these claims of underenforcement with the sweep of America’s carceral state? Is it possible that more people should be in prison? Is it still valid to insist that the punitive capacities of American criminal law be
restrained? Or instead should they sometimes be made even more far-reaching? Consider Alexandra Natapoff, Underenforcement, 75 Fordham L. Rev. 1715, 1716-1719 (2006):
IA] system as pervasive, harsh, and racially charged as ours requires serious rethinking. [In the 1990s}, Randall Kennedy argued that “the principal injury suffered by African-Americans in relation to criminal matters is not
overenforcement but underenforcement of the laws.2. . . Underenforcement is far from abstract. . . . Within certain communities or institutions — what | will call “underenforcement zones” — the state routinely and pre-
dictably fails to enforce the law to the detriment of vulnerable residents. Police concede that they will not arrest certain sorts of perpetrators; many victims expect that they will remain unprotected; and violators rest secure
in the knowledge that their crimes are the sort that will go unpunished. This type of underenforcement deprives residents of personal and economic security, rendering calls to the police futile or even dangerous and victim-
hood a routine fact of life.
[Overenforcement and underenforcement] are typically juxtaposed as a conundrum, particularly in poor, high-crime communities of color: How can a community be simultaneously over-policed and under-
policed? [Yet] underenforcement is not necessarily an alternative to overenforcement but often its corollary. Over- and underenforcement are twin symptoms of a deeper democratic weakness of the criminal system: its non-
responsiveness to the needs of the poor, racial minorities, and the otherwise politically vulnerable. Because of this weakness, justice and lawfulness are distributed unevenly and unequally across racial and class lines, crime
remains rampant in some communities but not others, and some people can trust and rely on law enforcement while others cannot. Official disregard of crime is part of this dynamic, as are mass imprisonment, excessive
sentences, and racially skewed enforcement practices. . . .
Underenforcement encompasses a broad spectrum of state behavior, not all of which is pernicious. [But when underenforcement] disadvantages already vulnerable groups or impedes their ability to participate
fully in civic life, underenforcement .. . deserves special scrutiny above and beyond the deference traditionally given to law enforcement discretion.

This tension between underenforcement and the excesses of overenforcement complicates calls for defunding the police and broadly reducing the reach of the criminal law. While many want to reduce the footprint of the police to
address mass incarceration and create fewer opportunities for police violence, others worry that a reduced police force might make neighborhoods that already feel like they receive insufficient police protection even more vulnerable. A council
member from the West Bronx in New York recently explained that she was concerned about overpolicing in her district but that a recent increase in violent crime in the district made a budget cut tricky. “Many residents equate public safety with
more policing. If | go to them and tell them there would be less police, they would not be happy.”22


QUESTIONS: Is criminal law predestined to reinforce these social inequalities? Or are there reliable ways to identify the situations in which enforcement needs to be strengthened, not restrained, without creating a risk that the carceral state

will balloon even more and further aggravate racial disparities? Can we seek to treat everyone as well as the wealthiest and most powerful are treated, or will the push for equality inevitably mean that the harshest treatment wins out for all? The
challenge is to ensure that stronger enforcement tools — when needed — are deployed fairly, and not just in favor of individuals and groups that are already advantaged. Can criminal law address these issues meaningfully on its own, or are they
inextricably embedded in broader social policies, from educational and employment opportunities to affordable housing, urban design, and access to medical services and mental health care? Consider how the criminal justice dimension of these
issues can best be addressed in the context of the material in the next section and throughout this book.

B. WHY CRIMINAL PUNISHMENT?

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Itis not possible to answer whether we have too much or too little criminal punishment in America without stepping back to ask why any society punishes at all. Punishment is unpleasant. In America, most people equate punishment
with prison, which is a particularly harsh response, even more so given the way American prisons are typically run. See pp. 1096-1102 infra. However, punishment can take many other forms, including fines, probation, community service, manda-
tory treatment programs, and other restrictions on behavior. Some of these, like probation, are used more often than incarceration. While some of these other forms of punishment are not as afflictive as prison, they are all unpleasant. And unlike
other potentially unpleasant experiences (paying taxes, military service in wartime), punishment is intended to be unpleasant. Moreover, convictions also entail formal and informal collateral consequences, from the loss of voting and other civic
rights to significant impediments to employment, housing, and public benefits. There is


universal agreement, therefore, that government must have a strong justification when it deliberately seeks to inflict physical or emotional pain on an individual. Here we explore what these justifications might be and whether they are adequate to
justify state-inflicted sanctions of any sort.

Broadly speaking, the justifications for punishment fall into two large categories, retributive and utilitarian. “[A] retributivist claims that punishment is justified because people deserve it; a utilitarian believes that justification lies in the
useful purposes that punishment serves (the latter approach is sometimes referred to as ‘consequentialist,’ or ‘instrumentalist’).’22 These are rough groupings, because precise definitions vary from one commentator to another. But at their core,
retributive rationales are essentially backward looking; in order to decide what sanction that behavior deserves, they attribute crucial importance to the offender's behavior in the past, and in particular to the blameworthiness of that behavior.
Utilitarian or “consequentialist” rationales are essentially forward looking; they seek to justify punishment on the basis of the good consequences it is expected to produce in the future. Three consequences in particular are paramount: deterrence
(of the offender and others), incapacitation of the offender, and rehabilitation of the offender. We will consider each of these theories in detail, but first we explore the general themes in the context of one of the most famous cases in the history of
the common law, which arose under circumstances that were unusual, to say the least. Nonetheless, many generations of lawyers, law students, legal scholars, and philosophers have debated — and continue to debate — the issues it poses and
their implications for more commonplace problems of criminal justice. In reading the court's decision, consider both whether there were good reasons to impose any punishment on these defendants and, if so, what punishment was called for.

More broadly, the case also raises questions about the role of courts, about the legal method, and about the very meaning of “the law.” How should a judge ascertain the correct legal principle and apply it when the facts of a case are
unlike those present in prior precedents? Is a court duty-bound to enforce existing rules, even when they were established in very different circumstances? Alternatively, should judges have the right (or the obligation) to craft new rules specifically
tailored to the facts before them?

Consider whether the court gives persuasive answers to these questions concerning the reasons for punishment and the proper role of the courts.

Regina v. Dudley and Stephens


Queen's Bench Division
14 Q.B.D. 273 (1884)
Lorp CoteRrince, C.J. The two prisoners, Thomas Dudley and Edwin Stephens, were indicted for the murder of Richard Parker on the high seas on the 25th of July in the present year. They were tried before my Brother Huddleston at
Exeter on the

p.10
6th of November, and, under the direction of my learned Brother, the jury returned a special verdict, the legal effect of which has been argued before us, and on which we are now to pronounce judgment. The special verdict . . . is as follows.

That on July 5, 1884, the prisoners, . . . with one Brooks, all able-bodied English seamen, and the deceased also an English boy, between seventeen and eighteen years of age, the crew of . . . a registered English vessel,
were cast away in a storm on the high seas 1,600 miles from the Cape of Good Hope, and were compelled to put into an open boat belonging to the said [vessel]. That in this boat they had no supply of water and no supply
of food, except two 1 Ib. tins of turnips, and for three days they had nothing else to subsist upon. That on the fourth day they caught a small turtle, upon which they subsisted for a few days, and this was the only food they
had up to the twentieth day when the act now in question was committed. That on the twelfth day the remains of the turtle were entirely consumed, and for the next eight days they had nothing to eat. That they had no fresh
water, except such rain as they from time to time caught in their oilskin capes. That the boat was drifting on the ocean, and was probably more than 1,000 miles away from land. That on the eighteenth day, when they had
been seven days without food and five without water, the prisoners spoke to Brooks as to what should be done if no succour came, and suggested that some one should be sacrificed to save the rest, but Brooks dissented,
and the boy, to whom they were understood to refer, was not consulted. That on the 24th of July, the day before the act now in question, the prisoner Dudley proposed to Stephens and Brooks that lots should be cast [to
determine] who should be put to death to save the rest, but Brooks refused to consent, and it was not put to the boy, and in point of fact there was no drawing of lots. That on the day the prisoners spoke of their families,
and suggested it would be better to kill the boy that their lives should be saved, and Dudley proposed that if there was no vessel in sight by the morrow morning the boy should be killed. That next day, the 25th of July, no
vessel appearing, Dudley told Brooks that he had better go and have a sleep, and made signs to Stephens and Brooks that the boy had better be killed. The prisoner Stephens agreed to the act, but Brooks dissented from
it. That the boy was then lying at the bottom of the boat quite helpless and extremely weakened by famine and by drinking sea water, and unable to make any resistance, nor did he ever assent to his being killed. The prisoner
Dudley offered a prayer asking forgiveness for them all if either of them should be tempted to commit a rash act, and that their souls might be saved. That Dudley, with the assent of Stephens, went to the boy, and telling him
that his time was come, put a knife into his throat and killed him then and there; that the three men fed upon the body and blood of the boy for four days; that on the fourth day after the act had been committed the boat was
picked up by a passing vessel, and the prisoners were rescued, stil alive, but in the lowest state of prostration. . .. That if the men had not fed upon the body of the boy they would probably not have survived to be so picked
up and rescued, but would within four days have died of famine. That the boy, being in a much

p.10

weaker condition, was likely to have died before them. That at the time of the act in question there was no sail in sight, nor any reasonable prospect of relief. That under these circumstances there appeared to the prisoners
every probability that unless they then fed or very soon fed upon the boy or one of themselves they would die of starvation. That there was no appreciable chance of saving life except by killing some one for the others to eat.
That assuming any necessity to kill anybody, there was no greater necessity for killing the boy than any of the other three men. But whether upon the whole matter by the jurors found the killing of Richard Parker by Dudley
and Stephens be felony and murder the jurors are ignorant, and pray the advice of the Court thereupon, and if upon the whole matter the Court shall be of opinion that the killing of Richard Parker be felony and murder, then
the jurors say that Dudley and Stephens were each guilty of felony and murder as alleged in the indictment. . . .


From these facts, stated with the cold precision of a special verdict, it appears sufficiently that the prisoners were subject to terrible temptation, to sufferings which might break down the bodily power of the strongest man, and try the
conscience of the best. Other details yet more harrowing, facts still more loathsome and appalling, were presented to the jury, and are to be found recorded in my learned Brother’s notes. But nevertheless this is clear, that the prisoners put to
death a weak and unoffending boy upon the chance of preserving their own lives by feeding upon his flesh and blood after he was killed, and with the certainty of depriving him of any possible chance of survival. The verdict finds in terms that “if
the men had not fed upon the body of the boy they would probably not have survived,” and that “the boy being in a much weaker condition was likely to have died before them.” They might possibly have been picked up [the] next day by a passing
ship; they might possibly not have been picked up at all; in either case it is obvious that the killing of the boy would have been an unnecessary and profitless act. It is found by the verdict that the boy was incapable of resistance, and, in fact, made
none; and it is not even suggested that his death was due to any violence on his part attempted against, or even so much as feared by, those who killed him. . .

[T]he real question in the case [is] whether killing under the circumstances set forth in the verdict be or not be murder. The contention that it could be anything else was, to the minds of us all, both new and strange, and we stopped the
Attorney General in his negative argument in order that we might hear what could be said in support of a proposition which appeared to us to be at once dangerous, immoral, and opposed to all legal principle and analogy. ... . First it is said that
it follows from various definitions of murder in books of authority, which definitions imply, if they do not state, the doctrine, that in order to save your own life you may lawfully take away the life of another, when that other is neither attempting nor
threatening yours, nor is guilty of any illegal act whatever towards you or any one else. But if these definitions be looked at they will not be found to sustain this contention. . . .

[The doctrine contended for receives no support from the great authority of Lord Hale. . . . Lord Hale regarded the private necessity which justified, and alone justified, the taking the life of another for the safeguard of one’s own to be
what is commonly called “self-defence.” [He thus expresses himself: — “If a man


p12
be desperately assaulted and in peril of death, and cannot otherwise escape unless, to satisfy his assailant’s fury, he will kill an innocent person then present, the fear and actual force will not acquit him of the crime and punishment of murder, if he
commit the fact [sic], for he ought rather to die himself than kill an innocent; but if he cannot otherwise save his own life the law permits him in his own defence to kill the assailant, for by the violence of the assault, and the offence committed upon
him by the assailant himself, the law of nature, and necessity, hath made him his own protector. . . .” (Hale’s Pleas of the Crown, vol. i. 51.)

But, further still, Lord Hale in the following chapter deals with the position asserted . . . he says, by Grotius and Puffendorf, that in a case of extreme necessity, either of hunger or clothing; “theft is no theft, or at least not punishable as
theft, as some even of our own lawyers have asserted the same.” “But,” says Lord Hale, “I take it that here in England, that rule . .. is false; and therefore, if a person, being under necessity for want of victuals or clothes, shall upon that account
clandestinely and animo furandi steal another man’s goods, itis felony, and a crime by the laws of England punishable with death.” (Hale, Pleas of the Crown, i. 54.) If, therefore, Lord Hale is clear — as he is — that extreme necessity of hunger does
not justify larceny, what would he have said to the doctrine that it justified murder? . ..

Is there, then, any authority for the proposition which has been presented to us? Decided cases there are none. . .. The American case cited by my Brother Stephen in his Digest . . . in which it was decided, correctly indeed, that sailors
had no right to throw passengers overboard to save themselves, but on the somewhat strange ground that the proper mode of determining who was to be sacrificed was to vote upon the subject by ballot, can hardly . . . be an authority satisfac-
tory to a court in this country.2...

The one real authority of former time is Lord Bacon, who .. . lays down the law as follows: — “Necessity carrieth a privilege in itself. [I a man steals viands to satisfy his present hunger, this is no felony nor larceny. So if divers be in
danger of drowning by the casting away of some boat or barge, and one of them get to some plank, . . . and another to save his life thrust him from it, whereby he is drowned, this is neither se defendendo nor by misadventure, but justifiable.”

p12
p13

. .. Lord Bacon was great even as a lawyer; but it is permissible to much smaller men, relying upon principle and on the authority of others, . .. to question the soundness of his dictum. There are many conceivable states of things in
which it might possibly be true, but if Lord Bacon meant to lay down the broad proposition that man may save his life by killing, if necessary, an innocent and unoffending neighbour, it certainly is not law at the present day. .. .

Now it is admitted that the deliberate killing of this unoffending and unresisting boy was clearly murder, unless the killing can be justified by some well-recognised excuse admitted by the law. It is further admitted that there was in this
case no such excuse, unless the killing was justified by what has been called “necessity.” But the temptation to the act which existed here was not what the law has ever called necessity. Nor is this to be regretted. Though law and morality are not


the same, and many things may be immoral which are not necessarily illegal, yet the absolute divorce of law from morality would be of fatal consequence; and such divorce would follow if the temptation to murder in this case were to be held by
law an absolute defence of it. .. . To preserve one’s life is generally speaking a duty, but it may be the plainest and the highest duty to sacrifice it. War is full of instances in which it is a man’s duty not to live, but to die. The duty, in case of ship-
wreck, of a captain to his crew, of the crew to the passengers, of soldiers to women and children impose[s] on men the moral necessity, not of the preservation, but of the sacrifice of their lives for others, from which in no country, least of all, it is to
be hoped, in England, will men ever shrink, as indeed, they have not shrunk. It is not correct, therefore, to say that there is any absolute or unqualified necessity to preserve one's life. . . . It would be a very easy and cheap display of commonplace
learning to quote from Greek and Latin authors, from Horace, from Juvenal, from Cicero, from Euripides, passage after passage, in which the duty of dying for others has been laid down in glowing and emphatic language as resulting from the
principles of heathen ethics; it is enough in a Christian country to remind ourselves of the Great Example whom we profess to follow. It is not needful to point out the awful danger of admitting the principle which has been contended for. Who is to
be the judge of this sort of necessity? By what measure is the comparative value of lives to be measured? Is it to be strength, or intellect, or what? It is plain that the principle leaves to him who is to profit by it to determine the necessity which will
justify him in deliberately taking another's life to save his own. In this case the weakest, the youngest, the most unresisting, was chosen. Was it more necessary to kill him than one of the grown men? The answer must be “No” —
So spake the Fiend, and with necessity
The tyrant’s plea, excused his devilish deeds.°
Itis not suggested that in this particular case the deeds were “devilish,” but it is quite plain that such a principle once admitted might be made the legal cloak for unbridled passion and atrocious crime. There is no safe path for judges
to tread but to ascertain the law to the best of their ability and to declare it according to
p13
their judgment; and if in any case the law appears to be too severe on individuals, to leave it to the Sovereign to exercise that prerogative of mercy which the Constitution has intrusted to the hands fittest to dispense it.
It must not be supposed that in refusing to admit temptation to be an excuse for crime it is forgotten how terrible the temptation was; how awful the suffering; how hard in such trials to keep the judgment straight and the conduct pure.
We are often compelled to set up standards we cannot reach ourselves, and to lay down rules which we could not ourselves satisfy. But a man has no right to declare temptation to be an excuse, though he might himself have yielded to it, nor allow
compassion for the criminal to change or weaken in any manner the legal definition of the crime. It is therefore our duty to declare that the prisoners’ act in this case was wilful murder, that the facts as stated in the verdict are no legal justification
of the homicide; and to say that in our unanimous opinion the prisoners are upon this special verdict guilty of murder.22
The Court then proceeded to pass sentence of death upon the prisoners.2
NOTES AND QUESTIONS
1. Background. For discussion of the background of Dudley and Stephens, see Neil Hanson, The Custom of the Sea (2000); A.W.B. Simpson, Cannibalism and the Common Law (1984). As both books report, cannibalism was an
accepted fact of life at sea before the era of modern communications and rescue capabilities, because seamen occasionally found themselves stranded far from help. Through most of the nineteenth century, such cases were treated as tragedies,
either celebrated or discreetly ignored; the survivors were received with sympathy or perverse fascination but were seldom considered candidates for prosecution. The “custom of the sea” (cannibalism) was so well established that Dudley talked
freely about the episode with an apparently clear conscience. But British officials, concerned that the “custom of the sea” set a potentially bad precedent, were determined to make a test case of the incident, and the prosecution of Dudley and
Stephens ensued. See also Allen D. Boyer, Crime, Cannibalism and Joseph Conrad: The Influence of Regina v. Dudley and Stephens on Lord Jim, 20 Loy. L.A. L. Rev. 9 (1986).
2. Prudential concerns. On facts like those in Dudley and Stephens, does punishment serve any practical purpose? Is the threat of the death penalty adequate to deter this sort of conduct? If not, should murder at sea under circum-
stances such as those in Dudley and Stephens be punished by some especially painful sort of capital punishment? Conversely, what was the rationale for reducing the punishment,


p15
‘commuting the death sentence to a six months’ prison term? If a severe sentence is inappropriate when a defendant faces powerful temptation to commit a prohibited act, why bother imposing any punishment at all?

Would the convictions be defensible if the “custom of the sea” was having a prejudicial impact on the British maritime industry? Would punishment on that ground be justified even if the defendants’ actions were not blameworthy, or is
it essential to limit punishment to those who deserve it? If so, did Dudley and Stephens deserve punishment?

The specific situation faced by Dudley and Stephens was unusual even at the time, but in a sense the underlying problem is a recurrent one for our own penal system, because harmful conduct is often the product of great pressure or
temptation. Should defendants who commit crimes in such circumstances receive especially severe punishment, especially lenient punishment, or no punishment at all?

3. The problem of desert. Are there legitimate grounds to conclude that Dudley and Stephens did not deserve to be punished, despite their deliberate, carefully premeditated decision to kill Parker? There are several distinct reasons
why punishment may not be deserved, even when a person intentionally causes serious harm. Consider these possibilities:

(a) Justification. Any reasonable legal system must provide for self-defense as a justification, and of course ours does. But should Dudley and Stephens be permitted to rely on this concept? Should a claim of self-defense fail because
Parker was not threatening them? Or should self-defense be available because they sought to save their own lives? After all, it was necessary (or reasonably seemed necessary) to kill one person so that the two others had a chance of survival. In
a severe storm it is desirable for a ship’s captain to jettison cargo (whose owner of course has done nothing wrong) in order to keep the ship from sinking. Is it also desirable, therefore, to sacrifice one person in order to save two, rather than to let
all three die? Legal doctrine governing these issues is explored in Chapter 8.8, Principles of Justification, infra. But it is worth pausing now to consider what approach makes sense in terms of the underlying purposes of punishment.

Is the problem in Dudley and Stephens simply that the defendants did not draw straws or use some other fair means to determine who would be sacrificed? Lord Coleridge mocks that idea and indicates that the defendants would have
been guilty of murder even if the person to be sacrificed had been chosen fairly. What possible purpose would punishment serve in such a case?

(b) Excuse. The law provides a defense to certain limited classes of defendants whose actions are harmful and unjustified, when we believe they could not reasonably be expected to have done better. Children and legally insane people
are examples. Should the same principle excuse Dudley and Stephens? Could they fairly have been expected to do better? The judges in Dudley and Stephens, just prior to sentencing the two defendants to death, acknowledge that they were
imposing a standard of conduct that they themselves might well have been unable to reach. But how can we fairly punish an act that a law-abiding person might commit? Current law governing these issues is explored in Chapter 8.C, Principles of
Excuse, infra.

The case of Dudley and Stephens raises fundamental questions about the purposes of punishment. We now turn to the major theories of punishment to consider why societies choose to punish at all. Debate about such justifications
sometimes seems purely academic, because both retributive and utilitarian purposes often

p15

p16
appear self-evidently sound and mutually reinforcing. Thus, when a contract killer is convicted of murder, with no extenuating circumstances, severe punishment seems appropriate for both retributive and utilitarian reasons. But even in cases of
intentional killing, the justifications can sometimes be troubling or in conflict with each other, as the case of Dudley and Stephens demonstrates. Nor is such tension limited to the unusual situation presented in that case. A need to choose between
justifications arises almost routinely in the application of punishment. For mentally disturbed defendants, or defendants driven to commit predatory crime because of addiction or economic need, a focus on moral blame may suggest reducing the
severity of punishment, while concern for deterrence might suggest increasing it. Both the theory of criminal law and its real-world application therefore require working with the following purposes of punishment and understanding their limitations.

1. The Utilitarian View
JEREMY BENTHAM, AN INTRODUCTION TO THE PRINCIPLES OF MORALS AND LEGISLATION (ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED IN 1789), IN BENTHAM & MILL, THE UTILITARIANS 162, 166 (DOLPHIN BOOKS, 1961): The general object which all laws
have, or ought to have, in common, is to augment the total happiness of the community; and therefore, in the first place, to exclude, as far as may be, every thing that tends to subtract from that happiness: in other words, to exclude mischief.

But all punishment is mischief: all punishment in itself is evil. Upon the principle of utility, if it ought at all to be admitted, it ought only to be admitted in as far as it promises to exclude some greater evil... .


JEREMY BENTHAM, PRINCIPLES OF PENAL LAW, PT. II, BK. 1, CH. 3, INJ. BENTHAM’S WORKS 396, 402 (J. BOWRING ED., 1843): Pain and pleasure are the great springs of human action. When a man perceives or supposes pain to be the conse-
quence of an act, he is acted upon in such a manner as tends, with a certain force, to withdraw him, as it were, from the commission of that act. If the apparent magnitude, or rather value of that pain be greater than the apparent magnitude or value
of the pleasure or good he expects to be the consequence of the act, he will be absolutely prevented from performing it. The mischief which would have ensued from the act, if performed, will also by that means be prevented. . ..

The observation of rules of proportion between crimes and punishments has been objected to as useless, because they seem to suppose, that a spirit of calculation has place among the passions of men, who, it is said, never calculate.
But dogmatic as this proposition is, it is altogether false. In matters of importance every one calculates. Each individual calculates with more or less correctness, according to the degrees of his information, and the power of the motives which
actuate him, but all calculate. It would be hard to say that a madman does not calculate. Happily, the passion of cupidity, which on account of its power, its constancy, and its extent, is most formidable to society, is the passion which is most given
to calculation. This, therefore, will be more successfully combated, the more carefully the law turns the balance of profit against it.

p16
p.17
NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Jeremy Bentham, who lived from 1748 to 1832, was a leading social reformer of his day. At the time, England punished all felonies with death, and Bentham’s writings were in part a reaction against those draconian sanctions. By insist-
ing that punishment “ought only to be admitted in as far as it promises to exclude some greater evil,” Bentham sought to promote “rules of proportion between crimes and punishments.”

But does the cost-benefit approach necessarily lead to proportionality? Couldn't it be “efficient” to punish all offenses by imprisonment for life? Bentham’s answer is that for trivial offenses, the cost of imprisonment would exceed the
benefit in terms of the minor offenses that would be deterred. But even so, for truly serious crimes, such as robbery and rape, couldn't Bentham’s approach require life imprisonment? Here the utilitarian can respond that, if robbery is subject to the
highest possible punishment, the offender would suffer no additional sanction for committing additional robberies or for killing all possible witnesses. Bentham wrote, “Where two offenses are in conjunction, the greater offense ought to be sub-
jected to severer punishment, in order that the delinquent may have a motive to stop at the lesser.”21

Although utilitarians like Bentham have an answer for why maximum punishments for all crimes do not serve utilitarian theory, the theory suggests other intuitively unappealing conclusions if no other limiting principles apply. Consider
these problems:

1. Punishment of the innocent. Suppose that a string of robberies has gone unsolved and police hear rumors that many people are talking about committing similar crimes, convinced that they will not get caught. From the utilitarian
perspective, would the police chief be justified in seizing and framing an innocent person, in order to send a strong deterrent message that such crimes cannot be committed with impunity? If this step is unacceptable, is that because its costs
would ultimately outweigh its benefits?®2 Or is there some reason to resist such a step, regardless of how all details of the cost-benefit calculus might work out?

2. Disproportionate punishment. Bentham gives a plausible utilitarian objection to imposing long prison sentences on those who are guilty only of a minor offense. But is it clear that the costs of doing so will always outweigh the
benefits? For example, suppose that convenience stores lose millions of dollars every year as a result of shoplifting, and even with security cameras, it is very difficult for them to catch individuals who walk off without paying for a candy bar. On
utilitarian grounds, would it be justified to authorize a 20-year prison term for a teenager who steals a 75-cent piece of candy? To be sure, there can be many subtle, indirect costs of such a policy, and a good utilitarian must be careful to consider
all such effects. If

p.17

p18
the 20-year prison term is unjustified, is that because the costs, properly measured, outweigh the benefits? Is it because less costly alternatives to incarceration would have the same deterrent effect? Or are such elaborate cost-benefit calculations
(the next excerpt calls them “the serpent-windings of utilitarianism”) essentially beside the point? Is there, again, a more basic reason to reject the punishment, regardless of how its costs and benefits add up?


Even if one accepts a utilitarian calculus, standing alone, as a theoretical basis for punishment, there remains the question whether punishment achieves the ends its proponents believe it does. The next three sections take up each of

the major consequences of punishment utilitarians rely upon.
a. Deterrence
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

1. The effect of variations in punishment. Bentham argues that the point of criminal punishment is to deter offenses by threatening to inflict painful consequences on those who commit them: “If the apparent magnitude, or rather
value of that pain be greater than the apparent magnitude or value of the pleasure or good he expects to be the consequence of the act, he will be absolutely prevented from performing it.” Like Bentham, modern scholars who favor the economic
approach to law posit that potential criminals consciously or subconsciously calculate costs and benefits, even in the context of “crimes of passion.” But others argue that for the most important kinds of criminal behavior, perpetrators do not cal-
culate at all or calculate only in bizarre ways, ignoring ordinary sorts of benefits and costs (including punishment).

Few people, if any, doubt, that crime would increase, probably dramatically, if no criminal punishments were ever imposed at all.°2 In that sense, the institution of criminal punishment surely does have a substantial deterrent effect. The
principal pragmatic question concerning deterrence centers around the question whether variations in punishment — for example, increasing its severity, either generally or for particular offenses — will lead to variations in the amount of crime.
Many empirical studies appear to show a link between expected punishment and the crime rate,°4 but it is hard to determine the strength of the relationship or the factors that affect it. Younger people seem particularly impervious to changes in
sentence length; a 10 percent increase in sentence length resulted in no changes to their arrest rates. Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Perspectives on Incarceration and the Justice System 37 (Apr. 2016). But methodological problems,
such as the unreliability of reported arrest rates, make all such findings fragile or difficult to interpret.

p18
p.19

Moreover, while an increase in punishment might deter future crimes by setting a higher price for criminal behavior and by incapacitating people for a longer period of time, longer sentences could also tend to increase crime, because
those who spend more time in prison may be more likely to re-offend when released because they will encounter greater difficulty readjusting to society. An Obama White House report noted that, for every additional year of incarceration, there _
is “an average increase in future offending of 4 to 7 percentage points.”55 Perhaps as a result, studies that have attempted to figure out the relationship between longer sentences and recidivism have failed to find a consistent impact in either
direction.2°

But regardless of whether empirical studies confirm particular deterrent effects, isn’t some link between the expected costs of committing a crime and the willingness to commit it virtually inevitable, as a matter of human nature? When
an activity becomes more expensive, people typically don’t engage in it as often. Why might that theory not play out that way in a real-world penal system? Consider these comments:

JAMES Q. WILSON, THINKING ABOUT CRIME 117 (REV. ED. 1983): [T]he socially imposed consequences of committing a crime, unlike the market consequences of shopping around for the best price, are characterized by delay, uncertainty, and
ignorance. In addition, some scholars contend that a large fraction of crime is committed by persons who are so impulsive, irrational, or abnormal that even if there were no delay, uncertainty, or ignorance attached to the consequences of crimi-
nality, we would still have a lot of crime.

PAUL H. ROBINSON & JOHN M. DARLEY, THE ROLE OF DETERRENCE IN THE FORMULATION OF CRIMINAL CODE RULES, 91 GEO. L.J. 949, 951, 953 (2003): Lawmakers have sought to optimize the control of crime by . . . assign[ing] criminal pun-
ishments of a magnitude sufficient to deter a thinking individual from committing a crime. Although this seems initially an intuitively compelling strategy, we suggest it is a poor one. . . . If a criminal law rule is to deter violators, three prerequisites
must be satisfied: The potential offender must know of the rule; he must perceive the cost of violation as greater than the perceived benefit; and he must be able and willing to bring such knowledge to bear on his conduct decision at the time of the
offense. But. . . one or more of these hurdies typicaily block any material deterrent effect of doctrinal manipulation. The social science literature suggests that potential offenders commonly do not know the law, do not perceive an expected cost
for a violation that outweighs the expected gain, and do not make rational self-interest choices.


2. What about actors who are rational and well informed? Many crimes are committed by individuals who can and surely do (at least implicitly) calculate the potential costs and benefits of violating the law. Tax evasion, insider

trading, and

p19

p.20
some sophisticated drug distribution schemes often fit that description. But many analysts suggest that even in such cases, increased punishment can sometimes induce more crime than it deters. How could this happen? One complication is
the “income” effect. Severe punishments are intended to induce rational actors to shift from illegal to legal pursuits. But if severe punishment of drug dealers raises an addict's cost of buying drugs, the addict may have to commit more preda-
tory crimes (robbery and burglary) in order to finance those drug purchases.°7 Another complication, confirmed by many studies, is that very severe penalties can reduce the likelihood that significant sanctions will be imposed at all — witnesses
become less willing to report crime or to cooperate in prosecution, prosecutors become reluctant to file the highest charges, and juries hesitate to convict. Thus, in practice, attempts to increase the severity of punishment sometimes have the op-
posite of their intended effect. For detailed exploration of these and related problems, see Neal Kumar Katyal, Deterrence’s Difficulty, 95 Mich. L. Rev. 2385 (1997).

3. Certainty versus severity. The two plausible ways to increase the direct deterrent effect of punishment are, first, to increase the risk of conviction, and second, to increase the severity of punishment. The first alternative appears
to be the more effective. A 2016 report by the President's Council of Economic Advisers found that a $10 billion increase in spending on incarceration would reduce crime between 1 and 4 percent, whereas spending that same amount instead
on hiring new police officers would decrease crime between 5 and 16 percent — roughly four times as much.28 It is important to note, however, that increased enforcement does not by itself increase general deterrence. Since the effectiveness of
the threat of punishment must be judged from the viewpoint of the potential criminal, increased enforcement and any resulting increase in the certainty of punishment are important only as they contribute to the appearance of certainty. Moreover,
some police budgets might be excessive and lead to policing in areas where the net effect is not to produce greater safety benefits. This is one basis of calls for defunding the police. See Alex S. Vitale, The End of Policing (2017). Other communi-
ties, however, may be starved for sufficient policing resources and an increased investment might improve safety outcomes by improving the odds of detecting serious crimes. See Stephen Rushin & Roger Michalski, Police Funding, 72 Fla. L. Rev.
277, 284 (2020) (noting “massive inequality” in police funding).

Even with its limitations, improving the certainty of punishment is a better strategy for deterrence than increasing the severity of punishment. A panel of the National Academy of Sciences concluded in 1993 that a 10 percent increase in
the probability of apprehension would prevent twice as much violent crime as the same increase in the severity of punishment, partly because, as just noted, increases in severity can reduce the probabilities of apprehension and conviction.22

p.20
p.21

4, Moral influence. Can the law's threat of punishment induce conformity in ways other than through cost-benefit calculations of the rational actor? Consider these observations (Paul H. Robinson & John M. Darley, The Utility of
Desert, 91 Nw. U. L. Rev. 453, 468 (1997):

More than because of the threat of legal punishment, people obey the law (1) because they fear the disapproval of their social group if they violate the law, and (2) because they generally see themselves as moral beings

who want to do the right thing as they perceive it. In social science, these two factors are referred to as (1) compliance produced by normative social influence, and (2) behavior produced by internalized moral standards and

rules...

The evidence reviewed suggests that the influences of social group sanctions and internalized norms are the most powerful determinants of conduct, more significant than the threat of deterrent legal sanctions.

But, we argue, the law is not irrelevant to the operation of these powerful forces. Criminal law . . . influences the powerful social forces of normative behavior control through its central role in the creation of shared norms. .. .

The act of criminalization sometimes nurtures the norm, as does faithful enforcement and prosecution, and over time the community view may mature into a strong consensus. . .. We have seen the process at
work recently in enhancing prohibitory norms against sexual harassment, hate speech, drunk driving, and domestic violence. It has also been at work in diluting existing norms against homosexual conduct, fornication, and
adultery. . ..


Perhaps more than any other society, ours relies on the criminal law for norm-nurturing. Our greater cultural diversity means that we cannot expect a stable pre-existing consensus on the contours of con-
demnable conduct that is found in more homogeneous societies. . . . W]e share no religion or other arbiter of morality that might perform this role. Our criminal law is, for us, the place we express our shared beliefs of what
is truly condemnable. . . .

The criminal law also has a second effect. .. . If it has developed a reputation as a reliable statement of existing norms, people will be willing to defer to its moral authority in cases where there exists some ambi-
guity as to the wrongfulness of the contemplated conduct. . ..

There is evidence, largely collected and analyzed by Tyler, that people are inclined to accept the law as a source of moral authority that they themselves should take seriously. [Tom R. Tyler, Why People Obey the
Law 60 (1990),]. . . Tyler reviews a number of studies that suggest that the level of commitment to obey the law is proportional to what Tyler calls the law's perceived “legitimacy.” ... [I]f one regards the law as a legitimate
source of rules, if it has what we have called “moral credibility,” then one should be more likely to regard the law's judgments about right and wrong actions as an appropriate input to one’s own moral thinking; in turn, one
should be more likely to obey the law... .

But the criminal law can only hope to shape moral thinking or to have people follow its rules in ambiguous cases if it has earned a reputation as an institution whose focus is morally condemnable conduct. . ..
p.21
p22

The criminal law's power in nurturing and communicating societal norms and its power to have people defer to it . . . is directly proportional to criminal law's moral credibility. If criminalization or conviction (or decriminaliza-
tion or refusal to convict) is to have an effect in the norm-nurturing process, it will be because the criminal law has a reputation for criminalizing and punishing only that which deserves moral condemnation, and for decrimi-
nalizing and not punishing that which does not. . .

Enhancing the criminal law's moral credibility requires, more than anything, that the criminal law make clear to the public that its overriding concern is doing justice. . . . The criminal law must earn a reputation for
(1) punishing those who deserve it under rules perceived as just, (2) protecting from punishment those who do not deserve it, and (3) where punishment is deserved, imposing the amount of punishment deserved, no more,
no less... .

The point is that every deviation from [desert] can incrementally undercut the criminal law's moral credibility, which in turn can undercut . . . its power to gain compliance by its moral authority. Thus, contrary to.
the apparent assumptions of past utilitarian debates, such deviations from desert are not cost free, and their cost must be included in the calculation when determining which distribution of liability will most effectively reduce
crime.

b. Rehabilitation
Michael Vitiello
Reconsidering Rehabilitation
65 Tul. L. Rev. 1011, 1138-1140 (1991),
. .. In Puritan America, the law was used to advance the dominant religious beliefs and to enforce “proper standards of moral behavior.” Based on the Calvinist belief in the innate depravity of human beings, the criminal law served to
keep people from temptation. Punishment was not intended to save the criminall,] because humans were inherently sinful. . .. Punishment served to keep the rest of the community from temptation. . . .
Quaker views contrasted sharply with the Puritan conception of the criminal law. Early in our history, the Quakers led a movement away from capital and corporal punishment to a system of workhouses and prisons. Viewed as grim in
retrospect, that system was generally enlightened by comparison to earlier treatment of criminals. At root, it was based on an optimism about human capacity for transformation.


. .. Quakers believed that crime was the product of society, rather than a result of inherent sinfulness. But the method chosen for transformation was not “treatment.” Instead, they believed that the offender could be reformed through
a process of rationality. Freed from the corrupting influences and permitted to reflect on moral questions, the offender could be “restored to fellowship with God and humanity.”

Around the time of the American Revolution and the adoption of the Constitution, Quaker idealism was a powerful force in penology. It led to the establishment of penitentiaries, first in Pennsylvania where Quaker influence was
strongest.

p.22
p23
Modeled on monastic prisons of the Middle Ages, the penitentiary used solitary confinement, religious instruction, and hard labor to facilitate repentance.

Early prison reformers also stressed the community's responsibility for corrupting the individual. For example, one Boston clergyman inquired, ““How can it be justice to punish as a crime that which the institutions of society render
unavoidable?” Recognition that social conditions were a cause of crime did not render society incapable of punishing the offender, but it created a moral imperative to offer the offender a chance at moral transformation. Nor was the prescription
mollycoddling; devices that look unabashedly punitive, like hard labor, were believed to have the beneficial effect of aiding the transformation of the offender.

MICHAEL S. MOORE, LAW AND PSYCHIATRY 234-235 (1984): Rehabilitation is pethaps the most complex of the theories of punishment, because it involves two quite different ideals of rehabilitation that are usually confused. . . .

The first sort of rehabilitative ideal is one that is achieved when we make criminals safe to return to the streets. This sort of rehabilitative theory justifies punishment, not by appeal to how much better off criminals will be at the end of the
process, but rather by how much better off all of us will be if “treatment” is completed because the streets will be that much safer. The second sort of rehabilitative ideal . .. seeks to rehabilitate offenders not just so they can be returned safely to
the streets, but so they can lead flourishing and successful lives. Such a theory justifies punishment, not in the name of all of us, but rather in the offenders’ own name; since it does so in their name, but contrary to their own expressed wishes (few
offenders want to be punished), this kind of rehabilitative theory is paternalistic in character.

This paternalistic type of rehabilitative theory has no proper part to play in any theory of punishment, even in the minimal sense of constituting a prima facie justification of punishment. There are three reasons why this is so. First, such a
paternalistic reform theory allocates scarce societal resources away from other, more deserving groups that want them [such as individuals with mental disabilities or the poor]. ... Second, in any political theory according high value to liberty, pa-
temalistic justifications are themselves to be regarded with suspicion. Criminals are not in the standard classes in society for which paternalistic state intervention is appropriate, such as [those] whose capacity for rational choice is diminished. . .
Third, such recasting of punishment in terms of “treatment” for the good of the criminal makes possible a kind of moral blindness that is dangerous in itself. As C.S. Lewis pointed out some years ago, adopting a “humanitarian” conceptualization
of punishment makes it easy to inflict treatments and sentences that need bear no relation to the desert of the offender. We may do more to others “for their own good” than we ever allow ourselves to do when we see that it is really for our good
that we act.

NOTE—THE RISE AND FALL OF THE MEDICAL MODEL

By the early twentieth century, rehabilitation had taken a firm hold in the ideology (if not in the practices) of American punishment. The state agency responsible for criminal punishment came to be known as the “Department of Correc-
tions” (a terminology that remains with us to this day). In 1949, the Supreme Court stated: “Retribution is no longer the dominant objective of the criminal law. Reformation and rehabilitation of offenders have become important goals of criminal
jurisprudence.”

p23
p24
Williams v. New York, 337 U.S. 241, 248 (1949). The prevailing conception of rehabilitation, moreover, was that described by Professor Vitiello — the Quaker conception that reformation could be achieved by religious instruction and hard labor.


By the 1960s, this view of rehabilitation came increasingly to be replaced by a “medical” model. As Professor Vitiello notes, id. at 1016, “growing faith in psychiatry and science had strongly influenced penology. Based on a perception
of the criminal as sick and in need of treatment or rehabilitation, legislatures entrusted to judges wide latitude in imposing indeterminate sentences: if the offender is ill... his sentence ought to be conditioned on his cure. Parole boards . . . helped
to administer indeterminate sentences by determining when the ‘patient’ was cured.”

Within a decade, however, the medical model came under attack from multiple directions. Many (especially critics on the left) saw it as paternalistic and coercive, as well as dangerously discretionary and biased against low-income
defendants of color. There was also considerable evidence that, far from benefiting the person convicted, it often led to longer penal confinement. At the same time, other observers (especially critics on the right) saw the rehabilitative approach as
too costly and too lenient. A crucial point for both groups was the perception that efforts to rehabilitate offenders simply were not (and perhaps could not be) successful. By the late 1970s, rehabilitation had fallen almost entirely out of favor; when
Congress passed the Sentencing Reform Act in 1984, it specifically noted that “imprisonment is not an appropriate means of promoting correction and rehabilitation.” 18 U.S.C. §3582(a). Thus, federal judges may not “impose or lengthen a prison
sentence to enable an offender to complete a treatment program or otherwise to promote rehabilitation.” Tapia v. United States, 564 U.S. 319, 334 (2011). Similarly, a federal court of appeals deemed a sentence substantively unreasonable be-
cause the district court expressly lengthened it so the person sentenced could qualify for a particular rehabilitative program. United States v. Hyrne, 2018 U.S. App. LEXIS 9275 (6th Cir. 2018).

Although there remains well-founded skepticism about the value of providing rehabilitation services in prisons, see p. 25 infra, there has been a substantial resurgence of interest in rehabilitation in other contexts, especially in so-called
problem-solving courts that divert individuals from incarceration into programming, with the judge playing a strong oversight role. While some applaud the creation of these approaches as improvements over imprisonment, others raise many of
the same objections to rehabilitation in this context as well. For overviews, see Erin R. Collins, Status Courts, 105 Geo. L.J. 1481 (2017); Robin Steinberg & Skylar Albertson, Broken Windows Policing and Community Courts: An Unholy Alliance, 38
Cardozo L. Rev. 885 (2016); Allegra M. McLeod, Decarceration Courts: Possibilities and Perils of a Shifting Criminal Law, 100 Geo. L.J. 1587 (2012). And the question remains today, as always, whether rehabilitation can be effective.

NOTE — DOES REHABILITATION WORK?
The effects of rehabilitation efforts were questioned in an important 1974 paper (Robert Martinson, What Works? — Questions and Answers About Prison Reform, 36 Pub. Int. 22, 25 (1974)). The author concluded: “With few and isolated
exceptions, the rehabilitative efforts that have been reported so far have no appreciable effect on recidivism.” Martinson soon withdrew that conclusion, having
p24
p25
found evidence that some programs do reduce recidivism for some offenders under some circumstances.° Subsequent research has provided further support for this cautiously optimistic view. A review of 118 systematic assessments of
programs and practices concluded that there is “persuasive evidence of the effectiveness of programs, policies, and practices across a variety of intervention areas,” leading the authors to conclude “[iIt is time to abandon the idea that ‘nothing
works,’ not only in corrections but also in developmental, community, and situational prevention; sentencing; policing; and drug treatment.”41 Despite this evidence to the contrary, the conventional wisdom that “nothing works” had become fixed
in the public mind, and it proved difficult to dislodge. Consider George Mair, What Works — Nothing or Everything?, Home Office [Great Britain], Research Bulletin #30, pp. 3-5 (1991):

Martinson — quite unintentionally — found a remarkably receptive audience from both sides of the political spectrum in the U.S.A. On the right, the period from the second half of the sixties into the seventies was seen as a

time of serious disorder and instability; Vietnam, black power and youth protest were seen to threaten the traditional order. And out of all this “crime . . . became a codeword for all that was wrong with American society.”

The right, therefore, welcomed Martinson’s attack on the rehabilitative ideal which was seen as being soft on offenders and looked forward to new, tougher methods of punishing criminals. The perspective from the left was,

of course, rather different. Here, the benevolence of the state was subject to sustained questioning, a process which inevitably touched upon criminal justice. Rehabilitation and treatment . . . were criticised as theoretically

faulty, discriminatory and unjust, and the unfettered discretion entrusted to criminal justice professionals was attacked as leading to abuse of power and injustice. . . .

Martinson’s argument is fundamentally flawed in two ways: first, by reliance upon recidivism as the sole measure of success of a sentence; and second, by a failure to address the issue of how sentences are
implemented . . . in practice. . .. If, for example, a considerable number of the [treatment programs] included in Martinson’s analysis . . . had been starved of resources, had used badly trained and uncommitted staff, and had


been studied in the first year or so of operation, would it be any surprise that the sentences had failed? Only by studying how a sentence or treatment program has been put into practice . . . [can we] understand more clearly

why a penal measure may be working successfully or — equally important — why it may be failing.

Controversy continues over the effectiveness of particular rehabilitation programs, but most researchers concur in Professor Vitiello's assessment (supra at 1037) that “some offenders are amenable to rehabilitation and . . . social
scientists

p25

p26
can identify those offenders by the use of objective criteria.” The success rates of different programs vary, and often depend on the type of offense and offender. For example, while drug treatment programs have been found to reduce recidivism
by as much as 25 percent for drug offenders, interventions for people who have committed certain types of sex offenses have proven less effective and did not lower recidivism rates. Rachel E. Barkow, Life Without Parole and the Hope for Real
Sentencing Reform 190, 199-200, in Life Without Parole (Austin Sarat & Charles J. Ogletree eds., 2012). For discussion of the features most often associated with effective programs, see Bosma Anouk et al., Prison-Based Rehabilitation: Predictors
of Offender Treatment Participation and Treatment Completion, 62 Crime & Delinquency 1095 (2016); Lois M. David et al., Evaluating the Effectiveness of Correctional Education: A Meta-Analysis of Programs That Provide Education to Incarcerated
Adults (2015); Edward J. Letessa, What Works in Correctional Intervention, 23 S. Ill. U. LJ. 415 (1999).
ANDREW VON HIRSCH & LISA MAHER, SHOULD PENAL REHABILITATIONISM BE REVIVED?, CRIM. JUST. ETHICS pp. 25, 26-29 (WINTER/SPRING 1992): Some new advocates of penal rehabilitationism . . . stress its humaneness. . . . Treatment
programs, however, seldom aim merely at social service. . .. To accomplish [their] crime-preventive aim, the intervention may well have to be more drastic. It will take more to get the drug-abusing robber to stop committing further robberies than
to teach him/her a skill. ... A proportionate sanction for [crimes of intermediate or lesser gravity] should be of no more than moderate severity. What of a rehabilitative response? That would depend on how much intervention, and how long, is re-
quired to alter the offender's criminal propensities — and to succeed, the intervention may have to be quite substantial (as in the just-noted case of drug treatments). . ..

Some new rehabilitationists’ rejection of other models, such as desert, is based on a “socially critical” perspective: how the rationale is likely to be implemented in a society characterized by race, class, and gender inequalities. Such a
critique, however, cuts both ways: one also needs to consider how rehabilitationism might be implemented in such an unpropitious social setting. . . .

Treatment . . . can seldom rely on criteria relating to the blameworthiness of the conduct; whether the offender is amenable to a particular treatment depends, instead, on his/her social and personal characteristics. [O]ne is using crimi-
nal punishment, a blame-conveying response, and yet deciding the intervention on the basis of those personal and social variables that have little to do with how reprehensible the behavior is. ..

One possibility would be to give proportionality a limiting role: The seriousness of the criminal conduct would set upper and lower bounds on the quantum of punishment — within which rehabilitation could be invoked to fix the sen-
tence. . .. Here, one faces the familiar dilemma; the narrower one sets those limits, the less room there would be for treatment considerations; whereas the wider one sets the limits, the more one would need to worry about seemingly disparate or
disproportionate responses.

Another possibility would be to try to dispense with notions of proportionality altogether. [But is it] justifiable to employ punishment — a blaming institution — without regard to the blameworthiness of the conduct[?] . . . Second, the
absence of significant proportionality constraints could open the way for abuses of the kind that discredited the old rehabilitation — for example, long-term,

p26

p27
open-ended intervention against those deemed to be in special need of treatment. (One thinks of the young car thief who was confined for sixteen years at Patuxent Institution because he refused to talk to the therapists.) One might hope that we
are more sophisticated now about the therapeutic value of such interventions — but is such hope enough without principled restraints upon rehabilitative responses?

The most dangerous temptation is to treat the treatment ethos as a kind of edifying fiction: If we only act as though we cared — and minister treatment to offenders as a sign of our caring — a more humane penal system will emerge. No
serious inquiry is needed, on this view, about the criteria for deciding what constitutes a humane penal system or about how a renewed treatment emphasis could achieve its intended effects. . .. Such thinking is a recipe for failure. [It] could do no
more good than the old, largely hortatory treatment ethic: Create a facade of treatment behind which decision makers act as they choose.


¢. Incapacitation
Franklin E. Zimring & Gordon Hawkins
Incapacitation — Penal Confinement and the Restraint of Crime
(1995)
Of all the justifications for the criminal punishment, the desire to incapacitate is the least complicated, the least studied, and often the most important. The major institutions of criminal punishment in the Western world — the prison and
the jail — are designed and operated to restrain those under their control. All of the other objectives of incarceration are ancillary to the basic structure of the modern prison and jail: incapacitation is central.
John J. Dilulio, Jr.
Prisons Are a Bargain, by Any Measure
N.Y. Times, Jan. 16, 1996, p. A17
Most experts . . . love to repeat, “incarceration is not the answer.” If incarceration is not the answer, what, precisely, is the question? If the question is how to prevent at-risk youths from becoming stone-cold predators in the first place,
then, of course, incarceration is no solution. But if the question is how to restrain known convicted criminals from murdering, raping, robbing, assaulting and stealing, then incarceration is a solution, and a highly cost-effective one. On average, it
costs about $25,000 a year to keep a convicted criminal in prison. For that money, society gets four benefits: Imprisonment punishes offenders and expresses society's moral disapproval. It teaches felons and would-be felons a lesson: Do crime,
do time. Prisoners get drug treatment and education. And, as the columnist Ben Wattenberg has noted, “A thug in prison can't shoot your sister.”
. . . [P]risons pay big dividends even if all they deliver is relief from the murder and mayhem that incarcerated felons would be committing if free. Harvard economist Anne Piehl and | found that prisoners in New Jersey and Wisconsin
committed
per
p28
an average of 12 crimes a year when free, excluding all drug crimes. . . . Patrick A. Langan calculated that tripling the prison population from 1975 to 1989 may have reduced “violent crime by 10 to 15 percent below what it would have been,”
thereby preventing a “conservatively estimated 390,000 murders, rapes, robberies and aggravated assaults in 1989 alone.” . . . [T]he violent crimes committed each year will cost victims and society more than $400 billion in medical bills, lost days
from work, lost quality of life — and lost life. . .. All told, research shows it costs society at least twice as much to let a prisoner loose than to lock him up. Compared with the human and financial toll of revolving-door justice, prisons are a real
bargain.
Prison definitely pays, but there’s one class of criminal that is an arguable exception: low-level, first-time drug offenders. Most drug felons in state prisons do not fit that description [but] it makes no sense to lock away even one drug
offender whose case could be adjudicated in special drug courts and handled less expensively through intensively supervised probation featuring no-nonsense drug treatment and community service.
NOTES


1. Estimating the benefits. Dilulio and others argue that “it costs society at least twice as much to let a prisoner loose than to lock him up.” But critics contend that these claims rest on greatly exaggerated estimates of the number
of crimes that can be averted by incarcerating individuals for longer terms. Note Dilulio's claim that “prisoners in New Jersey and Wisconsin committed an average of 12 crimes a year when free” (emphasis added). Does this mean that extending a
person's sentence for an additional year will avert 12 crimes? Compare John J. Donohue Ill & Peter Seligman, Allocating Resources Among Prisons and Social Programs in the Battle Against Crime, 27 J. Legal Stud. 1, 10-12 (1998):
A.common error among researchers [is] the failure to distinguish between the average number of crimes committed by the total stock of prisoners and the mean criminality of the group of prisoners who are poised to leave
prison. . .. If there is a positive correlation between sentence length and prior record, as seems likely, then the cohort of released prisoners will tend to have lower than average [rates of offending]. Thus, the crimes prevented
by keeping the current group of released prisoners incarcerated for an additional year will tend to be less than the average number of crimes committed by all prisoners — and probably dramatically so.
[Studies like Dilulio’s] assume that incarcerating a prisoner for an additional year will reduce crime by the number of crimes that the prisoner committed in the year prior to his incarceration. This may be plausible
for some crimes but is certainly not true for others. Many crimes are committed by criminal rings or gangs; under these circumstances, the loss of one gang member will probably just lead to the recruitment of another.
[Mlost criminals do not commit offenses uniformly over their entire adult lifetimes. Instead, criminal behavior is disproportionately concentrated over a much shorter period, typically in the late teens and early
twenties. This fact has obvious implications for the efficacy of imprisonment as a means of controlling crime. Consider a 20-year-old who
p28
p29
committed 40 crimes in the year prior to receiving a 10-year sentence. Simply multiplying 40 crimes/year by 10 years suggests that imprisoning this person would forestall 400 crimes over the next 10 years. But if the pris-
oner's criminal career would in any case have ended at age 25, the true crime reduction is only 200, and 5 years of the 10-year sentence produce no incapacitative benefit.
2. Selective incapacitation. If across-the-board increases in prison sentences are overinclusive and inefficient, a more cost-effective strategy might involve efforts to target the individuals most likely to commit serious crimes at high
rates. But consider Jacqueline Cohen, incapacitating Criminals: Recent Research Findings, U.S. Dept. of Justice, Natl. Institute of Justice, Research in Brief (Dec. 1983):
Proponents [of selective incapacitation] argue that persons convicted of crimes can justly receive any lawful sentence . . . and that holding some offenders longer than others for predictive reasons raises no significant ethical
problems. Moreover, proponents point out that existing sentencing is implicitly incapacitative: presumably, most judges and other officials base their decisions in part on their beliefs about an offender's future dangerous-
ness. From this perspective, selective incapacitation policies are preferable to existing practice because predictions of future crime would no longer be ad hoc and idiosyncratic, but would be based upon the best available
scientific evidence.
Some critics argue against selective incapacitation in principle: punishment should be deserved and two persons who have committed the same offense deserve equal punishment. If selective incapacitation
means that one person will be held longer than another because of predictions of future crimes, it is unjust.
Other critics — including people who in principle do not object to unequal punishments — offer other objections:
1. Itis unfair to punish people for crimes they have not yet committed, and might not commit if released.
2. Itis unjust to incarcerate (or further incarcerate) people on the basis of predictions of future crime because those predictions are too often wrong... .
3. Many of the variables in prediction formulas raise other policy or ethical questions. For example, [a common] formula includes employment information, . . . education and similar factors, . . . class-based variables that, in
effect, discriminate against the poor.
4, Many prediction variables, like education, employment, and residential stability, are associated with race: some minorities are on average less well educated and less stably employed than the white majority. Building such
variables into sentencing standards, while not intended to punish minorities more severely, would have that effect... .


3. Empirical problems of prediction. Even if ethical objections to selective incapacitation are set aside, a major difficulty lies in the inaccuracy of the judgments on which it rests. Predictions of future criminality based on intuitive

clinical assessments typically have “false-positive” rates of more than 60 percent; in other

p29

p30
words, of every three individuals predicted to offend in the future, approximately two do not. As a result, when people convicted of a crime are held for longer periods on the basis of such predictions, two-thirds of the individuals suffer unnecessary
curtailment of their liberty, and of course society incurs costs of incarceration that can easily exceed the costs of the crimes prevented. Prediction accuracy improves, however, if clinicians or other actors use actuarial risk-assessment instruments
that rely on objective risk indicators such as age, gender, mental disorder, substance abuse, and prior criminal record. In some instances, such tools have had accuracy rates of over 50 percent and occasionally up to 75 percent. See Christopher
Slobogin, The Civilization of the Criminal Law, 58 Vand. L. Rev. 121, 144-145 (2005). Nonetheless, false-positive rates remain high, particularly for predictions of violence. A recent evaluation of the widely used COMPAS (Correctional Offender
Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions) tool compared its risk predictions with the actual recidivism rates of people after two years. The tool was 61 percent accurate in predicting overall recidivism, but correctly predicted violent recidi-
vism only 20 percent of the time.*2

4, Built-in bias. Although actuarial risk instruments attempt to mitigate disparity and bias in individualized risk predictions by judges, prosecutors, and other actors who are charged with assessing future dangerousness (for example,
in decisions about pretrial detention and sentencing), these actuarial instruments have biases of their own. The study of COMPAS found that “Black defendants who did not recidivate over a two-year period were nearly twice as likely to be mis-
classified as higher risk compared to their white counterparts (45 percent vs. 23 percent).” The opposite error occurred with white defendants, with the risk instrument mistakenly labeling them as low risk almost twice as often as Black defendants.
Algorithms used at sentencing can produce similar disparities because they use “demographic, socioeconomic, family, and neighborhood variables [which are correlated with race] to determine whether and for how long a defendant is incarcer-
ated.” Sonja B. Starr, Evidence-Based Sentencing and the Scientific Rationalization of Discrimination, 66 Stan. L. Rev. 803, 806 (2014). Another common predictor of future dangerousness is criminal history, but a person's history of prior arrests
and convictions can be a function of policing patterns that are themselves biased on the basis of race. Vincent M. Southerland, The Intersection of Race and Algorithmic Tools in the Criminal Legal System, 80 Md. L. Rev. 487 (2021).

5. Taking credit for the crime decline of the 1990s? From 1988 to 1998, American prison populations soared from 800,000 to 1.8 million, an increase of 125 percent. During the same period, crime rates fell dramatically; in cities of
more than 1 million inhabitants, for example, the homicide rate fell by 55 percent from 1991 to 1998.43 Many attribute these crime-control successes to the incapacitation effect of the prison population boom, but many states with much smaller in-
creases in prison population nonetheless experienced significant crime-control successes

p30

pst
as well. As a result, many competing explanations have been offered for the drop in crime during the 1990s, including demographic trends, community policing innovations, the waning of the crack epidemic, the decreasing use of lead in paint
and gasoline, and even the possibility that legalized abortion may have reduced the number of “unwanted” children who began reaching their crime-prone teen years during this period.“ Efforts to sort out the impact of these diverse factors are
necessarily speculative and imprecise; studies range from crediting incarceration as being 58 percent responsible for the 1990s crime decline to blaming incarceration because it may have caused violent crime to decline 3 percent less than it oth-
erwise would have.5

6. Cost-effective alternatives? Three years after declaring that “prisons are a bargain,” Professor Dilulio qualified his position. In a 1999 article, he insisted that increasing the incarceration rate was a justified policy in 1996 (when
there were 1.6 million prisoners nationwide),4° but with the U.S. prison and jail population then near the 2 million mark, he argued that “the nation has ‘maxed out’ on the public-safety value of incarceration” and that the penal system “is becoming
less capable of distributing sanctions and supervision rationally, especially where drug offenders are concerned.” Accordingly, Dilulio maintained, “[it’s time for policy makers to change focus, aiming for zero prison growth,” and devoting more
resources to drug treatment and effective supervision of people on probation and parole. Signaling that his changed assessment was the result of more than just a shift in the cost-benefit calculus, Dilulio concluded, “In the end, whether or not we
achieve this goal [of zero prison growth] will be a profound measure not merely of how nimble we are when it comes to managing public safety cost-effectively, but also of how decent we are, despite our many differences, when it came to loving
all God's children unconditionally.”47

The soaring costs of incarceration have generated some degree of consensus across political lines that America’s reliance on imprisonment has gone too far. A congressional task force noted:!®


There is broad, bipartisan agreement that the costs of incarceration have far outweighed their benefits, [and] that our country has largely failed to meet the goals of a well-functioning justice system: to enhance public safety,
to prevent future victimization, and to rehabilitate those who have engaged in criminal acts.
pst
p32
There has been bipartisan support for modest measures to roll back some of the harshest punishments. During the Trump Administration, for example, Congress passed the First Step Act of 2018. That Act reduced some mandatory minimums, but
the reductions were small and not retroactive. Most significantly, even as jurisdictions have seen bipartisan support for reductions in sentence lengths, they have also witnessed bipartisan opposition. For many offenses, jurisdictions continue to
raise the length of prison sentences, and overall incarceration rates have risen in many places.

If our punitive approach is not serving public safety ends, can it be justified on any other basis? One possible answer is that American punishment practices are largely grounded in, and perhaps justified by, retributive intuitions and
retributive values, to which we now turn.

2. Retribution
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

“Retributive” views (of which there are many) share an insistence that punishment must be justified by the seriousness of the offense committed, rather than by the future benefits to be obtained by punishing. But those who prefer a
retributive approach often disagree about precisely what such an approach requires.

One school of thought holds a just society must punish the blameworthy. This view is called positive retributivism. Another view sees retributive justice operating as a constraint, where moral guilt is a necessary, but not automatically a
sufficient condition of just punishment; under this view (often called negative retributivism), retributivism sets the upper limit to a permissible punishment (.e., one cannot get more than one deserves), but the state may opt to punish less than that.

Another point of disagreement concerns the appropriate focus to use in establishing how much punishment an offender deserves. Retributive views usually link desert to the offender's moral culpability. But the term retribution is
sometimes associated, perhaps inaccurately, with a rather different notion that might be thought of as retaliation — that desert is linked to the harm caused by an offense. Because that shift from blame to harm marks a fundamental change in the
focus of the theory of punishment, we postpone consideration of retaliation until Section B.3.a below.

In reading the excerpts that follow, consider where the various writers stand in these debates about the nature of retributive justice. For each of them, what does the concept of retribution require, and more importantly, why?
IMMANUEL KANT, THE PHILOSOPHY OF LAW (W. HASTIE TRANS., 1887) (ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED 1797): Juridical punishment can never be administered merely as a means of promoting another good either with regard to the criminal himself
or to civil society, but must in all cases be imposed only because the individual on whom it is inflicted has committed a crime. For one man ought never to be dealt with merely as a means subservient to the purpose of another. . . . He must first be

p32

p33
found guilty and punishable, before there can be any thought of drawing from his punishment any benefit for himself or his fellow-citizens. The penal law is a categorical imperative; and woe to him who creeps through the serpent-windings of
utilitarianism to discover some advantage that may discharge him from the justice of punishment, or even from the due measure of it, according to the Pharisaic maxim: “It is better that one man should die than that the whole people should per-
ish.” For if justice and righteousness perish, human life would no longer have any value in the world. What, then, is to be said of such a proposal as to keep a criminal alive who has been condemned to death, on his being given to understand that


if he agreed to certain dangerous experiments being performed upon him, he would be allowed to survive if he came happily through them? It is argued that physicians might thus obtain new information that would be of value to the commonweal.
But a court of justice would repudiate with scorn any proposal of this kind if made to it by the medical faculty; for justice would cease to be justice if it were bartered away for any consideration whatever... .

But what is the mode and measure of punishment which public justice takes as its principle and standard? It is just the principle of equality, by which the pointer of the scale of justice is made to incline no more to the one side than the
other. It may be rendered by saying that the undeserved evil which any one commits on another is to be regarded as perpetrated on himself. Hence it may be said: “If you slander another, you slander yourself; if you steal from another, you steal
from yourself; if you strike another, you strike yourself; if you kill another, you kill yourself.” This is the right of retaliation (jus talionis); and properly understood, it is the only principle which in regulating a public court, as distinguished from mere
private judgment, can definitely assign both the quality and the quantity of a just penalty. All other standards are wavering and uncertain; and on account of other considerations involved in them, they contain no principle conformable to the sen-
tence of pure and strict justice. . .

[Whhoever has committed murder must die. There is, in this case, no juridical substitute or surrogate that can be given or taken for the satisfaction of justice. There is no likeness or proportion between life, however painful, and death;
and therefore there is no equality between the crime of murder and the retaliation of it but what is judicially accomplished by the execution of the criminal. His death, however, must be kept free from alll maltreatment that would make the humanity
suffering in his person loathsome or abominable. Even if a civil society resolved to dissolve itself with the consent of all its members — as might be supposed in the case of a people inhabiting an island resolving to separate and scatter themselves
through the whole world — the last murderer lying in the prison ought to be executed before the resolution was carried out. This ought to be done in order that every one may realize the desert of his deeds, and that bloodguiltiness may not remain
upon the people; for otherwise they might all be regarded as participators in the murder as a public violation of justice.

MICHAEL S. MOORE, THE MORAL WORTH OF RETRIBUTION, IN RESPONSIBILITY, CHARACTER AND EMOTIONS 179 (F. SCHOEMAN ED., 1987): Retributivism is the view that punishment is justified by the moral culpability of those who receive it. A
retributivist punishes because, and only because, the offender deserves it.
p33
p34
Retributivism thus stands in stark contrast to utilitarian views that justify punishment of past offenses by the greater good of preventing future offenses. .. .

[Retributivism] differs from a variety of views that are often paraded as retributivist, but that in fact are not. [For example] retributivism is sometimes identified with a particular measure of punishment such as lex talionis, an eye for an
eye, or with a kind of punishment such as the death penalty. Yet retributivism answers a [different] question. . .. True enough, retributivists at some point have to answer the “how much’ and “what type” questions for specific offenses, and they are
committed to the principle that punishment should be graded in proportion to desert; but they are not committed to any particular penalty scheme. . .. It is quite possible to be a retributivist and to be against both the death penalty and lex talionis,
the idea that crimes should be punished by like acts being done to the criminal.

[Further,] retributivism is not the “view that only the guilty are to be punished.” A retributivist will subscribe to such a view, but [the] distinctive aspect of retributivism is that the moral desert of an offender is a sufficient reason to punish
him or her. . .. That future crime might also be prevented by punishment is a happy surplus for a retributivist, but no part of the justification for punishing.

. .. Retributivism is not the view that punishment of offenders satisfies the desires for vengeance of their victims. . .. A retributivist can justify punishment as deserved even if the criminal's victims are indifferent (or even opposed) to
punishing the one who hurt them. Indeed, a retributivist should urge punishment on all offenders who deserve it, even if no victims wanted it. [Nor is punishment for a retributivist . .. justified by the need to prevent private violence, which is an es-
sentially utilitarian justification. Even in the most well-mannered state, those criminals who deserve punishment should get it, according to retributivism. . .

Retributivism is a very straightforward theory of punishment: We are justified in punishing because and only because offenders deserve it. Moral culpability (“desert”) . . . gives society more than merely a right to punish culpable
offenders. . . . For a retributivist, the moral culpability of an offender also gives society the duty to punish. Retributivism, in other words, is truly a theory of justice such that, if itis true, we have an obligation to set up institutions so that retribution
is achieved.

NOTE ON CRITICISMS AND DEFENSES OF RETRIBUTION


Does retributivism avoid the difficulties of the purely utilitarian approach? Are there persuasive reasons to accept the retributive view, or is it merely, as Professor H.L.A. Hart once suggested (Punishment and Responsibility 234-235
(1968), “a mysterious piece of moral alchemy in which the combination of the two evils of moral wickedness [of the offense] and suffering [of the offender who is punished] are transmuted into good”? In thinking about whether there is a sound
basis for the retributive approach, consider the materials that follow.

pst

p35
HERBERT MORRIS, ON GUILT AND INNOCENCE 33-34 (1976): Let us suppose that men are constituted roughly as they now are, with a rough equivalence in strength and abilities, a capacity to be injured by each other and to make judgments that
such injury is undesirable, a limited strength of will, and a capacity to reason and to conform conduct to rules. Applying to the conduct of these men are a group of rules . . . that prohibit violence and deception and compliance with which provides
benefits for all persons. . . . Making possible this mutual benefit is the assumption by individuals of a burden. The burden consists in the exercise of self-restraint by individuals over inclinations that would, if satisfied, directly interfere or create a
substantial risk of interference with others in proscribed ways. If a person fails to exercise self-restraint even though he might have and gives in to such inclinations, he renounces a burden which others have voluntarily assumed and thus gains an
advantage which others, who have restrained themselves, do not possess. This system, then, is one in which the rules establish a mutuality of benefit and burden and in which the benefits of noninterference are conditional upon the assumption of
burdens.

Connecting punishment with the violation of these primary rules, and making public the provision for punishment, is both reasonable and just. First, it is only reasonable that those who voluntarily comply with the rules be provided some
assurance that they will not be assuming burdens which others are unprepared to assume. Their disposition to comply voluntarily will diminish as they learn that others are with impunity renouncing burdens they are assuming. Second, fairness
dictates that a system in which benefits and burdens are equally distributed have a mechanism designed to prevent a maldistribution in the benefits and burdens. Thus, sanctions are attached to noncompliance with the primary rules so as to in-
duce compliance . . . among those who may be disinclined to obey. In this way the likelihood of an unfair distribution is diminished.

Third, it is just to punish those who have violated the rules and caused the unfair distribution of benefits and burdens. A person who violates the rules has something others have — the benefits of the system — but by renouncing what
others have assumed, the burdens of self-restraint, he has acquired an unfair advantage. Matters are not even until this advantage is in some way erased. Another way of putting it is that he owes something to others, for he has something that
does not rightfully belong to him. Justice — that is punishing such individuals — restores the equilibrium of benefits and burdens by taking from the individual what he owes, that is, exacting the debt.

JEFFRIE MURPHY, MARXISM AND RETRIBUTION, 2 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 217 (1973): The retributive theory really presupposes what might be called a “gentlemen's club” picture of the relation between man and society — i.e., men are viewed as being
part of a community of shared values and rules. The rules benefit all concerned and, as a kind of debt for the benefits derived, each man owes obedience to the rules. In the absence of such obedience, he deserves punishment in the sense that he
‘owes payment for the benefits. For, as a rational man, he can see that the rules benefit everyone (himself included) and that he would have selected them in the original position of choice. . . .
But to think that [this] applies to the typical criminal, from the poorer classes, is to live in a world of social and political fantasy. [T]hey certainly would be hard-pressed to name the benefits for which they are supposed to owe obedience.
It
p35
p36
justice . . . is based on reciprocity, it is hard to see what these persons are supposed to reciprocate for. . ..

Consider one example: A man has been convicted of armed robbery. On investigation, we learn that he is an impoverished black whose whole life has been one of frustrating alienation from the prevailing socio-economic structure — no
job, no transportation if he could get a job, substandard education for his children, terrible housing and inadequate health care for his whole family, condescending-tardy-inadequate welfare payments, harassment by the police but no real protec-
tion by them against the dangers in his community, and near total exclusion from the political process. Learning all this, would we still want to talk — as many do — of his suffering punishment under the rubric of “paying a debt to society”? . . . Debt
for what? I do not, of course, pretend that all criminals can be so described. But | do think that this is a closer picture of the typical criminal than the picture that is presupposed in the retributive theory — i.e., the picture of an evil person who, of his
‘own free will, intentionally acts against those just rules of society which he knows, as a rational man, benefit everyone including himself.


[llf we are morally sensitive enough to want to be sure that we have the moral right to punish before we inflict it, then we had better first make sure that we have restructured society in such a way that criminals genuinely do correspond
to the only model that will render punishment permissible — i.e., make sure that they are autonomous and that they do benefit in the requisite sense.

JEAN HAMPTON, CORRECTING HARMS VERSUS RIGHTING WRONGS: THE GOAL OF RETRIBUTION, 39 UCLA L. REV. 1659, 1660-1661 (1992): [A] basic difficulty with [the fair play] theory is its assumption that . .. we censure and punish . . . because
[wrongdoers] are free riders. This assumption makes sense only if we believe that constraining ourselves so that we do not rape or murder or steal imposes a cost upon us. Yet that idea makes sense only if raping, murdering, and stealing are
viewed by us as desirable and attractive. ... However, surely this is exactly what most of us do not think about crime. Very few of us . . . resent murderers, muggers, or rapists because they have unfairly enjoyed benefits coveted by the rest of us.
[I]t seems absurd to say that this is what is wrong with wrongdoers who murder, assault, or abuse others.

JOHN L. MACKIE, RETRIBUTION: A TEST CASE FOR ETHICAL OBJECTIVITY, IN PHILOSOPHY OF LAW 677 (JOEL FEINBERG & HYMAN GROSS EDS., 1991): [RJetribuo in Latin means “| pay back.” . . . Punitive retribution is the repaying of harm with
harm, as reward is the repaying of benefit with benefit. We can class as an essentially retributivist approach any that sees at least some prima facie rightness in the repaying of evil with evil, especially a proportionate evil. . . . But this is a very dark
saying. Why should it be so? . ..

Repayment: How does the criminal's suffering or deprivation pay anything to society? No doubt repaying a debt often hurts the person who pays it, but it does not follow that anything that hurts someone amounts to his repaying a
debt. . . . So this account is simply incoherent. . . .

Annulment: This notion . . . seems to be that as long as a criminal goes scot-free, the crime itself still exists, still flourishes, but when the criminal is adequately punished the crime itself is somehow wiped out. It is not, therefore, by any
sort of repayment or restitution that “right is restored,” but just by trampling on the

p36
p.s7
previously flourishing crime. But . . . there is no comprehensible way in which a penalty wipes out an otherwise still-existing crime. . ..

Fair play: Here the suggestion is that the . . . criminal has gained an unfair advantage by breaking the rules; to restore fairness this advantage must be taken away from him. Unlike our last two approaches, this one is not incoherent; it
makes perfectly good sense in certain contexts. It has its clearest exemplification in the award of a penalty in football . . . when there has been a foul. . . . Itis also retributivist in our basic sense of being retrospective; the justification is complete
when the penalty has been imposed; fairness has then (roughly at least) been restored, irrespective of whether there are or are not any further desirable consequences. The trouble with this approach, however, is that it has little relation to most
cases of punishment. Any serious attempt to apply it would lead to bizarre results. . . . Thus if a businessman has secured a contract worth $100,000, but has exceeded the speed limit in order to get to the relevant appointment on time, he should
presumably be fined $100,000, whereas a fine of $1 would be enough for someone who murders a blind cripple to rob him of $1... . Unsuccessful attempts at murder (or anything else) should not be punished at all. ... What is basically wrong with
the fair play approach . . . is that it focuses on the advantage that may have been gained by the criminal in some sort of social competition, whereas the point of punishment surely lies not in this but in the wrongness of his act and the harm that he
has done or tried to do. ..

DANIELLE SERED, UNTIL WE RECKON: VIOLENCE, MASS INCARCERATION, AND A ROAD TO REPAIR 89 (2019): Retribution becomes more complicated when we recognize that those we are punishing are almost invariably also people we have
failed to protect. Nearly everyone who commits violence has survived it, and while that in no way excuses their actions, it reminds us that state-conducted retribution for violence is carried out almost entirely against survivors of violence. We can
develop respectful methods to hold people accountable that deny neither their culpability nor their humanity, but when our aim is simply to inflict pain, we end up hurting people our society failed to protect from victimization and harm in the first
place.

NOTE ON RETRIBUTION AS A CONSTRAINT


The preceding excerpts focus on positive retribution — the claim that a just society must impose punishment equivalent in severity to the seriousness of the crime. This is the most controversial form of retributivism; there has been
much less discomfort with negative retribution — the claim that the seriousness of the offense sets an upper limit to permissible punishment but does not require the state to punish to that extent. But what does this upper limit actually mean in
practice? The notion that justice imposes a constraint on punishment is intuitively appealing, but unless that upper limit has some content, it can hardly serve as a significant constraint. So it becomes essential to know how the upper limit is fixed.

Kant, for example, insists (p. 33 supra) that the amount of punishment must not be “wavering and uncertain,” and he requires “equality” between crime and punishment. His analysis seems to imply an “eye for an eye” approach, but
neither Kant nor other retributivists take that formula literally. (Even capital

p37
p38
punishment, Kant says, “must be kept free from all maltreatment that would make the humanity suffering in his person loathsome.”) How, then, can we prevent the upper limit on punishment from becoming “wavering and uncertain”?

One approach (“empirical desert”) has used questionnaires to ascertain community views about deserved punishment in typical cases. Such surveys find broad agreement about the relative seriousness of different offenses, but little
agreement about absolute seriousness — the amount of punishment warranted in a particular case.°2 In any event, are public opinion surveys (or the punishments that elected legislatures authorize) the right place to look to determine whether a
particular punishment is justified? Professor Paul H. Robinson, who has done much of the leading work on empirical desert, also notes (The Ongoing Revolution in Punishment Theory: Doing Justice as Controlling Crime, 42 Ariz. St. L.J. 1089, 1108
(2010)) that adhering to this approach “may do injustice that is not apparent to the present community.” And beyond that concer, does any conception of deserved punishment really set a meaningful constraint in practice? Specific constitutional
doctrines relevant to a proportionality requirement are examined at pp. 1150-1161 infra. With respect to the broader question whether “negative” retributivism delivers on its promise to limit punishment severity, consider Alice Ristroph, Desert,
Democracy, and Sentencing Reform, 96 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1293, 1293-1297 (2006):

[In legal and political practice, desert has proven more illimitable than limiting. Democratic conceptions of desert are first, elastic: desert is hard to quantify and easy to stretch. .. . Many of the sentencing policies alleged by

academics to violate “desert as a limiting principle” were (and continue to be) popularly justified in the language of desert. . .. Moreover, desert is opaque: it is difficult to know or control which particular details of an offender

or offense inform a decision-maker’s assessment of desert. Racial bias, fear, disgust, and other arbitrary factors can shape desert assessments, but they do so under cover of a seemingly legitimate moral judgment. [T]he

‘opacity of desert claims may enable prejudice to take effect in sentencing practices even as the moralistic tenor of desert rhetoric shields sentencing practices from meaningful scrutiny.

For a detailed analysis of the ways in which racial bias and fear influence societal views of retribution and desert, see Justin D. Levinson, Robert J. Smith & Koichi Hioki, Race and Retribution: An Empirical Study of Implicit Bias and
Punishment in America, 53 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 839 (2019). Based on a national study with more than 500 jury-eligible citizens, the authors present empirical evidence that Americans “more strongly associate Black faces with the concepts of retri-
bution, payback, and revenge, and White faces with the concepts of rehabilitation, treatment, and redemption.” Id. at 844. Thus, the authors claim, “race has become inextricably tied to the concept of retribution itself.” Id. at 842. What, if anything,
can be done to address these societal biases? To the extent that notions of retributive justice are tainted by racial bias, does retribution lose its credentials as a justified basis for imposing punishment? But if the law does not consider retributive im-
pulses, does that create a greater risk of vigilante responses that might be even more biased?

p38
p39

3. “Cousins” of Retribution
INTRODUCTORY NOTE


As we have seen, the essence of a retributive approach is its focus on the nature of the offender's crime. More specifically, classic retributivism emphasizes the blameworthiness of that crime, and views blame as a decisive concern in
itself, without regard to its possible bearing on the consequences of imposing punishment. Several efforts to justify punishment are closely related to retributivism, in the sense that they too give central importance to the past offense. Indeed for
that reason, some of these close relatives are often confused with retributivism or equated with it. But these theories differ in respects that are fundamental. Some of these theories — often called theories of retaliation or vengeance — focus less
on the blameworthiness of the past offense than on the harm it caused. Others look to the harmfulness or blameworthiness of the past offense, but do so not because those concerns are considered sufficient in their own right but instead because
that emphasis is thought to have certain beneficial consequences. In this section we consider these “cousins” of retributivism — first retaliation and vengeance, and then the theories of social cohesion.

a. Retaliation and Vengeance
JAMES FITZJAMES STEPHEN, A HISTORY OF THE CRIMINAL LAW OF ENGLAND 81-82 (1883 ED.): [T]he sentence of the law is to the moral sentiment of the public in relation to any offence what a seal is to hot wax. It converts into a permanent
final judgment what might otherwise be a transient sentiment. The mere general suspicion or knowledge that a man has done something dishonest may never be brought to a point, and the disapprobation excited by it may in time pass away,
but the fact that he has been convicted and punished as a thief stamps a mark upon him for life. In short, the infliction of punishment by law gives definite expression and a solemn ratification and justification to the hatred which is excited by the
commission of the offence, and which constitutes the moral or popular as distinguished from the conscientious sanction of that part of morality which is also sanctioned by the criminal law. The criminal law thus proceeds upon the principle that it
is morally right to hate criminals, and it confirms and justifies that sentiment by inflicting upon criminals punishments which express it.
QUESTIONS
Is there a moral case for tying punishment to the amount of resentment and outrage generated by a crime?5" If it is desirable for criminal punishment to be affected by hatred, indignation, and outrage, how should we design our
p39
p40
institutions of punishment in order to harness and reflect those emotions? Should sentences (within the legislatively authorized range) be selected by the victims of the offense, rather than by a neutral, detached judge? Alternatively, should we at
least require that the judge give substantial weight to the punishment preferences of the victims? What impact would such approaches have on other goals of criminal punishment? Consider these questions in connection with the problems that
follow.
PROBLEM: UNEXPECTED HARM

In 2003, a catastrophic fire at a Rhode Island nightclub killed 100 people and injured more than 200.°2 The fire was the result of a publicity stunt on the part of Daniel Biechele, the tour manager for the heavy metal band Great White.
Biechele arranged for fireworks, which he ignited on stage at the club, as part of the performance. The plan went disastrously wrong when the fireworks ignited flammable soundproofing foam, setting off a maelstrom consuming the crowded
wooden building. Biechele pleaded guilty to 100 counts of involuntary manslaughter pursuant to a plea agreement that authorized the judge to impose a maximum ten-year prison term. The prosecutor sought that maximum, arguing that Biechele’s
failure to obtain a permit for the fireworks was “not simply an unwitting and innocuous oversight, but a deliberate and intentional decision not to abide by Rhode Island law. . .. A child could have foreseen the harm” of setting off fireworks in the
club jammed with people. He added, “If this isn’t the case that deserves a serious sentence, what one is?” The judge, however, sentenced Biechele to serve four years in prison, leaving him eligible for parole release after serving one-third of his
sentence. The judge pointed to the defendant's clean record, remorse, willingness to accept responsibility, and potential for rehabilitation. The judge also emphasized that the defendant never intended to harm anyone.

The sentence provoked outrage among relatives of some of the victims. One called the sentence “a joke” and said of Biechele’s mother, “She'll get her son in four years, and they'll go back to being a happy family. What do we have?”
Another parent, whose son was killed and daughter injured, said: “One year for every 25 people that died — it’s crazy. You can do what you want in Rhode Island and get away with it.” But other victims’ relatives disagreed. A mother who lost


her son said: “I think it’s a fair and just reaction. He didn’t set out to kill anybody. It was a horrendous accident.” The father of an 18-year-old killed in the fire testified that his son would have wanted the family to accept Biechele’s apology. Other
relatives placed more blame on the club's owners, who had installed the highly flammable soundproofing. They were later convicted, and one of them received the same sentence as Biechele. Some relatives also blamed the fire on building inspec-
tors for failing to issue citations for the soundproofing material.
p.40
pat
QUESTIONS: What sentence should the judge have imposed? For what reasons? Retribution? Vengeance? Deterrence? Would your reaction be different if someone had succeeded in dousing the fire before it spread?
PROBLEM: VICTIM-IMPACT STATEMENTS
In state and federal sentencing proceedings, it has become common for the court to consider statements from victims and family members describing the damaging consequences of the crime. See Paul G. Cassell & Margaret Garvin,
Protecting Crime Victims in State Constitutions: The Example of the New Marsy's Law for Florida, 110 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 99 (2020); Victoria Schwartz, The Victims’ Rights Amendment, 42 Harv. J. on Legis. 525 (2005); Symposium on Crime
Victim Law, Theory and Practice, 9 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 481-668 (2005). Such statements typically detail the grief of victims and their families, physical illnesses that may have ensued, financial and emotional consequences, and the like. Some-
times such statements also recommend what the victim or family members regard as suitable punishment. The rationale for considering such statements is by no means clear. Which theory of punishment justifies the use of these statements?
Consider People v. Levitt, 156 Cal. App. 3d 500, 516 (1984):
[A] defendant's level of culpability depends . . . on circumstances over which he has control. A defendant may choose, or decline, to premeditate, to act callously, to attack a vulnerable victim, to commit a crime while on
probation, or to amass a record of offenses. . . . In contrast, the fact that a victim's family is irredeemably bereaved can be attributable to no act of will of the defendant other than his commission of homicide in the first place.
Such bereavement is relevant to damages in a civil action, but it has no relationship to the proper purposes of sentencing in a criminal case.
Compare Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U.S. 812 (1991). Payne had used a butcher knife to kill a young mother who had refused his sexual advances. In the same incident, Payne killed her two-year-old daughter, Lacie, and attempted to kill her three-
year-old son, Nicholas. The circumstances were particularly horrifying. The state presented the testimony of Nicholas's grandmother about his reaction to the murders:
He cries for his mom. He doesn’t seem to understand why she doesn’t come home. And he cries for his sister Lacie. He comes to me many times during the week and asks me, Grandmama, do you miss my Lacie. And | tell
him yes. He says, I'm worried about my Lacie.
In arguing for the death penalty, the prosecutor commented on Nicholas’s experience:
Nicholas was still conscious. His eyes were open. He was able to hold his intestines in as he was carried to the ambulance. So he knew what happened to his mother and baby sister. . . . There is nothing you can do to ease
the pain of any of the families involved in this case. . . . But there is something that you can do for Nicholas. . .. Somewhere down the road Nicholas is going to grow up, hopefully. . . . And he is going to
pat
p42
know what happened to his baby sister and his mother. He is going to want to know what type of justice was done. . . . With your verdict, you will provide the answer.


The jury convicted the defendant of first-degree murder and sentenced him to death. The Supreme Court held that the victim-impact testimony and the prosecutor's arguments on that subject were relevant to the defendant's moral
blame, which is the crucial factor in determining eligibility for the death penalty.5° The majority opinion explained:

[A] State may properly conclude that for the jury to assess meaningfully the defendant's moral culpability and blameworthiness, it should have before it at the sentencing phase evidence of the specific harm caused by the

defendant. “[T]he State has a legitimate interest in counteracting the mitigating evidence which the defendant is entitled to put in, by reminding the sentencer that just as the murderer should be considered as an individual,

so too the victim is an individual whose death represents a unique loss to society and in particular to his family.”

QUESTIONS: (a) The particular details. Both the grandmother's testimony and the closing argument of the prosecutor focused on the impact of the killings on Nicholas. How was that impact relevant to Payne's blameworthiness? Would
Nicholas’s experience have the same relevance if he had not been present, but had heard about the attack afterwards? Would Payne be less deserving of capital punishment if he had succeeded in killing Nicholas instantly? If not, why was evi-
dence of Nicholas's horrifying experience needed for the jury properly to assess Payne's blameworthiness? Justice Souter, in a concurring opinion, responded to this challenge:

Every defendant knows... . that the life he will take by his homicidal behavior is that of a unique person, .. . and that the person to be killed probably has close associates . . . who will suffer harms and deprivations from the

victim's death. . . . The foreseeability of the killing’s consequences imbues them with direct moral relevance.

Ina similar vein, courts have upheld the admissibility of testimony that a victim's aunt died of a heart attack after hearing of her nephew's killing, Young v. State, 992 P.2d 332 (Okla. Crim. App. 1998), and testimony that a victim's father
abandoned his career after hearing of his daughter's murder, Griffith v. State, 983 S.W.2d 282 (Tex. Crim. App. 1998). For a discussion of how victim-impact statements can help jurors understand the magnitude of a loss but also may distort the
deliberative process, see Susan A. Bandes & Jessica M. Salerno, Emotion, Proof and Prejudice: The Cognitive Science of Gruesome Photos and Victim Impact Statements, 46 Ariz. St. LJ. 1003 (2014). For a perspective on how contemporary
social media can multiply the effects of victim impact statements, see Erin Sheley, Victim Impact Statements and Expressive Punishment in the Age of Social Media, 52 Wake Forest L. Rev. 157, 185 (2017). The author discusses the victim impact
statement

p42

p43
submitted in a high-profile 2016 college campus sexual assault case involving Brock Tumer, a member of the Stanford swim team; when the statement “went viral,” it made a broad public aware of the harm of the crime and brought “home the
reality of the trauma of sexual assault.”
(b) Foreseeability. What is the “moral relevance” of the fact that a foreseeable consequence did or did not come about? Would the murderer in Young deserve less punishment if the victim's aunt had not died of a heart attack? Would the murderer
in Griffith deserve less punishment if the victim's father had not given up his job? Another kind of problem arises if a defendant, either because of age or a mental disability, did not foresee that the crime would cause harm to members of the
victim's family. Should the defendant still face an aggravated punishment, simply because the average person would have foreseen such consequences? Or is it inconsistent with retributive justice to impose a more severe punishment in these
circumstances?

Are unintended harms considered in sentencing because they aggravate the defendant's degree of fault or because there is a social interest in using punishment to compensate the victim? In the latter case, one could view the victim's
satisfaction as a social benefit, but many would argue that the suffering experienced by the person punished should count as a social cost, especially if it involves more suffering than moral blame requires. On what basis can we justify the choice
to give satisfaction to a victim, at the cost of inflicting extra, undeserved suffering on the person who committed the crime? The materials in the next section, dealing with social cohesion, offer one possible answer to these questions. The effort to
reinforce social cohesion suggests an independent justification for punishment; it is not necessarily linked to the concept of revenge and might even be antithetical to it. In assessing the social-cohesion theories, consider whether they tend to re-
inforce or undermine the argument for tying punishment to desires for victim satisfaction, retaliation, or revenge.


b. Social Cohesion

HLL.A. HART, PUNISHMENT AND RESPONSIBILITY 235 (1968): [Some] modern retributive theory has shifted the emphasis, from the alleged justice or intrinsic goodness of the return of suffering for moral evil done, to the value of the authoritative
expression, in the form of punishment, of moral condemnation for the moral wickedness involved in the offence. This theory . . . shares with other modern retributive theories two important points of contrast with Utilitarian theories; for like [classic
retributivism] it insists that the conduct to be punished must be a species of voluntary moral wrongdoing, and the severity of punishment must be proportionate to the wickedness of the offence. But this form of theory has also at least two different
forms: in one of them the public expression of condemnation of the offender by punishment of his offence may be conceived as something valuable in itself; in the other it is valuable only because it tends to certain valuable results, such as the vol-
untary reform of the offender, his recognition of his moral error, or the maintenance, reinforcement or “vindication” of the morality of the society against which the person punished has offended. Plainly the latter

p43

pad
version of reprobation [is a form of] Utilitarian theory, [although] the good to be achieved through punishment is less narrowly conceived than in Bentham’s or in other orthodox forms of Utilitarianism.
EMILE DURKHEIM, THE DIVISION OF LABOR IN SOCIETY 62-63 (W.D. HALLS TRANS., 1984) (ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED IN 1893): [Punishment] does not serve, or serves only very incidentally, to correct the guilty person or to scare off any possible
imitators. . .. Its real function is to maintain inviolate the cohesion of society by sustaining the common consciousness in all its vigour. If that consciousness were thwarted . . . , it would necessarily lose some of its power, were an emotional reac-
tion from the community not forthcoming to make good that loss. Thus there would result a relaxation in the bonds of social solidarity. The consciousness must therefore be conspicuously reinforced. . . . The sole means of doing so is to give voice
to the unanimous aversion that the crime continues to evoke, and this by an official act, which can only mean suffering inflicted upon the wrongdoer. [T]his suffering is not a gratuitous act of cruelty. It is a sign indicating that the sentiments of the
collectivity are still unchanged, that the communion of minds sharing the same beliefs remains absolute, and in this way the injury that the crime has inflicted upon society is made good. This is why it is right to maintain that the criminal should
suffer in proportion to his crime, and why theories that deny to punishment any expiatory character appear, in the minds of many, to subvert the social order. In fact such theories could only be put into practice in a society from which almost every
trace of the common consciousness has been expunged. . . . Thus, without being paradoxical, we may state that punishment is above all intended to have its effect upon honest people. . .. Undoubtedly, by forestalling in minds already distressed
any further weakening of the collective psyche, punishment can indeed prevent such attacks from multiplying. But such a result, useful though it is, is merely a particular side-effect. In short, . . . the two opposing theories [of retribution and preven-
tion] must be reconciled: . . . Certainly [punishment] does fulfill the function of protecting society, but this is because of its expiatory [ie., retributive] nature. Moreover, if it must be expiatory, this is not because suffering redeems error by virtue of
some mystic strength or another, but because it cannot produce its socially useful effect save on this one condition.
2 JAMES FITZJAMES STEPHEN, A HISTORY OF THE CRIMINAL LAW OF ENGLAND 81-82 (1883 ED.): [The] close alliance between criminal law and moral sentiment is in all ways healthy and advantageous to the community. | think it highly desirable
that criminals should be hated, [and] that the punishments inflicted upon them should be so contrived as to give expression to that hatred. . . . The doctrine that hatred and vengeance are wicked in themselves appears to me to contradict plain
facts, and to be unsupported by any argument deserving of attention... . No doubt they are peculiarly liable to abuse, and in some states of society are commonly in excess of what is desirable, and so require restraint rather than excitement, but
unqualified denunciations of them are as ill judged as unqualified denunciations of sexual passion. The forms in which deliberate anger and righteous disapprobation are expressed, and the execution of criminal justice is the most emphatic of such
forms, stand to the one set of passions in the same relation in which marriage stands to the other.

pas

p45
NOTE


A large literature explores what is often called the “expressive function” of criminal punishment. Some scholars treat the expressive dimension as a means to achieve socially desirable effects, such as enhanced compliance with the
law. Other work in this vein bears a close affinity to classic retributivism because its proponents view the expressive dimension of punishment as worthwhile for its own sake. See especially Dan Markel, What Might Retributive Justice Be?, in Re-
tributivism: Essays on Theory and Policy 49 (Mark D. White ed., 2011), arguing that retributive punishment is intrinsically good because it affirms the dignity of the victim and communicates respect for the offender as a responsible moral agent. See
also Jean Hampton, Correcting Harms Versus Righting Wrongs: The Goal of Retribution, 39 UCLA L. Rev. 1659 (1992), explaining that in an “expressive” theory of retribution, punishment serves to repudiate the offender's claim of superiority over
the victim.

Douglas Husak argues in The Price of Criminal Law Skepticism: Ten Functions of the Criminal Law, 23 New Crim. L. Rev. 27 (2020), that criminal punishment serves an important expressive function because it “effectively indicate[s] that
the state regards a given kind of conduct as serious and worthy of condemnation.” Professor Husak provides the example of a 2018 U.K. bill criminalizing “upskirting.”=4 The bill was introduced in response to public outcry about a case in which a
man had surreptitiously taken a photo under a womans skirt. Police refused to charge the man with a crime because the photo was not sufficiently “graphic,” and the outcry suggested that the public valued punishment in this instance as a means
of affirming societal disapproval of such an act. One empirical study of the public’s response to violence found that most respondents were less concerned with punishment’s instrumental function of stopping crime than with its symbolic value of
“expressing a broader set of beliefs about social organization, individual responsibility, and perceived group differences.” Michael O’Hear & Darren Wheelock, Violent Crime and Punitiveness: An Empirical Study of Public Opinion, 103 Marq. L. Rev.
1035, 1070 (2020).

Professor Susan Bandes argues that, although expressivism may provide a helpful descriptive account of the role of punishment in society, the theory does little to advance a normative framework for understanding what punishment
ought to do or why punishment should be imposed in a particular circumstance. Susan A. Bandes, All Bathwater, No Baby: Expressive Theories of Punishment and the Death Penalty, 116 Mich. L. Rev. 905 (2018). See also Heidi M. Hurd, Express-
ing Doubts About Expressivism, 2005 U. Chi. Legal F. 405 (arguing that neither crimes nor punishments have coherent “social meanings,” and questioning why an attempt to communicate such meanings should be viewed as intrinsically good,
regardless of its consequences). For an attempt to provide a normative justification of society's impulse that seeks to address expressivism’s shortcomings, see Joshua Kleinfeld, Reconstructivism: The Place of Criminal Law in Ethical Life, 129
Harv. L. Rev. 1486 (2016) (using the label reconstructivism to describe the function of punishment in reconstructing the social order in the wake of a crime).

p45

4. Mixed Theories
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Although many criminal law theorists and practitioners subscribe to either retributive or utilitiarian approaches exclusively, others sense a need to combine them in some fashion. Consider just a few of the principal problems with an all-
or-nothing approach: Pure utilitarianism can, under some circumstances, require extremely severe punishments disproportionate to a defendant’s blameworthiness, merely because those punishments produce some beneficial consequence for
society. From the other direction, pure utilitarianism can sometimes require a punishment that is too lenient in the eyes of society, say because an offender intentionally committed a horrible act but — because of some change in circumstances —
is no longer likely to offend again. Pure retributivism poses different problems. Under some circumstances, it can call for punishments that do much more harm than good — for example, requiring incarceration of an offender whose small children
will be forced into foster care as a result. Pure retributivism could also, under some circumstances, call for a punishment that reflects a just desert for a particular defendant but fails adequately to deter future criminal conduct.

One solution to this dilemma would be to permit sentencing authorities to decide, on an ad hoc basis, which theory to follow, according to whatever outcome the circumstances seem to warrant. But this approach leaves so much room
for choice among punishments that many commentators feel it is less a theory than the complete absence of one. (Despite its conceptual shortcomings, this tends to be the practice in most jurisdictions, which authorize their sentencing policy
makers to consider all the purposes of punishment, prioritizing them in whatever way the decision maker prefers at a given time.) Apart from its conceptual messiness, however, what are the practical drawbacks of that approach?

A different and more rigorous solution, prominently proposed by H.L.A. Hart, stresses the need to distinguish between the aim of punishment, and the limits on its permissible use. Hart, Punishment and Responsibility 8-12 (1968). Hart
argued that the aim of punishment is utilitarian — to enhance social welfare, especially by preventing crime. But we can justly pursue this aim only within retributive limits — by never punishing an innocent person and never punishing a guilty per-


son to an extent disproportionate to blame. Thus, utilitarian and retributive principles both play a role, but we do not simply “mix and match” them at will. Social benefit is a necessary but not a sufficient condition of just punishment, and likewise,
desert is a necessary but not a sufficient condition of just punishment. This approach bars disproportionate punishment, even if a cost-benefit calculus would arguably support it. But this approach also bars punishment that is perfectly proportion-
ate to an offender's blame, if that punishment would not be socially beneficial under all the circumstances.

Does Hart's approach, which can be called the classic mixed theory, finally produce a satisfactory framework? Or does it too yield unacceptable results? This “classic” mixed theory has strong support in criminal law commentary, as
well as in American statutes and precedents; it is, for example, the foundation for the

p46
p.a7
Supreme Court's death penalty jurisprudence.55 Nonetheless, important misgivings have been expressed, as the following excerpt explores.
QUESTIONING THE CLASSIC MIXED THEORY
MICHAEL S. MOORE, LAW AND PSYCHIATRY 238-243 (1984): There is [a] thought experiment that tests whether one truly believes the mixed theory, or is in fact a pure retributivist. . . .

[In State v. Chaney,] the defendant was . . . convicted of two counts of forcible rape and one count of robbery.? The defendant and a companion had picked up the prosecutrix at a downtown location in Anchorage. [They] beat her and
forcibly raped her four times. [T]he victim's money was removed from her purse, and she only then was allowed to leave the vehicle after dire threats of reprisals if she attempted to report the incident. . ..

Despite this horrendous series of events, the trial judge imposed the minimum sentence on the defendant for each of the three counts and went out of his way to remark that he (the trial judge) was “sorry that the (military) regulations
would not permit keeping (defendant) in the service if he wanted to stay because it seems to me that it is a better setup for everybody concerned than putting him in the penitentiary.” The trial judge also mentioned that as far as he was concerned,
there would be no problem for the defendant to be paroled on the very first day of his sentence, if the parole board should so decide. . . .

The thought experiment such a case begins to pose for us is as follows: Imagine . . . that after the rape but before sentencing the defendant has gotten into an accident so that his sexual desires are dampened to such an extent that he
presents no further danger of rape; if money is also one of his problems, suppose further that he has inherited a great deal of money, so that he no longer needs to rob. Suppose, because of both of these facts, we are reasonably certain that he
does not present a danger of either forcible assault, rape, robbery, or related crimes in the future. Since Chaney is (by hypothesis) not dangerous, he does not need to be incapacitated, specially deterred, or reformed. Suppose further that we could
successfully pretend to punish Chaney, instead of actually punishing him, and that no one is at all likely to find out. Our pretending to punish him will thus serve the needs of general deterrence and maintain social cohesion, and the cost to the state
will be less than if it actually did punish him. Is there anything in the mixed theory of punishment that would urge that Chaney nonetheless should really be punished? | think not, so that if one’s conclusion is that Chaney and people like him none-
theless should be punished, one will have to give up the mixed theory of punishment.

p.a7
p48
NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Do you share Professor Moore's intuition that in the hypothetical circumstances “Chaney . . . should be punished”? If so, is that because you agree that deserved punishment must be imposed even if there are no societal benefits?
Does something specific to the crimes at issue here demand that punishment be imposed? Or do you agree on the need to punish only because you resist the hypothetical’s assumption that we can pretend to punish him, without having the pre-
tense discovered?


2. In response to discomfort with the classic mixed theory, some recent scholarship has sought to combine the rationales for punishment in more flexible ways, so that desert alone will sometimes be sufficient to justify the imposition of
punishment. See, e.g., Michael T. Cahill, Punishment Pluralism, in Retributivism: Essays on Theory and Policy (Mark D. White ed., 2011); Mitchell N. Berman, Punishment and Justification, 118 Ethics 258 (2008). Is the relative indeterminacy of these
approaches an important drawback? Or is that flexibility a strength for a theory designed to guide social practices in a society that is itself far from uniform in its values? Although the “classic” mixed approach holds a strong position in criminal law
theory and in the law itself, criminal law doctrine and practice often tend to be eclectic or (in Professor Cahill’s term) “pluralistic.”

C. WHAT TO PUNISH?

Theories of criminal punishment help guide the inquiry of what to punish. A retributivist will not impose punishment on behavior that is not morally blameworthy. But even if conduct is morally blameworthy, there may be reasons for a
free society to treat certain conduct as a matter of personal choice rather than seeking to prohibit it. The utilitarian perspective raises a different set of questions. Even if conduct entails moral blame, criminal punishment will be inappropriate when
it produces more harm than good. Although abolitionists reject the existing model of punishment in the United States, they, too, agree that harm reduction is critical. All these approaches thus require consideration of the question of what types of
behavior require any kind of intervention, whether it is punishment from the state or the alternative responses that abolitionists advocate.

In the field of constitutional law, a large body of doctrine deals with identifying conduct that is protected against government interference. Religious worship and political speech are two obvious examples. The constitutional right to pri-
vacy has invalidated many prohibitions that were long embedded in Anglo-American criminal law, such as laws criminalizing abortion (which were struck down in Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973)) and sodomy (which was struck down in Lawrence
v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003). Within the wide domain of conduct that government has constitutional power to regulate, however, there was at one time intense debate about whether the criminal law should be used to punish conduct simply on
the ground that society considered it “immoral.” Defending criminal laws of that sort, a British judge once wrote:5°

p48
p49

What makes a society of any sort is community of ideas, not only political ideas but also ideas about the way its members should behave and govern their lives; these latter ideas are its morals. [WJithout shared ideas on

politics, morals, and ethics no society can exist [flor society is not something that is kept together physically; it is held by the invisible bonds of common thought. If the bonds were too far relaxed the members would drift

apart. . .. Societies disintegrate from within more frequently than they are broken up by external pressures. There is disintegration when no common morality is observed . . . , so that society is justified in taking the same

steps to preserve its moral code as it does to preserve its government and other essential institutions.

This view has been widely criticized. In Britain, it was largely rejected in a 1957 government report concluding that “legislation which covers acts [committed between consenting adults in private] goes beyond the proper sphere of the
law’s concern.”57 Instead, the prevailing principle is the one articulated by John Stuart Mill:°2

[T]he sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. [T]he only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over

any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant.

Mill's approach — the harm principle — is widely accepted today as the basis for decisions about criminalization. But it turns out to have little practical bite. As Professor Bernard Harcourt explains (The Collapse of the Harm Principle,
90 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 109, 192-193 (1999)):

During the past two decades, the proponents of regulation and prohibition of a wide range of human activities — activities that have traditionally been associated with moral offense — have turned to the harm argument.

Catharine MacKinnon has focused on the multiple harms to women and women’s sexuality caused by pornography. The broken windows theory of crime prevention has emphasized how minor crimes, like prostitution and

loitering, cause major crimes, neighborhood decline, and urban decay. . .. The debate on drugs has focused on the harms caused by drug use and the harms caused by the war on drugs. . . .


This shift has significantly changed the structure of the debate over the legal enforcement of morality. [In the nineteenth century,] moralists could argue that the immorality of the offense was sufficient to enforce

a prohibition, and the proponents of the harm principle could argue that the lack of harm precluded legal enforcement. . . . Today the debate is characterized by a cacophony of competing harm arguments without any

p49
p50

way to resolve them. . . . The original harm principle was never equipped to determine the relative importance of harms. . . .

The collapse of the harm principle . . . may help us realize that there is probably harm in most human activities and, in most cases, on both sides of the equation — on the side of the persons harmed by the pur-

ported moral offense, but also on the side of the actor whose conduct is restricted by the legal enforcement of morality.

For the reasons Professor Harcourt identifies, the challenge in criminal law policy today is to assess the actual extent of such alleged harms, the effects in practice of attempting to use criminal sanctions to prevent them, and the poten-
tial advantages of resorting to other methods of social control, such as tax penalties, tort liability, licensing, administrative regulations, or even informal social pressure. Consider those issues with respect to the following problem.

PROBLEM — SEX WORK

An important part of the criminal law is addressed to the behavior of adults who willingly participate in transactions that society wishes to discourage, such as gambling, drug sales, and prostitution. It is common to refer to such
offenses as “victimless” crimes, but this terminology begs a crucial question, because in the eyes of those who support these prohibitions, the conduct is anything but victimless. Prostitution can spread AIDS and venereal disease and can involve
the exploitation and abuse of individuals who are vulnerable because of poverty, drug-dependency, or a host of other factors. Drug use can make some users more dangerous or draw them into predatory crime to support their habit. The extent of
these indirect harms is hotly debated, but crimes of this sort have one characteristic that is distinctive and incontrovertible: Unlike murder, robbery, or rape, they center on a consensual transaction.

Every jurisdiction in the United States (except some counties in Nevada) criminalizes prostitution, but there is a growing movement to decriminalize sex work. Even among those who argue that sex workers should not face criminal
sanctions, however, there remains strong disagreement about whether the purchaser of sex should be subject to prosecution. As you read the following excerpts, consider what are the best strategies for reducing the harms associated with this
activity.

HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH, WHY SEX WORK SHOULD BE DECRIMINALIZED (AUG. 2019): Criminalizing adult, voluntary, and consensual sex — including the commercial exchange of sexual services — is incompatible with the human right to per-
sonal autonomy and privacy. In short — a government should not be telling consenting adults who they can have sexual relations with and on what terms... .

Why does Human Rights Watch support full decriminalization rather than the “Nordic model”? The “Nordic model,” first introduced in Sweden, makes buying sex illegal, but does not prosecute the seller, the sex worker. Proponents of
the Nordic model see “prostitution” as inherently harmful and coerced; they aim to end sex work by killing the demand for transactional sex. Disagreement between organizations seeking full decriminalization of sex work and groups supporting the
Nordic model has been a contentious issue within the women's rights community in many countries and globally.

p50
pst

Human Rights Watch supports full decriminalization rather than the Nordic model because research shows that full decriminalization is a more effective approach to protecting sex workers’ rights. Sex workers themselves also usually
want full decriminalization.


The Nordic model appeals to some politicians as a compromise that allows them to condemn buyers of sex but not people they see as having been forced to sell sex. But the Nordic model actually has a devastating impact on people
who sell sex to earn a living. Because its goal is to end sex work, it makes it harder for sex workers to find safe places to work, unionize, work together and support and protect one another, advocate for their rights, or even open a bank account for
their business. It stigmatizes and marginalizes sex workers and leaves them vulnerable to violence and abuse by police as their work and their clients are still criminalized. .. .

When a sex worker is the victim of a crime, including sexual violence, the police should promptly investigate and refer suspects for prosecution. When a person exchanges sex for money as a result of coercion — for example by a pimp
— of experiences violence from a pimp or a customer, or is a victim of trafficking, these are serious crimes. The police should promptly investigate and refer the case for prosecution.

Sex workers are often exposed to high levels of violence and other abuse or harm, but this is usually because they are working in a criminalized environment. Research by Human Rights Watch and others indicates that decriminalization
can help reduce crime, including sexual violence, against sex workers. . .

NANCY DOWLING & JAYNE BIGELSEN, A BIG MISTAKE ON SEX WORK: REFORMERS WOULD LET BUYERS, PIMPS AND PROMOTERS ESCAPE CRIMINAL CONSEQUENCES, NY. DAILY NEWS, JUNE 5, 2019: Advocates in New York are pushing for the
full decriminalization of prostitution. If successful, people would no longer be arrested or prosecuted for selling, purchasing or facilitating (pimping) the sale of sex. Some are likening this to the decriminalization of marijuana, arguing that prostitu-
tion is a victimless crime and consenting adults should be able to do whatever they want with their own bodies.

We've spent the last decade working [with] homeless youth and trafficking survivors. They have shown us that prostitution is far from a victimless crime, and those who end up selling sex typically have little choice in the matter.

Real choice means making an informed decision not based on an addiction to drugs, domestic violence or coercion from a boyfriend or girlfriend. It means someone must have the mental capacity to make such a decision and not be
suffering with mental illness or PTSD. Finally, true choice means there are real alternatives in an individual's life.

A study conducted last year by The Field Center at the University of Pennsylvania across three major U.S. cities found that approximately one in five homeless young adults have been trafficked or felt they had no choice but to trade sex
for food, shelter or money; 22% were approached by a pimp to sell sex their very first night of homelessness. Of young people who reported engaging in any commercial sex, 54% experienced prior sexual abuse. This study also shows the dispro-
portionate prevalence of tracking among LGBTQ youth; representing 39% of those exploited. .. .

Advocates for full decriminalization . . . want to separate consensual commercial sex from human trafficking, but they do not seem to understand how intrinsically linked the two are. Many of our youth have told us their exploiter was
often the

pst

p52
first person to show them “care and affection,” which can create a bond through trauma. Exploiters alternate between affection and violence, and the exploited person frequently believes that what they are doing is out of love and everything that
follows is therefore consensual.

Meanwhile, the media perniciously portrays sex workers as college-educated white women choosing to sell sex because that is how they prefer to make their money. This may happen occasionally, but . . . we see mostly women of
color, LGBTQ youth and impoverished people being bought by men with both money and a sense of entitlement.

[We support the Nordic model], in which those selling sex aren't criminalized but offered services, and those buying and pimping out others for sex are held accountable. All advocates agree that selling sex should never be grounds for
arrest, . . . [bJut we are baffled as to why those advocating for full decriminalization want buyers and pimps to be given a free pass.

In this age of #MeToo, should anyone be advocating it is okay to purchase another's body, who is almost always poorer and more vulnerable than the buyer? Advocates fighting for full decriminalization say they're promoting progres-
sivism by emphasizing choice to engage in the sex trade, but true progressivism means fighting to end a system that reinforces inequality and serves as a surefire gateway to violence against those most marginalized.

QUESTIONS: How can one assess whether criminalizing the purchase of sex will reduce harm or exacerbate it? There is broad agreement that coercion and other abuse of sex workers is all too common. A recent American Law Institute report
observes:52


Commercial sex trafficking is a grave and widespread form of sexual abuse that has become an increasing focus of law-enforcement concern over the past two decades. The traffickers profit financially by exploiting individ-

uals who are particularly vulnerable, for example because of youth; advanced age; physical or psychological disability; drug addiction; immigration status; flight from civil war, natural disaster, or family violence; and a wide

range of other circumstances that can be exploited for coercive effect. Yet law enforcement faces unusually difficult obstacles. Because the victims often live in fear of deportation or retaliation against themselves or relatives

initiated by those who exploit them, these victims are especially hesitant to seek help from authorities. Even when a trafficking scheme comes to light, effective prosecution can be a daunting challenge because the same cli-

mate of fear leaves victims reluctant to testify.

Those who favor the “Nordic model” believe that punishing the purchaser of sexual services is an effective means to stop abusive practices. As the ALI report explains:52
p82
p53

Trafficking flourishes only in response to the demand for commercial sex, and sanctions targeting the customer can suppress a trafficker’s incentives to supply victims of trafficking on order to meet this demand. Indeed,

demand-side strategies focused on easy-to-deter customers can be more effective and efficient than supply-side efforts to punish hard-to-deter suppliers who reap millions of dollars in profit from their crimes.

Advocates of the Nordic model would rely on the discretion of police and prosecutors to prevent overuse of the criminal sanction.

Those who favor full decriminalization believe that prosecuting the purchaser makes it harder for individuals who voluntarily engage in sex work to earn a living. These advocates support the prosecution of those responsible for sex
trafficking and other coercive practices, but they are unwilling to broadly criminalize the purchase of sex as a means to make those prosecutions easier. A further concern is that holding the purchaser responsible, in effect, for coercion of the sex-
trafficking victim, regardless of the purchaser's knowledge of or direct participation in that part of the abuse, can result in punishment greatly disproportionate to fault. The ALI, for example, ultimately disapproved a federal decision that permits
convicting a purchaser for “sex trafficking” solely on the basis of the act of purchasing sexual services from a trafficked victim.

In the absence of controlled empirical studies that measure harm — which is unfortunately most often how discretionary charging decisions must be made — in which direction should society err? Does the answer depend on how much
trust you have in police and prosecutors to use their discretion to target the most serious cases? If the purchase of sex is criminalized, can some of the worry about overreach be addressed by requiring the government to prove that the buyer was
aware that the sex worker was being coerced?

For a discussion of these issues, you can listen to the following excerpt from NPR’s All Things Considered, available at https://www.npr.org/2019/03/22/705354179/should-sex-work-be-decriminalized-some-activists-say-its-time.

D. ALTERNATIVES TO PUNISHMENT

1. Abolish Prisons? Abolish Punishments?
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

In thinking about whether to extend or rein in the reach of the criminal law, some advocates conclude that questions like whether to criminalize sex work are far too narrow. They argue that even when a person’s conduct causes grave
injury, punishment does much more harm than good. These self-described “abolitionists”

p53


ps8
differ among themselves about whether to drastically reduce the footprint of police and prisons or do away with them entirely. They also differ about what social response should replace police and prisons — whether it should take the form of
milder, more constructive punishments or whether “punishment” should be eliminated altogether. Positions like these once fell far outside the mainstream of American criminal law policy, and to some extent they still do. But the ravages of mass
incarceration, the substantial social and racial inequalities of the American penal system, and the poor results of many previous cycles of penal reform have convinced a growing community of advocates that a thorough-going transformation of law
enforcement in America is imperative. A discussion of the “why” and “what” of punishment would be incomplete without attention to these deeply felt arguments for fundamental change.

‘Awareness of the shortcomings of imprisonment is not new. In the 1960s, Karl Menninger, a prominent psychiatrist and reformer of the mid-twentieth century, wrote (The Crime of Punishment 79, 89 (1968)):

[Prisons are] monuments to stupidity. . . . [Prison] is a creaking, groaning monster through whose heartless jaws hundreds of American citizens grind daily, to be maimed and embittered so that they emerge as implacable

enemies of the social order.

Menninger’s alternative to punishment was psychiatric treatment, a solution that was quickly discovered to present fundamental problems of its own.

Contemporary abolitionists see prisons not only as ineffective and counterproductive, but also as deeply implicated in pervasive social inequities, including structural biases against people of color. They point to the strong historical
connections between criminal laws and efforts to control Black people in America, including the roots of Southern policing in slave patrols, the Black Codes, and convict leasing. Dorothy E. Roberts, Constructing a Criminal Justice System Free of
Racial Bias: An Abolitionist Framework, 39 Colum. Hum. Rts. L. Rev. 261, 262 (2007). The abolitionist Angela Davis makes the more general point that “‘punishment’ does not follow from ‘crime’ in the neat and logical sequence offered by those
who insist on the justice of imprisonment, but rather punishment — primarily through imprisonment (and sometimes death) — is linked to the agendas of politicians, the profit drive of corporations, and media representations of crime.” Davis, Are
Prisons Obsolete? 112 (2003). Instead of a presumption of punishment, abolitionists argue for “the creation of an array of social institutions that would begin to solve the social problems that set people on the track to prison.” Angela Davis, Aboli-
tion Democracy 92 (2005).

Consider the following material on the abolition movement. Do proponents of abolition offer a persuasive account of how society should respond to harm? Would abolition mitigate or aggravate harm to communities of color? If its vision
is persuasive, how much time would be necessary for its aims to be realized? And of particular importance for lawyers and prospective lawyers who will be engaged in criminal law, how should society and its laws address violence, corruption, and
abuses of power during the period until those aims are achieved?

ps8
p55
Mariame Kaba
We Do This ‘Til We Free Us
pp. 2-4, 61 (2021)

Prison industrial complex [PIC] abolition is a political vision, a structural analysis of oppression, and a practical organizing strategy. While some people might think of abolition as primarily a negative project — “Let's tear everything
down tomorrow and hope for the best” — PIC abolition is a vision of a restructured society in a world where we have everything we need: food, shelter, education, health, art, beauty, clean water, and more things that are foundational to our per-
sonal and community safety.

Some people may ask, “Does this mean that I can never call the cops if my life is in serious danger?” Abolition does not center that question. Instead, abolition challenges us to ask “Why do we have no other well-resourced options?”
and pushes us to creatively consider how we can grow, build, and try other avenues to reduce harm. Repeated attempts to improve the sole option offered by the state, despite how consistently corrupt and injurious it has proven itself, will neither
reduce nor address the harm that actually required the call... .


Most people assume that incarceration helps to reduce violence and crime, thinking, “The criminal punishment system might be racist, sexist, classist, ableist, and unfair, but at least it keeps me safe from violence and crime.” Facts and
history tell a different story: Increasing rates of incarceration have minimal impact on crime rates. Research and common sense suggest that economic precarity is correlated with higher crime rates. Moreover, crime and harm are not synonymous.
All that is criminalized isn’t harmful, and all harm isn’t necessarily criminalized. . . .

A world without harm isn’t possible and isn’t what an abolitionist vision purports to achieve. Rather, abolition politics and practice contend that disposing of people by locking them away in jails and prisons does nothing significant to
prevent, reduce, or transform harm in the aggregate. It rarely, if ever, encourages people to take accountability for their actions. . .. At the same time, it allows us to avoid our own responsibilities to hold each other accountable, instead delegating
it to a third party — one that has been built to hide away social and political failures. . ..

IA] system that never addresses the why behind a harm never actually contains the harm itself. Cages confine people, not the conditions that facilitated their harms or the mentalities that perpetuate violence... .

[Wie simply do not know, and cannot know, what the occurrence, prevention, or resolution of harm could look like in our society under more just conditions. So long as the structures that instill desperation are maintained, some people
will be shaped by desperation. And so long as we perpetuate mass criminalization — a security blanket with all the substance of “The Emperor's New Clothes” — we will not know what it would look like to live differently.

AMNA AKBAR, TOWARD A RADICAL IMAGINATION OF LAW, 93 NLY.U. L. REV. 405, 460(2018): Given their historical and contemporary entanglements with anti-Black racism, police cannot be reformed or fixed. The state must be transformed, the
law must be transformed, the police must be eliminated, or at least the[] social and fiscal footprint of police must be considerably diminished, if not eliminated. . .
p55
p56
A core part of this program must be to shift resources from the primary mode of governance of Black people — criminalization — into other social programs, including housing, health care, education, and jobs. All of this must be driven by the
voices and experiences of Black people, especially those who are directly impacted and multiply marginalized. Nothing will change without a change in the power and resources available within, to, and for Black communities.
QUESTIONS: If these writers are correct in diagnosing the deep social and economic roots of inequality and injustice in American law enforcement, what are the solutions? Consider these observations:
LIAT BEN-MOSHE, THE TENSION BETWEEN ABOLITION AND REFORM, in M. NAGEL & A.J. NOCELLA EDS., THE END OF PRISONS: REFLECTIONS FROM THE DECARCERATION MOVEMENT 83-92 (2013): Prison abolitionists view the prison-industrial-
complex as a set of institutional and political relationships that extend well beyond the walls of the prison proper. . . . In this sense the effectiveness of deinstitutionalization as a movement is in ensuring community living, with all needed supports,
not merely in the closure of the institution, which is only a first step.

This ideological stance may create a dilemma. Should proponents of deinstitutionalization wait until there are sufficient community placements before advocating for institutional closure? Or, should they go ahead regardless, on the
principle that no one should live in an institution at any time? [C}losure in itself is still embedded within the same circuits of power that created such institution. [T]here is a danger that other systems with the same goals would arise to fill the void left
by the abolished system. . . . Hence we notice a shift of many prison abolitionist activists and writers, beginning in the 1990s, from promoting prison abolition to conceptualizing penal abolition more broadly. . . . Penal abolitionists believe that. . .
other ways of dealing with problematic behaviors and situations should be practiced.

[There is tension] between abolition and reform. [When reforms] improve the system so it will act more effectively, . .. the system gains strength and abolition becomes more difficult. Examples of [such] reforms . . . include probation and
technological monitoring systems (such as ankle bracelets) which, although [they] ensure that those convicted could live outside of the prisons, further the reach of the penal regime to populations and actions that it had not dealt with before. . ..
By insisting on reforms in the prison, these activists reinforce the system as a whole, so that positive change in the daily lives of prisoners actually perpetuates the power structure that keeps prisons as a viable solution to criminality.

[Another approach] is to excarcerate (i.e. avoid incarceration to begin with) . .. by such steps as abolishing jail for those who cannot make bail... . , creating community conflict resolution centers, establishing community probation
programs, and decriminalizing whole categories such as prostitution, sex related crimes, marijuana, public intoxication and other crimes without victims. . . . The problem of chipping at the margins of the system is that the center remains intact.
Decarceration and excarceration led to deepening a retributive system in programs now billed as alternatives to incarceration, such as boot camps and parole sanctions.

p56
ps7


ALLEGRA M. MCLEOD, ENVISIONING ABOLITION DEMOCRACY, 132 HARV. L. REV. 1613 (2019): Whereas reformist efforts aim to redress extreme abuse or dysfunction in the criminal process without further destabilizing existing legal and social
systems, abolitionist measures recognize justice as attainable only through a more thorough transformation of our political, social, and economic lives. . .. The question, then, became what justice for abolitionists would consist of instead. . . .

Many . . . local projects provide alternative first responders, mediation support, or other forms of mutual aid to those who would otherwise likely be subject to victimization, arrest, possible police violence, or incarceration. In Chicago
and some other major cities, for example, teams of “violence interrupters” . . . work to identify community conflicts likely to escalate into gun violence or other violent assaults. Then mediators, often individuals formerly involved in gangs, intervene
to help resolve or de-escalate disputes. The program is accompanied by ongoing empirical analysis that has demonstrated ... . “statistically significant reductions in violence”. . . . In Eugene, Oregon, [the CAHOOTS program] assists in teams com-
posed of at least one nurse or EMT and one crisis worker in cases of “drug and substance abuse, poverty-related issues, and mental health crises” without involving police. . . .

Of course, not all interpersonal harm will be prevented through these measures; but neither is such harm effectively addressed through existing penal measures. These projects hold more promise than penal measures, however, be-
cause they initiate a shift in resources, values, and political power.

JAMES FORMAN JR., COMMENTS OFFERED AT CRIMINAL JUSTICE ROUNDTABLE, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, MAY 2021: Are there a precise set of commitments that one needs to have made to be an abolitionist? | ask this because I'm afraid this
term gets tossed around in ways that, at least for me, are confusing.

Here are a few concrete examples of how. | moderated a panel with a lawyer who was once incarcerated. One of the students asked the speaker, “Are you an abolitionist?”

He said, “Yes. | think we should try to imagine a world without prisons, which are racist, oppressive, brutal institutions. | don’t believe that world is now, or is likely to come anytime soon. A lot of people in prison are scary, often for no
fault of their own, but they are. But | think we can definitely cut our prison population by 50% if we enact a series of reforms.”

When it was done one of my students came to me angry that | hadn't challenged the speaker — according to my student, the speaker was a reformer, not an abolitionist. | said, “Well 50% would be pretty dramatic.” She pointed out that
his 50% reduction was the same as that advocated by Cut50, supported by Newt Gingrich and Van Jones and other people who were decidedly not, in her view, abolitionists.

Was my student right? | wasn't sure then and am not sure now. Most importantly, I've been struggling with the metrics we should use to decide who is an abolitionist.

Maybe what separates abolitionists from aggressive reformers is how much they want to shrink the system. Paul Butler says in Chokehold that he’s unsure about what to do about the small group of incarcerated people likely to cause
harm to others if released, and suggests we focus on a number, which he says is 80%, that have not

ps7
p58
committed the most severe offenses. So is that it? An 80% reduction makes you an abolitionist whereas 50%, suggested by the speaker | mentioned earlier, doesn’t?

Or maybe the question isn’t the number — maybe it's the time frame. Perhaps to qualify as an abolitionist you must commit to complete abolition by a particular date.

Or maybe this is all missing the point. Perhaps abolition isn’t about a number, or a date, but rather the accompanying analysis. Maybe the dispute is over the function of the criminal system. Perhaps abolitionists believe that our current
system functions to impose an unjust social or racial order whereas reformers believe it functions to redress the harms associated with crime.

What if it does some of both? Nobody actually believes it is all one or all the other. If abolitionists believed it were 100% about imposing an unjust social order and 0% about redressing harms associated with crime then we'd have no
problem saying abolish immediately. We wouldn't have to bother with Butler's 80% now and 20% later.

Maybe, rather than a clear line separating abolitionists from reformers, we should instead think of them as existing on a spectrum.

On one end you have the Manhattan Institute and Bill Barr and the NYPD's Ed Mullins and other defenders of mass incarceration. Then as you move down the spectrum you find Van Jones and Newt Gingrich and a lot of people who
start to identify as reformers. At the other end are people like Mariame Kaba and Amna Akbar and others with the most expansive vision of our ability to shrink the size and scale of our prison/policing system and the strongest conviction that our
current system does not and cannot play any role in responding to harm.

But maybe that’s wrong. Perhaps the boundaries and categories are clearer than I've drawn them. But if that’s the case, those invested in distinguishing abolition from reform need to draw them.


Randall Kennedy
Say It Loud!
pp. xi, 453-459 (2021)

[Professor Kennedy offers, in his words, “the impressions of a Black/Negro/Colored/African American law professor born in Columbia, South Carolina, in 1954, four months after the Supreme Court handed down Brown v. Board of
Education”: Maintaining that [transformation of the penal system] cannot be accomplished without broader change, the proponents of abolition call for nothing less than revolutionary renewal in every sphere of American life — political, socioeco-
nomic, and cultural. . . . They generally disavow compromise aimed at winning over adversaries or fence-sitters. They harbor a thoroughgoing disgust toward the status quo and a profound disappointment with previous efforts at racial reform. . . .

[M)he term “abolition” is in itself a problem. [A]nti-slavery abolitionists demanded the immediate and unconditional cessation of enslavement. They sought its prohibition because slavery was unequivocally evil and served no good social
function. The same cannot be said of prisons or the police. [Both] institutions . . . serve useful social functions. . .. Prisons house convicted inmates who have hurt society by injuring victims absent justification or excuse. They are confined to

p58
p59
prevent further criminality, to deter others who might be inclined to transgress the boundaries of criminal law, and to impose punishment. . . .

America is disgraced by the barbarity, the hyper-punitiveness, and obvious inequities in its system of criminal justice. . .. Justice requires that arbitrariness, prejudice, and cruelty be removed from such agencies. But that is a project of
reform, not abolition.

Some abolitionists insist that the number of people who can properly be confined against their will for the safety of the community is much smaller than is usually realized. Let's grant that . .. some fraction of the incarcerated population
is unjustifiably imprisoned. What about the rest — the several thousands (probably the tens of thousands) of prisoners who did in fact engage in serious, violent criminal encroachments — murder, robbery, assault, rape? Is it wrong to detain them
for at least some period of time? [A]lmost everyone will concede that at least under some circumstances confining someone against their will is required for the social good. . ..

Many prison abolitionists. . . . awkwardly admit that they do not actually favor unlocking all prison gates right away. . . . But if massive shrinkage is what they really seek, . . . as opposed to abolition, why not say so? . . . “Abolition” has
a dramatic, absolutistic ring to it. “Shrinking” the imprint of prisons is less alluring. It is also partly a matter of wanting to avoid conceding openly that at least to some extent prisons do serve a useful social function.

A similar argument obtains with respect to police abolition. .. . It is imperative that police be scrutinized more and regulated more closely and effectively. But some agency cloaked with the authority to use force in support of legitimate
social norms is required to protect people against marauders, to apprehend criminal predators, and to perform other essential tasks. Need is especially acute among those dependent upon public as opposed to private protective services. Some
abolitionists who insist that they really do want to eliminate police altogether regrettably deny or minimize the very real problem posed by violent criminality, especially in vulnerable neighborhoods. . . .

This aspiration is so far-fetched that it lacks the plausibility needed to gain substantial political traction. No political movement can do away with human evil and thus moot the necessity for protection against it. ... | am not claiming that
police and prisons can ensure our safety. . .. There are limits to what any system of criminal law enforcement can accomplish. But by seeking to apprehend, detain, deter, and punish lawbreakers, society signals a profound disapproval of criminal
encroachment upon others. That signal is rendered all too indistinct by abolitionist theorists.

[The abolitionists underestimate both the social misery imposed by criminality and the extent to [policing, prosecutions, and prisons reduce] that misery. It is true that blacks are victimized by racism in the enforcement of law. But it is
also true that blacks are victimized by racism in the under-enforcement of law. . . . This is a facet of social injustice to which abolitionists often give short shrift (at least when the victimizers of blacks are other civilian blacks). [AJn effective response
to the uniquely deadly scourge of violent criminality that menaces so many poor African Americans will entail “a commitment to guaranteeing meaningful work . . . and crucial public services] . . .a more responsible gun policy and . . . [a] roll back

p59
p60
[of] America’s disastrous investment in punitive control of black communities.” [Blut the ineradicable presence of some criminality will require the indispensable presence of some police and prisons.


In part because of abolitionism, localities across the country are already benefiting from reforms in the administration of criminal law... . More and deeper reforms will hopefully ensue. Abolitionism has erred, however, in choosing to
target for erasure (actually or even only rhetorically) public institutions that are essential. If the racial promised land for abolitionism is a polity devoid of police or prisons, it . .. has no likelihood of realization and a great likelihood of generating a ret-
rograde reaction.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. The issues in dispute. (a) Who is an abolitionist? Abolitionists often speak in absolutist terms — that prisons need to be abolished, not merely reformed. But even abolitionists acknowledge this cannot happen immediately
because of structural changes that need to go along with it. Professor Forman thus raises several critical questions of timing and scope when defining the abolition movement. Do abolitionists have sufficient answers to Professor Forman’s defini-
tional questions?

(b) Strategy and tactics. Abolitionists and Professor Kennedy disagree across a range of issues. One is the question of political effectiveness. Kennedy thinks the terminology and end goal of abolition will backfire and undermine
needed reform. Abolitionists, for their part, believe incremental reforms will always fall short, in part because many of those reforms are based on the assumption that the failures with American criminal law and punishment stem from biased en-
forcement decisions and fail to recognize the importance of underlying social, political, and economic arrangements that generate inequality. Abolitionists think that incremental reforms will always tinker around the edges of deeper problems that
require radical restructuring, whereas skeptics think that incremental reforms are the only ones that stand a chance of being realized.

Alec Karakatsanis puts this part of the abolitionist argument as follows (Karakatsanis, The Punishment Bureaucracy: How to Think About “Criminal Justice Reform,” 128 Yale L.J. F. 848, 851 (2019):

The conventional wisdom is that there is an emerging consensus that the criminal legal system is “broken.” But the system is “broken” only to the extent that one believes its purpose is to promote the well-being of all mem-

bers of our society. If the function of the modem punishment system is to preserve racial and economic hierarchy through brutality and control, then its bureaucracy is performing well.

(c) What's the alternative? A second point of disagreement between abolitionists and reformers is whether abolition can offer a viable alternative to prisons and police. This is a particularly difficult challenge because advanced soci-
eties throughout the world rely on policing and incarceration in various forms, and there is no existing model of an alternative that abolishes them outright.

Abolitionists argue that more effort needs to be placed on preventing crime in the first place through investment in affordable housing, education, public

p60

p61
health, nutrition, mental health, a living wage, and a redistribution of resources.®2 In response to the harmful activity that remains, abolitionists suggest addressing any underlying conditions that may have led to the situation. For an example of
how this works in the context of substance abuse, poverty-related issues, and mental health crises, abolitionists often point to Eugene, Oregon's CAHOOTS program, discussed in the McLeod excerpt, supra. CAHOOTS serves as an alternative
publicly-funded first-responder operated through a central city ambulance dispatch. Teams composed of at least one nurse or EMT and one crisis worker can intervene, without involving the police, to support people who are homeless and other
populations otherwise subject to frequent police contact, arrest, and incarceration.°2

In response to violent crime, including sexual violence, abolitionists suggest “transformative justice,” which seeks to “build support and more safety for the person harmed, figure out how the broader context was set up for this harm to
happen, and how that context can be changed so that this harm is less likely to happen again.” In one instance where transformative justice was implemented, for example, a sexual assault survivor asked her assaulter to publicly acknowledge
the harm he had caused, and to commit to political education about consent.£5

(d) Deep structural change? A third source of disagreement involves the viability of the structural and philosophical changes that abolitionists consider necessary to realize their vision. McLeod, for example, calls for “democratizing
political and economic institutions so as to prevent and respond to the highly unequal distribution of resources and life chances.”°° Many abolitionists believe that capitalism itself must fall for abolition to succeed. Consider Bernard E. Harcourt, On
the New Abolitionism (manuscript, Mar. 31, 2021):


[M)his new abolitionism militates not just for the abolition of repressive institutions like the police and prisons, but also, more broadly, in favor of new forms of codperation: the common thread in these intersectional-identi-

tarian social movements and their writings today is an ethic of care, of codperation, of mutual aid. In their more radical expressions, the objective reaches to the abolition of the institutions and practices of neoliberal racial

capitalism and the instantiation of a new society based on codperation.

2. Questions. (a) Foundational or incremental change? Many abolitionists seek a dramatic shift in the current American social order — including the dismantling of capitalism and reorientation of personal values in a more coopera-
tive direction. Are these politically achievable ends? If abolition depends on “an ethic of care, of cooperation, of mutual aid,” can that occur in a country currently as

p61

p62
divided along political and other lines as America is? Are abolitionists right that such ambitious steps are necessary to cure the injustices of America’s current penal system? If so, does that conclusion support or undercut the viability of the aboli-
tionist agenda?

Is there a framework where abolition can succeed without major changes to America’s commitment to capitalism or individualism? If the root of the problem with criminal punishment in America is its long history of racial bias and op-
pression, does that suggest this movement cannot succeed until those very same biases are overcome such that there is sufficient support for an abolition movement to succeed?

Ifa fundamental reordering of American society is not achievable (or not desirable), is it nevertheless useful to frame the goal in these terms? Or does using abolitionist language risk losing political support that might otherwise exist
for reforms that are consistent with the abolitionist agenda, such as viewing prison as a last resort or transferring some functions that currently reside with the police to other actors better suited to deal with social issues (such as mental health
professionals)?

(b) What about crimes that do not stem from structural deprivation? What is the right response under an abolition framework to opportunistic crimes typically driven by greed or the lust for power, such as white-collar crime,
environmental harms, and political corruption? Are abolitionist arguments grounded primarily in objections to the cruelty and counterproductive character of prison for any convicted person, or do those arguments largely apply only to people
whose misconduct is primarily a product of deprivation or discrimination?

What is the abolitionist answer to Professor Kennedy's point that “no political movement can do away with human evil”? Few people doubt that there are intractable situations and mental health issues that cannot be solved even with
substantial economic, social, and psychological investments. Since harmful activity cannot be prevented entirely, even with the kinds of interventions that McLeod and others describe, what is to be done when harms do occur? Does Kaba’s claim
that “we simply do not know, and cannot know, what the occurrence, prevention, or resolution of harm could look like in our society under more just conditions” mean that adopting abolition would to some extent require a leap of faith?

(©) Abolition and traditional theories of punishment. Can the abolitionist vision of justice be reconciled with traditional theories of punishment? To the extent abolitionists seek approaches to crime that better achieve public safety,
they fall within a utilitarian tradition (though one can ask whether they will in fact achieve those goals). Can abolition be reconciled with the retributive function of punishment? On the one hand, one might see abolition’s emphasis on structural
forces as suggesting that individuals do not deserve punishment because forces outside themselves are responsible. On the other hand, abolitionists recognize that individuals must account for the harms they cause, even if abolitionists do not
believe that this accounting should include prison. So, in that sense, abolitionists do acknowledge some level of individual responsibility. In an abolitionist framework, what are the available means for expressing social condemnation and assuring
that people who engage in criminal behavior adequately acknowledge their responsibility?

p62
p63

One scholar has attempted to answer this last question. Rafi Reznik, Retributive Abolitionism, 24 Berkeley J. Crim. L. 123 (2019), argues that retribution can be pursued in an abolitionist framework by imposing non-carceral sanctions on
people who engage in criminal behavior. Such sanctions, Reznik argues, might involve the deliberate and measured imposition of what scholars currently deem “collateral consequences.” Thus, “{tJhe abolition of prisons ought to be conceptually
tied to embracing collateral consequences as the primary, and justified, punitive response to crime. . . . The goal is to treat [people who cause harm] as fellow citizens deserving of flourishing lives within a political community, but also deserving of
hard treatment imposed by this community when they commit an offense.” Mariame Kaba, similarly, cites options for expressing social condemnation without incarceration: requiring people who harm others to forgo financial gain, provide labor to


those harmed, make public apology, and accept restrictions on their access to specific groups or spaces. Kaba is quick to note, however, that “any consequences should be determined in direct relationship to the harm done and should involve
input by people impacted by the harm.” Kaba, supra, at 137.

Are collateral consequences like these suitable as punishments? Are they preferable to imprisonment? How can restrictions on someone’s access to groups and spaces not devolve into shaming, ostracism, or radical limitations on the
affected person’s ability to lead a flourishing life?

Many measures of these kinds have a long and not altogether attractive history. Providing labor to those harmed is not identical to the widely condemned systems of convict labor that emerged in the Jim Crow South after the Civil War,
but it could lead to many comparable abuses. Restrictions on permitted places of residency and employment already are commonly imposed on persons convicted of a sexual offense, and there is strong evidence that these measures have se-
verely negative impacts on those subject to them, along with criminogenic consequences that make them dangerous for public safety.&2 For a discussion of similar difficulties with respect to shaming punishments, see pp. 1104-1114 infra.

Should these consequences be pursued for retributive purposes even if they undermine utilitarian goals because they fuel recidivism, for example, by limiting the affected person’s ability to reside in public housing? If these conse-
quences come at the cost of public safety, are they worth risking solely to satisfy the victim's and society's desire for some kind of hard treatment in response to crime?

(d) Immediate concerns. Even if abolition is a promising long-term solution, how should the legal system and attorneys working within it respond to crime in the interim period before abolition’s social and institutional reforms can bear
fruit?

p63
p64
2. Restorative Justice

Many abolitionists, along with many who reject their ambitious agenda, embrace “restorative justice” and “transformative justice” as alternative models of accountability that can avoid both incarceration and other traditional forms of
punishment. Restorative justice is an alternative to the adversarial process that seeks to address harm by bringing together those affected by it — the alleged perpetrator, the victim, and the community — to collaboratively discuss and agree upon
how to repair the damage caused. Transformative justice “is a community-based approach to responding to violence or interpersonal harm that works . . . to ‘build support and more safety for the person harmed, figure out how the broader context
was set up for this harm to happen, and how that context can be changed so that this harm is less likely to happen again.””68 Transformative justice focuses on underlying structural drivers of crime, such as poverty, failing schools, and discrimi-
nation. The two models can work together, with restorative-justice encounters including a discussion of the broader structural forces that may have contributed to the crime at issue, while still requiring the perpetrator of the crime to acknowledge
responsibility. The restorative agreement that sets out what the perpetrator of the harm must do to remedy its effects can also account for transformative justice issues by making sure not to impose unreasonable burdens on someone already fac-
ing difficult circumstances and by providing access to needed social services. See Adriaan Lanni, Taking Restorative Justice Seriously, 69 Buff. L. Rev. 635, 672-673 (2021).

Although many abolitionists endorse these models, one need not be an abolitionist to support a restorative or transformative justice framework. And conversely, some abolitionists oppose “restorative” justice. As Professor Ben-Moshe
puts it (Ben-Moshe, supra, at 89), “The ‘justice’ system uses the language of healing and restorative justice but without implementing the necessary changes that will alter the system from within . . . restoring does not deal with the structural in-
equalities that lead to injustice.”

The specific details of different restorative-justice programs vary; Thalia Gonzalez’s comprehensive study, The State of Restorative Justice in American Criminal Law, 2020 Wis. L. Rev. 1147, 1174-1178, 1185, describes what it most
commonly looks like currently. Forty-five states and the District of Columbia have codified some version of restorative justice into their law enforcement process. The dominant model is a mediation, in which the victim and alleged perpetrator sit
down with a trained mediator to discuss the harm allegedly done, the thoughts and feelings of both parties, and methods of reconciliation.©2 The victim must agree to

p64
p65


participate, but jurisdictions vary in terms of whether the perpetrator's participation is voluntary or mandatory. Even if the victim elects restorative justice, in the overwhelming majority of jurisdictions — 96 percent — some state actor (typically a
prosecutor or judge) must also agree. Most often restorative justice is offered pretrial and if completed successfully takes the place of traditional forms of punishment such as incarceration. But some jurisdictions use restorative justice as a part of
probation, parole, and reentry programs, so in that framework it does not necessarily replace incarceration or other traditional criminal sanctions like fines.

The cases in which restorative justice is used in America overwhelmingly involve minor offenses, and in most jurisdictions it is not available in cases of violent crime. Lanni, supra, at 637. In countries where restorative justice is more
widely available, it is often used to address violent misconduct, at least for juveniles and for adults not previously convicted of an offense. Studies show that even in these circumstances, victims of violence who participated in restorative justice
reported feeling more secure and with a greater sense of closure than victims who used the traditional criminal process. With respect to the deterrent effects of restorative justice compared to imprisonment in cases involving violent crime or other
offenses serious enough to involve a potential prison sentence, evidence is sparse but not discouraging.

One reason restorative justice is not more widely used in America, despite positive views of those who have participated in it, is that prosecutors, who play the key gatekeeping role, tend to be skeptical of it. This is due to many factors,
including the heavy demands on time and money that come with setting up and using restorative-justice programs, and the unproven nature of these programs (including a potential inability to use them at scale). Resistance to restorative justice
also reflects broader philosophical disagreements about moving away from the adjudicative process and from incapacitation and retribution as central purposes of punishment, particularly in cases involving serious harms. See Bruce A. Green &
Lara Bazelon, Restorative Justice from Prosecutors’ Perspective, 88 Fordham L. Rev. 2287, 2297-2299 (2020).

The movement to elect more reform-oriented prosecutors, however, might be changing some of those leanings, as many newly elected progressive district attorneys have expanded restorative-justice options in their jurisdictions. Id.
at 2287-2288. Nevertheless, these programs still remain limited to relatively minor offenses. And even its most ardent supporters concede that restorative justice will not work in every case. See Danielle Sered, Until We Reckon: Violence, Mass
Incarceration, and a Road to Repair 133 (2019). Restorative justice is not an option in cases where the perpetrator does not accept responsibility, nor would it seem appropriate for repeat offenders who demonstrate that they cannot be deterred by
restorative-justice processes. Lanni, supra, at 677.

It is also unclear whether restorative justice can be used at scale given how resource intensive it is. Lanni, supra, at 658-659, describes the process as follows:

Effective encounters are time-consuming and highly individualized, requiring extensive preparation and improvisation to win the trust of the participants and meet the needs of the parties. Well-trained, experienced, and

highly-motivated facilitators are critical. Maintaining high quality while expanding restorative justice to a large volume of cases presents

p65
p66

several challenges, including recruiting and training scores of facilitators, resisting the pressure to emphasize speed and efficiency in processing cases, and securing sufficient funding to give due attention to each case.

Because restorative justice is so resource intensive, it tends to be employed in wealthier jurisdictions that can afford it. Other factors add to this tendency for bias in the use of restorative justice, as Lanni, supra, at 669, explains:

Because restorative justice often involves discretion by many actors, expanding restorative justice has the potential to re-create existing racial and class biases in the administration of criminal justice. Wealthier communities

may be in a better position to provide restorative programs with funding and volunteer support. Discretionary decisions by police, prosecutors, and restorative justice providers to refer certain offenders to restorative justice

may be affected by explicit and implicit biases. The informality of restorative processes may allow differences in socioeconomic status and education among participants to influence outcomes. And the process may not fully

acknowledge underlying social and economic conditions that may reduce the offender's individual responsibility.

Studies of restorative justice in America show that it has been disproportionately used for whiter and older defendants, compared to the overall population of defendants charged with crimes, so white offenders are disproportionately
avoiding incarceration or getting lower sentences as a result. Joseph L.D. Kennedy et al., Long-Term Effectiveness of a Brief Restorative Justice Intervention, 63 Int'l J. Offender Therapy & Compar. Criminology 3, 7 tbl. 1 (2019). See also Nancy
Rodriguez, Restorative Justice, Communities, and Delinquency: Whom Do We Reintegrate, 4 Criminology & Pub. Pol'y 103, 119 (2005). The use of restorative-justice programs in schools shows a similarly disturbing pattem, with restorative prac-
tices used less frequently in schools with larger percentages of Black students. Alison Ann Payne & Kelly Welch, Restorative Justice in Schools: The Influence of Race on Restorative Discipline, 47 Youth & Soc. 539 (2015).


A further concern is the potential for “net widening”: Restorative justice can seem attractive when it is assumed to be an alternative to imprisonment. But often these programs do not replace imprisonment with less restrictive forms of
state control, because many prosecutors and victims reject the restorative-justice path in cases likely to involve incarceration. Instead, restorative-justice programs often tend to extend restrictive forms of state control to persons who otherwise
would not be charged or prosecuted at al. In effect, instead of diverting people out of prison, restorative justice can in effect divert people into the penal system, the opposite of its intended objective. To the extent this dynamic is occurring, the
net widening might be applying to a disproportionately whiter and older pool of defendants.

QUESTIONS: Restorative and transformative justice models critically depend on victim and community support and agreement. What should occur if people impacted by the harm disagree on what consequences should follow or prefer a much
harsher approach than what restorative justice offers? Is it likely that restorative justice will be expanded to crimes involving the most serious harms? Can restorative justice be used alongside more traditional forms of punishment like incarceration
as a way to reduce periods of incarceration if not eliminating them entirely?
p66
p.67
E. THE RELEVANT INSTITUTIONAL ACTORS

Separate from the preceding substantive questions — whether and how much to rely on criminal law and punishment — is the issue of who should make the controlling decision in any given case. Even if our substantive criminal laws
are justified in the abstract, those laws must be applied in the real world, by real — and inevitably fallible — people. It thus becomes critical to understand these institutional actors and the constraints under which they operate. Four characteristics
of our penal system are especially salient.

First, the agencies of criminal justice must deal with what is, by any measure, a high volume of cases. As a result, although the mission of the criminal process is to deliver carefully individualized justice, in practice “the process is in fact
one of mass production."2° The FBI estimates that more than 10 million arrests were made in 2019.7! Even after these cases are narrowed to defendants who are formally charged, convicted, and sentenced to incarceration, the volume of cases
is staggering. In 2020, prisons admitted 600,000 people for felony offenses. There is an even higher volume of misdemeanor cases in any given year. Jurisdictions vary in how they define misdemeanors, but these are less serious offenses that
typically cannot be punished by more than a year of incarceration, a sentence that is usually served in a local jail as opposed to a state prison. Each year, an estimated 13 million people are charged with misdemeanor offenses that can range from
simple assault (including instances of intimate partner violence without serious bodily injury), DUI, and resisting arrest to petty theft, possession of marijuana, public intoxication, and even jaywalking.?2 People with misdemeanor convictions make
up roughly 25 percent of the jail population on any given day. Even worse, roughly three-quarters of the people in jail on any given day have not been convicted of anything; they are being held pending trial.73 People went to jail 10.6 million times
in 2020. Another 3.6 million people were on probation and 840,000 on parole.”

Second, the agencies of criminal justice face a chronic shortage of resources and personnel, insufficient to come anywhere close to prosecuting all possible criminal violations or giving the staggeringly large number of cases already in
the system close individualized attention. When it comes to the question of resources for prosecution, it may well be that the goal should not be to prosecute every criminal offense or anything close to it. Calls for defunding the police are targeted
precisely to the idea that resource constraints can help reduce the carceral state

p.67

p68
so that the money saved can be channeled to other community investments like education and mental health resources.” But as long as resources remain insufficient to bring all possible actions, there will be pressure for a mass-production
approach, and inevitably there will be a high degree of selectivity in choosing the individuals who will be arrested, charged, convicted, and sentenced at the highest available levels. Indeed, reducing the funding available to police and prosecutors
will mandate an even higher degree of selectivity in deciding whom to arrest and prosecute.


Third, that selection process operates through the exercise of broad, largely unguided and largely uncontrolled discretion. Within police departments, decisions about what crimes to target and which individuals to arrest, particularly for
offenses without identifiable victims, such as narcotics and so-called quality of life offenses like loitering, are often left to the personal judgment of the police officer on the beat. Within the prosecutor's office, charging decisions are often left to the
personal judgment of the assistant district attorney assigned to the case, subject to guidance and review that is extensive in some offices but virtually nonexistent in others. Even when there is higher-level guidance, the head prosecutor has broad
discretion to decide which cases to prioritize, meaning there is wide variation from district to district. See pp. 84-89 infra. The result is wide variation in the treatment of similarly situated offenders, and outcomes are determined by many consider-
ations extraneous to the formal criteria of the law on the books.

Fourth, public opinion often affects the way this discretion is exercised; criminal law in the United States is highly politicized. In most jurisdictions, the head prosecutor and the judges are chosen by popular election, as are sheriffs who
often control policing and jails at the county level. For most of the past four decades, criminal law was a high-profile political issue and anyone running for office — whether as a sheriff, prosecutor, judge, legislator, mayor, governor, or president —
took pains to avoid the label of being soft on crime. Criminal law remains an important issue for voters, but being tough-on-crime is no longer the winning strategy in all elections. The Black Lives Matter Movement and concerns with mass incarcer-
ation have changed the political calculus in some important contexts. Many policing reforms passed in the wake of racial justice protests during the summer of 2020,7° and district-attorney races in dozens of locations have seen candidates win on
commitments to reduce incarceration, address racial inequality, and be smarter in the approach to crime.77

It remains unclear how far this trend will reach. While some important policing reforms have materialized, others have stalled, and there has been a backlash to some of these efforts. Many of the DAs elected on progressive platforms
are facing resistance from other elected leaders and attorneys within their offices when they

p68
p69
try to implement reforms.78 Moreover, many politicians still view the tough-on-crime posture as the winning electoral strategy.

Another important development has been legislation rolling back some exceptionally punitive laws, but reforms at the legislative level have largely targeted the low-hanging fruit of excessive sentences for nonviolent conduct. At the
current pace of legislative change, it would take 75 years to reduce the prison population by 50 percent.” Elected officials still see dividends in proposing tough new criminal laws and criticizing opponents for being soft on crime.

The United States is unique in placing such weight on the views of voters in setting criminal justice policies:°2

Compared with the criminal justice systems of many other developed countries, the U.S. system is more susceptible to the influence of “short-term emotionalism” and partisan and interest group politics. . .. Because of

the nation’s system of frequent legislative elections, dispersed governmental powers, and election of judges and prosecutors, policy makers tend to be susceptible to public alarms about crime and drugs and vulnerable to

pressures from the public and political opponents to quickly enact tough legislation. [Prosecutors and judges] are typically mindful of the political environment in which they function. . . . In contrast, prosecutors and judges

in many European countries are career civil servants who have evolved a distinctive occupational culture with a less punitive orientation, partly as a result of differences in legal training and career paths between the United

States and European countries.

With these dynamics in mind, consider the structures of criminal justice administration described in the following Notes and how the incentives of individuals charged with particular roles affect the ways that criminal law actually oper-
ates in practice.2.

NOTES

1. Multiple jurisdictions. References to our penal “system” are in some ways a misnomer. America has no single “system” for criminal law enforcement. There are some 40,000 independent police departments, roughly one for every

city and town in the nation. More than 3,000 counties have elected sheriffs in charge of their
p69


p.70
police departments, but most urban police departments are led by chiefs of police who are typically appointed by a mayor, who in turn is elected by the voters of the municipality. The chief prosecutor typically is not appointed by or responsible
to the mayor. The prosecutor is usually an independent elected official, who may or may not represent the same political party as the mayor. Either way, prosecutors may be their mayor's political rival, and in most instances, they are elected by
the voters of the county, a constituency that may be larger (as in the Chicago area) or smaller (as in New York City) than the constituency that elects the mayor. Judges are often elected on a countywide basis, but sometimes they are appointed
by the governor of the state. The agencies responsible for punishment and corrections are similarly fractured. Probation services and jails are typically run and paid for by the county, but prisons and parole systems are run and paid for by the state.

In practice, penal authority is even more dispersed and decentralized than this oversimplified picture suggests. State governments have their own police forces (state troopers), many cities have independent police agencies with spe-
cialized missions (transit police, housing police), and most cities and states have independent prosecuting authorities with specialized mandates (a city department for municipal code enforcement, a state attorney general's office).

Alongside all of this, and entirely independent of it, is the powerful engine of federal law enforcement. The federal process (again, it would be an exaggeration to call it a “system”) has its own complement of prosecutors (U.S. Attorneys
appointed by the President and centrally supervised, to a degree, by the Department of Justice), independent judges (appointed for life terms by the President, on the advice and consent of the Senate), and correctional authorities (the U.S. Pro-
bation Service, responsible to the courts, and the Federal Bureau of Prisons, within the Department of Justice). For its police force, the federal government of course has the FBI, responsible to the Department of Justice, but that is not all: Also of
great importance are the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), also in the Department of Justice; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) in the Treasury Department; the bureaus of Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and Immi-
gration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in the Department of Homeland Security; and the Enforcement Division of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for certain white-collar offenses — to name only a few.

America’s penal system, in short, is extremely decentralized. Many view the uncoordinated, overlapping, and conflicting responsibilities of its various agencies as inefficient and even irrational. Others view the same chaotic arrangement
as a valuable mechanism for preventing the accumulation and centralization of power, with its accompanying dangers of abuse. As one commentator observes:

These decision-makers often have incompatible incentives, different policy agendas, and only very partial control over ultimate outcomes, given the power of other parties to effectively undermine or otherwise respond to

decisions made elsewhere in the system. The diversity of offices and agencies, and the inevitable division of powers and functions among them, might be all for the best. Or it might not. In any case, it seems mostly to have

developed by accident, and to be subject to no meaningful centralized oversight.

p.70

p.7t
Vincent Chiao, Criminal Law in the Age of the Administrative State 22 (2018). Whatever its merits or demerits, extreme decentralization is and will remain a dominant fact of life in American criminal law. As a Presidential Commission stated in
1967:52

What most significantly distinguishes the system of one country from that of another is the extent and the form of the protections it offers individuals in the process of determining guilt and imposing punishment. Our system

of justice deliberately sacrifices much in efficiency and even in effectiveness in order to preserve local autonomy and to protect the individual.

That said, the agencies and institutions of law enforcement are also highly interdependent. Police, prosecutors, courts, and correctional agencies inevitably interact. The results of police effort — suspects arrested — are passed on to
prosecutors for the filing of charges, those charged move into the judicial system for adjudication, and those convicted and sentenced become the responsibility of probation services, jails, and prisons. For these reasons, efforts to address prob-
lems in one of these agencies are likely to fail if they do not take into account the repercussions of reform on all the others.

2. The police. To an important extent, crimes are defined, in practice, by the police officer on the beat. Because officers cannot possibly arrest all the offenders they encounter, they must decide which scuffles warrant an arrest for
assault. They must decide when juveniles responsible for vandalism should be arrested rather than merely warned or taken home to their parents. Sometimes the police chief or precinct captain sets guidelines. More often, the decision is made ad
hoc by the individual officer. It may or may not be the same as the decisions made in similar circumstances by other officers or even by the same officer at other times. In some jurisdictions, police have the still greater power to file criminal charges
and handle those cases in court. They act, in other words, as the prosecutor. This is true in hundreds of misdemeanor courts in at least 14 states. Alexandra Natapoff, When the Police Become Prosecutors, N.Y. Times, Dec. 26, 2018.


3. Prosecutors. In most jurisdictions, the decision whether there is sufficient evidence to send a case to trial is initially made by the prosecutor. Although that judgment must be approved by a judge at a preliminary hearing or by a
grand jury, these steps are largely formalities, because of the low level of proof required at those stages. The grand jury and the preliminary-hearing judge almost always ratify the prosecutor's decision. As a result, the prosecutor wields enormous
power, deciding whether to press charges or drop a case, whether to file the most serious charges or lesser offenses, and whether to reduce the charges after they are filed.

Yet many prosecutors serve only part-time, while conducting a private law practice on the side. And whether full-time or part-time, prosecutors generally are elected on a partisan political basis and serve for relatively short terms.
Often the position serves as a stepping-stone to higher political office. Only the federal government and four states (Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, and New Jersey) choose their chief prosecutors by appointment. The system of choosing chief
prosecutors

p.7t
p.72
by popular election (rather than by professional training and advancement) is a distinctively American practice, virtually unknown elsewhere in the world.

Large cities always have a chief prosecutor employed full-time and a large staff of full-time assistants, but 15 percent of American jurisdictions do not have a full-time chief prosecutor, and a majority of prosecutors’ offices only employ
three or fewer full-time assistant prosecutors.°2

4, Defense counsel. Only about 20 percent of criminal defendants have the means to hire their own lawyers, so the kind of defense representation commonly seen in civil litigation is the exception on the criminal side. Five distinct
criminal-defense systems are in use — two for defendants who can afford to retain counsel and three for those who cannot.

(a) Non-indigent defendants. In the approach most analogous to representation in major tort and contract suits, a defendant of substantial means retains a highly experienced attorney (or team of attorneys), agreeing to compensate
them on an hourly basis or paying up front a substantial retainer (often in the range of $100,000 or more). This approach is often used in white-collar and political-corruption cases, but overall it is the rare exception, even for the minority of defen-
dants who can afford to retain counsel at all.

Far more common for these non-indigent defendants is a second system, in which a person with limited financial resources retains an attorney by paying in advance a modest fee (a few hundred or a few thousand dollars) that will
constitute the lawyer's sole compensation. Because rules of court typically prevent a retained attorney from withdrawing from a case once an appearance is entered, the lawyer’s compensation under this approach remains identical, regardless of
whether the defendant quickly accepts a guilty plea offer, prefers to negotiate at length, or seeks to present an elaborate defense at trial. Attorneys who defend cases under this arrangement must manage their ethical obligation to provide vigorous
representation along with their personal need to avoid strategies that require large amounts of uncompensated time.

(b) Indigent defendants. The three systems in common use for indigent defendants share one common characteristic: All of them deny defendants any say in choosing their counsel. Under each system a judge, court administrator, or
some other official makes the choice, and the indigent defendant must either accept the lawyer who has been selected or agree to proceed without professional assistance.°4

p72
p73

One common approach is the appointed counsel system: A judge or court official selects defense counsel from a list of attorneys in private practice. The system of conscripting these lawyers to serve “pro bono,” without compensation,
still exists in a few jurisdictions but is now rare. Instead, appointed attorneys typically are compensated at a fixed hourly rate up to a predetermined maximum. The maximum usually is higher for felonies than for misdemeanors, but it usually is not
higher for complex cases that go to trial than for simple cases that plead out quickly.

In a second approach, the contract system, a lawyer or group of lawyers in private practice agree that over the course of a year, in return for a substantial retainer paid by the government, they will represent a specified number of indi-
gent criminal defendants along with their own paying clients. Again, the attorney's compensation for the indigent defense work remains independent of the time and effort spent on the representation.


Finally, in the defender system, often used in the larger cities, an agency funded by the city, county, or state (sometimes with partial support from private sources) represents most or all criminal defendants in the jurisdiction. Its staff
attorneys are paid an annual salary and usually serve full-time. As a result, they are not under personal financial pressure to control the time spent on individual cases, and many defender offices are organized to permit a team of attorneys, social
workers, and investigators to work intensively on felony jury trials and other high-stakes cases. Many defender offices, however, have high caseloads and strong pressures for staff attorneys to budget their time carefully.

5. Judges. The mechanism for selecting judges varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, and some states use different methods of selection for appellate judges than for lower court judges. In 21 states, appellate judges are chosen by
popular election. In 29 states, appellate judges are initially appointed either by the governor or the legislature; in 16 of these states, appellate judges must run for election after serving their first term. Only 22 states appoint lower court judges, and
10 states require that they be elected for subsequent terms.°5 Thus, in the great majority of states, judges must stand for election at some point. In some states, a nonpartisan screening committee identifies well-qualified candidates, but that
safeguard of competence and quality is not in widespread use, nor is it always effective in jurisdictions where it exists. Political party influence and, more recently, expensive television advertising are widely used in the effort to achieve electoral
success. These ads increasingly focus on judges’ records in criminal cases, with 56 percent of the ads in 2013-2014 focused on criminal law.2° In 2015-2016, outside groups

p73

p74
spent nearly $20 million on TV ads in races for state supreme court justices, up 44 percent from 2011-2012.87 Studies show that elected judges impose harsher sentences the closer they are to their reelection, thus reflecting their view that harsher
sentences are more appealing to voters.°° Among Western democracies, the United States is virtually unique in selecting its judges predominantly by popular election.22 And whether by appointment or election, these judges are drawn dispropor-
tionately from the ranks of prosecutors. On the federal bench, the ratio of former prosecutors to former criminal defense attorneys is 4 to 1.22 State supreme courts are similarly dominated by former prosecutors.

Congestion, delay, and hasty decisions when a case is finally ready for disposition are especially common in the lower criminal courts where misdemeanors and “petty offenses” are handled. These courts process the overwhelming
majority of offenses and offenders, yet they are chronically understaffed. In many jurisdictions, judges in the lower courts must handle a hundred cases or more in a single day. Observers report that speed becomes more important than care, and
casual out-of-court bargains are often substituted for adjudication." In 2008, American courts achieved an average of 991 criminal case dispositions per judge. Federal judges have, on average, only 96 criminal cases per year,®2 but the average
number of incoming cases for state judicial officers is 3,413.25

6. Corrections. Although it remains customary to identify the agency responsible for a state's prison system as the “Department of Corrections,” incarceration no longer aims primarily to “correct” (Je. rehabilitate) those who have been
convicted of crime. Punishment for the sake of punishment and incapacitation have become the system's principal purposes.

One result of the emphasis on incapacitation is that there is little interest in, or resources for, creative programs to treat or educate individuals who are in prison and people on probation and parole. While probationers and parolees need
varying degrees of assistance and supervision, most experts agree that an average of no more than 35 cases per officer is necessary to give those in their charge sufficient attention and support. Yet probation supervision caseloads now average
about 106

p74
p75
people per officer, with 72 percent of officers describing their overall workload as too large. Too-high probation caseloads increase the likelihood that probation will be revoked.°+

In addition to these obstacles to successful rehabilitation, convicted individuals typically encounter difficulty obtaining housing and lawful employment when they reenter free society. Even if charges do not lead to imprisonment, the
encounter with the penal system can have devastating consequences. This problem has always existed, but it is becoming increasingly common and severe, because statutory restrictions on obtaining occupational licenses, educational assis-
tance, and other public benefits and necessities have proliferated. Technological advances allow would-be employers, landlords, and any other interested member of the public to obtain a wealth of information about the one in three adults in the
United States who have a criminal record. James B. Jacobs, The Eternal Criminal Record (2015).°5 And these collateral consequences of conviction have a disproportionate and especially severe impact on people of color who have been convicted
of acriminal offense. See Michael Pinard, Collateral Consequences of Criminal Convictions: Confronting Issues of Race and Dignity, 85 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 457 (2010).


With the foundations for the administration of criminal law and punishment established, we now turn in Chapter 2 to the procedures for administering them.

11. Alessandro Corda & Rhys Hester, Leaving the Shining City on a Hil: A Plea for Rediscovering Comparative Criminal Justice Policy in the United States, 31 Int'l Crim. Just. Rev. 203 (2021).

2. Vera Institute for Justice, People in Jail and Prison in 2020, Jan. 2021, https://www.vera.org/downloads/publications/people-in-Jall-and-prison-in-2020-fact-sheet. pdf

‘3. National Research Council, The Growth of Incarceration in the United States 2 (2014); The Sentencing Project, Fact Sheet: Trends in U.S. Corrections 2 (2019), https://sentencingproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Trends-In-US-Corrections.pat.

4. U.S, Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Correctional Populations in the United States, 2016, httos://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pat/cpus16.pat; National Research Council, The Growth of Incarceration in the United States 2 (2014).

‘5. Equal Justice Initiative, United States Stil Has Highest Incarceration Rate in the World (Apr. 26, 2079), https://e, org/news/united-states-stil-has-highest-incarceration-rate-world/.

6. Dir van Zyl Smit & Catherine Appleton, Life Imprisonment: A Global Human Rights Analysis (Harvard Univ. Press 2019).

7.USS. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Correctional Populations in the United States, 2016, httos://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pat/cpus16.pat.

8. United States Census, Bureau Quick Facts (July 2019), https:// ww. census. gov/quickfacts/tact/table/US/PSTO45219.

9. Executive Office of the President, Economic Perspectives on Incarceration and the Criminal Justice System (2016), https://obamawhitehouse.archives. gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/documents/CEA%2BCriminal%2BJustice%2BReport.pa.

10. The Sentencing Project, Report to the United Nations on Racial Disparities in the U.S. Criminal Justice System (Apr. 19, 2018), https://www.sentencingproject. org/publications/un-report-on-racial-disparities/.

111. John Gramlich, The Gap Between the Number of Blacks and Whites in Prison Is Shrinking, Pew Research Center (Apr. 30, 2079), httpsi//www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/04/30/shrinking-gap-between-number-of-blacks-and-whites-in-prison/,

12. Alan Flurry, Study Estimates U.S. Population with Felony Convictions, UGA Today (Oct. 1, 2017), https://news.uga.edu/total-us-population-with-felony-convictionsy.

15. The Sentencing Project, Report to the United Nations on Racial Disparities in the U.S. Criminal Justice System (Apr. 19, 2018), https://www.sentencingproject. org/publications/un-report-on-racial-disparities/.

114, Jeremy Travis, But They All Come Back: Facing the Challenges of Prisoner Reentry 122 (2005).

15. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal Offender Statistics, Lifetime Likelihood of Going to State or Federal Prison, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/crimoff.htm#tifetime,

16. The Sentencing Project, Report to the United Nations on Racial Disparities in the U.S. Criminal Justice System (Apr. 19, 2018), https://www.sentencingproject. org/publications/un-report-on-racial-disparities/.

17. United States Sentencing Commission, Demographic Differences in Sentencing (Nov. 14, 2077), httos://www.ussc. qov/research/research-reports/demographic-differences-sentencing,

118. National Research Council, supra note 3, at 2.

19. U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal Victimization — 2004 (Sept. 2005), p. 1. Data for 2015 suggest a possible shitt in this trend. Although the crime rate for property offenses continued to decline, dropping by 2.6 percent, the crime rate for violent offenses rose by 3.9
percent in 2015. See FBI, 2015 Crime in the United States (Sept. 26, 2016), htto://uor.fbi.qov/crime-in-the-u.s/201S/ctime-in-the-u.s.-2015/home,

20. See John Pfaff, The Empirics of Prison Growth: A Critical Review and Path Forward, 98 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 547 (2008); James P. Lynch, A Comparison of Prison Use in England, Canada, and West Germany, 79 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 180 (1999).

21, National Research Council, supra note 3, at 3-4.

22. National Research Council, supra note 3, at 5-7, 9.

23. White House Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Perspectives on Incarceration and the Justice System 33 (Apr. 2016).

24, Marlame Kaba, We Do This ‘Til We Free Us 21 (2021).

25. Jonathan Simon, Governing Through Crime (2007).

26. See, for example, the question of when to punish “immoral” behavior (pp. 48-50 infra); when to make failure to act a crime (Chapter 3.0.1); whether (and if so when) one should be liable for causing harm without regard to intent or negligence (Chapters 3.0.2¢ & d and 5.C.2); when we should
criminalize threatening or preparatory conduct that does not cause harm (Chapters 6.8 and 7.8); when mistakes of law, intoxication, mental disability, and other conditions should be recognized as excuses (Chapters 3.0.2.¢ and 8.C); how far the criminal law should regulate sexual overreaching (Chapter 4);
when a person should be held responsible for crimes committed by another (Chapter 7. and 8); when corporations should be criminally lable (Chapter 7.C); when to allow (and how to limit) the use of deadly force for setf-protection (Chapter 8.8); and when to punish misrepresentation, dishonesty, and inter-
‘erence with intellectual property (Chapter 9)

27. Deborah Tuerkheimer, Underenforcement as Unequal Protection, 57 B.C. L. Rev. 1287, 1290-1291 (2016).

1, See pp. 182-183 infra, discussing Professor Kennedy's concerns in connection with the problems of jury nullification. — EDS.

28. Jeffrey C. Mays, Who Opposes Defunding the N.Y.P.D.? These Black Lawmakers, N.Y. Times, Aug. 10, 2020 (quoting City Councilwoman Vanessa L. Gibson).


29. Kent Greenawalt, Punishment, 4 Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice 1336 (Ist ed. 1983).

«a. Lord Coleridge Is referring to United States v. Holmes, 26 F. Cas. 360 (C.C.E.D. Pa. 1842). But that court had not suggested that the selection be made “by ballot." The relevant passage states (Id. at 367):

When .. . all sustenance is exhausted, and a sacrifice of one person is necessary to appease the hunger of others, the selection Is by lot. This mode is resorted to as the falrest mode, and, in some sort, as an appeal to God, for selection of the victim. ... Inno other than this or some like

‘way are those having equal rights put upon an equal footing, and in no other way Is it possible to guard against partiality and oppression, violence and conflict.
‘The Holmes case is discussed in more detall at p. 890 infra. — EDS.

>, Bacon introduced the quoted passage as follows:

The law chargeth no man with default where the act is compulsory and not voluntary ...: and therefore, if either there be an impossibility for a man to do otherwise, or so great a perturbation of the judgment and reason as in presumption of law man’s nature cannot overcome, such

necessity carrieth a privilege in itset.
‘Shedding, Ellis & Heath, The Works of Francis Bacon $43 (1859). — EDS.

.c. The court here is quoting from John Milton, Paradise Lost. — EDs.

‘80. My brother Grove has furnished me with the following suggestion, too late to be embodied in the judgment but well worth preserving: “I the two accused men were justified in killing Parker, then if not rescued in time, two of the three survivors would be justified in kiling the third, and of the two
who remained the stronger would be justified in killing the weaker, so that three men might be justifiably killed to give the fourth a chance of surviving.” — C.

d. The Crown later commuted the sentence to six months’ imprisonment. — EDS.

31, Jeremy Bentham, The Theory of Legisiation 201 (1975).

82, Consider Guyora Binder & Nicholas J. Smith, Framed: Utltarianism and Punishment of the Innocent, 32 Rutgers L.J. 115, 211 (2001): “Utiltarian penology could not recommend . .. secretly framing the innocent, because a system of criminal justice could only advance its primary aim of public
‘security fit was sufficiently transparent in design to guarantee the public that such acts would be discovered and punished.”

‘88, For contemporary debate around the question whether prisons, and perhaps other punitive sanctions, could be entirely replaced by other social approaches to preventing crime, see pp. 53-67 supra.

‘84, For a review of empirical studies, see Aaron Chaflin & Justin McCrary, Criminal Deterrence: A Review of the Literature, 55 J. Econ. Literature § (2017).

‘85, Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Perspectives on Incarceration and the Criminal Justice System, at 4.

36, Pew Ctr. on the States, State of Recidivism: The Revolving Door of America’s Prisons, at 17 (2011), httos://www.pewtrusts.org/-/media/legacy/uploadediiles/pcs_assets/201 1/pewstateotrecidivismpat.pdt.

87. See Richard Posner, Economic Analysis of Law 242 (7th ed. 2007); Stephen J. Schulhofer, Solving the Drug Enforcement Dilemma: Lessons from Economics, 1994 U. Chi. Legal F. 207.

‘88, Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Perspectives on Incarceration and the Criminal Justice System, at 6.

89, Albert J. Relss, Jr. & Jeffrey A. Roth eds., Understanding and Preventing Violence: Report of the National Research Panel on the Understanding and Control of Violence 6 (1993).

40, Robert Martinson, New Findings, New Views: A Note of Caution Regarding Sentencing Reform, 7 Hofstra L. Rev. 243 (1979).

41, See David Weisburd et al., What Works in Crime Prevention and Rehabilitation: An Assessment of Systematic Reviews, 16 Criminology & Pub. Pol'y 415 (2017).

42, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, Lauren Kirchner & Julla Angwin, How We Analyzed the COMPAS Recidivism Algorithm, ProPublica, May 28, 2016, https://www.propublica.org/article/now-we-analyzed-the-compas-recidivism-algorithm,

43, U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Homicide Trends in the United States: 1998 Update (Mar. 2000).

44, See Hannah 8. Laquer, Incapacitation: Penal Policy and the Lessons of Recent Experience, 24 Berkeley J. Crim. L. 48 (2019); John J. Donohue Ill & Steven Levit, The Impact of Legalized Abortion and Crime, 116 Q.J. Econ. 379 (2001).

45, Ollver Roeder et al., What Caused the Crime Decline? 22 tbl. § (Feb. 12, 2015), https://www.brennancenter.org/sites/default/files/analysis/What Caused The Crime Decline.pat.

46. U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prison and Jail Inmates at Midyear 1999 (Apr. 2000), p. 2.

47. John J. Dilulio, Jr., Two Million Prisoners Are Enough, Wall St. J., Mar. 12, 1999.

48, Charles Colson Task Force on Federal Corrections, Transforming Prisons, Restoring Lives ix, Jan. 2016.

49, Rachel Elise Barkow, Prisoners of Politics: Breaking the Cycle of Mass Incarceration 15 (2018).

a. See, e.g., Dan Markel, State, Be Not Proud: A Retributivist Defense of the Commutation of Death Row and the Abolition of the Death Penalty, 40 Harv. C.R.-C.L. L. Rev. 407 (2008) (arguing that retributive justice, because it is committed to “modesty and dignity in modes of punishment” can
‘support opposition to the death penalty). — Es.

‘80. See Paul H. Robinson, Distributive Principles of Criminal Law: Who Should Be Punished How Much? (2008).


51. For helpful discussion of the issues, see Chad Flanders, Time, Death, and Retribution, 19 U. Pa. J. Const. L. 431 (2016); Peter A. French, The Virtues of Vengeance (2001); George Fletcher, The Place of Victims in the Theory of Retribution, 3 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 51 (1999); Michael Moore, Victims
and Retribution: A Reply to Professor Fletcher, id. at 65; Jeftrie Murphy, Getting Even: The Role of the Victim, 7 Soc. Phil. & Pol'y 209 (1990).

‘52, Facts drawn from Pam Bulluck, Defendant in Club Fire Draws a 4-Year Sentence, N.Y. Times, May 11, 2006; Providence J., Projo.com, May 10, 2006.

59. See p. 1180 intra.

‘54, See Upskirting Now a Crime After Woman's Campaign, BBC News (Apr. 12, 2019), https://www.bbe.com/news/uk-47902522.

‘55, Thus, in Gregg v. Georgia, p. 1172 infra, the Supreme Court stated that in order for punishment not to violate the Eighth Amendment, it “must not involve the unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain {the utilitarian requirement] [and it] must not be grossly out of proportion to the severity of the
crime [the retributive constraint].”

a. 477 P.2d 441 (Alaska 1970). — EDs.

‘56, Patrick Devlin, The Enforcement of Morals (1965).

57, Home Office U.K., Report of the Committee on Homosexual Offences and Prostitution (Wolfenden Report) (1957).

‘58. John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, in Utilitarianism, Liberty and Representative Government 95-96 (Everyman's Library Edition, 1950).

‘59, Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses, Tentative Draft No. 5, at 430-431 (May 4, 2021).

60. Id. at 446.

1. Id. at 441, 449 (expressing disagreement with the result in United States v. Jungers, 702 F.3d 1066 (8th Cir. 2013).

62, Allegra M. McLeod, Envisioning Abolition Democracy, 132 Hatv. L. Rev. 1613, 1637 (2019).

63. Id. at 1630.

64. Id. (citing Kelly Hayes & Mariame Kaba, The Sentencing of Larry Nassar Was Not “Transformative Justice.” Here’s Why, The Appeal, Feb. 5, 2018, https:/theappeal.orq/the-sentencing-of-larry-nassar-was-not-transformative-lustice-here-s-why-a2ea323a6645/),

65. Id. at 1632.

66. Id. at 1616.

67. See Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses, Tentative Draft No. 5, at 485-486 (May 4, 2021) (noting that “there is clear evidence, widely acknowledged by professionals in the field, that these laws are seriously counterproductive. They are expensive for local police to admin-
ister, unduly hinder the rehabilitation of ex-offenders, and ultimately defeat their own central purposes by impeding law enforcement and increasing the incidence of sexual offenses.”).

68, Allegra M. McLeod, Envisioning Abolition Democracy, 132 Harv. L. Rev. 1613, 1630 (2019) (quoting Kelly Hayes & Mariame Kaba, The Sentencing of Larry Nassar Was Not “Transformative Justice.” Here’s Why, The Appeal, Feb. 5, 2018, https:/theappeal.orq/the-sentencing-of-larry-nassar-
was-not-transformative -{ustice-here-s-why-a2ea323a6645)),

(69, Other models include restorative circles and conferencing (in which members of the community affected by the harm can offer support to the patties), and community panels (which employ trained members of the community to guide the victim and alleged perpetrator through the process).
Janna M. Miller Midura & Elizabeth Bleakley, Restorative Justice: An Overview, Hum. Rts. (ll. State Bar Assn., Springfield, Ill), Dec. 2019, at 3.

70. Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr., Criminal Justice System: Overview, in 2 Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice 450, 454 (S.H. Kadish ed., 1983).

71. US. Dept. of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2019 Crime in the United States, hittps://ucr.fbi,gov/orime-in-the-u.8/2019/crime-in-the-u.s.-2019/toplo-pages/persons-arrested.

72, See Sandra G. Mayson & Megan T. Stevenson, Misdemeanors by the Numbers, 61 B.C. L. Rev. 971, 999-1000 (2020).

73. Wendy Sawyer & Peter Wagner, Prison Policy Initiative, Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2020, Mar. 24, 2020, https://www.prisonpolicy. orq/reports/pie2020.htm!?c=pie&golid'=EAlalQobChMI2LTk-MCj7wIVDoriCh2k9w6aEAAYASAAEGKVBID_BwE.

TA.td.

75. Alex S. Vitale, The End of Policing (2017); Mariame Kaba, Yes, We Mean Literally Abolish the Police, N.Y. Times, June 12, 2020.

76, Steve Eder, Michael H. Keller & Blacki Migliozzi, As New Police Reform Laws Sweep Across the U.S., Some Ask: Are They Enough, Apr. 18, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/18/us/police-reform-bilis.htm

‘77. Emily Bazelon, Charged: The New Movement to Transform American Prosecution and End Mass Incarceration (2019).

78, Rachel E. Barkow, Can Prosecutors End Mass Incarceration?, 119 Mich. L. Rev. 1365 (2021).

79, Nazgol Ghandnoosh, Can We Wait 75 Years to Cut the Prison Population in Half2, Sentencing Project (Mar. 8, 2018), https://www. sentencingproject.orq/publications/can-wait-75-years-cut-prison-population-half/; Rachel Elise Barkow, Prisoners of Politics: Breaking the Cycle of Mass Incarcer-
ation 12 (2019).


80, National Research Council, supra note 3, at 123-125.

81, Except as otherwise noted, the material in these Notes is drawn from U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, htip://www.albany.edu/sourcebook/; id, Crime in the United States — 2009 (2010); U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statis-
tics, Federal Justice Statistics, 2011-2012 (2015); and President's Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice, The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society 7-12, 91-107, 127-1397, 141-150 (1967).

£82, President's Commission, supra note 61, at 12.

83, See U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prosecutors in State Courts, 2007 (Dec. 2011), pp. 2, 4 & tb. 2.

‘84, See Stephen J. Schulhofer & David Friedman, Rethinking Indigent Defense: Promoting Effective Representation Through Consumer Sovereignty and Freedom of Choice for All Criminal Defendants, 31 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 73 (1993). One Texas county implemented an experimental plan to permit
indigent defendants to choose their own counsel. See Stephen J. Schulhofer, Client Choice for Indigent Criminal Defendants: Theory and Implementation, 12 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 505 (2018). Clients in the study had stronger perceptions of falmess and impartiality compared to those who were not able to
choose their counsel, and clients who chose their lawyer more often pled guilty to lesser charges or went to trial, “suggesting] a higher level of representation in that lawyers chosen by defendants were more successful advocates for achieving pleas to lesser charges and more zealous in pursuing tial ver-
dicts rather than settling for plea deals.” M. Elaine Nugent-Borakove & Franklin Cruz, The Power of Choice: The Implications of a System Where Indigent Defendants Choose Their Own Counsel Ii (Mar. 2017). Alexis Hoag argues that choice is particularly important for indigent Black defendants, because they
have better communication and more trusting relationships when they are able to choose a Black lawyer as their defense counsel. See Alexis Hoag, Black on Black Representation, 96 N.Y.U. L. Rev 1493 (2021).

£85, U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State Court Organization, 2011 (Nov. 2013) p. 7.

86, Kate Berry, How Judicial Elections Impact Criminal Cases, Dec. 2, 2018, hitps://wwnw.brennancenter.org/publication/how-{udicial-elections-impact-criminal-cases,

87. Brennan Center for Justice, Spending by Outside Groups in Judicial Races Hits Record High, Secret Money Dominates (Nov. 15, 2016), htips://wwnw.brennancenter. org/our-work/analysis-opinion/spending,- outside-groups-judiclal-races-hits-record-high-secret-money.

88, Sanford C. Gordon & Gregory Huber, The Effect of Electoral Competitiveness on Incumbent Behavior, 2 Q.J. Pol. Sci. 107 (2007) (demonstrating statistically significant effect of elections on sentencing in Kansas); Kate Berry, Brennan Ctr., How Judicial Elections Impact Criminal Cases 2 (2015)
(compiling academic literature suggesting that judicial elections increase punitive sentencing).

£89, See Craig M. Bradley, Criminal Procedure: A Worldwide Study (2d ed. 2007).

20. Clark Nelly, There Are Way Too Many Prosecutors in the Federal Judiciary, Cato Inst. (Oct. 14, 2019), tips://www.cato.org/publications/commentary/there-are-way-too-many-prosecutors-federal-judiclary.

21, For a vivid account, see Steve Bogira, Courtroom 302 (2005).

22, United States Courts, Federal Court Management Statistics (2020).

93, National Center for State Courts, Court Statistics Project, Examining the Work of State Courts: An Analysis of 2010 State Court Caseloads (2012).

94, See U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Characteristics of State Parole Supervising Agencies, 2006 (Aug. 2008), p. 1; Joan Petersilia, Community Corrections: Probation, Parole, and Prisoner Reentry, in Crime and Public Policy (James Q. Wilson & Joan Petersilia eds., 2011);
Justin Adelman, Thesis, Somebody's Watching Me: Examining the Impact of Probation Officer Caseloads on Revocation Rates (2019), hitps://www.csus.edu/college/social-sciences-interdisciplinary-studies/public-policy-administration/_internal/_documents/thesis-bank-2019-adelman,pd

‘95, National Conference of State Legislatures, Barriers to Work: People with Criminal Records (July 17, 2018), hitps://www.nosl.org/research/labor-and-employment/barriers-to-work-individuals-with-criminal-records.aspx.

p.75
