
p. 1207
APPENDIX
*
AMERICAN LAW INSTITUTE, MODEL PENAL CODE OFFICIAL DRAFT (1962, AS AMENDED 2009, 2017, 2021-)

[The American Law Institute (ALI), a private nonprofit association founded in 1923, consists of prominent lawyers, judges, and academics committed to clarifying and simplifying the law and improving the administration of justice.
Among its early products were a series of “restatements” that sought systematically to organize and summarize the law of torts, contracts, and other common-law fields, as that law had emerged from the common law process of judicial decision
making. In 1935 the Institute, acting on a suggestion from President Roosevelt, approved a project to attempt something similar in the field of criminal law.1 But because of the Depression and World War Il, the project was postponed, and it did
not begin in earnest until 1950. The advisory committee formed for that purpose quickly concluded, however, that the “restatement” approach was ill-suited to a project in the field of criminal law. Unlike the law of torts and contracts, criminal law,
a complex mixture of statutory and judicial doctrines, had developed with enormous variation from state to state and little coherence or consistency in its underlying principles.

p. 1207

p. 1208
An accurate restatement accordingly was neither possible nor desirable. The advisory committee decided instead to begin from first principles and attempt to draft a “model” code that could serve as a basis for comprehensive legislative reform in
every American jurisdiction.

[Under the leadership of a Chief Reporter, Professor Herbert Wechsler of Columbia Law School, and an Associate Reporter, Professor Louis B. Schwartz of the University of Pennsylvania Law School, the ALI assembled teams of aca-
demics and practitioners who labored over the next ten years to produce a series of “tentative drafts,” followed by an Official Draft that was approved by the ALI in 1962.

[This Model Penal Code achieved a success that is unprecedented for a project of its kind. ALI approval of the Official Draft triggered a wave of criminal law codification throughout the United States. Over the next 20 years, 34 states
enacted codes based to some degree on the Model Penal Code.2 Many of these codes (including those of New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, and Oregon) adhere closely to the Model Penal Code text; others, though they diverge from it, make
significant use of Model Penal Code concepts and vocabulary. In addition, courts have come to rely heavily on the Model Penal Code and its accompanying commentaries, even in jurisdictions (such as California and the federal system) that have
not recodified their criminal law. Thus, although the Model Penal Code is not, in itself, “law,” and is not legally binding anywhere, it exerts a powerful influence on the content and development of criminal law rules and principles throughout the
United States. It has become an essential point of reference in any discussion of what the doctrines of criminal law are or should be.]

PART I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1. Preliminary
Section 1.01. Title and Effective Date [omitted]
Section 1.02. Purposes; Principles of Construction

Section 1.04. Classes of Crimes; Violations

Section 1.05. All Offenses Defined by Statute; Application of General Provisions of the Code

Section 1.06. Time Limitations

Section 1.07. Method of Prosecution When Conduct Constitutes More Than One Offense

Section 1.08. When Prosecution Barred by Former Prosecution for the Same Offense [omitted]

Section 1.09. When Prosecution Barred by Former Prosecution for Different Offense [omitted]

Section 1.10. Former Prosecution in Another Jurisdiction: When a Bar [omitted]

p. 1208

Tne 1208

Section 1.11. Former Prosecution Before Court Lacking Jurisdiction or When Fraudulently Procured by the Defendant [omitted]

Section 1.12. Proof Beyond a Reasonable Doubt; Affirmative Defenses; Burden of Proving Fact When Not an Element of an Offense; Presumptions

Section 1.13. General Definitions
Article 2. General Principles of Liability

Section 2.01. Requirement of Voluntary Act; Omission as Basis of Liability; Possession as an Act

Section 2.02. General Requirements of Culpability

Section 2.03. Causal Relationship Between Conduct and Result; Divergence Between Result Designed or Contemplated and Actual Result or Between Probable and Actual Result

Section 2.04. Ignorance or Mistake

Section 2.05. When Culpability Requirements Are inapplicable to Violations and to Offenses Defined by Other Statutes; Effect of Absolute Liability in Reducing Grade of Offense to Violation

Section 2.06. Liability for Conduct of Another; Complicity

Section 2.07. Liability of Corporations, Unincorporated Associations and Persons Acting, or Under a Duty to Act, in Their Behalf

Section 2.08. Intoxication

Section 2.09. Duress

Section 2.10. Military Orders

Section 2.11. Consent

Section 2.12. De Minimis Infractions

Article 3. General Principles of Justification
Section 3.01. Justification an Affirmative Defense; Civil Remedies Unaffected
Section 3.02. Justification Generally: Choice of Evils
Section 3.03. Execution of Public Duty
Section 3.04. Use of Force in Self-Protection
Section 3.05. Use of Force for the Protection of Other Persons
Section 3.06. Use of Force for the Protection of Property
Section 3.07. Use of Force in Law Enforcement
Section 3.08. Use of Force by Persons with Special Responsibility for Care, Discipline or Safety of Others
Section 3.09. Mistake of Law as to Unlawfulness of Force or Legality of Arrest; Reckless or Negligent Use of Otherwise Justifiable Force; Reckless or Negligent Injury or Risk of Injury to Inno-
cent Persons
p. 1209
nnn 81810
Section 3.10. Justification in Property Crimes
Section 3.11. Definitions
Article 4. Responsibility
Section 4.01. Mental Disease or Defect Excluding Responsibility
Section 4.02. Evidence of Mental Disease or Defect Admissible When Relevant to Element of the Offense; [Mental Disease or Defect Impairing Capacity as Ground for Mitigation of Punishment
in Capital Cases]
Section 4.03. Mental Disease or Defect Excluding Responsibility Is Affirmative Defense; Requirement of Notice; Form of Verdict and Judgment When Finding of Irresponsibility Is Made
Section 4.04. Mental Disease or Defect Excluding Fitness to Proceed
Section 4.05. Psychiatric Examination of Defendant with Respect to Mental Disease or Defect
Section 4.06. Determination of Fitness to Proceed; Effect of Finding of Unfitness; Proceedings if Fitness is Regained[; Post-Commitment Hearing]
Section 4.07. Determination of Irresponsibility on Basis of Report; Access to Defendant by Psychiatrist of His Own Choice; Form of Expert Testimony When Issue of Responsibility Is Tried
Section 4.08. Legal Effect of Acquittal on the Ground of Mental Disease or Defect Excluding Responsibility; Commitment; Release or Discharge

Section 4.09. Statements for Purposes of Examination or Treatment Inadmissible Except on Issue of Mental Condition omitted]
Section 4.10. Immaturity Excluding Criminal Conviction; Transfer of Proceedings to Juvenile Court
Article 5. Inchoate Crimes
Section 5.01. Criminal Attempt
Section 5.02. Criminal Solicitation
Section 5.03. Criminal Conspiracy
Section 5.04. Incapacity, Irresponsibility or Immunity of Party to Solicitation or Conspiracy
Section 5.05. Grading of Criminal Attempt, Solicitation and Conspiracy; Mitigation in Cases of Lesser Danger; Multiple Convictions Barred
Section 5.06. Possessing Instruments of Crime; Weapons
Section 5.07. Prohibited Offensive Weapons
Articles 6-11. Sentencing; Authorized Disposition of Offenders [omitted]
p. 1210
pratt
PART II. DEFINITION OF SPECIFIC CRIMES
Offenses Involving Danger to the Person
Article 210. Criminal Homicide
Section 210.0. Definitions
Section 210.1. Criminal Homicide
Section 210.2. Murder
Section 210.3. Manslaughter
Section 210.4. Negligent Homicide
Section 210.5. Causing or Aiding Suicide
Section 210.6. Sentence of Death for Murder; Further Proceedings to Determine Sentence
Article 211. Assault; Reckless Endangering; Threats

Section 211.1. Assault
Section 211.2. Recklessly Endangering Another Person
Section 211.3. Terroristic Threats
Article 212. Kidnapping and Related Offenses; Coercion
Section 212.0. Definitions
Section 212.1. Kidnapping
Section 212.2. Felonious Restraint
Section 212.3. False Imprisonment
Section 212.4. Interference with Custody
Section 212.5. Criminal Coercion
Article 213. Sexual Offenses
Section 213.0. General Principles of liability; Definitions
Section 213.1. Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force or Restraint
Section 213.2. Sexual Assault by Physical Force or Restraint
Section 213.3. Sexual Assault of an Incapacitated, Vulnerable, or Legally Restricted Person
Section 213.4. Sexual Assault by Extortion
Section 213.5. Sexual Assault by Prohibited Deception
Section 213.6. Sexual Assault in the Absence of Consent
Section 213.7. Offensive Sexual Contact
Section 213.8. Sexual Offenses Involving Minors
Section 213.9. Sex Trafficking
Section 213.10. Affirmative Defense of Explicit Prior Permission
Section 213.11-11.J Sentencing and Collateral Consequences of Conviction
pret
nnn 1812

Offenses Against Property
Article 220. Arson, Criminal Mischief, and Other Property Destruction
Section 220.1. Arson and Related Offenses
Section 220.2. Causing or Risking Catastrophe
Section 220.3. Criminal Mischief
Article 221. Burglary and Other Criminal Intrusion
Section 221.0. Definitions
Section 221.1. Burglary
Section 221.2. Criminal Trespass
Article 222. Robbery
Section 222.1. Robbery
Article 223. Theft and Related Offenses
Section 223.0. Definitions
Section 223.1. Consolidation of Theft Offenses; Grading; Provisions Applicable to Theft Generally
Section 223.2. Theft by Unlawful Taking or Disposition
Section 223.3. Theft by Deception
Section 223.4. Theft by Extortion
Section 223.5. Theft of Property Lost, Mislaid, or Delivered by Mistake
Section 223.6. Receiving Stolen Property
Section 223.7. Theft of Services
Section 223.8. Theft by Failure to Make Required Disposition of Funds Received
Section 223.9. Unauthorized Use of Automobiles and Other Vehicles
Article 224. Forgery and Fraudulent Practices
Section 224.0. Definitions
Section 224.1. Forgery

Section 224.2. Simulating Objects of Antiquity, Rarity, Etc. [omitted]
Section 224.3. Fraudulent Destruction, Removal or Concealment of Recordable Instruments
Section 224.4. Tampering with Records
Section 224.5. Bad Checks
Section 224.6. Credit Cards
Section 224.7. Deceptive Business Practices
Section 224.8. Commercial Bribery and Breach of Duty to Act Disinterestedly
Section 224.9. Rigging Publicly Exhibited Contest
Section 224.10. Defrauding Secured Creditors
Section 224.11. Fraud in Insolvency [omitted]
Section 224.12. Receiving Deposits in a Failing Institution [omitted]
p.1212
p.1213
Section 224.13. Misapplication of Entrusted Property and Property of Government or Financial Institution [omitted]
Section 224.14. Securing Execution of Documents by Deception
Offenses Against the Family
Article 230. Offenses Against the Family
Section 230.1. Bigamy and Polygamy
Section 230.2. Incest
Section 230.3. Abortion [omitted]
Section 230.4. Endangering Welfare of Children
Section 230.5. Persistent Non-Support
Offenses Against Public Administration
Article 240. Bribery and Corruption Influence [omitted]
Article 241. Perjury and Other Falsification in Official Matters [omitted]

Article 242. Obstructing Governmental Operations; Escapes [omitted]
Article 243. Abuse of Office [omitted]
Offenses Against Public Order and Decency
Article 250. Riot, Disorderly Conduct, and Related Offenses
Section 250.1. Riot; Failure to Disperse
Section 250.2. Disorderly Conduct
Section 250.3. False Public Alarms
Section 250.4. Harassment
Section 250.5. Public Drunkenness; Drug Incapacitation
Section 250.6. Loitering or Prowling
Section 250.7. Obstructing Highways and Other Public Passages
Section 250.8. Disrupting Meetings and Processions
Section 250.9. Desecration of Venerated Objects [omitted]
Section 250.10. Abuse of Corpse [omitted]
Section 250.11. Cruelty to Animals [omitted]
Section 250.12. Violation of Privacy [omitted]
Article 251. Public Indecency
Section 251.1. Open Lewdness
Section 251.2. Prostitution and Related Offenses
Section 251.3. Loitering to Solicit Deviate Sexual Relations
Section 251.4. Obscenity [omitted]
p.1213
nnn 188
PART III. TREATMENT AND CORRECTION [OMITTED]
PART IV. ORGANIZATION OF CORRECTION [OMITTED]

PART I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1. PRELIMINARY
Section 1.01. Title and Effective Date [omitted]
Section 1.02. Purposes; Principles of Construction”
(1) The general purposes of the provisions governing the definition of offenses are:
(a) to forbid and prevent conduct that unjustifiably and inexcusably inflicts or threatens substantial harm to individual or public interests;
(b) to subject to public control persons whose conduct indicates that they are disposed to commit crimes;
(c) to safeguard conduct that is without fault from condemnation as criminal;
(d) to give fair warning of the nature of the conduct declared to constitute an offense;
(e) to differentiate on reasonable grounds between serious and minor offenses.
(2) The general purposes of the provisions on sentencing, applicable to all official actors in the sentencing system, are:
(a) in decisions affecting the sentencing of individual offenders:
(i) to render sentences in all cases within a range of severity proportionate to the gravity of offenses, the harms done to crime victims, and the blameworthiness of offenders;
(ii) when reasonably feasible, to achieve offender rehabilitation, general deterrence, incapacitation of dangerous offenders, restitution to crime victims, preservation of families, and reintegration of
offenders into the law-abiding community, provided these goals are pursued within the boundaries of proportionality in subsection (a)();
(iii) to render sentences no more severe than necessary to achieve the applicable purposes in subsections (a)() and (a)(i); and
(iv) to avoid the use of sanctions that increase the likelihood offenders will engage in future criminal conduct.
(b) in matters affecting the administration of the sentencing system:
(i) to preserve judicial discretion to individualize sentences within a framework of law;
(ii) to produce sentences that are uniform in their reasoned pursuit of the purposes in subsection (2)(a);
p.1214
p. 1215
(iii) to eliminate inequities in sentencing across population groups;
(iv) to ensure that adequate resources are available for carrying out sentences imposed and that rational priorities are established for the use of those resources;
(v) to ensure that all criminal sanctions are administered in a humane fashion;
(vi) to promote research on sentencing policy and practices, including the effects of criminal sanctions on families and communities; and
(vii) to increase the transparency of the sentencing and corrections system, its accountability to the public, and the legitimacy of its operations as perceived by all affected communities.
(3) The provisions of the Code shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms but when the language is susceptible of differing constructions it shall be interpreted to further the general purposes stated in
this Section and the special purposes of the particular provision involved. The discretionary powers conferred by the Code shall be exercised in accordance with the criteria stated in the Code and, insofar as such criteria are not de-
cisive, to further the general purposes stated in this Section.

Section 1.03. Territorial Applicability

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Section, a person may be convicted under the law of this State of an offense committed by his own conduct or the conduct of another for which he is legally accountable if:

(a) either the conduct which is an element of the offense or the result which is such an element occurs within this State; or

(b) conduct occurring outside the State is sufficient under the law of this State to constitute an attempt to commit an offense within the State; or

(c) conduct occurring outside the State is sufficient under the law of this State to constitute a conspiracy to commit an offense within the State and an overt act in furtherance of such conspiracy occurs within
the State; or

(a) conduct occurring within the State establishes complicity in the commission of, or an attempt, solicitation or conspiracy to commit, an offense in another jurisdiction which also is an offense under the law
of this State; or

(e) the offense consists of the omission to perform a legal duty imposed by the law of this State with respect to domicile, residence or a relationship to a person, thing or transaction in the State; or

(f) the offense is based on a statute of this State which expressly prohibits conduct outside the State, when the conduct bears a reasonable relation to a legitimate interest of this State and the actor knows or
should know that his conduct is likely to affect that interest.

(2) Subsection (1)(a) does not apply when either causing a specified result or a purpose to cause or danger of causing such a result is an element of an offense and the result occurs or is designed or likely to occur only
in another jurisdiction where the conduct charged would not constitute an offense, unless a legislative purpose plainly appears to declare the conduct criminal regardless of the place of the result.

p. 1215
p. 1216

(3) Subsection (1)(a) does not apply when causing a particular result is an element of an offense and the result is caused by conduct occurring outside the State which would not constitute an offense if the result had
occurred there, unless the actor purposely or knowingly caused the result within the State.

(4) When the offense is homicide, either the death of the victim or the bodily impact causing the death constitutes a “result,” within the meaning of Subsection (1)(a) and if the body of the homicide victim is found within
the State, it is presumed that such result occurred within the State.

(5) This State includes the land and water and the air space above such land and water with respect to which the State has legislative jurisdiction.

Section 1.04. Classes of Crimes; Violations

(1) An offense defined by this Code or by any other statute of this State, for which a sentence of [death or of] imprisonment is authorized, constitutes a crime. Crimes are classified as felonies, misdemeanors or petty
misdemeanors.

(2) A crime is a felony if it is so designated in this Code or if persons convicted thereof may be sentenced [to death or] to imprisonment for a term which, apart from an extended term, is in excess of one year.

(3) A crime is a misdemeanor if it is so designated in this Code or in a statute other than this Code enacted subsequent thereto.

(4) A crime is a petty misdemeanor if it is so designated in this Code or in a statute other than this Code enacted subsequent thereto or if it is defined by a statute other than this Code which now provides that persons
convicted thereof may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term of which the maximum is less than one year.

(5) An offense defined by this Code or by any other statute of this State constitutes a violation if it is so designated in this Code or in the law defining the offense or if no other sentence than a fine, or fine and forfeiture or
other civil penalty is authorized upon conviction or if it is defined by a statute other than this Code which now provides that the offense shall not constitute a crime. A violation does not constitute a crime and conviction of a violation
shall not give rise to any disability or legal disadvantage based on conviction of a criminal offense.

(6) Any offense declared by law to constitute a crime, without specification of the grade thereof or of the sentence authorized upon conviction, is a misdemeanor.

(7) An offense defined by any statute of this State other than this Code shall be classified as provided in this Section and the sentence that may be imposed upon conviction thereof shall hereafter be governed by this
Code.
Section 1.05. All Offenses Defined by Statute; Application of General Provisions of the Code
(1) No conduct constitutes an offense unless it is a crime or violation under this Code or another statute of this State.
p.1216
p.12i7
(2) The provisions of Part | of the Code are applicable to offenses defined by other statutes, unless the Code otherwise provides.
(3) This Section does not affect the power of a court to punish for contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law for the enforcement of an order or a civil judgment or decree.
Section 1.06. Time Limitations
(1) A prosecution for murder may be commenced at any time.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Section, prosecutions for other offenses are subject to the following periods of limitation:
(a) a prosecution for a felony of the first degree must be commenced within six years after it is committed;
(b) a prosecution for any other felony must be commenced within three years after it is committed;
(c) a prosecution for a misdemeanor must be commenced within two years after it is committed;
(a) a prosecution for a petty misdemeanor or a violation must be commenced within six months after it is committed.
(3) If the period prescribed in Subsection (2) has expired, a prosecution may nevertheless be commenced for:
(a) any offense a material element of which is either fraud or a breach of fiduciary obligation within one year after discovery of the offense by an aggrieved party or by a person who has legal duty to represent
an aggrieved party and who is himself not a party to the offense, but in no case shall this provision extend the period of limitation otherwise applicable by more than three years; and
(b) any offense based upon misconduct in office by a public officer or employee at any time when the defendant is in public office or employment or within two years thereafter, but in no case shall this provi-
sion extend the period of limitation otherwise applicable by more than three years.
(4) An offense is committed either when every element occurs, or, if a legislative purpose to prohibit a continuing course of conduct plainly appears, at the time when the course of conduct or the defendant's complicity
therein is terminated. Time starts to run on the day after the offense is committed.
(5) A prosecution is commenced either when an indictment is found [or an information filed] or when a warrant or other process is issued, provided that such warrant or process is executed without unreasonable delay.
(6) The period of limitation does not run:
(a) during any time when the accused is continuously absent from the State or has no reasonably ascertainable place of abode or work within the State, but in no case shall this provision extend the period of
limitation otherwise applicable by more than three years; or
(b) during any time when a prosecution against the accused for the same conduct is pending in this State.
p.12i7
p. 1218

Section 1.07. Method of Prosecution When Conduct Constitutes More Than One Offense
(1) Prosecution for Multiple Offenses; Limitation on Convictions. When the same conduct of a defendant may establish the commission of more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted for each such of-
fense. He may not, however, be convicted of more than one offense if:
(a) one offense is included in the other, as defined in Subsection (4) of this Section; or
(b) one offense consists only of a conspiracy or other form of preparation to commit the other; or
(c) inconsistent findings of fact are required to establish the commission of the offenses; or
(d) the offenses differ only in that one is defined to prohibit a designated kind of conduct generally and the other to prohibit a specific instance of such conduct; or
(e) the offense is defined as a continuing course of conduct and the defendant's course of conduct was uninterrupted, unless the law provides that specific periods of such conduct constitute separate
offenses.
(2) Limitation on Separate Trials for Multiple Offenses. Except as provided in Subsection (8) of this Section, a defendant shall not be subject to separate trials for multiple offenses based on the same conduct or arising
from the same criminal episode, if such offenses are known to the appropriate prosecuting officer at the time of the commencement of the first trial and are within the jurisdiction of a single court.
(3) Authority of Court to Order Separate Trials. When a defendant is charged with two or more offenses based on the same conduct or arising from the same criminal episode, the Court, on application of the prosecuting
attorney or of the defendant, may order any such charge to be tried separately, if it is satisfied that justice so requires.
(4) Conviction of Included Offense Permitted. A defendant may be convicted of an offense included in an offense charged in the indictment [or the information]. An offense is so included when:
(a) it is established by proof of the same or less than all the facts required to establish the commission of the offense charged; or
(b) it consists of an attempt or solicitation to commit the offense charged or to commit an offense otherwise included therein; or
(c) it differs from the offense charged only in the respect that a less serious injury or risk of injury to the same person, property or public interest or a lesser kind of culpability suffices to establish its commis-
sion.
(5) Submission of Included Offense to Jury. The Court shall not be obligated to charge the jury with respect to an included offense unless there is a rational basis for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense
charged and convicting him of the included offense.
Section 1.08. When Prosecution Barred by Former Prosecution for the Same Offense [omitted]
Section 1.09. When Prosecution Barred by Former Prosecution for Different Offense [omitted]
p.1218
p.1219
Section 1.10. Former Prosecution in Another Jurisdiction: When a Bar [omitted]
Section 1.11. Former Prosecution Before Court Lacking Jurisdiction or When Fraudulently Procured by the Defendant [omitted]
Section 1.12. Proof Beyond a Reasonable Doubt; Affirmative Defenses; Burden of Proving Fact When Not an Element of an Offense; Presumptions
(1) No person may be convicted of an offense unless each element of such offense is proved beyond a reasonable doubt. In the absence of such proof, the innocence of the defendant is assumed.
(2) Subsection (1) of this Section does not:

(a) require the disproof of an affirmative defense unless and until there is evidence supporting such defense; or
(b) apply to any defense which the Code or another statute plainly requires the defendant to prove by a preponderance of evidence.
(3) A ground of defense is affirmative, within the meaning of Subsection (2)(a) of this Section, when:
(a) it arises under a section of the Code which so provides; or
(b) it relates to an offense defined by a statute other than the Code and such statute so provides; or
(c) it involves a matter of excuse or justification peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant on which he can fairly be required to adduce supporting evidence.
(4) When the application of the Code depends upon the finding of a fact which is not an element of an offense, unless the Code otherwise provides:
(a) the burden of proving the fact is on the prosecution or defendant, depending on whose interest or contention will be furthered if the finding should be made; and
(b) the fact must be proved to the satisfaction of the Court or jury, as the case may be.
(5) When the Code establishes a presumption with respect to any fact which is an element of an offense, it has the following consequences:
(a) when there is evidence of the facts which give rise to the presumption, the issue of the existence of the presumed fact must be submitted to the jury, unless the Court is satisfied that the evidence as a
whole clearly negatives the presumed fact; and
(b) when the issue of the existence of the presumed fact is submitted to the jury, the Court shall charge that while the presumed fact must, on all the evidence, be proved beyond a reasonable doubt, the law
declares that the jury may regard the facts giving rise to the presumption as sufficient evidence of the presumed fact.
(6) A presumption not established by the Code or inconsistent with it has the consequences otherwise accorded it by law.
Section 1.13. General Definitions
In this Code, unless a different meaning plainly is required:
p.1219
p.1220
(1) “statute” includes the Constitution and a local law or ordinance of a political subdivision of the State;
(2) “act” or “action” means a bodily movement whether voluntary or involuntary;
(3) “voluntary” has the meaning specified in Section 2.01;
(4) “omission” means a failure to act;
(5) “conduct” means an action or omission and its accompanying state of mind, or, where relevant, a series of acts and omissions;
(6) “actor” includes, where relevant, a person guilty of an omission;
(7) “acted” includes, where relevant, “omitted to act”;
(8) “person,” “he” and “actor” include any natural person and, where relevant, a corporation or an unincorporated association;
(9) “element of an offense” means ()) such conduct or (i) such attendant circumstances or (ji) such a result of conduct as
(a) is included in the description of the forbidden conduct in the definition of the offense; or
(b) establishes the required kind of culpability; or
(c) negatives an excuse or justification for such conduct; or

(a) negatives a defense under the statute of limitations; or
(e) establishes jurisdiction or venue;
(10) “material element of an offense” means an element that does not relate exclusively to the statute of limitations, jurisdiction, venue or to any other matter similarly unconnected with () the harm or evil, incident to
conduct, sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense, or (i) the existence of a justification or excuse for such conduct;
(11) “purposely” has the meaning specified in Section 2.02 and equivalent terms such as “with purpose,” “designed” or “with design” have the same meaning;
(12) “intentionally” or “with intent” means purposely;
(13) “knowingly” has the meaning specified in Section 2.02 and equivalent terms such as “knowing” or “with knowledge” have the same meaning;
(14) “recklessly” has the meaning specified in Section 2.02 and equivalent terms such as “recklessness” or “with recklessness” have the same meaning;
(15) “negligently” has the meaning specified in Section 2.02 and equivalent terms such as “negligence” or “with negligence” have the same meaning;
(16) “reasonably believes” or “reasonable belief” designates a belief which the actor is not reckless or negligent in holding.
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LIABILITY
Section 2.01. Requirement of Voluntary Act; Omission as Basis of Liability; Possession as an Act
(1) A person is not guilty of an offense unless his liability is based on conduct which includes a voluntary act or the omission to perform an act of which he is physically capable.
p.1220
p. 1221
(2) The following are not voluntary acts within the meaning of this Section:
(a) a reflex or convulsion;
(b) a bodily movement during unconsciousness or sleep;
(c) conduct during hypnosis or resulting from hypnotic suggestion;
(@) a bodily movement that otherwise is not a product of the effort or determination of the actor, either conscious or habitual.
(3) Liability for the commission of an offense may not be based on an omission unaccompanied by action unless:
(a) the omission is expressly made sufficient by the law defining the offense; or
(b) a duty to perform the omitted act is otherwise imposed by law.
(4) Possession is an act, within the meaning of this Section, if the possessor knowingly procured or received the thing possessed or was aware of his control thereof for a sufficient period to have been able to terminate
his possession.
Section 2.02. General Requirements of Culpability
(1) Minimum Requirements of Culpability. Except as provided in Section 2.05, a person is not guilty of an offense unless he acted purposely, knowingly, recklessly or negligently, as the law may require, with respect to
each material element of the offense.
(2) Kinds of Culpability Defined.

(a) Purposely. A person acts purposely with respect to a material element of an offense when:
(i) if the element involves the nature of his conduct or a result thereof, it is his conscious object to engage in conduct of that nature or to cause such a result; and
ii) if the element involves the attendant circumstances, he is aware of the existence of such circumstances or he believes or hopes that they exist.

(b) Knowingly. A person acts knowingly with respect to a material element of an offense when:

(i) if the element involves the nature of his conduct or the attendant circumstances, he is aware that his conduct is of that nature or that such circumstances exist; and
(ii) if the element involves a result of his conduct, he is aware that it is practically certain that his conduct will cause such a result.

(c) Recklessly. A person acts recklessly with respect to a material element of an offense when he consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the material element exists or will result from his
conduct. The risk must be of such a nature and degree that, considering the nature and purpose of the actor's conduct and the circumstances known to him, its disregard involves a gross deviation from the standard of
conduct that a law-abiding person would observe in the actor's situation.

(a) Negligently. A person acts negligently with respect to a material element of an offense when he should be aware of a substantial and

p. 1221
p. 1222

unjustifiable risk that the material element exists or will result from his conduct. The risk must be of such a nature and degree that the actor’s failure to perceive it, considering the nature and purpose of his conduct and

the circumstances known to him, involves a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would observe in the actor's situation.

(3) Culpability Required Unless Otherwise Provided. When the culpability sufficient to establish a material element of an offense is not prescribed by law, such element is established if a person acts purposely, knowingly
or recklessly with respect thereto.

(4) Prescribed Culpability Requirement Applies to All Material Elements. When the law defining an offense prescribes the kind of culpability that is sufficient for the commission of an offense, without distinguishing
among the material elements thereof, such provision shall apply to all the material elements of the offense, unless a contrary purpose plainly appears.

(5) Substitutes for Negligence, Recklessness and Knowledge. When the law provides that negligence suffices to establish an element of an offense, such element also is established if a person acts purposely, knowingly or
recklessly. When recklessness suffices to establish an element, such element also is established if a person acts purposely or knowingly. When acting knowingly suffices to establish an element, such element also is established if a
person acts purposely.

(6) Requirement of Purpose Satisfied if Purpose Is Conditional. When a particular purpose is an element of an offense, the element is established although such purpose is conditional, unless the condition negatives the
harm or evil sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense.

(7) Requirement of Knowledge Satisfied by Knowledge of High Probability. When knowledge of the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge is established if a person is aware of a high
probability of its existence, unless he actually believes that it does not exist.

(8) Requirement of Wilfulness Satisfied by Acting Knowingly. A requirement that an offense be committed wilfully is satisfied if a person acts knowingly with respect to the material elements of the offense, unless a pur-
pose to impose further requirements appears.

(9) Culpability as to Ilegality of Conduct. Neither knowledge nor recklessness or negligence as to whether conduct constitutes an offense or as to the existence, meaning or application of the law determining the ele-
ments of an offense is an element of such offense, unless the definition of the offense or the Code so provides.

(10) Culpability as Determinant of Grade of Offense. When the grade or degree of an offense depends on whether the offense is committed purposely, knowingly, recklessly or negligently, its grade or degree shall be the
lowest for which the determinative kind of culpability is established with respect to any material element of the offense.

Section 2.03. Causal Relationship Between Conduct and Result; Divergence Between Result Designed or Contemplated and Actual Result or Between Probable and Actual Result

(1) Conduct is the cause of a result when:
p. 1222
p. 1228
(a) it is an antecedent but for which the result in question would not have occurred; and
(b) the relationship between the conduct and result satisfies any additional causal requirements imposed by the Code or by the law defining the offense.
(2) When purposely or knowingly causing a particular result is an element of an offense, the element is not established if the actual result is not within the purpose or the contemplation of the actor unless:
(a) the actual result differs from that designed or contemplated, as the case may be, only in the respect that a different person or different property is injured or affected or that the injury or harm designed or
contemplated would have been more serious or more extensive than that caused; or
(b) the actual result involves the same kind of injury or harm as that designed or contemplated and is not too remote or accidental in its occurrence to have a [just] bearing on the actor's liability or on the
gravity of his offense.
(3) When recklessly or negligently causing a particular result is an element of an offense, the element is not established if the actual result is not within the risk of which the actor is aware or, in the case of negligence, of
which he should be aware unless:
(a) the actual result differs from the probable result only in the respect that a different person or different property is injured or affected or that the probable injury or harm would have been more serious or
more extensive than that caused; or
(b) the actual result involves the same kind of injury or harm as the probable result and is not too remote or accidental in its occurrence to have a [just] bearing on the actor's liability or on the gravity of his
offense.
(4) When causing a particular result is a material element of an offense for which absolute liability is imposed by law, the element is not established unless the actual result is a probable consequence of the actor's
conduct.
Section 2.04. Ignorance or Mistake
(1) Ignorance or mistake as to a matter of fact or law is a defense if:
(a) the ignorance or mistake negatives the purpose, knowledge, belief, recklessness or negligence required to establish a material element of the offense; or
(b) the law provides that the state of mind established by such ignorance or mistake constitutes a defense.
(2) Although ignorance or mistake would otherwise afford a defense to the offense charged, the defense is not available if the defendant would be guilty of another offense had the situation been as he supposed. In such
case, however, the ignorance or mistake of the defendant shall reduce the grade and degree of the offense of which he may be convicted to those of the offense of which he would be guilty had the situation been as he supposed.
(3) A belief that conduct does not legally constitute an offense is a defense to a prosecution for that offense based upon such conduct when:
p.1223
p. 1224
(a) the statute or other enactment defining the offense is not known to the actor and has not been published or otherwise reasonably made available prior to the conduct alleged; or

(b) he acts in reasonable reliance upon an official statement of the law, afterward determined to be invalid or erroneous, contained in () a statute or other enactment; (i) a judicial decision, opinion or judgment;
(ii) an administrative order or grant of permission; or (iv) an official interpretation of the public officer or body charged by law with responsibility for the interpretation, administration or enforcement of the law defining the
offense.
(4) The defendant must prove a defense arising under Subsection (3) of this Section by a preponderance of evidence.
Section 2.05. When Culpability Requirements Are Inapplicable to Violations and to Offenses Defined by Other Statutes; Effect of Absolute Liability in Reducing Grade of Offense to Violation
(1) The requirements of culpability prescribed by Sections 2.01 and 2.02 do not apply to:
(a) offenses which constitute violations, unless the requirement involved is included in the definition of the offense or the Court determines that its application is consistent with effective enforcement of the
law defining the offense; or
(b) offenses defined by statutes other than the Code, insofar as a legislative purpose to impose absolute liability for such offenses or with respect to any material element thereof plainly appears.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of existing law and unless a subsequent statute otherwise provides:
(a) when absolute liability is imposed with respect to any material element of an offense defined by a statute other than the Code and a conviction is based upon such liability, the offense constitutes a viola~
tion; and
(b) although absolute liability is imposed by law with respect to one or more of the material elements of an offense defined by a statute other than the Code, the culpable commission of the offense may be
charged and proved, in which event negligence with respect to such elements constitutes sufficient culpability and the classification of the offense and the sentence that may be imposed therefor upon conviction are de-
termined by Section 1.04 and Article 6 of the Code.
Section 2.06. Liability for Conduct of Another; Complicity
(1) A person is guilty of an offense if it is committed by his own conduct or by the conduct of another person for which he is legally accountable, or both.
(2) A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another person when:
(a) acting with the kind of culpability that is sufficient for the commission of the offense, he causes an innocent or irresponsible person to engage in such conduct; or
(b) he is made accountable for the conduct of such other person by the Code or by the law defining the offense; or
p. 1204
p. 1225
(c) he is an accomplice of such other person in the commission of the offense.
(3) A person is an accomplice of another person in the commission of an offense if:
(a) with the purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of the offense, he
(i) solicits such other person to commit it; or
(ii) aids or agrees or attempts to aid such other person in planning or committing it; or
(iii) having a legal duty to prevent the commission of the offense, fails to make proper effort so to do; or
(b) his conduct is expressly declared by law to establish his complicity.

(4) When causing a particular result is an element of an offense, an accomplice in the conduct causing such result is an accomplice in the commission of that offense, if he acts with the kind of culpability, if any, with
respect to that result that is sufficient for the commission of the offense.

(5) A person who is legally incapable of committing a particular offense himself may be guilty thereof if it is committed by the conduct of another person for which he is legally accountable, unless such liability is inconsis-
tent with the purpose of the provision establishing his incapacity.

(6) Unless otherwise provided by the Code or by the law defining the offense, a person is not an accomplice in an offense committed by another person if:

(a) he is a victim of that offense; or

(b) the offense is so defined that his conduct is inevitably incident to its commission; or

(c) he terminates his complicity prior to the commission of the offense and

(i) wholly deprives it of effectiveness in the commission of the offense; or
(ii) gives timely warning to the law enforcement authorities or otherwise makes proper effort to prevent the commission of the offense.
(7) An accomplice may be convicted on proof of the commission of the offense and of his complicity therein, though the person claimed to have committed the offense has not been prosecuted or convicted or has been
convicted of a different offense or degree of offense or has an immunity to prosecution or conviction or has been acquitted.
Section 2.07. Liability of Corporations, Unincorporated Associations and Persons Acting, or Under a Duty to Act, in Their Behalf
(1) A corporation may be convicted of the commission of an offense if:

(a) the offense is a violation or the offense is defined by a statute other than the Code in which a legislative purpose to impose liability on corporations plainly appears and the conduct is performed by an
agent of the corporation acting in behalf of the corporation within the scope of his office or employment, except that if the law defining the offense designates the agents for whose conduct the corporation is accountable
or the circumstances under which it is accountable, such provisions shall apply; or

p. 1225
p. 1226

(b) the offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty of affirmative performance imposed on corporations by law; or

(c) the commission of the offense was authorized, requested, commanded, performed or recklessly tolerated by the board of directors or by a high managerial agent acting in behalf of the corporation within
the scope of his office or employment.

(2) When absolute liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a legislative purpose to impose liability on a corporation shall be assumed, unless the contrary plainly appears.
(3) An unincorporated association may be convicted of the commission of an offense if:

(a) the offense is defined by a statute other than the Code which expressly provides for the liability of such an association and the conduct is performed by an agent of the association acting in behalf of the
association within the scope of his office or employment, except that if the law defining the offense designates the agents for whose conduct the association is accountable or the circumstances under which it is ac-
countable, such provisions shall apply; or

(b) the offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty of affirmative performance imposed on associations by law.

(4) As used in this Section:
(a) “corporation” does not include an entity organized as or by a governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program;

(b) “agent” means any director, officer, servant, employee or other person authorized to act in behalf of the corporation or association and, in the case of an unincorporated association, a member of such
association;

(©) “high managerial agent” means an officer of a corporation or an unincorporated association, or, in the case of a partnership, a partner, or any other agent of a corporation or association having duties of
such responsibility that his conduct may fairly be assumed to represent the policy of the corporation or association.

(5) In any prosecution of a corporation or an unincorporated association for the commission of an offense included within the terms of Subsection (1)(a) or Subsection (3)(a) of this Section, other than an offense for which
absolute liability has been imposed, it shall be a defense if the defendant proves by a preponderance of evidence that the high managerial agent having supervisory responsibility over the subject matter of the offense employed due
diligence to prevent its commission. This paragraph shall not apply if it is plainly inconsistent with the legislative purpose in defining the particular offense.

(6) (a) A person is legally accountable for any conduct he performs or causes to be performed in the name of the corporation or an unincorporated association or in its behalf to the same extent as if it were performed in
his own name or behalf.

(b) Whenever a duty to act is imposed by law upon a corporation or an unincorporated association, any agent of the corporation or association having primary responsibility for the discharge of the duty is
legally accountable for a reckless omission to perform the required act to the same extent as if the duty were imposed by law directly upon himself.
p. 1226
p. 1227
(c) When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of his legal accountability for the conduct of a corporation or an unincorporated association, he is subject to the sentence authorized by law when a
natural person is convicted of an offense of the grade and the degree involved.
Section 2.08. Intoxication

(1) Except as provided in Subsection (4) of this Section, intoxication of the actor is not a defense unless it negatives an element of the offense.

(2) When recklessness establishes an element of the offense, if the actor, due to self-induced intoxication, is unaware of a risk of which he would have been aware had he been sober, such unawareness is immaterial.

(3) Intoxication does not, in itself, constitute mental disease within the meaning of Section 4.01.

(4) Intoxication which (a) is not self-induced or (b) is pathological is an affirmative defense if by reason of such intoxication the actor at the time of his conduct lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate its criminality
[wrongfulness] or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law.

(5) Definitions. In this Section unless a different meaning plainly is required:

(a) “intoxication” means a disturbance of mental or physical capacities resulting from the introduction of substances into the body;
(b) “self-induced intoxication” means intoxication caused by substances which the actor knowingly introduces into his body, the tendency of which to cause intoxication he knows or ought to know, unless he
introduces them pursuant to medical advice or under such circumstances as would afford a defense to a charge of crime;
(c) “pathological intoxication” means intoxication grossly excessive in degree, given the amount of the intoxicant, to which the actor does not know he is susceptible.
Section 2.09. Duress

(1) It is an affirmative defense that the actor engaged in the conduct charged to constitute an offense because he was coerced to do so by the use of, of a threat to use, unlawful force against his person or the person of
another, which a person of reasonable firmness in his situation would have been unable to resist.

(2) The defense provided by this Section is unavailable if the actor recklessly placed himself in a situation in which it was probable that he would be subjected to duress. The defense is also unavailable if he was negligent
in placing himself in such a situation, whenever negligence suffices to establish culpability for the offense charged.

(3) Itis not a defense that a woman acted on the command of her husband, unless she acted under such coercion as would establish a defense under this Section. [The presumption that a woman, acting in the presence
of her husband, is coerced is abolished.]
(4) When the conduct of the actor would otherwise be justifiable under Section 3.02, this Section does not preclude such defense.
p. 1227
p. 1228
Section 2.10. Military Orders
It is an affirmative defense that the actor, in engaging in the conduct charged to constitute an offense, does no more than execute an order of his superior in the armed services which he does not know to be unlawful.
Section 2.11. Consent
(1) In General. The consent of the victim to conduct charged to constitute an offense or to the result thereof is a defense if such consent negatives an element of the offense or precludes the infliction of the harm or evil
sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense.
(2) Consent to Bodily Harm. When conduct is charged to constitute an offense because it causes or threatens bodily harm, consent to such conduct or to the infliction of such harm is a defense if:
(a) the bodily harm consented to or threatened by the conduct consented to is not serious; or
(b) the conduct and the harm are reasonably foreseeable hazards of joint participation in a lawful athletic contest or competitive sport; or
(c) the consent establishes a justification for the conduct under Article 3 of the Code.
(3) Ineffective Consent. Unless otherwise provided by the Code or by the law defining the offense, assent does not constitute consent if:
(a) itis given by a person who is legally incompetent to authorize the conduct charged to constitute the offense; or
(b) it is given by a person who by reason of youth, mental disease or defect or intoxication is manifestly unable or known by the actor to be unable to make a reasonable judgment as to the nature or harmful-
ness of the conduct charged to constitute the offense; or
(0) it is given by a person whose improvident consent is sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense; or
(d) it is induced by force, duress or deception of a kind sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense.
Section 2.12. De Minimis Infractions
The Court shall dismiss a prosecution if, having regard to the nature of the conduct charged to constitute an offense and the nature of the attendant circumstances, it finds that the defendant's conduct:
(1) was within a customary license or tolerance, neither expressly negatived by the person whose interest was infringed nor inconsistent with the purpose of the law defining the offense; or
(2) did not actually cause or threaten the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense or did so only to an extent too trivial to warrant the condemnation of conviction; or
(3) presents such other extenuations that it cannot reasonably be regarded as envisaged by the legislature in forbidding the offense.
Section 2.13. Entrapment
(1) A public law enforcement official or a person acting in cooperation with such an official perpetrates an entrapment if for the purpose of obtaining
p. 1228
p. 1229

evidence of the commission of an offense, he induces or encourages another person to engage in conduct constituting such offense by either:
(a) making knowingly false representations designed to induce the belief that such conduct is not prohibited; or
(b) employing methods of persuasion or inducement which create a substantial risk that such an offense will be committed by persons other than those who are ready to commit it.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection (3) of this Section, a person prosecuted for an offense shall be acquitted if he proves by a preponderance of evidence that his conduct occurred in response to an entrapment. The
issue of entrapment shall be tried by the Court in the absence of the jury.
(3) The defense afforded by this Section is unavailable when causing or threatening bodily injury is an element of the offense charged and the prosecution is based on conduct causing or threatening such injury to a
person other than the person perpetrating the entrapment.
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF JUSTIFICATION
Section 3.01. Justification an Affirmative Defense; Civil Remedies Unaffected
(1) In any prosecution based on conduct which is justifiable under this Article, justification is an affirmative defense.
(2) The fact that conduct is justifiable under this Article does not abolish or impair any remedy for such conduct which is available in any civil action.
Section 3.02. Justification Generally: Choice of Evils
(1) Conduct which the actor believes to be necessary to avoid a harm or evil to himself or to another is justifiable, provided that:
(a) the harm or evil sought to be avoided by such conduct is greater than that sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense charged; and
(b) neither the Code nor other law defining the offense provides exceptions or defenses dealing with the specific situation involved; and
(c) a legislative purpose to exclude the justification claimed does not otherwise plainly appear.
(2) When the actor was reckless or negligent in bringing about the situation requiring a choice of harms or evils or in appraising the necessity for his conduct, the justification afforded by this section is unavailable in a
prosecution for any offense for which recklessness or negligence, as the case may be, suffices to establish culpability.
Section 3.03. Execution of Public Duty
(1) Except as provided in Subsection (2) of this Section, conduct is justifiable when it is required or authorized by:
(a) the law defining the duties or functions of a public officer or the assistance to be rendered to such officer in the performance of his duties; or
(b) the law governing the execution of legal process; or
p.1229
p.1230
(c) the judgment or order of a competent court or tribunal; or
(d) the law governing the armed services or the lawful conduct of war; or
(e) any other provision of law imposing a public duty.
(2) The other sections of this Article apply to:
(a) the use of force upon or toward the person of another for any of the purposes dealt with in such sections; and

(b) the use of deadly force for any purpose, unless the use of such force is otherwise expressly authorized by law or occurs in the lawful conduct of war.
(3) The justification afforded by Subsection (1) of this Section applies:
(a) when the actor believes his conduct to be required or authorized by the judgment or direction of a competent court or tribunal or in the lawful execution of legal process, notwithstanding lack of jurisdiction
of the court or defect in the legal process; and
(b) when the actor believes his conduct to be required or authorized to assist a public officer in the performance of his duties, notwithstanding that the officer exceeded his legal authority.
Section 3.04. Use of Force in Self-Protection
(1) Use of Force Justifiable for Protection of the Person. Subject to the provisions of this Section and of Section 3.09, the use of force upon or toward another person is justifiable when the actor believes that such force is
immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting himself against the use of unlawful force by such other person on the present occasion.
(2) Limitations on Justifying Necessity for Use of Force.
(a) The use of force is not justifiable under this Section:
(i) to resist an arrest which the actor knows is being made by a peace officer, although the arrest is unlawful; or
(ii) to resist force used by the occupier or possessor of property or by another person on his behalf, where the actor knows that the person using the force is doing so under a claim of right to
protect the property, except that this limitation shall not apply if:
(1) the actor is a public officer acting in the performance of his duties or a person lawfully assisting him therein or a person making or assisting in a lawful arrest; or
(2) the actor has been unlawfully dispossessed of the property and is making a re-entry or recaption justified by Section 3.06; or
(3) the actor believes that such force is necessary to protect himself against death or serious bodily harm.
(b) The use of deadly force is not justifiable under this Section unless the actor believes that such force is necessary to protect himself against death, serious bodily harm, kidnapping or sexual intercourse
compelled by force or threat; nor is it justifiable if:
(i) the actor, with the purpose of causing death or serious bodily harm, provoked the use of force against himself in the same encounter; or
(ii) the actor knows that he can avoid the necessity of using such force with complete safety by retreating or by surrendering possession
p. 1230
p.1231
of a thing to a person asserting a claim of right thereto or by complying with a demand that he abstain from any action which he has no duty to take, except that:
(1) the actor is not obliged to retreat from his dwelling or place of work, unless he was the initial aggressor or is assailed in his place of work by another person whose place of work the actor knows it to be; and
(2) a public officer justified in using force in the performance of his duties or a person justified in using force in his assistance or a person justified in using force in making an arrest or preventing an escape is not obliged
to desist from efforts to perform such duty, effect such arrest or prevent such escape because of resistance or threatened resistance by or on behalf of the person against whom such action is directed.
(c) Except as required by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this Subsection, a person employing protective force may estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances as he believes them to be when the force
is used, without retreating, surrendering possession, doing any other act which he has no legal duty to do or abstaining from any lawful action.
(3) Use of Confinement as Protective Force. The justification afforded by this Section extends to the use of confinement as protective force only if the actor takes all reasonable measures to terminate the confinement as
soon as he knows that he safely can, unless the person confined has been arrested on a charge of crime.
Section 3.05. Use of Force for the Protection of Other Persons

(1) Subject to the provisions of this Section and of Section 3.09, the use of force upon or toward the person of another is justifiable to protect a third person when:
(a) the actor would be justified under Section 3.04 in using such force to protect himself against the injury he believes to be threatened to the person whom he seeks to protect; and
(b) under the circumstances as the actor believes them to be, the person whom he seeks to protect would be justified in using such protective force; and
(c) the actor believes that his intervention is necessary for the protection of such other person.
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection (1) of this Section:
(a) when the actor would be obliged under Section 3.04 to retreat, to surrender the possession of a thing or to comply with a demand before using force in self-protection, he is not obliged to do so before
using force for the protection of another person, unless he knows that he can thereby secure the complete safety of such other person; and
(b) when the person whom the actor seeks to protect would be obliged under Section 3.04 to retreat, to surrender the possession of a thing or to comply with a demand if he knew that he could obtain com-
plete safety by so doing, the actor is obliged to try to cause him to do so before using force in his protection if the actor knows that he can obtain complete safety in that way; and
p. 1231
p. 1232
(c) neither the actor nor the person whom he seeks to protect is obliged to retreat when in the other's dwelling or place of work to any greater extent than in his own.
Section 3.06. Use of Force for the Protection of Property
(1) Use of Force Justifiable for Protection of Property. Subject to the provisions of this Section and of Section 3.09, the use of force upon or toward the person of another is justifiable when the actor believes that such
force is immediately necessary:
(a) to prevent or terminate an unlawful entry or other trespass upon land or a trespass against or the unlawful carrying away of tangible, movable property, provided that such land or movable property is, or is
believed by the actor to be, in his possession or in the possession of another person for whose protection he acts; or
(b) to effect an entry or re-entry upon land or to retake tangible movable property, provided that the actor believes that he or the person by whose authority he acts or a person from whom he or such other
person derives title was unlawfully dispossessed of such land or movable property and is entitled to possession, and provided, further, that:
(i) the force is used immediately or on fresh pursuit after such dispossession; or
(ii) the actor believes that the person against whom he uses force has no claim of right to the possession of the property and, in the case of land, the circumstances, as the actor believes them to
be, are of such urgency that it would be an exceptional hardship to postpone the entry or re-entry until a court order is obtained.
(2) Meaning of Possession. For the purposes of Subsection (1) of this Section:
(a) a person who has parted with the custody of property to another who refuses to restore it to him is no longer in possession, unless the property is movable and was and still is located on land in his
possession;
(b) a person who has been dispossessed of land does not regain possession thereof merely by setting foot thereon;
(c) a person who has a license to use or occupy real property is deemed to be in possession thereof except against the licensor acting under claim of right.
(3) Limitations on Justifiable Use of Force.
(a) Request to Desist. The use of force is justifiable under this Section only if the actor first requests the person against whom such force is used to desist from his interference with the property, unless the
actor believes that:
(i) such request would be useless; or

(ii) it would be dangerous to himself or another person to make the request; or
(iii) substantial harm will be done to the physical condition of the property which is sought to be protected before the request can effectively be made.
(b) Exclusion of Trespasser. The use of force to prevent or terminate a trespass is not justifiable under this Section if the actor knows that the
p. 1232
p. 1233
exclusion of the trespasser will expose him to substantial danger of serious bodily harm.
(c) Resistance of Lawful Re-entry or Recaption. The use of force to prevent an entry or re-entry upon land or the recaption of movable property is not justifiable under this Section, although the actor believes
that such re-entry or recaption is unlawful, if:
(i) the re-entry or recaption is made by or on behalf of a person who was actually dispossessed of the property; and
(ii) it is otherwise justifiable under paragraph (1)(b) of this Section.
(d) Use of Deadly Force. The use of deadly force is not justifiable under this Section unless the actor believes that:
(i) the person against whom the force is used is attempting to dispossess him of his dwelling otherwise than under a claim of right to its possession; or
(ii) the person against whom the force is used is attempting to commit or consummate arson, burglary, robbery or other felonious theft or property destruction and either:
(1) has employed or threatened deadly force against or in the presence of the actor; or
(2) the use of force other than deadly force to prevent the commission or the consummation of the crime would expose the actor or another in his presence to substantial danger of serious bodily harm.
(4) Use of Confinement as Protective Force. The justification afforded by this Section extends to the use of confinement as protective force only if the actor takes all reasonable measures to terminate the confinement as
soon as he knows that he can do so with safety to the property, unless the person confined has been arrested on a charge of crime.
(5) Use of Device to Protect Property. The justification afforded by this Section extends to the use of a device for the purpose of protecting property only if:
(a) the device is not designed to cause or known to create a substantial risk of causing death or serious bodily harm; and
(b) the use of the particular device to protect the property from entry or trespass is reasonable under the circumstances, as the actor believes them to be; and
(c) the device is one customarily used for such a purpose or reasonable care is taken to make known to probable intruders the fact that it is used.
(6) Use of Force to Pass Wrongful Obstructor. The use of force to pass a person whom the actor believes to be purposely or knowingly and unjustifiably obstructing the actor from going to a place to which he may lawfully
90 is justifiable, provided that:
(a) the actor believes that the person against whom he uses force has no claim of right to obstruct the actor; and
(b) the actor is not being obstructed from entry or movement on land which he knows to be in the possession or custody of the person obstructing him, or in the possession or custody of another person by
whose authority the obstructor acts, unless the circumstances, as the actor believes them to be, are of such urgency that it would not be reasonable to postpone the entry or movement on such land until a court order is
obtained; and
p.1233
(c) the force used is not greater than would be justifiable if the person obstructing the actor were using force against him to prevent his passage.

Section 3.07. Use of Force in Law Enforcement
(1) Use of Force justifiable to Effect an Arrest. Subject to the provisions of this Section and of Section 3.09, the use of force upon or toward the person of another is justifiable when the actor is making or assisting in
making an arrest and the actor believes that such force is immediately necessary to effect a lawful arrest.
(2) Limitations on the Use of Force.
(a) The use of force is not justifiable under this Section unless:
(i) the actor makes known the purpose of the arrest or believes that it is otherwise known by or cannot reasonably be made known to the person to be arrested; and
(ii) when the arrest is made under a warrant, the warrant is valid or believed by the actor to be valid.
(b) The use of deadly force is not justifiable under this Section unless:
(i) the arrest is for a felony; and
(ii) the person effecting the arrest is authorized to act as a peace officer or is assisting a person whom he believes to be authorized to act as a peace officer; and
(iii) the actor believes that the force employed creates no substantial risk of injury to innocent persons; and
(iv) the actor believes that:
(1) the crime for which the arrest is made involved conduct including the use or threatened use of deadly force; or
(2) there is a substantial risk that the person to be arrested will cause death or serious bodily harm if his apprehension is delayed.
(3) Use of Force to Prevent Escape from Custody. The use of force to prevent the escape of an arrested person from custody is justifiable when the force could justifiably have been employed to effect the arrest under
which the person is in custody, except that a guard or other person authorized to act as a peace officer is justified in using any force, including deadly force, which he believes to be immediately necessary to prevent the escape of a
person from a jail, prison, or other institution for the detention of persons charged with or convicted of a crime.
(A) Use of Force by Private Person Assisting an Unlawful Arrest.
(a) A private person who is summoned by a peace officer to assist in effecting an unlawful arrest, is justified in using any force which he would be justified in using if the arrest were lawful, provided that he
does not believe the arrest is unlawful.
(b) A private person who assists another private person in effecting an unlawful arrest, or who, not being summoned, assists a peace officer in effecting an unlawful arrest, is justified in using any force which
he would be justified in using if the arrest were lawful, provided that (i) he believes the arrest is lawful, and (ii) the arrest would be lawful if the facts were as he believes them to be.
(5) Use of Force to Prevent Suicide or the Commission of a Crime.
p.1234
p. 1235
(a) The use of force upon or toward the person of another is justifiable when the actor believes that such force is immediately necessary to prevent such other person from committing suicide, inflicting serious
bodily harm upon himself, committing or consummating the commission of a crime involving or threatening bodily harm, damage to or loss of property or a breach of the peace, except that:
(i) any limitations imposed by the other provisions of this Article on the justifiable use of force in self-protection, for the protection of others, the protection of property, the effectuation of an arrest
or the prevention of an escape from custody shall apply notwithstanding the criminality of the conduct against which such force is used; and
(ii) the use of deadly force is not in any event justifiable under this Subsection unless:

(1) the actor believes that there is a substantial risk that the person whom he seeks to prevent from committing a crime will cause death or serious bodily harm to another unless the
commission or the consummation of the crime is prevented and that the use of such force presents no substantial risk of injury to innocent persons; or
(2) the actor believes that the use of such force is necessary to suppress a riot or mutiny after the rioters or mutineers have been ordered to disperse and warned, in any particular man-
ner that the law may require, that such force will be used if they do not obey.
(b) The jurisdiction afforded by this Subsection extends to the use of confinement as preventive force only if the actor takes all reasonable measures to terminate the confinement as soon as he knows that he
safely can, unless the person confined has been arrested on a charge of crime.
Section 3.08. Use of Force by Persons with Special Responsibility for Care, Discipline or Safety of Others
The use of force upon or toward the person of another is justifiable if:
(1) the actor is the parent or guardian or other person similarly responsible for the general care and supervision of a minor or a person acting at the request of such parent, guardian or other responsible person and:
(a) the force is used for the purpose of safeguarding or promoting the welfare of the minor, including the prevention or punishment of his misconduct; and
(b) the force used is not designed to cause or known to create a substantial risk of causing death, serious bodily harm, disfigurement, extreme pain or mental distress or gross degradation; or
(2) the actor is a teacher or a person otherwise entrusted with the care or supervision for a special purpose of a minor and:
(a) the actor believes that the force used is necessary to further such special purpose, including the maintenance of reasonable discipline in a school, class or other group, and that the use of such force is
consistent with the welfare of the minor; and
(b) the degree of force, if it had been used by the parent or guardian of the minor, would not be unjustifiable under Subsection (1)(b) of this Section; or
p. 1235
p. 1236
(3) the actor is the guardian or other person similarly responsible for the general care and supervision of an incompetent person; and:
(a) the force is used for the purpose of safeguarding or promoting the welfare of the incompetent person, including the prevention of his misconduct, or, when such incompetent person is in a hospital or other
institution for his care and custody, for the maintenance of reasonable discipline in such institution; and
(b) the force used is not designed to cause or known to create a substantial risk of causing death, serious bodily harm, disfigurement, extreme or unnecessary pain, mental distress, or humiliation; or
(4) the actor is a doctor or other therapist or a person assisting him at his direction, and:
(a) the force is used for the purpose of administering a recognized form of treatment which the actor believes to be adapted to promoting the physical or mental health of the patient; and
(b) the treatment is administered with the consent of the patient or, if the patient is a minor or an incompetent person, with the consent of his parent or guardian or other person legally competent to consent
in his behalf, or the treatment is administered in an emergency when the actor believes that no one competent to consent can be consulted and that a reasonable person, wishing to safeguard the welfare of the patient,
would consent; or
(5) the actor is a warden or other authorized official of a correctional institution, and:
(a) he believes that the force used is necessary for the purpose of enforcing the lawful rules or procedures of the institution, unless his belief in the lawfulness of the rule or procedure sought to be enforced is,
erroneous and his error is due to ignorance or mistake as to the provisions of the Code, any other provision of the criminal law or the law governing the administration of the institution; and
(b) the nature or degree of force used is not forbidden by Article 303 or 304 of the Code; and
(0) if deadly force is used, its use is otherwise justifiable under this Article; or

(6) the actor is a person responsible for the safety of a vessel or an aircraft or a person acting at his direction, and
(a) he believes that the force used is necessary to prevent interference with the operation of the vessel or aircraft or obstruction of the execution of a lawful order, unless his belief in the lawfulness of the order
is erroneous and his error is due to ignorance or mistake as to the law defining his authority; and
(b) if deadly force is used, its use is otherwise justifiable under this Article; or
(7) the actor is a person who is authorized or required by law to maintain order or decorum in a vehicle, train or other carrier or in a place where others are assembled, and:
(a) he believes that the force used is necessary for such purpose; and
p. 1236
p. 1237
(b) the force used is not designed to cause or known to create a substantial risk of causing death, bodily harm, or extreme mental distress.
Section 3.09. Mistake of Law as to Unlawfulness of Force or Legality of Arrest; Reckless or Negligent Use of Otherwise Justifiable Force; Reckless or Negligent Injury or Risk of Injury to Innocent Persons

(1) The justification afforded by Sections 3.04 to 3.07, inclusive, is unavailable when:

(a) the actor's belief in the unlawfulness of the force or conduct against which he employs protective force or his belief in the lawfulness of an arrest which he endeavors to effect by force is erroneous; and
(b) his error is due to ignorance or mistake as to the provisions of the Code, any other provision of the criminal law or the law governing the legality of an arrest or search.

(2) When the actor believes that the use of force upon or toward the person of another is necessary for any of the purposes for which such belief would establish a justification under Sections 3.03 to 3.08 but the actor is
reckless or negligent in having such belief or in acquiring or failing to acquire any knowledge or belief which is material to the justifiability of his use of force, the justification afforded by those Sections is unavailable in a prosecution
for an offense for which recklessness or negligence, as the case may be, suffices to establish culpability.

(3) When the actor is justified under Sections 3.03 to 3.08 in using force upon or toward the person of another but he recklessly or negligently injures or creates a risk of injury to innocent persons, the justification afforded
by those Sections is unavailable in a prosecution for such recklessness or negligence towards innocent persons.

Section 3.10. Justification in Property Crimes
Conduct involving the appropriation, seizure or destruction of, damage to, intrusion on or interference with property is justifiable under circumstances which would establish a defense of privilege in a civil action based thereon, unless:
(1) the Code or the law defining the offense deals with the specific situation involved; or
(2) a legislative purpose to exclude the justification claimed otherwise plainly appears.
Section 3.11. Definitions
In this Article, unless a different meaning plainly is required:

(1) “unlawful force” means force, including confinement, which is employed without the consent of the person against whom it is directed and the employment of which constitutes an offense or actionable tort or would
constitute such offense or tort except for a defense (such as the absence of intent, negligence, or mental capacity; duress; youth; or diplomatic status) not amounting to a privilege to use the force. Assent constitutes consent, within
the meaning of this Section, whether or not it otherwise is legally effective, except assent to the infliction of death or serious bodily harm.

p. 1287
p. 1238

(2) “deadly force” means force which the actor uses with the purpose of causing or which he knows to create a substantial risk of causing death or serious bodily harm. Purposely firing a firearm in the direction of another
person or at a vehicle in which another person is believed to be constitutes deadly force. A threat to cause death or serious bodily harm, by the production of a weapon or otherwise, so long as the actor's purpose is limited to cre-
ating an apprehension that he will use deadly force if necessary, does not constitute deadly force.

(3) “dwelling” means any building or structure, though movable or temporary, or a portion thereof, which is for the time being the actor's home or place of lodging.

ARTICLE 4. RESPONSIBILITY
Section 4.01. Mental Disease or Defect Excluding Responsibility

(1) A person is not responsible for criminal conduct if at the time of such conduct as a result of mental disease or defect he lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate the criminality [wrongfulness] of his conduct or
to conform his conduct to the requirements of law.

(2) As used in this Article, the terms “mental disease or defect” do not include an abnormality manifested only by repeated criminal or otherwise anti-social conduct.

Section 4.02. Evidence of Mental Disease or Defect Admissible When Relevant to Element of the Offense; [Mental Disease or Defect Impairing Capacity as Ground for Mitigation of Punishment in Capital Cases]

(1) Evidence that the defendant suffered from a mental disease or defect is admissible whenever it is relevant to prove that the defendant did or did not have a state of mind which is an element of the offense.

[(2) Whenever the jury or the Court is authorized to determine or to recommend whether or not the defendant shall be sentenced to death or imprisonment upon conviction, evidence that the capacity of the defendant to
appreciate the criminality [wrongfulness] of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law was impaired as a result of mental disease or defect is admissible in favor of sentence of imprisonment]

Section 4.03.Mental Disease or Defect Excluding Responsibility Is Affirmative Defense; Requirement of Notice; Form of Verdict and Judgment When Finding of Irresponsibility Is Made

(1) Mental disease or defect excluding responsibility is an affirmative defense.

(2) Evidence of mental disease or defect excluding responsibility is not admissible unless the defendant, at the time of entering his plea of not guilty or within ten days thereafter or at such later time as the Court may for
good cause permit, files a written notice of his purpose to rely on such defense.

p. 1238
p. 1239
(3) When the defendant is acquitted on the ground of mental disease or defect excluding responsibility, the verdict and the judgment shall so state.
Section 4.04. Mental Disease or Defect Excluding Fitness to Proceed
No person who as a result of mental disease or defect lacks capacity to understand the proceedings against him or to assist in his own defense shall be tried, convicted or sentenced for the commission of an offense so long as such inca-
pacity endures.
Section 4.05. Psychiatric Examination of Defendant with Respect to Mental Disease or Defect

(1) Whenever the defendant has filed a notice of intention to rely on the defense of mental disease or defect excluding responsibility, or there is reason to doubt his fitness to proceed, or reason to believe that mental
disease or defect of the defendant will otherwise become an issue in the cause, the Court shall appoint at least one qualified psychiatrist or shall request the Superintendent of the Hospital to designate at least one qualified
psychiatrist, which designation may be or include himself, to examine and report upon the mental condition of the defendant. The Court may order the defendant to be committed to a hospital or other suitable facility for the purpose

of the examination for a period of not exceeding sixty days or such longer period as the Court determines to be necessary for the purpose and may direct that a qualified psychiatrist retained by the defendant be permitted to witness
and participate in the examination.

(2) In such examination any method may be employed which is accepted by the medical profession for the examination of those alleged to be suffering from mental disease or defect.

(3) The report of the examination shall include the following: (a) a description of the nature of the examination; (b) a diagnosis of the mental condition of the defendant; (c) if the defendant suffers from a mental disease or
defect, an opinion as to his capacity to understand the proceedings against him and to assist in his own defense; (d) when a notice of intention to rely on the defense of irresponsibility has been filed, an opinion as to the extent, if
any, to which the capacity of the defendant to appreciate the criminality [wrongfulness] of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law was impaired at the time of the criminal conduct charged; and (e) when di-
rected by the Court, an opinion as to the capacity of the defendant to have a particular state of mind which is an element of the offense charged.

If the examination can not be conducted by reason of the unwillingness of the defendant to participate therein, the report shall so state and shall include, if possible, an opinion as to whether such unwilling-
ness of the defendant was the result of mental disease or defect.
The report of the examination shall be filed [in triplicate] with the clerk of the Court, who shall cause copies to be delivered to the district attorney and to counsel for the defendant.
p.1239
p. 1240
Section 4.06. Determination of Fitness to Proceed; Effect of Finding of Unfitness; Proceedings if Fitness is Regained|; Post-Commitment Hearing]

(1) When the defendant's fitness to proceed is drawn in question, the issue shall be determined by the Court. If neither the prosecuting attorney nor counsel for the defendant contests the finding of the report filed
pursuant to Section 4.05, the Court may make the determination on the basis of such report. If the finding is contested, the Court shall hold a hearing on the issue. If the report is received in evidence upon such hearing, the party
who contests the finding thereof shalll have the right to summon and to cross-examine the psychiatrists who joined in the report and to offer evidence upon the issue.

(2) If the Court determines that the defendant lacks fitness to proceed, the proceeding against him shall be suspended, except as provided in Subsection (3) [Subsections (3) and (4)] of this Section, and the Court shall
commit him to the custody of the Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health or Correction] to be placed in an appropriate institution of the Department of Mental Hygiene [Public Health or Correction] for so long as such unfit-
ness shall endure. When the Court, on its own motion or upon the application of the Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health or Correction] or the prosecuting attorney, determines, after a hearing if a hearing is requested,
that the defendant has regained fitness to proceed, the proceeding shall be resumed. If, however, the Court is of the view that so much time has elapsed since the commitment of the defendant that it would be unjust to resume the
criminal proceeding, the Court may dismiss the charge and may order the defendant to be discharged or, subject to the law governing the civil commitment of persons suffering from mental disease or defect, order the defendant to
be committed to an appropriate institution of the Department of Mental Hygiene [Public Health].

(3) The fact that the defendant is unfit to proceed does not preclude any legal objection to the prosecution which is susceptible of fair determination prior to trial and without the personal participation of the defendant.

(Alternative: (3) At any time within ninety days after commitment as provided in Subsection (2) of this Section, or at any later time with permission of the Court granted for good cause, the defendant or his counsel or the
Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health or Correction] may apply for a special post-commitment hearing. If the application is made by or on behalf of a defendant not represented by counsel, he shall be afforded a reason-
able opportunity to obtain counsel, and if he lacks funds to do so, counsel shall be assigned by the Court. The application shall be granted only if the counsel for the defendant satisfies the Court by affidavit or otherwise that as an
attorney he has reasonable grounds for a good faith belief that his client has, on the facts and the law, a defense to the charge other than mental disease or defect excluding responsibility.

[(4) If the motion for a special post-commitment hearing is granted, the hearing shall be by the Court without a jury. No evidence shall be offered at the hearing by either party on the issue of mental disease or defect as a

p. 1240
p. 1241

defense to, or in mitigation of, the crime charged. After hearing, the Court may in an appropriate case quash the indictment or other charge, or find it to be defective or insufficient, or determine that it is not proved beyond a reason-
able doubt by the evidence, or otherwise terminate the proceedings on the evidence or the law. In any such case, unless all defects in the proceedings are promptly cured, the Court shall terminate the commitment ordered under
Subsection (2) of this Section and order the defendant to be discharged or, subject to the law governing the civil commitment of persons suffering from mental disease or defect, order the defendant to be committed to an appropri-
ate institution of the Department of Mental Hygiene [Public Health].]

Section 4.07. Determination of Irresponsibility on Basis of Report; Access to Defendant by Psychiatrist of His Own Choice; Form of Expert Testimony When Issue of Responsibility Is Tried

(1) If the report filed pursuant to Section 4.05 finds that the defendant at the time of the criminal conduct charged sutfered from a mental disease or defect which substantially impaired his capacity to appreciate the
criminality [wrongfulness] of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law, and the Court, after a hearing if a hearing is requested by the prosecuting attorney or the defendant, is satisfied that such impairment
was sufficient to exclude responsibility, the Court on motion of the defendant shall enter judgment of acquittal on the ground of mental disease or defect excluding responsibility.

(2) When, notwithstanding the report filed pursuant to Section 4.05, the defendant wishes to be examined by a qualified psychiatrist or other expert of his own choice, such examiner shall be permitted to have reasonable
access to the defendant for the purposes of such examination.

(3) Upon the trial, the psychiatrists who reported pursuant to Section 4.05 may be called as witnesses by the prosecution, the defendant or the Court. If the issue is being tried before a jury, the jury may be informed that
the psychiatrists were designated by the Court or by the Superintendent of the __ Hospital at the request of the Court, as the case may be. If called by the Court, the witness shall be subject to cross-examination by the prose-
cution and by the defendant. Both the prosecution and the defendant may summon any other qualified psychiatrist or other expert to testify, but no one who has not examined the defendant shall be competent to testify to an expert
opinion with respect to the mental condition or responsibility of the defendant, as distinguished from the validity of the procedure followed by, or the general scientific propositions stated by, another witness.

(4) When a psychiatrist or other expert who has examined the defendant testifies concerning his mental condition, he shall be permitted to make a statement as to the nature of his examination, his diagnosis of the
mental condition of the defendant at the time of the commission of the offense charged and his opinion as to the extent, if any, to which the capacity of the defendant to appreciate the criminality [wrongfulness] of his conduct or to.
conform his conduct to the requirements of law or to have a particular state of mind which is an element of the offense charged was impaired as a result

p. 1241
p. 1242
of mental disease or defect at that time. He shall be permitted to make any explanation reasonably serving to clarify his diagnosis and opinion and may be cross-examined as to any matter bearing on his competency or credibility
or the validity of his diagnosis or opinion.
Section 4.08. Legal Effect of Acquittal on the Ground of Mental Disease or Defect Excluding Responsibility; Commitment; Release or Discharge

(1) When a defendant is acquitted on the ground of mental disease or defect excluding responsibility, the Court shall order him to be committed to the custody of the Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health] to
be placed in an appropriate institution for custody, care and treatment.

(2) If the Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health] is of the view that a person committed to his custody, pursuant to paragraph (1) of this Section, may be discharged or released on condition without danger to
himself or to others, he shall make application for the discharge or release of such person in a report to the Court by which such person was committed and shall transmit a copy of such application and report to the prosecuting
attorney of the county [parish] from which the defendant was committed. The Court shall thereupon appoint at least two qualified psychiatrists to examine such person and to report within sixty days, or such longer period as the
Court determines to be necessary for the purpose, their opinion as to his mental condition. To facilitate such examination and the proceedings thereon, the Court may cause such person to be confined in any institution located near
the place where the Court sits, which may hereafter be designated by the Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health] as suitable for the temporary detention of irresponsible persons.

(3) If the Court is satisfied by the report filed pursuant to paragraph (2) of this Section and such testimony of the reporting psychiatrists as the Court deems necessary that the committed person may be discharged or
released on condition without danger to himself or others, the Court shall order his discharge or his release on such conditions as the Court determines to be necessary. If the Court is not so satisfied, it shall promptly order a hear-

ing to determine whether such person may safely be discharged or released. Any such hearing shall be deemed a civil proceeding and the burden shall be upon the committed person to prove that he may safely be discharged or
released. According to the determination of the Court upon the hearing, the committed person shall thereupon be discharged or released on such conditions as the Court determines to be necessary, or shall be recommitted to the
custody of the Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health], subject to discharge or release only in accordance with the procedure prescribed above for a first hearing.

(4) If, within [five] years after the conditional release of a committed person, the Court shall determine, after hearing evidence, that the conditions of release have not been fulfilled and that for the safety of such person or
for the safety of others his conditional release should be revoked, the Court shall forthwith order him to be recommitted to the Commissioner of Mental

p. 1242
p.1243
Hygiene [Public Health], subject to discharge or release only in accordance with the procedure prescribed above for a first hearing.

(5) A committed person may make application for his discharge or release to the Court by which he was committed, and the procedure to be followed upon such application shall be the same as that prescribed above in
the case of an application by the Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health]. However, no such application by a committed person need be considered until he has been confined for a period of not less than [six months] from
the date of the order of commitment, and if the determination of the Court be adverse to the application, such person shall not be permitted to file a further application until [one year] has elapsed from the date of any preceding hear-
ing on an application for his release or discharge.

Section 4.09. Statements for Purposes of Examination or Treatment Inadmissible Except on Issue of Mental Condition [omitted]
Section 4.10. Immaturity Excluding Criminal Conviction; Transfer of Proceedings to Juvenile Court

(1) A person shall not be tried for or convicted of an offense if:

(a) at the time of the conduct charged to constitute the offense he was less than sixteen years of age [, in which case the Juvenile Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction]; or
(b) at the time of the conduct charged to constitute the offense he was sixteen or seventeen years of age, unless:

(i) the Juvenile Court has no jurisdiction over him, or,

(ii) the Juvenile Court has entered an order waiving jurisdiction and consenting to the institution of criminal proceedings against him.

(2) No court shall have jurisdiction to try or convict a person of an offense if criminal proceedings against him are barred by Subsection (1) of this Section. When it appears that a person charged with the commission of
an offense may be of such an age that criminal proceedings may be barred under Subsection (1) of this Section, the Court shall hold a hearing thereon, and the burden shall be on the prosecution to establish to the satisfaction of the
Court that the criminal proceeding is not barred upon such grounds. If the Court determines that the proceeding is barred, custody of the person charged shall be surrendered to the Juvenile Court, and the case, including all papers
and processes relating thereto, shall be transferred.

ARTICLE 5. INCHOATE CRIMES
Section 5.01. Criminal Attempt
(1) Definition of Attempt. A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for commission of the crime, he:
(a) purposely engages in conduct which would constitute the crime if the attendant circumstances were as he believes them to be; or
p. 1243
p. 1244

(b) when causing a particular result is an element of the crime, does or omits to do anything with the purpose of causing or with the belief that it will cause such result without further conduct on his part; or
(c) purposely does or omits to do anything which, under the circumstances as he believes them to be, is an act or omission constituting a substantial step in a course of conduct planned to culminate in his
commission of the crime.

(2) Conduct Which May Be Held Substantial Step Under Subsection (1)(c). Conduct shall not be held to constitute a substantial step under Subsection (1)(c) of this Section unless it is strongly corroborative of the actor's
criminal purpose. Without negativing the sufficiency of other conduct, the following, if strongly corroborative of the actor's criminal purpose, shall not be held insufficient as a matter of law:

(a) lying in wait, searching for or following the contemplated victim of the crime;

(b) enticing or seeking to entice the contemplated victim of the crime to go to the place contemplated for its commission;

(c) reconnoitering the place contemplated for the commission of the crime;

() unlawful entry of a structure, vehicle or enclosure in which it is contemplated that the crime will be committed;

(e) possession of materials to be employed in the commission of the crime, which are specially designed for such unlawful use or which can serve no lawful purpose of the actor under the circumstances;

(£) possession, collection or fabrication of materials to be employed in the commission of the crime, at or near the place contemplated for its commission, where such possession, collection or fabrication
serves no lawful purpose of the actor under the circumstances;

(g) soliciting an innocent agent to engage in conduct constituting an element of the crime.

(3) Conduct Designed to Aid Another in Commission of a Crime. A person who engages in conduct designed to aid another to commit a crime which would establish his complicity under Section 2.06 if the crime were
committed by such other person, is guilty of an attempt to commit the crime, although the crime is not committed or attempted by such other person.

(4) Renunciation of Criminal Purpose. When the actor's conduct would otherwise constitute an attempt under Subsection (1)(b) of (1)(c) of this Section, it is an affirmative defense that he abandoned his effort to commit
the crime or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of his criminal purpose. The establishment of such defense does not, however, affect the liability of an ac-
complice who did not join in such abandonment or prevention.

Within the meaning of this Article, renunciation of criminal purpose is not voluntary if it is motivated, in whole or in part, by circumstances, not present or apparent at the inception of the actor’s course of con-
duct, which increase the probability of detection or apprehension or which make more difficult the accomplishment of the criminal purpose. Renunciation
p. 1244
p. 1245
is not complete if it is motivated by a decision to postpone the criminal conduct until a more advantageous time or to transfer the criminal effort to another but similar objective or victim.
Section 5.02. Criminal Solicitation

(1) Definition of Solicitation. A person is guilty of solicitation to commit a crime if with the purpose of promoting or facilitating its commission he commands, encourages or requests another person to engage in specific
conduct which would constitute such crime or an attempt to commit such crime or which would establish his complicity in its commission or attempted commission.

(2) Uncommunicated Solicitation. It is immaterial under Subsection (1) of this Section that the actor fails to communicate with the person he solicits to commit a crime if his conduct was designed to effect such
communication.

(3) Renunciation of Criminal Purpose. It is an affirmative defense that the actor, after soliciting another person to commit a crime, persuaded him not to do so or otherwise prevented the commission of the crime, under
circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of his criminal purpose.

Section 5.03. Criminal Conspiracy

(1) Definition of Conspiracy. A person is guilty of conspiracy with another person or persons to commit a crime if with the purpose of promoting or facilitating its commission he:
(a) agrees with such other person or persons that they or one or more of them will engage in conduct which constitutes such crime or an attempt or solicitation to commit such crime; or
(b) agrees to aid such other person or persons in the planning or commission of such crime or of an attempt or solicitation to commit such crime.
(2) Scope of Conspiratorial Relationship. If a person guilty of conspiracy, as defined by Subsection (1) of this Section, knows that a person with whom he conspires to commit a crime has conspired with another person
or persons to commit the same crime, he is guilty of conspiring with such other person or persons, whether or not he knows their identity, to commit such crime.
(3) Conspiracy With Multiple Criminal Objectives. If a person conspires to commit a number of crimes, he is guilty of only one conspiracy so long as such multiple crimes are the object of the same agreement or contin-
uous conspiratorial relationship.
(4) Joinder and Venue in Conspiracy Prosecutions.
(a) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this Subsection, two or more persons charged with criminal conspiracy may be prosecuted jointly if:
(i) they are charged with conspiring with one another; or
(ii) the conspiracies alleged, whether they have the same or different parties, are so related that they constitute different aspects of a scheme of organized criminal conduct.
p. 1245
p. 1246
(b) In any joint prosecution under paragraph (a) of this Subsection:
(i) no defendant shall be charged with a conspiracy in any county [parish or district] other than one in which he entered into such conspiracy or in which an overt act pursuant to such conspiracy
was done by him or by a person with whom he conspired; and
(ii) neither the liability of any defendant nor the admissibility against him of evidence of acts or declarations of another shall be enlarged by such joinder; and
(iii) the Court shall order a severance or take a special verdict as to any defendant who so requests, if it deems it necessary or appropriate to promote the fair determination of his guilt or inno-
cence, and shall take any other proper measures to protect the fairness of the trial.
(5) Overt Act. No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit a crime, other than a felony of the first or second degree, unless an overt act in pursuance of such conspiracy is alleged and proved to have been done
by him or by a person with whom he conspired.
(6) Renunciation of Criminal Purpose. It is an affirmative defense that the actor, after conspiring to commit a crime, thwarted the success of the conspiracy, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his criminal purpose.
(7) Duration of Conspiracy. For purposes of Section 1.06(4):
(a) conspiracy is a continuing course of conduct which terminates when the crime or crimes which are its object are committed or the agreement that they be committed is abandoned by the defendant and
by those with whom he conspired; and
(b) such abandonment is presumed if neither the defendant nor anyone with whom he conspired does any overt act in pursuance of the conspiracy during the applicable period of limitation; and
(©) if an individual abandons the agreement, the conspiracy is terminated as to him only if and when he advises those with whom he conspired of his abandonment or he informs the law enforcement authori-
ties of the existence of the conspiracy and of his participation therein.
Section 5.04. Incapacity, Irresponsibility or Immunity of Party to Solicitation or Conspiracy
(1) Except as provided in Subsection (2) of this Section, it is immaterial to the liability of a person who solicits or conspires with another to commit a crime that:

(a) he or the person whom he solicits or with whom he conspires does not occupy a particular position or have a particular characteristic which is an element of such crime, if he believes that one of them
does; or
(b) the person whom he solicits or with whom he conspires is irresponsible or has an immunity to prosecution or conviction for the commission of the crime.

(2) Itis a defense to a charge of solicitation or conspiracy to commit a crime that if the criminal object were achieved, the actor would not be guilty of a crime under the law defining the offense or as an accomplice under
Section 2.06(6) or 2.06(6)(a) or (b).

p. 1246
p. 1247
Section 5.05. Grading of Criminal Attempt, Solicitation and Conspiracy; Mitigation in Cases of Lesser Danger; Multiple Convictions Barred

(1) Grading. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, attempt, solicitation and conspiracy are crimes of the same grade and degree as the most serious offense which is attempted or solicited or is an object of the
conspiracy. An attempt, solicitation or conspiracy to commit a [capital crime or a] felony of the first degree is a felony of the second degree.

(2) Mitigation. If the particular conduct charged to constitute a criminal attempt, solicitation or conspiracy is so inherently unlikely to result or culminate in the commission of a crime that neither such conduct nor the
actor presents a public danger warranting the grading of such offense under this Section, the Court shall exercise its power under Section 6.12 to enter judgment and impose sentence for a crime of lower grade or degree or, in ex-
treme cases, may dismiss the prosecution.

(3) Multiple Convictions. A person may not be convicted of more than one offense defined by this Article for conduct designed to commit or to culminate in the commission of the same crime.

Section 5.06. Possessing Instruments of Crime; Weapons
(1) Criminal Instruments Generally. A person commits a misdemeanor if he possesses any instrument of crime with purpose to employ it criminally. “Instrument of crime” means:
(a) anything specially made or specially adapted for criminal use; or
(b) anything commonly used for criminal purposes and possessed by the actor under circumstances which do not negative unlawful purpose.
(2) Presumption of Criminal Purpose from Possession of Weapon. If a person possesses a firearm or other weapon on or about his person, in a vehicle occupied by him, or otherwise readily available for use, it shall be
presumed that he had the purpose to employ it criminally, unless:
(a) the weapon is possessed in the actor's home or place of business;
(b) the actor is licensed or otherwise authorized by law to possess such weapon; or
(c) the weapon is of a type commonly used in lawful sport.
“Weapon” means anything readily capable of lethal use and possessed under circumstances not manifestly appropriate for lawful uses which it may have; the term includes a firearm which is not loaded or
lacks a clip or other component to render it immediately operable, and components which can readily be assembled into a weapon.

(3) Presumptions as to Possession of Criminal Instruments in Automobiles. Where a weapon or other instrument of crime is found in an automobile, it is presumed to be in the possession of the occupant if there is but

one. If there is more than one occupant, it shall be presumed to be in the possession of all, except under the following circumstances:
(a) where it is found upon the person of one of the occupants;
(b) where the automobile is not a stolen one and the weapon or instrument is found out of view in a glove compartment, car trunk, or other
p. 1247

p. 1248
enclosed customary depository, in which case it shall be presumed to be in the possession of the occupant or occupants who own or have authority to operate the automobile;
(c) in the case of a taxicab, a weapon or instrument found in the passengers’ portion of the vehicle shall be presumed to be in the possession of all the passengers, if there are any, and, if not, in the posses-
sion of the driver.
Section 5.07. Prohibited Offensive Weapons
A person commits a misdemeanor if, except as authorized by law, he makes, repairs, sells, or otherwise deals in, uses or possesses any offensive weapon. “Offensive weapon” means any bomb, machine gun, sawed-off shot-
gun, firearm specially made or specially adapted for concealment or silent discharge, any blackjack, sandbag, metal knuckles, dagger, or other implement for the infliction of serious bodily injury which serves no common lawful purpose. It
is a defense under this Section for the defendant to prove by a preponderance of evidence that he possessed or dealt with the weapon solely as a curio or in a dramatic performance, or that he possessed it briefly in consequence of having
found it or taken it from an aggressor, or under circumstances similarly negativing any purpose or likelihood that the weapon would be used unlawfully. The presumptions provided in Section 5.06(3) are applicable to prosecutions under this
Section.
ARTICLES 6-11. SENTENCING; AUTHORIZED DISPOSITION OF PERSONS CONVICTED
[Articles 6-7 of the 1962 Code, dealing with sentencing and the disposition of convicted persons, were withdrawn by the ALI in 2017. Their replacements, adopted at the same time (Articles 6-11), are omitted.]
PART II. DEFINITION OF SPECIFIC CRIMES
Offenses Involving Danger to the Person
ARTICLE 210. CRIMINAL HOMICIDE
Section 210.0. Definitions
In Articles 210-213, unless a different meaning plainly is required:
(1) “human being” means a person who has been born and is alive;
(2) “bodily injury” means physical pain, illness or any impairment of physical condition;
(3) “serious bodily injury” means bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious, permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ;
(4) “deadly weapon” means any firearm, or other weapon, device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or inanimate, which in the manner it is used or is intended to be used is known to be capable of
producing death or serious bodily injury.
p. 1248
p. 1249
Section 210.1. Criminal Homicide
(1) A person is guilty of criminal homicide if he purposely, knowingly, recklessly or negligently causes the death of another human being.
(2) Criminal homicide is murder, manslaughter or negligent homicide.

Section 210.2. Murder
(1) Except as provided in Section 210.3(1)(b), criminal homicide constitutes murder when:
(a) it is committed purposely or knowingly; or
(b) it is committed recklessly under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human life. Such recklessness and indifference are presumed if the actor is engaged or is an accomplice in
the commission of, or an attempt to commit, or flight after committing or attempting to commit robbery, rape or deviate sexual intercourse by force or threat of force, arson, burglary, kidnapping or felonious escape.
(2) Murder is a felony of the first degree [but a person convicted of murder may be sentenced to death, as provided in Section 210.6.].”
Section 210.3. Manslaughter
(1) Criminal homicide constitutes manslaughter when:
(a) it is committed recklessly; or
(b) a homicide which would otherwise be murder is committed under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which there is reasonable explanation or excuse. The reasonableness of
such explanation or excuse shall be determined from the viewpoint of a person in the actor's situation under the circumstances as he believes them to be.
(2) Manslaughter is a felony of the second degree.
Section 210.4. Negligent Homicide
(1) Criminal homicide constitutes negligent homicide when it is committed negligently.
(2) Negligent homicide is a felony of the third degree.
Section 210.5. Causing or Aiding Suicide
(1) Causing Suicide as Criminal Homicide. A person may be convicted of criminal homicide for causing another to commit suicide only if he purposely causes such suicide by force, duress or deception.
(2) Aiding or Soliciting Suicide as an Independent Offense. A person who purposely aids or solicits another to commit suicide is guilty of a felony of the second degree if his conduct causes such suicide or an attempted
suicide, and otherwise of a misdemeanor.
p.1249
p.1250
[Section 210.6. Sentence of Death for Murder; Further Proceedings to Determine Sentence]
This provision had suggested procedures to be used by jurisdictions that choose to authorize the death penalty. The ALI withdrew this provision in October 2009. The MPC no longer includes a provision addressing this issue.]
ARTICLE 211. ASSAULT; RECKLESS ENDANGERING; THREATS
Section 211.0. Definitions
In this Article, the definitions given in Section 210.0 apply unless a different meaning plainly is required.
Section 211.1. Assault

(1) Simple Assault. A person is guilty of assault if he:
(a) attempts to cause or purposely, knowingly or recklessly causes bodily injury to another; or
(b) negligently causes bodily injury to another with a deadly weapon; or
(c) attempts by physical menace to put another in fear of imminent serious bodily injury.
Simple assault is a misdemeanor unless committed in a fight or scuffle entered into by mutual consent, in which case it is a petty misdemeanor.
(2) Aggravated Assault. A person is guilty of aggravated assault if he:
(a) attempts to cause serious bodily injury to another, or causes such injury purposely, knowingly or recklessly under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human life; or
(b) attempts to cause or purposely or knowingly causes bodily injury to another with a deadly weapon.
Aggravated assault under paragraph (a) is a felony of the second degree; aggravated assault under paragraph (b) is a felony of the third degree.
Section 211.2. Recklessly Endangering Another Person
A person commits a misdemeanor if he recklessly engages in conduct which places or may place another person in danger of death or serious bodily injury. Recklessness and danger shall be presumed where a person know-
ingly points a firearm at or in the direction of another, whether or not the actor believed the firearm to be loaded.
Section 211.3. Terroristic Threats
Aperson is guilty of a felony of the third degree if he threatens to commit any crime of violence with purpose to terrorize another or to cause evacuation of a building, place of assembly, or facility of public transportation, or
otherwise to cause serious public inconvenience, or in reckless disregard of the risk of causing such terror or inconvenience.
p. 1260
p. 1251
ARTICLE 212. KIDNAPPING AND RELATED OFFENSES; COERCION
Section 212.0. Definitions
In this Article, the definitions given in Section 210.0 apply unless a different meaning plainly is required.
Section 212.1. Kidnapping
A person is guilty of kidnapping if he unlawfully removes another from his place of residence or business, or a substantial distance from the vicinity where he is found, or if he unlawfully confines another for a substantial period in a place of
isolation, with any of the following purposes:
(a) to hold for ransom or reward, or as a shield or hostage; or
(b) to facilitate commission of any felony or flight thereafter; or
(c) to inflict bodily injury on or to terrorize the victim or another; or
(d) to interfere with the performance of any governmental or political function.

Kidnapping is a felony of the first degree unless the actor voluntarily releases the victim alive and in a safe place prior to trial, in which case it is a felony of the second degree. A removal or confinement is unlawful within the meaning of
this Section if it is accomplished by force, threat or deception, or, in the case of a person who is under the age of 14 or incompetent, if it is accomplished without the consent of a parent, guardian or other person responsible for general supervision
of his welfare.

Section 212.2. Felonious Restraint
A person commits a felony of the third degree if he knowingly:
(a) restrains another unlawfully in circumstances exposing him to risk of serious bodily injury; or
(b) holds another in a condition of involuntary servitude.
Section 212.3. False Imprisonment
A person commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly restrains another unlawfully so as to interfere substantially with his liberty.
Section 212.4. Interference with Custody

(1) Custody of Children. A person commits an offense if he knowingly or recklessly takes or entices any child under the age of 18 from the custody of its parent, guardian or other lawful custodian, when he has no privi-

lege to do so. It is an affirmative defense that:
(a) the actor believed that his action was necessary to preserve the child from danger to its welfare; or
(b) the child, being at the time not less than 14 years old, was taken away at its own instigation without enticement and without purpose to commit a criminal offense with or against the child.
Proof that the child was below the critical age gives rise to a presumption that the actor knew the child’s age or acted in reckless disregard thereof. The offense is a misdemeanor unless the actor, not being a parent or
person in equivalent relation to the child, acted with knowledge that his conduct would
p. 1251
p. 1252
cause serious alarm for the child’s safety, or in reckless disregard of a likelihood of causing such alarm, in which case the offense is a felony of the third degree.

(2) Custody of Committed Persons. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he knowingly or recklessly takes or entices any committed person away from lawful custody when he is not privileged to do so. “Committed
person” means, in addition to anyone committed under judicial warrant, any orphan, neglected or delinquent child, mentally defective or insane person, or other dependent or incompetent person entrusted to another's custody by
or through a recognized social agency or otherwise by authority of law.

Section 212.5. Criminal Coercion
(1) Offense Defined. A person is guilty of criminal coercion if, with purpose unlawfully to restrict another's freedom of action to his detriment, he threatens to:
(a) commit any criminal offense; or
(b) accuse anyone of a criminal offense; or
(c) expose any secret tending to subject any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to impair his credit or business repute; or
(d) take or withhold action as an official, or cause an official to take or withhold action.

It is an affirmative defense to prosecution based on paragraphs (b), (c) or (d) that the actor believed the accusation or secret to be true or the proposed official action justified and that his purpose was limited
to compelling the other to behave in a way reasonably related to the circumstances which were the subject of the accusation, exposure or proposed official action, as by desisting from further misbehavior, making good
a wrong done, refraining from taking any action or responsibility for which the actor believes the other disqualified.

(2) Grading. Criminal coercion is a misdemeanor unless the threat is to commit a felony or the actor’s purpose is felonious, in which cases the offense is a felony of the third degree.

ARTICLE 213. SEXUAL OFFENSES~
Section 213.0. General Principles of Liability; Definitions
(1) This Article is governed by Part | of the 1962 Model Penal Code, and the definitions given in Section 210.0, except that:

(a) Section 2.11 (the definition of “consent’) does not apply to this article.

(b) Subsection (2) of Section 2.08 (Intoxication) does not apply to this article. Instead, the general provisions of the criminal law and rules of evidence of the jurisdiction govern the materiality of the actor's
intoxication in determining the actor's culpability for an offense.

p. 1252
p. 1253
(2) Definitions
In this Article, unless a different definition is plainly required:

(a) “Sexual penetration” means an act involving penetration, however slight, of the anus or genitalia by an object or a body part, except when done for legitimate medical, hygienic, or law-enforcement
purposes.

(b) “Oral sex” means a touching of the anus or genitalia of one person by the mouth or tongue of another person.

(c) “Sexual contact” means any of the following acts, when the actor's purpose is the sexual arousal, sexual gratification, sexual humiliation, or sexual degradation of any person:

(i) touching the clothed or unclothed genitalia, anus, groin, breast, buttocks, or inner thigh of any person with any body part or object; or

(ii) touching any body part of any person with the clothed or unclothed genitalia, anus, groin, breast, buttocks, or inner thigh of any person; or

(iii) touching any clothed or unclothed body part of any person with the ejaculate of any person.

The touching described in paragraph (c) includes the actor touching another person, another person touching the actor or a third party, or another person touching that person's own body. It does
not include the actor touching the actor’s own body.

(@) “Fondling” means prolonged contact with or manipulation of the genitals, when the actor's purpose is the sexual arousal, sexual gratification, sexual humiliation, or sexual degradation of any person.
Fondling requires more than a transient grope or grab. “To fondle” means to engage in fondling.

(@) “Consent”

(i) “Consent” for purposes of Article 213 means a person's willingness to engage in a specific act of sexual penetration, oral sex, or sexual contact.

(ii) Consent may be express or it may be inferred from behavior — both action and inaction — in the context of all the circumstances.

(iii) Neither verbal nor physical resistance is required to establish that consent is lacking, but their absence may be considered, in the context of all the circumstances, in determining the issue of
consent.

(iv) Notwithstanding subsection (2)(e)(i) of this Section, consent is ineffective when given by a person incompetent to consent or under circumstances precluding the free exercise of consent, as
provided in Sections 213.1, 213.2, 213.3, 213.4, 213.5, 213.7, 213.8, and 213.9.

(v) Consent may be revoked or withdrawn any time before or during the act of sexual penetration, oral sex, or sexual contact. A clear verbal refusal — such as “No,” “Stop,” or “Don’t” — estab-
lishes the lack of consent or the revocation or withdrawal of previous consent. Lack of consent or revocation or withdrawal of consent may be overridden by subsequent consent given prior to the act of sexual
penetration, oral sex, or sexual contact.

(f) Force.
(i) “Physical force or restraint” means a physical act or physical restraint that inflicts more than negligible physical harm, pain, or
p. 1253
p. 1254
discomfort or that significantly restricts a person's ability to move freely. More than negligible physical harm includes but is not limited to a burn, black eye, or bloody nose, and more than negligible pain or
discomfort includes but is not limited to the pain or discomfort resulting from a kick, punch, or slap on the face.

(ii) “Aggravated physical force or restraint” means a physical act or physical restraint that inflicts or is capable of inflicting death, serious bodily injury, or extreme physical pain, or that confines
another for a substantial period in a place of isolation other than under color of law.

(g) “Actor” means a person more than 12 years old, except that “actor” includes a person younger than 12 when the charge is Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force or Restraint (Section 213.1). “Actor”
includes, where relevant, a person guilty of an omission.
(h) “Registrable offense”

(i) “Registrable offense” means an offense that makes a convicted person eligible for or subject to any of the collateral consequences specified in Section 213.11.

(ii) No offense is a registrable offense under any provision of law unless it is specifically so designated in this Article or is committed in another jurisdiction, is a registrable offense in that jurisdic-
tion, and would be a registrable offense in this jurisdiction if it had been committed in this jurisdiction.

Section 213.1 Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force or Restraint
(1) Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force or Restraint. An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force or Restraint when:
(a) the actor causes another person to submit to or perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because:

(i) the actor uses or explicitly or implicitly threatens to use aggravated physical force or restraint against anyone; and

(ii) the actor's use of or threat to use aggravated physical force or restraint causes the other person to submit to or perform the act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(c) the actor acts knowingly with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).

(2) Grading *. Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force or Restraint is a registrable offense. It is a felony of the third degree [10-year maximum],
p. 1254

except that (1) the maximum term of imprisonment is five years greater than that otherwise applicable to a felony of the third degree; and (2) it is a felony of the second degree [20-year maximum] if the actor violates subsection (1)
of this Section and in so doing:
(a) knowingly uses or explicitly or implicitly threatens to use a deadly weapon and knows that this act causes the other person to submit to or perform the act of sexual penetration or oral sex; or
(b) knowingly acts with one or more persons who:
(i) also engage in an act or acts of sexual penetration or oral sex with the same victim at the same place at a time contemporaneous with the actor’s violation of this Section; or
(ii) assist in the use of or threat to use aggravated physical force or restraint when the actor's act of sexual penetration or oral sex occurs; or
(c) recklessly causes serious bodily injury to any person.

(3) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section 213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the other person submitted to or performed the act of sexual penetration or oral sex under the circumstances described in subsection(1)(b)..
Submission, acquiescence, or words or conduct that would otherwise indicate consent do not constitute effective consent when occurring in a circumstance described in that subsection. If applicable, the actor may raise an affirma-
tive defense of Explicit Prior Permission according to the terms of Section 213.10.

Section 213.2 Sexual Assault by Physical Force or Restraint
(1) Sexual Assault by Physical Force or Restraint. An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault by Physical Force or Restraint when:
(a) the actor causes another person to submit to or perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because:
(i) the actor uses or explicitly or implicitly threatens to use physical force or restraint against anyone; and
(ii) the actor's use of or threat to use physical force or restraint causes the other person to submit to or perform the act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).

(2) Grading. Sexual Assault by Physical Force or Restraint is a felony of the third degree [10-year maximum]. It is a registrable offense when the actor has previously been convicted of a felony sex offense.

(3) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section 213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the other person submitted to or performed the act of sexual penetration or oral sex under the circumstances described in subsection (1)(b).
Submission, acquiescence, or words or conduct that would otherwise indicate consent do not constitute effective consent when occurring in a circumstance described in that subsection. If applicable, the actor may raise an affirma-
tive defense of Explicit Prior Permission according to the terms of Section 213.10.

Section 213.3 Sexual Assault of an Incapacitated, Vulnerable, or Legally Restricted Person
(1) Sexual Assault of an Incapacitated Person. An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault of an Incapacitated Person when:
p. 1255
p. 1256
(a) the actor engages in, or causes another person to submit to or perform, an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the time of the act, the other person:
(i) is sleeping, unconscious, or physically unable to communicate lack of consent; or
(ii) lacks substantial capacity to appraise, control, or remember the person's own sexual conduct or that of anyone else because of a substance administered to that person, without that person's
knowledge or consent; and the actor administered the incapacitating substance for the purpose of causing that incapacity or knows that it was surreptitiously administered by another for that purpose; and

(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).
Sexual Assault of an Incapacitated Person is a felony of the third degree [10-year maximum]. It is a registrable offense when the actor has previously been convicted of a felony sex offense.
(2) Sexual Assault of a Vulnerable Person. An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault of a Vulnerable Person when:
(a) the actor engages in, or causes another person to submit to or perform, an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the time of the act, the other person:
(i) has an intellectual, developmental, or mental disability, or a mental illness, that makes the person substantially incapable of appraising the nature of the sexual activity involved, or of under-
standing the right to give or withhold consent in sexual encounters, and the actor has no similarly serious disability; or
(ii) is passing in and out of consciousness; or
(iii) lacks substantial capacity to communicate lack of consent; or
(iv) is wholly or partly undressed, or in the process of undressing, for the purpose of receiving nonsexual professional or commercial services from the actor and has not given the actor explicit
prior permission to engage in that act; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).
Sexual Assault of a Vulnerable Person is a felony of the fourth degree [five-year maximum].
(3) Sexual Assault of a Legally Restricted Person. An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault of Legally Restricted Person when:
(a) the actor, who did not have a consensual sexually intimate relationship with the other person at the time that a state-imposed restriction on that person's liberty began, causes the other person to submit to.
or perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the time of the act, the other person is:
(i) in custody, incarcerated, on probation, on parole, under civil commitment, in a pretrial release or pretrial diversion or treatment program, or in any other status involving a state-imposed restric-
tion on liberty; and
p. 1256
p. 1287
(ii) the actor is in a position of actual or apparent authority or supervision over the restriction on the other person's liberty; and
(c) the actor acts knowingly with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).
Sexual Assault of a Legally Restricted Person is a felony of the fifth degree [three-year maximum].

(4) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section 213.0(2)(e)(iv) when a condition or circumstance described in subsections (1)(b), (2)(b), or (3)(b) existed at the time the other person submitted to or performed
the act of sexual penetration or oral sex. Submission, acquiescence, or words or conduct that would otherwise indicate consent do not constitute effective consent when occurring in a condition or circumstance described in these
subsections.

Section 213.4. Sexual Assault by Extortion

(1) Sexual Assault by Extortion. An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault by Extortion when:

(a) the actor causes another person to submit to or perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because the actor explicitly or implicitly threatened:

(i) to accuse that person or anyone else of a criminal offense or of a failure to comply with immigration regulations; or

(ii) to take or withhold action as an official, or cause an official to take or withhold action, whether or not the purported official has actual authority to do so; or

(iii) to take any action or cause any consequence that would cause submission to or performance of the act of sexual penetration or oral sex by someone of ordinary resolution in that person's
situation under all the circumstances; and

(iv) the actor's threat causes the other person to submit to or perform the act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).

(2) Grading. Sexual Assault by Extortion is a felony of the fourth degree [five-year maximum].

(3) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section 213.0(2)(e)iv) when the other person submitted to or performed the act of sexual penetration or oral sex because of a threat described in subsection (1)(b).
Submission, acquiescence, or words or conduct that would otherwise indicate consent do not constitute effective consent when occurring in a circumstance described in that paragraph. If applicable, the actor may raise an affirma-
tive defense of Explicit Prior Permission under Section 213.10.

Section 213.5 Sexual Assault by Prohibited Deception
(1) An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault by Prohibited Deception when:
(a) the actor causes another person to submit to or perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because:
p. 1287
p. 1258
(i) the actor caused the other person to believe falsely that the act had diagnostic, curative, or preventive medical properties; or
(ii) the actor caused the other person to believe falsely that the actor was someone else who was personally known to that person; and
(iii) the actor's deception causes the other person to submit to or perform the act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(c) the actor acts knowingly with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).

(2) Grading. Sexual Assault by Prohibited Deception is a felony of the fifth degree [three-year maximum].

(3) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section 213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the other person submitted to or performed the act of sexual penetration or oral sex because of a circumstance described in subsection (1)
(b). Submission, acquiescence, or words or conduct that would otherwise indicate consent do not constitute effective consent when occurring under a circumstance described in that paragraph.

Section 213.6. Sexual Assault in the Absence of Consent
(1) An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault in the Absence of Consent when:
(a) the actor causes another person to submit to or perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the other person does not consent to that act; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).
(2) Grading. Sexual Assault in the Absence of Consent is a felony of the fifth degree [three-year maximum], except that it is a felony of the fourth degree [five-year maximum] when:

(a) the other person has, by words or actions, expressly communicated unwillingness to submit to or perform the act, or the act is so sudden or unexpected that the other person has no adequate opportunity
to express unwillingness before the act occurs; and
(b) the actor is reckless with respect to the attendant circumstances specified in paragraph (a).
(3) If applicable, the actor may raise an affirmative defense of Explicit Prior Permission under Section 213.10.
Section 213.7. Offensive Sexual Contact by Physical Force or Restraint or Surreptitious Incapacitation; Offensive Sexual Contact
(1) Offensive Sexual Contact by Physical Force or Restraint or by Surreptitious Incapacitation. An actor is guilty of Offensive Sexual Contact by Physical Force or Restraint or by Surreptitious Incapacitation when:
(a) the actor knowingly engages in, or causes another person to submit to or perform, an act of sexual contact with any person; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because:
(i) the actor uses or explicitly or implicitly threatens to use physical force or restraint against anyone, and that conduct causes the other person to submit to or perform the act of sexual contact; or
p. 1258
p. 1259
(ii) at the time of the act of sexual contact the other person lacks substantial capacity to appraise, control, or remember the person's own sexual conduct or that of anyone else because of a
substance administered to that person, without that person's knowledge or consent; and the actor administered the incapacitating substance for the purpose of causing that incapacity or knows that it was
surreptitiously administered by another for that purpose; and
(c) reckless with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraph (b).
Offensive Sexual Contact by Physical Force or Restraint or by Surreptitious Incapacitation is a felony of the fifth degree [three-year maximum].
(2) Offensive Sexual Contact. An actor is guilty of Offensive Sexual Contact when:
(a) the actor knowingly engages in, or causes another person to submit to or perform, an act of sexual contact with anyone; and
(b) the other person did not consent to that act, and the actor is reckless with respect to the lack of consent; or
(c) that act is without effective consent because:
(i) the other person is unaware that such act is occurring, or is physically unable to communicate lack of consent at the time of the act; and the actor is reckless with respect to whether the other
person is in that condition at the time of the act; or
(ii) the act would be an offense as defined by Section 213.3(2) or (3), involving vulnerable or legally restricted persons, had the act been one of sexual penetration or oral sex; or
(iii) the act would be an offense as defined by Section 213.4, involving extortion, had the act been one of sexual penetration or oral sex; or
(iv) the act would be an offense as defined by Section 213.5, involving prohibited deception, had the act been one of sexual penetration or oral sex.
Offensive Sexual Contact is a petty misdemeanor [six-month maximum].
(3) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section 213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the other person submitted to or performed the act of sexual contact under a circumstance described in subsections (1)(b) or (2)(c). Sub-
mission, acquiescence, or words or conduct that would otherwise indicate consent do not constitute effective consent when occurring under a circumstance described in those subsections. If applicable, an actor charged with a
violation of subsections (1)(b)(), (2)(b), or (2)(c)(ii) may raise an affirmative defense of Explicit Prior Permission under Section 213.10.
Section 213.8. Sexual Offenses Involving Minors

(1) Sexual Assault of a Minor. An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault of a Minor when:
(a) the actor engages in, or causes another person to submit to or perform, an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
p. 1259
Tn 1260
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the time of the act:
(i) the other person is younger than 16; and
(ii) the actor is more than five years older than the other person; and

(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).

Sexual Assault of a Minor is a felony of the fifth degree [three-year maximum] except that it is a felony of the fourth degree [five-year maximum] when at the time of the act the actor is 21 or older, and it is a
felony of the third degree [10-year maximum] and a registrable offense when at the time of the act the actor is 21 or older, the other person is younger than 12, and the actor is reckless with respect to whether the other
person is younger than 12.

(2) Incestuous Sexual Assault of a Minor. An actor is guilty of Incestuous Sexual Assault of a Minor when:

(a) the actor engages in, or causes another person to submit to or perform, an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and

(b) at the time of the act, the actor is 18 or older and the other person is younger than 18; and

(c) the act is without effective consent because at the time of the act the actor is:

(i) a parent or grandparent of the other person, including a biological, step, adoptive, or foster parent or grandparent; or
(ii) the legal spouse, domestic partner, or sexual partner of a person described by subparagraph (i); or
(iii) a legal guardian or de facto parent of the other person, who resides intermittently or permanently in the same dwelling as the other person; and

(d) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c).

Incestuous Sexual Assault of a Minor is a felony of the third degree [10-year maximum]. It is a registrable offense when at the time of the act the other person is younger than 16.
(3) Exploitative Sexual Assault of a Minor. An actor is guilty of Exploitative Sexual Assault of a Minor when:

(a) the actor engages in, or causes another person to submit to or perform, an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and

(b) the act is without effective consent because at the time of the act:

(i) the other person is younger than 18; and
(ii) the actor is more than five years older than the other person; and
(iii) the actor holds a formal position of authority over the other person, such as a teacher, employer, religious leader, treatment provider, administrator, or coach; and

(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct, attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs (a) and (b).

p. 1260
nnn 81861

Exploitative Sexual Assault of a Minor is a felony of the fifth degree [three-year maximum]. It is a defense to a prosecution under Section 213.8(3) for the actor to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that

the actor's position of authority over the other person did not impair the other person's ability to form an independent judgment about whether to consent to the act of sexual penetration or oral sex.

(4) Fondling a Minor. An actor is guilty of Fondling a Minor when:
(a) the actor knowingly fondles another person, or knowingly causes another person to submit to or perform an act of fondling with anyone; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the time of the act:
(i) the other person is younger than 12 and the actor is more than five years older than the other person; or
(ii) the other person is younger than 16 and the actor is more than seven years older than the other person; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the attendant circumstances described in subparagraph (b)\(i) or (i.
Grading. Fondling a Minor is a felony of the fifth degree [three-year maximum], except that it is a felony of the fourth degree [five-year maximum] when at the time of the act the actor is 21 or older, the other
person is younger than 12, and the actor is reckless as to whether the other person is younger than 12.
(5) Aggravated Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor. An actor is guilty of Aggravated Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor when:
(a) the actor knowingly engages in an act of sexual contact with another person or causes another person to submit to or perform an act of sexual contact; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the time of the act:
(i) the other person is younger than 18; and
(ii) the actor is more than five years older than the other person; and
(iii) the act, had it been an act of sexual penetration or oral sex, would be an offense as defined by Section 213.1, 213.2, 213.3, 213.4, 213.5, or 213.8(2) or (3); and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the attendant circumstances described in subparagraphs (b)() and (i.
Aggravated Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor is a felony of the fourth degree [five-year maximum].
(6) Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor. An actor is guilty of Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor when:
(a) the actor knowingly engages in, or causes another person to submit to or perform:
(i) an act of sexual contact; or
(ii) an act involving the touching of the tongue of anyone to any body part or object, when that act is for the purpose of anyone’s sexual arousal, sexual gratification, sexual humiliation, or sexual
degradation; and
p. 1261
p. 1262
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the time of the act:
(i) the other person is younger than 12, and the actor is more than five years older than the other person; or
(ii) the other person is younger than 16, and the actor is more than seven years older than the other person; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the attendant circumstances described in subparagraph (b)\(i) or (i.
Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor is a misdemeanor [one-year maximum], except that it is a felony of the fifth degree [three-year maximum] when at the time of the act the actor is 21 or older, the other
person is younger than 12, and the actor is reckless with respect to whether the other person is younger than 12.
(7) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section 213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the circumstances described in any of the subsections (1) through (6) exist at the time of the act. Submission, acquiescence, or words or
conduct that would otherwise indicate consent do not constitute effective consent when occurring under the circumstances described in any of those subsections.

(8) [omitted]
[(9) [omitted]
(10) [Bar against certain juvenile sexual offense felony charges, delinquency adjudications or convictions when the actor is less than 14 years old]. [omitted]
Section 213.9. Sex Trafficking
(1) Sex Trafficking. An actor is guilty of Sex Trafficking if the actor knowingly recruits, entices, transports, transfers, harbors, provides, isolates, or maintains a person by any means, with the purpose of facilitating a com-
mercial sex act involving that person when:
(a) coercion is being, or will be, used to cause the person to submit to or perform a commercial sex act, which therefore will be without effective consent; and the actor knows that coercion is being or will be
used to cause the person to submit to or perform that commercial sex act; or
(b) the person is younger than 18 and is being, or will be, caused to submit to or perform a commercial sex act; and the actor is reckless with respect to the risk that the person is younger than 18 and is being,
or will be, caused to submit to or perform the commercial sex act.
(2) Definitions. For purposes of Section 213.9(1):
(a) “Coercion” means:

(i) using or threatening to use physical force or restraint against anyone;

(ii) taking, destroying, or threatening to take or destroy the person's money, credit or debit card, passport, driver's license, immigration document, or other government-issued identification docu-
ment, including a document issued by a foreign government, or any travel document pertaining to the person;

(iii) restricting or threatening to restrict the person's access to a substance that is a controlled substance under the federal Controlled Substance Act, 21 U.S.C. § 801 et seq.;

p. 1262
p. 1263

(iv) administering or withholding a controlled substance in circumstances that impair the person's physical or mental ability to avoid, evade, or flee from the actor;

(v) using a scheme, plan, deception, misrepresentation, or pattern of behavior for the purpose of causing the person to believe that failing to submit to or perform a commercial sex act would result
in physical, psychological, financial, or reputational harm to anyone that is sufficiently serious to cause someone of ordinary resolution who is of the same background, in the same circumstances, and in the
same physical and mental condition as that person, to submit to or perform a commercial sex act in order to avoid incurring that harm; or

(vi) any combination of these circumstances.

(b) “Commercial Sex Act” means any act of sexual penetration, oral sex, or sexual contact performed in exchange, or the expectation of exchange, for money, property, services, or any other thing of value
given to or received by anyone.
(3) Grading. Sex Trafficking is a felony of the third degree [10-year maximum].
(4) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section 213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the circumstances described in subsection (1) are present. Submission, acquiescence, or words or conduct that would otherwise indicate

consent do not constitute effective consent when occuring under a circumstance described in that subsection. If applicable, the actor may raise an affirmative defense of Explicit Prior Permission under Section 213.10 when:
(a) a charge of Sex Trafficking is based on coercion under subsection (1)(a); and
(b) the person giving such permission does so before that person has been subjected to trafficking under subsection (1) and before that person has been subjected to coercion under subsection (1)(a)..
Section 213.10. Affirmative Defense of Explicit Prior Permission

(1) Except as provided in subsection (3), it is an affirmative defense to a charge under this Article that the actor reasonably believed that, in connection with the charged act of sexual penetration, oral sex, or sexual
contact, the other party personally gave the actor explicit prior permission to use or threaten to use physical force or restraint, or to inflict or threaten to inflict any harm otherwise proscribed by Sections 213.1, 213.2, 213.4, 213.7, or
213.9, or to ignore the absence of consent otherwise proscribed by Section 213.6.

(2) Permission is “explicit” under subsection (1) when it is given orally or by written agreement:

(a) specifying that the actor may ignore the other party's expressions of unwillingness or other absence of consent;
(b) identifying the specific forms and extent of force, restraint, or threats that are permitted; and
(c) stipulating the specific words or gestures that will withdraw the permission.
p. 1263
p. 1264
Permission given by gestures or other nonverbal conduct signaling assent is not “explicit” under subsection (1).
(3) The defense provided by this Section is unavailable when:
(a) the act of sexual penetration, oral sex, or sexual contact occurs after the explicit permission was withdrawn, and the actor is reckless with respect to whether the permission was withdrawn;
(b) the actor relies on permission to use force or restraint or ignore the absence of consent at a time when the other party will be unconscious, asleep, or otherwise unable to withdraw that permission;
(c) the actor recklessly engages in conduct that causes or risks serious bodily injury; or
(d) at the time explicit permission is given, the other party is, and the actor is reckless with respect to whether the other party is:
(i) younger than 18;
(ii) giving that permission while subjected to physical force or restraint;
(iii) giving that permission because of the use of or threat to use physical force or restraint, or extortion as defined by Section 213.4, if that party does not give the permission;
(iv) lacking substantial capacity to appraise or control his or her conduct as a result of intoxication, whether voluntary or involuntary, and regardless of the identity of the person who administered
the intoxicants;
(v) incapacitated, vulnerable, or legally restricted, as defined by Section 213.3;
(vi) subject to prohibited deception, as defined by Section 213.5; or
(vii) subject to trafficking, as defined by Section 213.9(1).
Section 213.11. Sentencing and Collateral Consequences of Conviction

(4) . .. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of law, collateral consequences applicable primarily to persons convicted of a sexual offense, including the obligation to register with law enforcement; associated duties;
restrictions on occupation and employment, education, and place of residence applicable primarily to persons convicted of a sexual offense; and other collateral consequences applicable primarily to persons convicted of a sexual
offense, are authorized and their scope and implementation are delineated [in sections 213.11A-J].

Section 213.11A. Registration for Law-Enforcement Purposes

(1) Offenses Committed in This Jurisdiction

(a) Except as provided in subsection (3), every person convicted of an offense that is designated a registrable offense in this Article must, in addition to any other sanction imposed upon conviction, appear

personally and register, at the time specified in Section 213.11C, with the law-enforcement authority designated by law in the [county] where the person resides. .. .

p. 1264
p. 1265
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no conviction for an offense under this Article, or for any other criminal offense in this jurisdiction, will require the person convicted to register with law enforce-
ment or other governmental authority in a registry regime applicable primarily to persons convicted of a sexual offense, unless this Article designates that offense as a registrable offense.

(2) Offenses Committed in Other Jurisdictions [omitted]

(3) Persons under the age of 18. No person may be subject to the obligation to register under subsection (1) of this Section, to other obligations or restrictions under this Section, or to additional collateral consequences
under Section 213.111, on the basis of a criminal conviction for an offense committed when the person was under the age of 18, or on the basis of an adjudication of delinquency based on conduct when the person was under the
age of 18; provided, however, that this subsection (3) does not apply to a person convicted of a criminal offense of Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force or Restraint if the person was at least 16 years old at the time of that
offense.

(4) Retroactive Effect [omitted]

213.11B. Notification of the Obligation to Register and Associated Duties [omitted]
213.11C. Time of Initial Registration [omitted]

213.11D. Information Required in Registration [omitted]

213.11E. Duty to Keep Registration Current [omitted]

213.11F. Duration of Registration Requirement

(1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (8) of this Section and Section 213.11J, a person required to register must keep the registration current for a period of 15 years, beginning on the date when the registrant is re-
leased from custody after conviction for the offense giving rise to the registration requirement; or if the registrant is not sentenced to a term of incarceration, beginning on the date when the registrant was sentenced for that offense.

(2) At the expiration of that 15-year period, the duty to keep that registration current will terminate; the person who had been registered will not be subject to any further duties associated with that registration require-
ment; and no public or private agency other than a government law-enforcement agency shall thereafter be permitted access to the person's registry information.

(3) Early termination. If, during the first 10 years of the period during which a person is required to keep registration information current, the person:

(a) successfully completes any period of supervised release, probation, or parole, and satisfies any financial obligation such as a fine or restitution, other than a financial obligation that the person, despite
good-faith effort, has been unable to pay; and
(b) successfully completes any required sex-offense treatment program; and
p. 1265
p. 1266
(c) is not convicted of, or facing pending charges for, any subsequent offense under this Article, or any subsequent sexual offense in another jurisdiction that would be an offense under this Article if commit-
ted in this jurisdiction; then:

the duty to keep that registry information current will terminate; the person who had been registered will not be subject to any further duties associated with that registration requirement; and subsequent
access to registry information will be governed by subsection (4).
(4) Access to Registry Information after Termination. [omitted]
(5) Notice of Termination. [omitted]
(6) Certification. [omitted]
(7) Calculating Required Years [omitted]
213.11G. Failure to Register [omitted]
213.11H. Access to Registry Information
(1) Confidentiality
(a) Each law-enforcement agency with which a person is registered and each law-enforcement agency that receives information about a registrant pursuant to Section 213.11D(4) must exercise due diligence
to ensure that all information about the registrant remains confidential, except that relevant information about a specific registrant must be made available to any government law-enforcement agency that requests infor-
mation to aid in the investigation of a specific criminal offense.
(b) Any disclosure pursuant to paragraph (a) must include a warning that:
(i) the law-enforcement agency receiving the information must exercise due diligence to ensure that the information remains confidential;
(ii) such information may be disclosed and used as provided in paragraph (a), but otherwise must not be disclosed to any person or public or private agency;
(iii) such information may be used only for the purpose requested;
(iv) such information may not be used to injure, harass, or commit a crime against the registrant or anyone else; and
(v) any failure to comply with the confidentiality and use-limitation requirements of paragraph (b) could result in civil or criminal penalties.
(2) Unauthorized Disclosure of Registry Information. An actor is guilty of Unauthorized Disclosure of Registry Information if:
(a) the actor, having received registry information as provided in subsection (1), knowingly or recklessly discloses that information, or permits that information to be disclosed, to any person not authorized to
receive it; or
(b) the actor obtains access to registry information by computer trespassing or otherwise in violation of law and subsequently knowingly or recklessly discloses that information, or permits that information to
be disclosed, to any other person.
Unauthorized Disclosure of Registry Information is a felony of the fourth degree [five-year maximum].
p. 1266
p. 1267
213.111. Additional Collateral Consequences of Conviction
(2) Additional Collateral Consequences Precluded for Persons Not Required to Register. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to an additional collateral consequence . . . unless that per-
son has been convicted of a registrable offense and is required to register with law enforcement under Section 213.11.

(3) Additional Collateral Consequences Precluded for Persons Required to Register. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person required to register with law enforcement under Section 213.11A must not be
subject to any government action notifying a community organization or entity or a private party that the person resides, works, or studies in the locality; and must not be subject to any government action permitting a public or pri-
vate agency, organization, or person to access registry information, except as authorized by Section 213.11H.

(4) Additional Collateral Consequences Available for Persons Required to Register.

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person required to register with law enforcement under Section 213.11A may be subject to an additional collateral consequence not specified in subsection (3), but only if an
official designated by law, after affording the person notice and an opportunity to respond concerning the proposed additional collateral consequence, determines that the additional collateral consequence is manifestly required in
the interest of public safety, after due consideration of:

(a) the nature of the offense;

(b) all other circumstances of the case;

(c) the person's prior record; and

(d) the potential negative impacts of the burden, restriction, requirement, or government action on the person, on the person's family, and on the person's prospects for rehabilitation and reintegration into
society.

(5) Limitations. [omitted]

(6) Confidentiality. [omitted]

(7) Judicial Review.. [omitted]

213.11). Discretionary Relief from Registration and Other Sentencing Consequences and Collateral Consequences [omitted]
Offenses Against Property
ARTICLE 220. ARSON, CRIMINAL MISCHIEF, AND OTHER PROPERTY DESTRUCTION
Section 220.1. Arson and Related Offenses
(1) Arson. A person is guilty of arson, a felony of the second degree, if he starts a fire or causes an explosion with the purpose of:
(a) destroying a building or occupied structure of another; or
(b) destroying or damaging any property, whether his own or another's, to collect insurance for such loss. It shall be an affirmative defense to
p. 1267
p. 1268
prosecution under this paragraph that the actor's conduct did not recklessly endanger any building or occupied structure of another or place any other person in danger of death or bodily injury.
(2) Reckless Burning or Exploding. A person commits a felony of the third degree if he purposely starts a fire or causes an explosion, whether on his own property or another's, and thereby recklessly:
(a) places another person in danger of death or bodily injury; or
(b) places a building or occupied structure of another in danger of damage or destruction.

(3) Failure to Control or Report Dangerous Fire. A person who knows that a fire is endangering life or a substantial amount of property of another and fails to take reasonable measures to put out or control the fire, when

he can do so without substantial risk to himself, or to give a prompt fire alarm, commits a misdemeanor if:

(a) he knows that he is under an official, contractual, or other legal duty to prevent or combat the fire; or
(b) the fire was started, albeit lawfully, by him or with his assent, or on property in his custody or control.

(4) Definitions. “Occupied structure” means any structure, vehicle or place adapted for overnight accommodation of persons, or for carrying on business therein, whether or not a person is actually present. Property is
that of another, for the purposes of this section, if anyone other than the actor has a possessory or proprietory interest therein. If a building or structure is divided into separately occupied units, any unit not occupied by the actor is
an occupied structure of another.

Section 220.2. Causing or Risking Catastrophe

(1) Causing Catastrophe. A person who causes a catastrophe by explosion, fire, flood, avalanche, collapse of building, release of poison gas, radioactive material or other harmful or destructive force or substance, or by
any other means of causing potentially widespread injury or damage, commits a felony of the second degree if he does so purposely or knowingly, or a felony of the third degree if he does so recklessly.

(2) Risking Catastrophe. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he recklessly creates a risk of catastrophe in the employment of fire, explosives or other dangerous means listed in Subsection (1).

(3) Failure to Prevent Catastrophe. A person who knowingly or recklessly fails to take reasonable measures to prevent or mitigate a catastrophe commits a misdemeanor if:

(a) he knows that he is under an official, contractual or other legal duty to take such measures; or

(b) he did or assented to the act causing or threatening the catastrophe.

Section 220.3. Criminal Mischief
(1) Offense Defined. A person is guilty of criminal mischief if he:

(a) damages tangible property of another purposely, recklessly, or by negligence in the employment of fire, explosives, or other dangerous means listed in Section 220.2(1); or
p. 1268
p. 1269

(b) purposely or recklessly tampers with tangible property of another so as to endanger person or property; or

(c) purposely or recklessly causes another to sutfer pecuniary loss by deception or threat.

(2) Grading. Criminal mischief is a felony of the third degree if the actor purposely causes pecuniary loss in excess of $5,000, or a substantial interruption or impairment of public communication, transportation, supply
of water, gas or power, or other public service. It is a misdemeanor if the actor purposely causes pecuniary loss in excess of $100, or a petty misdemeanor if he purposely or recklessly causes pecuniary loss in excess of $25. Oth-
erwise criminal mischief is a violation.

ARTICLE 221. BURGLARY AND OTHER CRIMINAL INTRUSION
Section 221.0. Definitions
In this Article, unless a different meaning plainly is required:
(1) “occupied structure” means any structure, vehicle or place adapted for overnight accommodation of persons, or for carrying on business therein, whether or not a person is actually present.
(2) “night” means the period between thirty minutes past sunset and thirty minutes before sunrise.
Section 221.1. Burglary

(1) Burglary Defined. A person is guilty of burglary if he enters a building or occupied structure, or separately secured or occupied portion thereof, with purpose to commit a crime therein, unless the premises are at the
time open to the public or the actor is licensed or privileged to enter. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for burglary that the building or structure was abandoned.
(2) Grading. Burglary is a felony of the second degree if it is perpetrated in the dwelling of another at night, or if, in the course of committing the offense, the actor:
(a) purposely, knowingly or recklessly inflicts or attempts to inflict bodily injury on anyone; or
(b) is armed with explosives or a deadly weapon.
Otherwise burglary is a felony of the third degree. An act shall be deemed “in the course of committing” an offense if it occurs in an attempt to commit the offense or in flight after the attempt or commission.
(3) Multiple Convictions. A person may not be convicted both for burglary and for the offense which it was his purpose to commit after the burglarious entry or for an attempt to commit that offense, unless the additional
offense constitutes a felony of the first or second degree.
Section 221.2. Criminal Trespass
(1) Buildings and Occupied Structures. A person commits an offense if, knowing that he is not licensed or privileged to do so, he enters or surreptitiously remains in any building or occupied structure, or separately se-
cured or
p. 1269
p.1270
occupied portion thereof. An offense under this Subsection is a misdemeanor if it is committed in a dwelling at night. Otherwise it is a petty misdemeanor.
(2) Defiant Trespasser. A person commits an offense if, knowing that he is not licensed or privileged to do so, he enters or remains in any place as to which notice against trespass is given by:
(a) actual communication to the actor; or
(b) posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders; or
(c) fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to exclude intruders.
An offense under this Subsection constitutes a petty misdemeanor if the offender defies an order to leave personally communicated to him by the owner of the premises or other authorized person. Otherwise
it is a violation.
(3) Defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Section that:
(a) a building or occupied structure involved in an offense under Subsection (1) was abandoned; or
(b) the premises were at the time open to members of the public and the actor complied with all lawful conditions imposed on access to or remaining in the premises; or
(c) the actor reasonably believed that the owner of the premises, or other person empowered to license access thereto, would have licensed him to enter or remain.
ARTICLE 222. ROBBERY
Section 222.1. Robbery
(1) Robbery Defined. A person is guilty of robbery if, in the course of committing a theft, he:
(a) inflicts serious bodily injury upon another; or
(b) threatens another with or purposely puts him in fear of immediate serious bodily injury; or

(c) commits or threatens immediately to commit any felony of the first or second degree.
An act shall be deemed “in the course of committing a theft” if it occurs in an attempt to commit theft or in flight after the attempt or commission.

(2) Grading. Robbery is a felony of the second degree, except that it is a felony of the first degree if in the course of committing the theft the actor attempts to kill anyone, or purposely inflicts or attempts to inflict serious
bodily injury.

ARTICLE 223. THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES
Section 223.0. Definitions
In this Article, unless a different meaning plainly is required:
(1) “deprive” means: (a) to withhold property of another permanently or for so extended a period as to appropriate a major portion of its economic
p.1270
p.1271
value, or with intent to restore only upon payment of reward or other compensation; or (b) to dispose of the property so as to make it unlikely that the owner will recover it.

(2) “financial institution” means a bank, insurance company, credit union, building and loan association, investment trust or other organization held out to the public as a place of deposit of funds or medium of savings or
collective investment.

(3) “government” means the United States, any State, county, municipality, or other political unit, or any department, agency or subdivision of any of the foregoing, or any corporation or other association carrying out the
functions of government.

(4) “movable property” means property the location of which can be changed, including things growing on, affixed to, or found in land, and documents although the rights represented thereby have no physical location.
“Immovable property” is all other property.

(5) “obtain” means: (a) in relation to property, to bring about a transfer or purported transfer of a legal interest in the property, whether to the obtainer or another; or (b) in relation to labor or service, to secure performance
thereof.

(6) “property” means anything of value, including real estate, tangible and intangible personal property, contract rights, choses-in-action and other interests in or claims to wealth, admission or transportation tickets,
captured or domestic animals, food and drink, electric or other power.

(7) “property of another” includes property in which any person other than the actor has an interest which the actor is not privileged to infringe, regardless of the fact that the actor also has an interest in the property and
regardless of the fact that the other person might be precluded from civil recovery because the property was used in an unlawful transaction or was subject to forfeiture as contraband. Property in possession of the actor shall not be
deemed property of another who has only a security interest therein, even if legal title is in the creditor pursuant to a conditional sales contract or other security agreement.

Section 223.1. Consolidation of Theft Offenses; Grading; Provisions Applicable to Theft Generally

(1) Consolidation of Theft Offenses. Conduct denominated theft in this Article constitutes a single offense. An accusation of theft may be supported by evidence that it was committed in any manner that would be theft
under this Article, notwithstanding the specification of a different manner in the indictment or information, subject only to the power of the Court to ensure fair trial by granting a continuance or other appropriate relief where the con-
duct of the defense would be prejudiced by lack of fair notice or by surprise.

(2) Grading of Theft Offenses.

(a) Theft constitutes a felony of the third degree if the amount involved exceeds $500, or if the property stolen is a firearm, automobile, airplane, motorcycle, motorboat or other motor-propelled vehicle, or in
the case of theft by receiving stolen property, if the receiver is in the business of buying or selling stolen property.
p.1271
p. 1272
(b) Theft not within the preceding paragraph constitutes a misdemeanor, except that if the property was not taken from the person or by threat, or in breach of a fiduciary obligation, and the actor proves by a
preponderance of the evidence that the amount involved was less than $50, the offense constitutes a petty misdemeanor.
(c) The amount involved in a theft shall be deemed to be the highest value, by any reasonable standard, of the property or services which the actor stole or attempted to steal. Amounts involved in thefts com-
mitted pursuant to one scheme or course of conduct, whether from the same person or several persons, may be aggregated in determining the grade of the offense.
(3) Claim of Right. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for theft that the actor:
(a) was unaware that the property or service was that of another; or
(b) acted under an honest claim of right to the property or service involved or that he had a right to acquire or dispose of it as he did; or
(c) took property exposed for sale, intending to purchase and pay for it promptly, or reasonably believing that the owner, if present, would have consented.
(4) Theft from Spouse. It is no defense that theft was from the actor's spouse, except that misappropriation of household and personal effects, or other property normally accessible to both spouses, is theft only if it
occurs after the parties have ceased living together.
Section 223.2. Theft by Unlawful Taking or Disposition
(1) Movable Property. A person is guilty of theft if he unlawfully takes, or exercises unlawful control over, movable property of another with purpose to deprive him thereof.
(2) Immovable Property. A person is guilty of theft if he unlawfully transfers immovable property of another or any interest therein with purpose to benefit himself or another not entitled thereto.
Section 223.3. Theft by Deception
Aperson is guilty of theft if he purposely obtains property of another by deception. A person deceives if he purposely:
(1) creates or reinforces a false impression, including false impressions as to law, value, intention or other state of mind; but deception as to a person's intention to perform a promise shall not be inferred from the fact
alone that he did not subsequently perform the promise; or
(2) prevents another from acquiring information which would affect his judgment of a transaction; or
(3) fails to correct a false impression which the deceiver previously created or reinforced, or which the deceiver knows to be influencing another to whom he stands in a fiduciary or confidential relationship; or
(4) fails to disclose a known lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of property which he transfers or encumbers in consideration for the property obtained, whether such impediment is or is not
valid, or is or is not a matter of official record.
p. 1272
p. 1273
The term “deceive” does not, however, include falsity as to matters having no pecuniary significance, or puffing by statements unlikely to deceive ordinary persons in the group addressed.
Section 223.4. Theft by Extortion

A person is guilty of theft if he obtains property of another by threatening to:
(1) inflict bodily injury on anyone or commit any other criminal offense; or
(2) accuse anyone of a criminal offense; or
(3) expose any secret tending to subject any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to impair his credit or business repute; or
(4) take or withhold action as an official, or cause an official to take or withhold action; or
(5) bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other collective unofficial action, if the property is not demanded or received for the benefit of the group in whose interest the actor purports to act; or
(6) testify or provide information or withhold testimony or information with respect to another's legal claim or defense; or
(7) inflict any other harm which would not benefit the actor.
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution based on paragraphs (2), (3) or (4) that the property obtained by threat of accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other invocation of official action was honestly claimed as restitution or indem-
nification for harm done in the circumstances to which such accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other official action relates, or as compensation for property or lawful services.
Section 223.5. Theft of Property Lost, Mislaid, or Delivered by Mistake
A person who comes into control of property of another that he knows to have been lost, mislaid, or delivered under a mistake as to the nature or amount of the property or the identity of the recipient is guilty of theft if, with
purpose to deprive the owner thereof, he fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to a person entitled to have it.
Section 223.6. Receiving Stolen Property
(1) Receiving. A person is guilty of theft if he purposely receives, retains, or disposes of movable property of another knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it has probably been stolen, unless the property is
received, retained, or disposed with purpose to restore it to the owner. “Receiving” means acquiring possession, control or title, or lending on the security of the property.
(2) Presumption of Knowledge. The requisite knowledge or belief is presumed in the case of a dealer who:
(a) is found in possession or control of property stolen from two or more persons on separate occasions; or
(b) has received stolen property in another transaction within the year preceding the transaction charged; or
(c) being a dealer in property of the sort received, acquires it for a consideration which he knows is far below its reasonable value.
p.1273
p.1274
“Dealer” means a person in the business of buying or selling goods including a pawnbroker.
Section 223.7. Theft of Services
(1) A person is guilty of theft if he purposely obtains services which he knows are available only for compensation, by deception or threat, or by false token or other means to avoid payment for the service. “Services”
includes labor, professional service, transportation, telephone or other public service, accommodation in hotels, restaurants or elsewhere, admission to exhibitions, use of vehicles or other movable property. Where compensation
for service is ordinarily paid immediately upon the rendering for such service, as is the case of hotels and restaurants, refusal to pay or absconding without payment or offer to pay gives rise to a presumption that the service was ob-
tained by deception as to intention to pay.
(2) A person commits theft if, having control over the disposition of services of others, to which he is not entitled, he knowingly diverts such services to his own benefit or to the benefit of another not entitled thereto.

Section 223.8. Theft by Failure to Make Required Disposition of Funds Received
A person who purposely obtains property upon agreement, or subject to a known legal obligation, to make specified payment or other disposition, whether from such property or its proceeds or from his own property to be
reserved in equivalent amount, is guilty of theft if he deals with the property obtained as his own and fails to make the required payment or disposition. The foregoing applies notwithstanding that it may be impossible to identify particular
property as belonging to the victim at the time of the actor's failure to make the required payment or disposition. An officer or employee of the government or of a financial institution is presumed: (i) to know any legal obligation relevant to
his criminal liability under this Section, and (ji) to have dealt with the property as his own if he fails to pay or account upon lawful demand, or if an audit reveals a shortage or falsification of accounts.
Section 223.9. Unauthorized Use of Automobiles and Other Vehicles
A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates another's automobile, airplane, motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without consent of the owner. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Sec-
tion that the actor reasonably believed that the owner would have consented to the operation had he known of it.
ARTICLE 224. FORGERY AND FRAUDULENT PRACTICES
Section 224.0. Definitions
In this Article, the definitions given in Section 223.0 apply unless a different meaning plainly is required.
Section 224.1. Forgery
(1) Definition. A person is guilty of forgery if, with purpose to defraud or injure anyone, or with knowledge that he is facilitating a fraud or injury to be perpetrated by anyone, the actor:
p. 1274
p. 1275
(a) alters any writing of another without his authority; or
(b) makes, completes, executes, authenticates, issues or transfers any writing so that it purports to be the act of another who did not authorize that act, or to have been executed at a time or place or ina
numbered sequence other than was in fact the case, or to be a copy of an original when no such original existed; or
(c) utters any writing which he knows to be forged in a manner specified in paragraphs (a) or (b).
“Writing” includes printing or any other method of recording information, money, coins, tokens, stamps, seals, credit cards, badges, trade-marks, and other symbols of value, right, privilege, or identification.
(2) Grading. Forgery is a felony of the second degree if the writing is or purports to be part of an issue of money, securities, postage or revenue stamps, or other instruments issued by the government, or part of an issue
of stock, bonds or other instruments representing interests in or claims against any property or enterprise. Forgery is a felony of the third degree if the writing is or purports to be a will, deed, contract, release, commercial instrument,
or other document evidencing, creating, transferring, altering, terminating, or otherwise affecting legal relations. Otherwise forgery is a misdemeanor.
Section 224.2. Simulating Objects of Antiquity, Rarity, Etc. [omitted]
Section 224.3. Fraudulent Destruction, Removal or Concealment of Recordable Instruments
A person commits a felony of the third degree if, with purpose to deceive or injure anyone, he destroys, removes or conceals any will, deed, mortgage, security instrument or other writing for which the law provides public
recording.

Section 224.4. Tampering with Records
A person commits a misdemeanor if, knowing that he has no privilege to do so, he falsifies, destroys, removes or conceals any writing or record, with purpose to deceive or injure anyone or to conceal any wrongdoing.
Section 224.5. Bad Checks
Apperson who issues or passes a check or similar sight order for the payment of money, knowing that it will not be honored by the drawee, commits a misdemeanor. For the purposes of this Section as well as in any prosecution for theft
committed by means of a bad check, an issuer is presumed to know that the check or order (other than a postdated check or order) would not be paid, if:
(1) the issuer had no account with the drawee at the time the check or order was issued; or
(2) payment was refused by the drawee for lack of funds, upon presentation within 30 days after issue, and the issuer failed to make good within 10 days after receiving notice of that refusal.
Section 224.6. Credit Cards
Aperson commits an offense if he uses a credit card for the purpose of obtaining property or services with knowledge that:
p. 1275
p. 1276
(1) the card is stolen or forged; or
(2) the card has been revoked or cancelled; or
(3) for any other reason his use of the card is unauthorized by the issuer.
Itis an affirmative defense to prosecution under paragraph (3) if the actor proves by a preponderance of the evidence that he had the purpose and ability to meet all obligations to the issuer arising out of his use of the card.
“Credit card” means a writing, or other evidence of an undertaking to pay for property or services delivered or rendered to or upon the order of a designated person or bearer. An offense under this Section is a felony of the third degree if the
value of the property or services secured or sought to be secured by means of the credit card exceeds $500; otherwise it is a misdemeanor.
Section 224.7. Deceptive Business Practices
A person commits a misdemeanor if in the course of business he:
(1) uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure, or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity; or
(2) sells, offers or exposes for sale, or delivers less than the represented quantity of any commodity or service; or
(3) takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity of any commodity or service when as buyer he furnishes the weight or measure; or
(4) sells, offers or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled commodities. “Adulterated” means varying from the standard of composition or quality prescribed by or pursuant to any statute providing criminal penalties
for such variance, or set by established commercial usage. “Mislabeled” means varying from the standard of truth or disclosure in labeling prescribed by or pursuant to any statute providing criminal penalties for such variance, or
set by established commercial usage; or
(5) makes a false or misleading statement in any advertisement addressed to the public or to a substantial segment thereof for the purpose of promoting the purchase or sale of property or services; or
(6) makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of obtaining property or credit; or
(7) makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of promoting the sale of securities, or omits information required by law to be disclosed in written documents relating to securities.
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Section if the defendant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that his conduct was not knowingly or recklessly deceptive.

Section 224.8. Commercial Bribery and Breach of Duty to Act Disinterestedly
(1) A person commits a misdemeanor if he solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit as consideration for knowingly violating or agreeing to violate a duty of fidelity to which he is subject as:
(a) partner, agent, or employee of another;
(b) trustee, guardian, or other fiduciary;
(c) lawyer, physician, accountant, appraiser, or other professional adviser or informant;
p. 1276
p.1277
(d) officer, director, manager or other participant in the direction of the affairs of an incorporated or unincorporated association; or
(e) arbitrator or other purportedly disinterested adjudicator or referee.
(2) A person who holds himself out to the public as being engaged in the business of making disinterested selection, appraisal, or criticism of commodities or services commits a misdemeanor if he solicits, accepts or
agrees to accept any benefit to influence his selection, appraisal or criticism.
(3) A person commits a misdemeanor if he confers, or offers or agrees to confer, any benefit the acceptance of which would be criminal under this Section.
Section 224.9. Rigging Publicly Exhibited Contest
(1) A person commits a misdemeanor if, with purpose to prevent a publicly exhibited contest from being conducted in accordance with the rules and usages purporting to govern it, he:
(a) confers or offers or agrees to confer any benefit upon, or threatens any injury to a participant, official or other person associated with the contest or exhibition; or
(b) tampers with any person, animal or thing.
(2) Soliciting or Accepting Benefit for Rigging. A person commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit the giving of which would be criminal under Subsection (1).
(3) Participation in Rigged Contest. A person commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly engages in, sponsors, produces, judges, or otherwise participates in a publicly exhibited contest knowing that the contest is not
being conducted in compliance with the rules and usages purporting to govern it, by reason of conduct which would be criminal under this Section.
Section 224.10. Defrauding Secured Creditors
A person commits a misdemeanor if he destroys, removes, conceals, encumbers, transfers or otherwise deals with property subject to a security interest with purpose to hinder enforcement of that interest.
Section 224.11. Fraud in Insolvency [omitted]
Section 224.12. Receiving Deposits in a Failing Financial Institution [omitted]
Section 224.13. Misapplication of Entrusted Property and Property of Government or Financial Institution [omitted]
Section 224.14. Securing Execution of Documents by Deception
Aperson commits a misdemeanor if by deception he causes another to execute any instrument affecting, purporting to affect, or likely to affect the pecuniary interest of any person.
Offenses Against the Family

p.1277
p.1278
ARTICLE 230. OFFENSES AGAINST THE FAMILY
Section 230.1. Bigamy and Polygamy
(1) Bigamy. A married person is guilty of bigamy, a misdemeanor, if he contracts or purports to contract another marriage, unless at the time of the subsequent marriage:

(a) the actor believes that the prior spouse is dead; or

(b) the actor and the prior spouse have been living apart for five consecutive years throughout which the prior spouse was not known by the actor to be alive; or

(c) a Court has entered a judgment purporting to terminate or annul any prior disqualifying marriage, and the actor does not know that judgment to be invalid; or

(d) the actor reasonably believes that he is legally eligible to remarry.

(2) Polygamy. A person is guilty of polygamy, a felony of the third degree, if he marries or cohabits with more than one spouse at a time in purported exercise of the right of plural marriage. The offense is a continuing one
until all cohabitation and claim of marriage with more than one spouse terminates. This section does not apply to parties to a polygamous marriage, lawful in the country of which they are residents or nationals, while they are in tran-
sit through or temporarily visiting this State.

(3) Other Party to Bigamous or Polygamous Marriage. A person is guilty of bigamy or polygamy, as the case may be, if he contracts or purports to contract marriage with another knowing that the other is thereby com-
mitting bigamy or polygamy.

Section 230.2. Incest
Aperson is guilty of incest, a felony of the third degree, if he knowingly marries or cohabits or has sexual intercourse with an ancestor or descendant, a brother or sister of the whole or half blood [or an uncle, aunt, nephew or
niece of the whole blood]. “Cohabit” means to live together under the representation or appearance of being married. The relationships referred to herein include blood relationships without regard to legitimacy, and relationship of parent
and child by adoption.
Section 230.3. Abortion [omitted]
Section 230.4. Endangering Welfare of Children
Aparent, guardian, or other person supervising the welfare of a child under 18 commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly endangers the child's welfare by violating a duty of care, protection or support.
Section 230.5. Persistent Non-Support
A person commits a misdemeanor if he persistently fails to provide support which he can provide and which he knows he is legally obliged to provide to a spouse, child or other dependent.
Offenses Against Public Administration
p.1278
p.1279
ARTICLE 240. BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION INFLUENCE [OMITTED]

ARTICLE 241. PERJURY AND OTHER FALSIFICATION IN OFFICIAL MATTERS [OMITTED]
ARTICLE 242. OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS; ESCAPES [OMITTED]
ARTICLE 243. ABUSE OF OFFICE [OMITTED]
Offenses Against Public Order and Decency
ARTICLE 250. RIOT, DISORDERLY CONDUCT, AND RELATED OFFENSES
Section 250.1. Riot; Failure to Disperse
(1) Riot. A person is guilty of riot, a felony of the third degree, if he participates with [two] or more others in a course of disorderly conduct:

(a) with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony or misdemeanor;

(b) with purpose to prevent or coerce official action; or

(c) when the actor or any other participant to the knowledge of the actor uses or plans to use a firearm or any other deadly weapon.

(2) Failure of Disorderly Persons to Disperse Upon Official Order. Where [three] or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly conduct likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance
or alarm, a peace officer or other public servant engaged in executing or enforcing the law may order the participants and others in the immediate vicinity to disperse. A person who refuses or knowingly fails to obey such an order
commits a misdemeanor.

Section 250.2. Disorderly Conduct
(1) Offense Defined. A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with purpose to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he:
(a) engages in fighting or threatening, or in violent or tumultuous behavior; or
(b) makes unreasonable noise or offensively coarse utterance, gesture or display, or addresses abusive language to any person present; or
(c) creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
“Public” means affecting or likely to affect persons in a place to which the public or a substantial group has access; among the places included are highways, transport facilities, schools, prisons, apartment
houses, places of business or amusement, or any neighborhood.

(2) Grading. An offense under this section is a petty misdemeanor if the actor's purpose is to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, or if he persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or request

to desist. Otherwise disorderly conduct is a violation.
p.1279
p. 1260
Section 250.3. False Public Alarms
Aperson is guilty of a misdemeanor if he initiates or circulates a report or warning of an impending bombing or other crime or catastrophe, knowing that the report or warning is false or baseless and that it is likely to cause
evacuation of a building, place of assembly, or facility of public transport, or to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
Section 250.4. Harassment

Aperson commits a petty misdemeanor if, with purpose to harass another, he:
(1) makes a telephone call without purpose of legitimate communication; or
(2) insults, taunts or challenges another in a manner likely to provoke violent or disorderly response; or
(3) makes repeated communications anonymously or at extremely inconvenient hours, or in offensively coarse language; or
(4) subjects another to an offensive touching; or
(5) engages in any other course of alarming conduct serving no legitimate purpose of the actor.
Section 250.5. Public Drunkenness; Drug Incapacitation
A person is guilty of an offense if he appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drugs, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that he may endanger himself or other persons
or property, or annoy persons in his vicinity. An offense under this Section constitutes a petty misdemeanor if the actor has been convicted hereunder twice before within a period of one year. Otherwise the offense constitutes a violation.
Section 250.6. Loitering or Prowling
A person commits a violation if he loiters or prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among
the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a peace officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself
or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a peace officer shall prior to any arrest for an offense under this section afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be
warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shalll be convicted of an offense under this Section if the peace officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial
that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
Section 250.7. Obstructing Highways and Other Public Passages
(1) A person, who, having no legal privilege to do so, purposely or recklessly obstructs any highway or other public passage, whether alone or with others, commits a violation, or, in case he persists after warning by a
law
p. 1260
p. 1281
officer, a petty misdemeanor. “Obstructs” means renders impassable without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard. No person shall be deemed guilty of recklessly obstructing in violation of this Subsection solely because of a
gathering of persons to hear him speak or otherwise communicate, or solely because of being a member of such a gathering.
(2) A person in a gathering commits a violation if he refuses to obey a reasonable official request or order to move:
(a) to prevent obstruction of a highway or other public passage; or
(b) to maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire or other hazard.
‘An order to move, addressed to a person whose speech or other lawful behavior attracts an obstructing audience, shall not be deemed reasonable if the obstruction can be readily remedied by police control of the size or loca-
tion of the gathering.
Section 250.8. Disrupting Meetings and Processions

Aperson commits a misdemeanor if, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, procession or gathering, he does any act tending to obstruct or interfere with it physically, or makes any utterance, gesture or display designed to
outrage the sensibilities of the group.
Section 250.9. Desecration of Venerated Objects [omitted]
Section 250.10. Abuse of Corpse [omitted]
Section 250.11. Cruelty to Animals [omitted]
Section 250.12. Violation of Privacy [omitted]
ARTICLE 251. PUBLIC INDECENCY
Section 251.1. Open Lewdness
Aperson commits a petty misdemeanor if he does any lewd act which he knows is likely to be observed by others who would be affronted or alarmed.
Section 251.2. Prostitution and Related Offenses
(1) Prostitution. A person is guilty of prostitution, a petty misdemeanor, if he or she:

(a) is an inmate of a house of prostitution or otherwise engages in sexual activity as a business; or

(b) loiters in or within view of any public place for the purpose of being hired to engage in sexual activity.

“Sexual activity” includes homosexual and other deviate sexual relations. A “house of prostitution” is any place where prostitution or promotion of prostitution is regularly carried on by one person under the
control, management or supervision of another. An “inmate” is a person who engages in prostitution in or through the agency of a house of prostitution. “Public place” means any place to which the public or any substan-
tial group thereof has access.

p. 1281
p. 1262
(2) Promoting Prostitution. A person who knowingly promotes prostitution of another commits a misdemeanor or felony as provided in Subsection (3). The following acts shall, without limitation of the foregoing, consti-
tute promoting prostitution:

(a) owning, controlling, managing, supervising or otherwise keeping, alone or in association with others, a house of prostitution or a prostitution business; or

(b) procuring an inmate for a house of prostitution or a place in a house of prostitution for one who would be an inmate; or

(c) encouraging, inducing, or otherwise purposely causing another to become or remain a prostitute; or

(d) soliciting a person to patronize a prostitute; or

(e) procuring a prostitute for a patron; or

(£) transporting a person into or within this state with purpose to promote that person's engaging in prostitution, or procuring or paying for transportation with that purpose; or

(g) leasing or otherwise permitting a place controlled by the actor, alone or in association with others, to be regularly used for prostitution or the promotion of prostitution, or failure to make reasonable effort
to abate such use by ejecting the tenant, notifying law enforcement authorities, or other legally available means; or

(h) soliciting, receiving, or agreeing to receive any benefit for doing or agreeing to do anything forbidden by this Subsection.
(3) Grading of Offenses Under Subsection (2). An offense under Subsection (2) constitutes a felony of the third degree if:
(a) the offense falls within paragraph (a), (b) or (c) of Subsection (2); or
(b) the actor compels another to engage in or promote prostitution; or
(c) the actor promotes prostitution of a child under 16, whether or not he is aware of the child’s age; or
(d) the actor promotes prostitution of his wife, child, ward or any person for whose care, protection or support he is responsible.
Otherwise the offense is a misdemeanor.
(4) Presumption from Living off Prostitutes. A person, other than the prostitute or the prostitute’s minor child or other legal dependent incapable of self-support, who is supported in whole or substantial part by the pro-
ceeds of prostitution is presumed to be knowingly promoting prostitution in violation of Subsection (2).
(5) Patronizing Prostitutes. A person commits a violation if he hires a prostitute to engage in sexual activity with him, or if he enters or remains in a house of prostitution for the purpose of engaging in sexual activity.
(6) Evidence. On the issue whether a place is a house of prostitution the following shall be admissible evidence: its general repute; the repute of the persons who reside in or frequent the place; the frequency, timing and
duration of visits by non-residents. Testimony of a person against his spouse shall be admissible to prove offenses under this Section.
p. 1262
p. 1263
Section 251.3. Loitering to Solicit Deviate Sexual Relations
Aperson is guilty of a petty misdemeanor if he loiters in or near any public place for the purpose of soliciting or being solicited to engage in deviate sexual relations.
Section 251.4. Obscenity [omitted]
PART III. TREATMENT AND CORRECTION [OMITTED]
PART IV. ORGANIZATION OF CORRECTION [OMITTED]
“The 1962 provision dealing with the death penalty, §210.6, was withdrawn in 2009. The 1962 provisions dealing with sentencing and the disposition of convicted persons, §1.02(2) and Articles 6-7, were withdrawn in 2017 and replaced with new text for §1.02(2) and Articles 6-11. In June 2021, the
ALI membership voted to withdraw the 1962 provision dealing with sexual offenses, Article 213, and to replace it with new text for Article 213; those amendments are to be formally issued by the ALI Council in January 2022. The MPC text included here reflects these three sets of amendments.
+1, See Sanford H. Kadish, Fifty Years of Criminal Law: An Opinionated Review, 87 Cal, L. Rev. 943, 947-948 (1999); Sanford H. Kadish, The Model Penal Code’s Historical Antecedents, 19 Rutgers L. Rev. 521 (1988).
2. Kadish, Fifty Years, supra note 1, at 948-949.
As amended, 2017.
“The brackets were meant to reflect the fact that the Institute took no position on the desirabilty of the death penalty. — EDs.
“The brackets were meant to reflect the fact that the Institute took no position on the desirability of the death penalty. — EDs.
*/As amended, June 2021.

The grading for offenses in amended Article 213 follows the grading structure of MPC Article 6, as amended in 2017, which provides for five felony degrees and two misdemeanor degrees. Amended Article 6 does not propose a maximum term of imprisonment for each grading category, but
instead mentions a term of years in brackets as a rough point of departure for judgments of relative offense severity. Amended Article 213 includes these bracketed terms of years for the same reason. The Comment to amended Article 6 explains, “[MJaximum authorized terms are stated in brackets in part be-
‘cause judgments about the sanctions appropriate to [each felony] degree are fundamental policy questions [to be resolved] within each state.” Model Penal Code: Sentencing (Proposed Final Draft, April 10, 2017), Section 6.06(6)(c), Comment k, p. 157.

p. 1283,
