p. 1013
CHAPTER 9
THEFT OFFENSES
Taking something belonging to another is at the root of a multitude of offenses that fall under the umbrella of theft. The nature of these crimes varies along two dimensions: how the item in question is acquired and what is taken. The
law has changed dramatically on both levels. The means of acquisition separate the various common-law offenses of larceny, embezzlement, obtaining by false pretenses, fraud, and blackmail, but modern statutes tend to consolidate these into
general theft statutes. Similarly, the property subject to theft has also evolved over time. There is no controversy about how to treat the unauthorized taking of tangible property, but what about other valuable rights and interests? Here, too, we
must ask what is appropriately treated as a criminal offense and where to draw the lines.
A. THE MEANS OF ACQUISITION
Model Penal Code and Commentaries
Comment to §223.1 at 128-131 (1980)
Distinctions among larceny, embezzlement, obtaining by false pretenses, extortion, and the other closely related theft offenses are explicable in terms of a long history of expansion of the role of the criminal law in protecting property.
That history begins with a concer for crimes of violence — in the present context, the taking of property by force from the possession of another, i.e., robbery. The criminal law then expanded, by means of the ancient quasi-criminal writ of tres-
pass, to cover all taking of another's property from his possession without his consent, even though no force was used. This misconduct was punished as larceny. The law then expanded once more, through some famous judicial manipulation of
the concept of possession, to embrace misappropriation by a person who with the consent of the owner already had physical control over the property, as in the case of servants. . .
At this point in the chronology of the law of theft, about the end of the 18th century, . . . the initiative pass[ed] from the courts to the legislature. . . .
The earliest statutes dealt with embezzlement by such narrowly defined groups as bank clerks. Subsequent laws extended coverage to agents, attorneys, bailees, fiduciaries, . . . until at last a few American legislatures enacted fraudu-
lent-conversion statutes penalizing misappropriation by anyone who received or had in his possession or control the property of another. . . .
p. 1013
p.1014
The fraud aspects of theft, never regarded with such abhorrence as larceny, begin with the common-law misdemeanor of cheat. This offense required use of false weights or similar “tokens,” thus limiting criminal deception to certain
special techniques conceived as directed against the public generally. One may suspect that this development was an outgrowth of guild regulation of unfair competition as much as it reflected a desire to protect the buying public... . A mere lie

for the purpose of deceiving another in a business transaction did not become criminal until the Statute of 30 Geo. 2, ch. 24 (1757), created the misdemeanor of obtaining property by false pretenses. Even this statute was not at first believed to
make mere misrepresentation criminal. Instead, it was thought to require some more elaborate swindling stratagem. . . . Eventually it was settled in Anglo-American law that false representations of “fact,” if “material,” would suffice. Today’s battle-
ground is over such matters as misrepresentation of “opinion,” “law,” or “value,” as well as “misleading omissions” and “false promises.”. . .

The criminal law reached larceny first and embezzlement later because of real distinctions between theft by a stranger and the peculations of a trusted agent. . . . The ordinary trespass-theft was committed by a stranger, an intruder with
no semblance of right even to touch the object taken. The offender was easily recognized by the very taking, surreptitious or forceful, and so set apart from the law-abiding community. . . . In contrast, the embezzler stands always in a lawful as well
as in an unlawful relation to the victim and the property. He is respectable; indeed, some tend to identify with him rather than with the bank or insurance company from which he embezzles. The line between lawful and unlawful activity is for the
embezzler a question of the scope of his authority, which may be ill-defined. Not every deviation from the authority conferred will be civilly actionable, much less a basis for criminal liability. . . .

The embezzlement problem is complicated further by the necessity of distinguishing between defalcation by one who has “property of another” and failure of a debtor to pay his debts. Modern society is opposed to imprisonment for
debt, however committed it may be to punishment for betrayal of trust. Yet when property is entrusted to a dealer for sale, with the expectation that he will receive the proceeds, deduct his commission, and remit the balance, the dealer's criminal
liability if he fails to remit may turn on refinements of the civil law of contracts, agency, sales, or trusts. Such refinements, designed to allocate financial risks or to determine priorities among creditors of an insolvent, are hardly a relevant index to
the harm done the owner or to the character of the defaulting dealer and thus may be entirely inappropriate as a measure of criminal liability.

1. Trespassory Takings
People v. Williams

‘Supreme Court of California
805 P.3d 1241 (Cal. 2013)

KeNNarD, J. [Defendant used credit cards that had been re-encoded with a third party’s credit card information to buy gift cards at Walmart. A store employee realized that the numbers on the card did not match the numbers on the

receipt and

p.1014
Tee 1018
confronted the defendant about it. The defendant headed for the store exit, and in the process shoved one of the store’s security guards. After a brief struggle, defendant was handcuffed. As relevant here, defendant was later charged with and
convicted of multiple counts of robbery under §211 of the California Penal Code. See p. 1022 infra. Because the defendant had a prior robbery conviction, he qualified under the state’s “three strikes” law and received a sentence of 23 years and 8
months.]

At issue here is the meaning of “felonious taking.” Can that element of robbery be satisfied only by the crime of theft by larceny, as defendant argues? Or can it also be committed through theft by false pretenses, as the Attorney Gen-
eral contends?

To help us ascertain the meaning that the Legislature intended when it used the words “felonious taking” in California’s robbery statute . . . we need to examine that statute’s common law roots. . . .

The common law defined larceny as the taking and carrying away of someone else’s personal property, by trespass, with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of possession. Larceny was considered to be an offense less serious
than robbery because of robbery’s additional requirement of personal violence against, or intimidation of, the victim. Not that the distinction made any difference to the accused: Under the common law, robbery and larceny were felonies, and all
felonies were punishable by death.

In 1275, the English Parliament enacted a . . . statute [whereby] grand larceny remained punishable by death; but petit larceny became punishable only by imprisonment, whipping, or forfeiture of goods. Larceny remained a felony,
however, irrespective of whether it was grand or petit... .

Until the latter part of the 18th century, death was the punishment for all theft offenses except petty larceny. By that time, English society and its judiciary had become troubled by that excessively harsh punishment for theft crimes. This
concern led the English courts to limit the scope of larceny. For instance, it was held not to be larceny — and not a crime at all — if someone in lawful possession of another's property misappropriated it for personal use (the later offense of embez-
zlement), or if someone acquired title to another's property by fraud (the later offense of false pretenses). These limitations to the law of larceny made sense [because] they were viewed as less likely to result in violence. . . .

[Llarceny requires a trespassory taking, which is a taking without the property owner's consent. . .. The reasoning supporting larceny by trick’s inclusion within the crime of larceny — that fraud vitiates the property owner's consent
to the taking — was not extended, however, to cases involving the fraudulent transfer of title. Under the common law, if title was transferred, there was no trespass and hence no larceny. The theory was that once title to property was voluntarily
transferred by its owner to another, the recipient owned the property and therefore could not be said to be trespassing upon it. Similarly, under the common law there was no trespass, and hence no larceny, when a lawful possessor of another's
property misappropriated it to personal use. These subtle limitations on the common law crime of larceny spurred the British Parliament in the 18th century to create the separate statutory offenses of theft by false pretenses and embezzlement. . ..

Unlike larceny, the newly enacted offense of theft by false pretenses involved acquiring title over the property, not just possession. Unlike larceny, the newly enacted offense of embezzlement involved an initial, lawful possession of the
victim's property, followed by its misappropriation.

p. 1015
p. 1016

Britain's 18th century division of theft into the three separate crimes of larceny, false pretenses, and embezzlement made its way into the early criminal laws of the American states. That import has been widely criticized in this nation’s
legal community because of the seemingly arbitrary distinctions between the three offenses and the burden these distinctions have posed for prosecutors. . .

In the early 20th century, many state legislatures, recognizing the burdens imposed on prosecutors by the separation of the three crimes of larceny, false pretenses, and embezzlement, consolidated those offenses into a single crime,
usually called “theft.”. . . [T]he California Legislature's consolidation of larceny, false pretenses, and embezzlement into the single crime of theft did not change the elements of those offenses. . . .

We now consider the issue here: whether robbery’s element of “felonious taking” can be satisfied through theft by false pretenses, the type of theft defendant committed.

Robbery is “the felonious taking of personal property in the possession of another, from his person or immediate presence, and against his will, accomplished by means of force or fear.” Reflected in that statutory definition are larceny's
elements of “the taking of another's property, with the intent to steal and carry it away.” The taking required in larceny, as in robbery, must be “felonious.”

[As explained above,] all larceny at common law was a felony, and thus the common law defined larceny as a “felonious taking.” Because California's robbery statute uses the common law's phrase “felonious taking,” and because at
common law “felonious taking” was synonymous with larceny, we conclude that larceny is a necessary element of robbery. . . .

‘Two differences in the crimes of larceny and theft by false pretenses tend to support our conclusion that only theft by larceny, not by false pretenses, can fulfill the “felonious taking” requirement of robbery.

First, larceny requires “asportation,” which is a carrying away of stolen property. This element of larceny, although satisfied by only the slightest movement, continues until the perpetrator reaches a place of temporary safety. Asporta-
tion is what makes larceny a continuing offense. Because larceny is a continuing offense, a defendant who uses force or fear in an attempt to escape with property taken by larceny has committed robbery. . . .

But theft by false pretenses, unlike larceny, has no requirement of asportation. The offense requires only that “(1) the defendant made a false pretense or representation to the owner of property; (2) with the intent to defraud the owner
of that property; and (3) the owner transferred the property to the defendant in reliance on the representation.” The crime of theft by false pretenses ends at the moment title to the property is acquired, and thus cannot become robbery by the
defendant's later use of force or fear. Here, when defendant shoved the store security guards, he was no longer engaged in the commission of theft because he had already acquired title to the Walmart gift cards; therefore, defendant did not com-
mit robbery. . ..

We now consider another significant difference between larceny and theft by false pretenses. . . . [Llarceny requires a “trespassory taking,” which is a taking without the property owner's consent. . . . By contrast, theft by false pretenses
involves the consensual transfer of possession as well as title of property; therefore, it cannot be committed by trespass. This is illustrated by the facts in a recent Court of

p. 1016

p.1017
Appeal decision, People v. Beaver (2010) 186 Cal. App. 4th 107. There, the defendant staged an accident at his place of employment, a ski resort, to obtain medical expenses for a preexisting injury to his knee. The defendant was convicted of
grand theft. The Court of Appeal reversed the conviction, holding that the jury was instructed on the incorrect type of theft — theft by larceny — and instead should have been instructed on theft by false pretenses. Beaver said: “The present matter
did not involve a taking of property from another without his consent. [The ski resort] willingly paid for defendant's medical treatment on the false representation that [it] had caused defendant's injuries. This was theft by false pretenses, not larce-
ny.” (Id. at p. 121)...

Here too defendant did not commit larceny. Walmart, through its store employees, consented to transferring title to the gift cards to defendant. Defendant acquired ownership of the gift cards through his false representation, on which
Walmart relied, that he was using valid payment cards to purchase the gift cards. Only after discovering the fraud did the store seek to reclaim possession. Because a “felonious taking,” as required in California's robbery statute, must be without
the consent of the property owner, or “against his will,” and Walmart consented to the sale of the gift cards, defendant did not commit a trespassory (nonconsensual) taking, and hence did not commit robbery. Moreover, unlike the offense of larceny
by trick, in which a defendant's fraud vitiates the consent of the victim as a matter of law, the acquisition of title involved in the crime of theft by false pretenses precludes a trespass from occurring. . . .

In resolving many complex legal issues, as Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., observed, “a page of history is worth a volume of logic.” (New York Trust Co. v. Eisner (1921) 256 U.S. 345, 349 (1921).) To determine the meaning of the
words “felonious taking” in our statutory definition of robbery, we have delved into the sources of this statutory definition and, in tum, into the history of the common law crime of larceny and the statutory crime of theft by false pretenses. This re-
view has led us to conclude that the words “felonious taking” in the robbery definition were intended to refer only to theft committed by larceny and not to theft by false pretenses.

The logic and fairness of this conclusion may be open to question because a thief who uses force to resist capture may be equally culpable whether the theft was committed by larceny (for example, ordinary shoplifting) or by false
pretenses (as occurred here). Nevertheless, our task is simply to interpret and apply the laws as the Legislature has enacted them, not to revise or reform them to better reflect contemporary standards. . ..

[Dissenting opinion of J. Baxter is omitted.]

NOTES

1. Traditional asportation and its statutory variants. Both at common law and under statutory formulations, larceny requires a trespassory taking as well as a carrying away (asportation). While courts have substantially minimized
the significance of this requirement by holding that any movement of the thing, no matter how slight, is sufficient, problems still may arise. Consider Terrell v. State, 237 So. 3d 717 (Miss. 2018). The defendant purported to sell timber, not his own,
to an innocent purchaser, and the purchaser carried the timber away. May the defendant be convicted

p.1017

p. 1018
of larceny? A few courts would answer in the negative because of the absence of an asportation. See, e.g., State v. Laborde, 11 So. 2d 404 (La. 1942). The majority, however, as in Terrell, supra, find the purchaser to be the innocent agent of the
seller and impute the purchaser's acts to the defendant. Can this be analytically defended?

The New York Court of Appeals, in People v. Alamo, 358 N.Y.S.2d 375 (1974), dispensed with the requirement of an actual movement of the object in a case where the defendant entered a stranger's car, tuned on the lights, and started
the engine. The court upheld the trial court's instruction that the jury might find theft of the car in these circumstances even if the defendant had not moved the vehicle (assuming, of course, they found the requisite intent to steal it). The court read
the traditional doctrine requiring an asportation as reflecting a concern that the crucial elements of possession and control were established. Drawing a comparison to pickpocket cases in which courts required some movement of the seized ob-
ject, the court stated (jd. at 379):

Awallet, or a diamond ring, or a safe are totally inert objects susceptible of movement only by physical lifting or shoving by the thief. An automobile, however, is itself an instrument of transportation and when activated

comes within the total possession and control of the operator. In this situation movement or motion is not essential to control. Absent any evidence that the vehicle is somehow fastened or immovable because of a mechan-

ical defect, the thief has taken command of the object of the larceny.

Congress makes it a federal crime when one “intentionally accesses a computer without authorization or exceeds authorized access, and thereby obtains . . . information from any protected computer.” 18 U.S.C. §1030(a)(2)(C). Should
it count as “obtain{ing] information” if a person reads or views information without downloading or copying it? The legislative history rejects an asportation requirement: “[T]he term ‘obtaining information’ includes merely reading it. There is no re-
quirement that the information be copied or transported. This is critically important because, in an electronic environment, information can be ‘stolen’ without asportation, and the original usually remains intact.” S. Rep. No. 104-357, at 7 (1996).

The MPC eliminates the requirement of an asportation and substitutes the requirement that the defendant “exercise unlawful control” over the movable property. Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §223.2(1) at 164
(1980), states:

Since larceny was generally a felony and attempt a misdemeanor, important differences in procedure and punishment turned on the criminologically insignificant fact of slight movement of the object of the theft. Under

Section 5.01 of the Model Code, and in modern criminal law generally, differences in penal consequences between attempt and completed crime are minimized, so that it becomes less important where the line is drawn be-

tween them... .

Most revised codes follow this lead. Id. at 165.
2. Problem. The defendant removed a price label for £2.73 from one piece of meat in a supermarket and affixed the label to another piece of meat that should have cost £6.91. His act was detected at the checkout counter before he
paid for the
p. 1018
p. 1019
mislabeled package. Could the defendant be convicted of larceny? See Regina v. Morris, [1983] 3 All E.R. 288, [1984] A.C. 320 (H.L. 1983).

Compare People v. Olivo, 52 N.Y.2d 309 (1981), a consolidated appeal from several petit larceny convictions for shoplifting from department stores and a bookstore. In one case, the defendant took objects on display and secreted them
in his clothing, while furtively looking around. In another case, the defendant removed a sensor device from a jacket, put the jacket on, placed his own jacket that he was previously wearing on a table, and walked toward the exit. N.Y. Penal Code
§155.05 provides that one commits larceny when “he wrongfully takes” another's property, with the intent to steal. The defense argued that a customer cannot “wrongfully take” an article in a self-service store so long as he remains in the store.
The court disagreed and affirmed all the convictions, holding that these defendants could be held for larceny even though they were apprehended before leaving the store. The court stated (id. at 317-318):

[ln modern self-service stores . . . customers are impliedly invited to examine, try on, and carry about the merchandise on display. . . . That the owner has consented to that possession does not, however, preclude a convic-

tion for larceny. If the customer exercises dominion and control wholly inconsistent with the continued rights of the owner, and the other elements of the crime are present, a larceny has occurred. Such conduct on the part

of a customer satisfies the “taking” element of the crime.

Topolewski v. State
‘Supreme Court of Wisconsin
130 Wis. 244, 109 N.W. 1037 (1906)

[The accused arranged with Dolan, who owed him money and was an employee of the Plankinton Packing Company, to place three barrels of the company’s meat on the loading platform, the plan being that accused would load the
barrels on his wagon and drive away as if he were a customer. Dolan carried out his end of the plan after informing the company’s representatives and receiving their instructions to feign cooperation. The accused took the barrels as planned and
was arrested, charged, and convicted of stealing the barrels of meat]

MaRrsHALL, J. . . . Did [Dolan’s agreement] with the accused to place the property of the packing company on the loading platform, where it could be appropriated by the accused . . . constitute consent to such appropriation?

The case is very near the border line, if not across it, between consent and nonconsent to the taking of the property. [In] Reg. v. Lawrence, 4 Cox C.C. 438, it was held that if the property was delivered by a servant to the defendant by
the master’s direction the offense cannot be larceny, regardless of the purpose of the defendant. In this case the property was not only placed on the loading platform, as was usual in delivering such goods to customers, with knowledge that the
accused would soon arrive, having a formed design to take it, but the packing company's employee in charge of the platform, Ernst Klotz, was instructed that the property

p. 1019

p. 1020
was placed there for a man who would call for it. Klotz from such statement had every reason to infer, when the accused arrived and claimed the right to take the property, that he was the one referred to and that it was proper to make delivery to
him and he acted accordingly. While he did not physically place the property, or assist in doing so, in the wagon, his standing by, witnessing such placing by the accused, and then assisting him in arranging the wagon, as the evidence shows he
did, and taking the order, in the usual way, from the accused as to the disposition of the fourth barrel, and his conduct in respect thereto amounted, practically, to a delivery of the three barrels to the accused.

In Rex v. Egginton, 2 P. & P. 508, [a] servant informed his master that he had been solicited to aid in robbing the latter's house. By the master’s direction the servant opened the house, gave the would-be thieves access thereto and took
them to the place where the intended subject of the larceny had been laid in order that they might take it. All this was done with a view to the apprehension of the guilty parties after the accomplishment of their purpose. The servant by direction of
the master not only gave access to the house but afforded the would-be thieves every facility for taking the property, and yet the court held that the crime of larceny was complete, because there was no direction to the servant to deliver the prop-
erty to the intruders or consent to their taking it. [T]he way was made easy for them to do so, but they were neither induced to commit the crime, nor was any act essential to the offense done by any one but themselves. . ..

[Whhere the owner of property by himself or his agent, actually or constructively, aids in the commission of the offense, as intended by the wrongdoer, by performing or rendering unnecessary some act in the transaction essential to the
offense, the would-be criminal is not guilty of all the elements of the offense... .

The logical basis for the doctrine above discussed is that there can be no larceny without a trespass. So if one procures his property to be taken by another intending to commit larceny, or delivers his property to such other, the latter
purposing to commit such crime, the element of trespass is wanting and the crime not fully consummated however plain may be the guilty purpose of the one possessing himself of such property. That does not militate against a person's being
free to set a trap to catch one whom he suspects of an intention to commit the crime of larceny, but the setting of such trap must not go further than to afford the would-be thief the amplest opportunity to carry out his purpose, formed without such
inducement on the part of the owner of the property, as to put him in the position of having consented to the taking. If | induce one to come and take my property and then place it before him to be taken, and he takes it with criminal intent, or if
knowing that one intends to take my property | deliver it to him and he takes it with such intent, the essential element of trespass involving nonconsent requisite to a completed offense of larceny does not characterize the transaction, regardless of
the fact that the moral turpitude involved is no less than it would be if such essential were present. Some writers in treating this subject give so much attention to condemning the deception practiced to facilitate and encourage the commission of
acrime . . . that the condemnation is liable to be viewed as if the deception were sufficient to excuse the would-be criminal, or to preclude his being prosecuted; . . . and that the wrongful participation of the owner of the property renders him and
the public incapable of being heard to charge the person he has

p. 1020

p. 1021
entrapped with the offense of larceny. That is wrong. [The obstacle to convicting the would-be thief] is the removal from the completed transaction . . . of the element of trespass or nonconsent. [Determining whether such element is absent] is often
not free from difficulty and courts of review should incline quite strongly to support the decision of the trial judge in respect to the matter and not disturb it except in a clear case. It seems that there is such a case before us.

The judgment is reversed, and the cause remanded for a new trial.

NOTES

1. Feigned accomplices and consent. An informant told a police officer that the defendant, Jarrott, proposed that he join him in stealing and selling cars. The informant was instructed to play along. Later, the informant informed the
police officer of the general time and place that Jarrott, with his ostensible help, planned to steal a car. The police officer thereupon arranged for his own car to be present at that time and place. He left it with the key in the ignition, concealing him-
self in the back. This was known to the informant. Jarrott and the informant later appeared. Jarrott saw the car and proposed they steal it. They entered and drove the car to a garage to try to sell it. When they arrived at the garage, the policeman
climbed out from the car and made his arrest. Defendant appealed his larceny conviction on the grounds that (1) the car was never taken from the personal possession of the owner and (2) the taking occurred with the owner's consent. What should
be the result? Jarrott v. State, 1 S.W.2d 619 (Tex. Crim. 1927). Concerning the defense of entrapment by police agents, see Model Penal Code §2.13, in the Appendix in this book.

2. Statutory modifications. In United States v. Bryan, 483 F.2d 88 (8d Cir. 1973), U.S. Lines, on the instruction of the FBI, permitted its agents to deliver a shipment of whiskey to Echols, who allegedly intended to steal it. The court
rejected the argument that Echols committed no crime because U.S. Lines consented to the taking, stating (at 90-91):

The crime alleged here is [stealing in] violation of 18 U.S.C. §659, [which] has been given a broad construction, free from the technical requirements of common law larceny. United States v. DeNormand, 149 F.2d 622, 624

(2d Cir. 1945). A trial court instruction that the jury need only find “an unlawful taking of the goods by the defendants,” was found sufficient in DeNormand. The consent to the removal of the goods by U.S. Lines personnel in

this case does not demonstrate the absence of an unlawful taking. [T]he relevant question involves not the state of mind of personnel of U.S. Lines, but rather the state of mind of defendants. . ..

In cases where the lawful possessor indicated to the taker that permission was granted for the taking, a finding of commission of a crime would be unlikely. [Here, however, t]here is no proof that U.S. Lines led
defendants to believe they had permission to take the goods.
3. Non-consent and attempt. In the Topolewski case, would it have been possible to convict the defendant of an attempt to commit larceny? See The Case of Lady Eldon’s French Lace, p. 644 supra.
p. 1021
p. 1022
NOTE ON ROBBERY AND EXTORTION
NOTE, A RATIONALE OF THE LAW OF AGGRAVATED THEFT, 54 COLUM. L. REV. 84, 84-86 (1954): [T]o protect not only against misappropriation but also against injuries which may result from peculiarly dangerous means devised for accomplishing
misappropriation, there developed the law of aggravated theft. At common law the only substantive crime embodied within this law was robbery, a larceny accomplished by violence or threat of immediate violence to the person of the victim.
In time it was acknowledged that men may be intimidated by threats other than those foreboding bodily harm. As a result, modern legislation has extended the substantive content of aggravated theft, complementing robbery with the crime of
extortion. ...

The first inquiry, then, concerns the manner in which these crimes differ. The statutory definitions of robbery restate in essence the common law definition: the felonious and forcible taking of property from the person of another or in
his presence, against his will, by violence or putting in fear. Extortion statutes are generally of two types. The majority of jurisdictions treat as the substantive crime of extortion the making of certain specified threats for the purpose of obtaining
property, but a substantial number require an actual misappropriation with the owner's consent. . .. In jurisdictions following either extortion pattern, robbery requires a taking from the person or in his presence, while for extortion the intimidation
is crucial and the place of the taking immaterial. In states which do not require more than the threat for extortion, the fact of misappropriation is relevant only to robbery. And in those states where misappropriation is essential to extortion, there is
a distinction based on the factor of consent. The robbery statutes speak of the absence of consent; the extortion statutes require its presence. But the willingness to surrender the property in any case is only an apparent willingness since in both
instances the victim must choose between alternative evils, namely, the surrender of his property or the execution of the threat. Only if the taking is accomplished by violence to the person of the victim is this apparent consent precluded, for then
the victim is presented with no choice. Thus the definitional distinctions between robbery and extortion are extremely tenuous. . . .

CALIFORNIA PENAL CODE §211 (2021): [Robbery Defined:] Robbery is the felonious taking of personal property in the possession of another, from his person or immediate presence, and against his will, accomplished by means of force or fear
[punishable by imprisonment for two, three, or five years; or, in aggravated cases, by imprisonment for three, four, or six years].

CALIFORNIA PENAL CODE §212 (2021). FEAR DEFINED: The fear mentioned in Section 211 may be either:
1. The fear of an unlawful injury to the person or property of the person robbed, or of any relative of his or member of his family; or,
2. The fear of an immediate and untawful injury to the person or property of anyone in the company of the person robbed at the time of the robbery.
CALIFORNIA PENAL CODE $518 (2021): [Extortion Defined:] Extortion is the obtaining of property or other consideration from another, with his or her consent, or the obtaining of an official act of a public officer, induced by a wrongful use of
p. 1022
p. 1023
force or fear, or under color of official right [punishable by imprisonment for two, three, or four years).
CALIFORNIA PENAL CODE §519 (2021). FEAR USED TO EXTORT; THREATS INDUCING: Fear, such as will constitute extortion, may be induced by a threat of any of the following:
1. To do an unlawful injury to the person or property of the individual threatened or of a third person.
2. To accuse the individual threatened, or any relative of his or her, or a member of his or her family, of a crime.
3. To expose, or to impute to him, her, or them a deformity, disgrace, or crime.
4. To expose any secret affecting him, her, or them.
5. To report his, her, or their immigration status or suspected immigration status.
MODEL PENAL CODE $222.1. ROBBERY: [See the Appendix.]
‘MODEL PENAL CODE §223.4. THEFT BY EXTORTION: [See the Appendix.]
MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT to §223.4 at 202 n.1, 208 (1980): At common law, robbery included taking not only by force but also by threat of force or even by threat of certain other serious harms. To be guilty of robbery
under the Model Penal Code, the defendant must threaten immediate and serious harm. Other coercive deprivation falls under Section 223.4. . ..

There is no requirement in Section 223.4 that the threatened harm be “unlawful.” The actor may be privileged or even obligated to inflict the harm threatened; yet, if he employs the threat to coerce a transfer of property for his own
benefit, he clearly belongs among those who should be subject to punishment for theft. The case of the policeman who has a duty to arrest illustrates the point. His threat to arrest unless the proposed subject of the arrest pays him money should
be treated as extortionate even though the failure to arrest would be dereliction of duty.

QUESTIONS: (a) Note that the threats sufficient to establish robbery are defined much more broadly in California than under the MPC. Is that a strength or a weakness of the California scheme?

(b) In California, if a defendant threatens to slash a motorist’s tires unless the motorist pays $200, is the defendant guilty of robbery, extortion, or both? What would be the answer in a state following the MPC approach? How should the
offense be classified?

(c) In California, if a defendant threatens to assault a person's spouse unless the person pays the defendant $200, is the defendant guilty of robbery, extortion, or both? What would be the answer in a state following the MPC approach?
How should the offense be classified?

(d) In California, a defendant stole a car from a parking lot and ran over the cat’s owner as the defendant was driving away. The defendant conceded an intent to steal the car but insisted that there was no intent to strike or frighten the
‘owner. Is this robbery? In People v. Anderson, 252 P.3d 968 (Cal. 2011), the California Supreme Court upheld the defendant's conviction, stating that “the intent element

p. 1028

Tene 1028
of robbery does not include an intent to apply force against the victim or to cause the victim to feel fear. It is robbery if the defendant committed a forcible act against the victim motivated by the intent to steal, even if the defendant did not also
intend for the victim to experience force or fear.” Do you agree with the court’s approach to the mens rea for robbery?

(e) In terms of moral culpability, should defendants like Anderson face lesser punishment than those who do intend to use force against their victims? Many states, like Maryland, provide separate offenses to cover those two cases and
authorize greater punishment for those who intend for the victim to be harmed or placed in fear of being harmed. State v. Stewart, 211 A.3d 371 (Md. 2019). Should the law draw such distinctions as a matter of substantive offense definition or can
those distinctions be sufficiently made at sentencing?

For more on extortion (also called blackmail), see p. 1049 infra.

2. Misappropriation
Nolan v. State

Maryland Court of Appeals

131 A.2d 851 (Md. 1957)

[Defendant was convicted of embezzlement. He was the office manager of the Federal Discount Corporation, a finance company engaged in the business of making loans and collections. The evidence showed that he appropriated
money from his employer as follows: As payments were received from customers, the payments would be placed in the cash drawer. At the end of the day, an accomplice would prepare a report showing the daily cash receipts. Defendant would
then take some of the cash from the drawer, and his accomplice would recompute the adding tapes to equal the remaining cash.]

CoLuins, J. ... The appellant . . . contends that . . . the evidence produced made the crime larceny and not embezzlement, as charged in the indictment.

. .. The embezzlement statutes were passed, not to cover any cause within the common law range of larceny, but to cover new cases outside of that range. If the goods were taken from the owner's possession, the crime is larceny, not
embezzlement. Goods which have reached their destination are constructively in the owner's possession although he may not yet have touched them and, hence, after such termination of transit, the servant who converts them is guilty of larceny,
not of embezzlement. . . .

The money was not taken by Mr. Nolan until it had been placed in the cash drawer and balanced at the end of the day. When taken by appellant, as alleged, the cash was in the possession of Federal. We must therefore conclude that
under the authorities cited and under the testimony in this case there was not sufficient evidence to find the defendant guilty of embezzlement. The case will be remanded for further proceedings in order that the State, if it deems proper, may try
the defendant on an indictment for embezzlement and larceny, if such an indictment is retuned against the defendant.

p. 1024
p. 1025

Prescorr, J. (concurring). [I]t seems to me that [the court’s opinion] reestablishes many of the tenuous niceties between larceny and embezzlement with which the early English cases are replete, and that it unnecessarily will embarrass
many future prosecutions although the accused palpably may be guilty. . . .

Our statute, Art. 27, §154 of the Maryland Code (1951), reads:

Whosoever being a... servant... . shall fraudulently embezzle any money . .. which . . . shall be . . . taken into possession by him, for... . his master or employer, shall be deemed to have feloniously stolen the same from his

master or employer, although such money . . . was not received into the possession of such master . . . otherwise than by the actual possession of his . .. servant... .

A simple down-to-earth application of the facts presented in the record discloses that every element required in the statute is fully and completely covered. . .. But the majority of the Court feel that the English decisions and other
authorities . . . require a holding that because the money went into the drawers before its fraudulent conversion, the offense was larceny and not embezzlement. If this be so, it seems to place the law in an unfortunate and somewhat indefensible
position. [WJe find ourselves in the peculiar position of following the subtle reasoning developed in the English decisions for the purpose of bringing the guilty to the bar of justice; but, in so doing, we directly come to their aid and comfort. Probably
the solution of this rather difficult problem lies in the course followed by several of our sister States (and as was done in England) where the legislative power has provided that under an indictment for larceny, or for larceny in one count and embez-
zlement in another, there may be a conviction of either offense.

NOTE ON EMBEZZLEMENT

The early conception of larceny as a trespassory taking from the possession of the owner against his will was thought to preclude conviction of persons who physically and lawfully held property of the owner, such as servants, guests,
and employees. Since they had “possession” of the owner's goods, their making off with them could not constitute larceny.

This was changed through judicial development of the concept that in some situations the servant merely had custody, while possession — “legal” or “constructive” possession — remained in the employer. The development was
gradual, and there was considerable disagreement over issues such as whether a servant had mere custody or legal possession when the master entrusted property to the servant so that the servant could take it away from the house. Such doubts
were resolved by statute in 1529, and by later cases it was established that “a servant, whether at the master’s home or elsewhere, never has legal possession of such property of his master as he controls in his capacity as servant.” 2 Wm. Oldnall
Russell, A Treatise on Crimes and Misdemeanors (11th ed., Turner, 1958). Therefore, servants who made off with their masters’ goods committed larceny from the possession of the master. What if servants are given goods by a third party for de-
livery to their masters? Could it be said here that when servants misappropriated the goods, they were taking them from someone's possession? The answer was no, since the master did not

p. 1025
p. 1026
have possession and the third party voluntarily gave up possession. As a result, the servants could not be convicted of larceny.

The courts found a way to fill part of this gap, too. They reasoned that if the servants deposited the goods or money they had received in a place provided by their masters and subject to their master’s control (as in Nolan, supra), then
possession passed to the master; the servants retained only custody. In that scenario, therefore, a dishonest appropriation was larceny. The solution, however, was far from perfect, as became clear in the Bazeley case, 168 Eng. Rep. 517 (1799).

Bazeley was a bank teller who pocketed a £100 note received from a customer for deposit. The court found no larceny because at the time of the conversion, the note was in the legal possession of the teller. To fill this gap in the law,
the first embezzlement statute was passed in 1799 (39 Geo. Ill, ch. 85) providing:

If... any person employed ... . in the capacity of a servant or clerk, to any person or persons whomsoever, or to any body corporate or politick, shall, by virtue, of such employment, receive or take into his possession any

money, goods, bond, bill, note, banker's draft, or other valuable security, or effects, for or in the name or on the account of his master or masters, or employer or employers, and shall fraudulently embezzle, secrete, or make

away with the same, or any part thereof, every such offender shall be deemed to have feloniously stolen the same.

Modern cases, such as Nolan, supra, are products of this history of larceny and embezzlement as mutually exclusive offenses distinguished by whether a defendant has lawful possession of the goods. North Carolina likewise follows
this approach. In State v. Weaver, 607 S.E.2d 599 (N.C. 2005), the Supreme Court of North Carolina held that a defendant could not be convicted of aiding and abetting embezzlement because his wife, who allegedly used company checks for
personal expenses, never lawfully possessed the funds she misappropriated with the checkbook. In State v. Jones, 800 S.E.2d 54 (N.C. 2017), a defendant knowingly received an overpayment by direct deposit and withdrew and spent the funds.

In that case, the court upheld a larceny conviction because the defendant never lawfully possessed the funds. Other jurisdictions have rejected this traditional distinction. In State v. Willard-Freckleton, 949 A.2d 416 (Vt. 2007), for example, the
Supreme Court of Vermont distinguished Weaver and found all employee conversions to constitute embezzlement when the employee's position affords custody or control of the property, even if the employee does not have lawful possession.

Additional enactments have gradually extended the categories of persons capable of embezzling to brokers, merchants, bankers, attorneys, trustees, and similar positions of trust. American embezzlement statutes still bear the mark of
this piecemeal legislative development. See Riggins, p. 1031 infra.

Because misappropriation cases involve individuals with lawful possession of property (or at least lawful custody), they often raise questions of when an employee's use goes too far and crosses the line into criminality. For example,
when does the employee's use of a company car for personal use cross the line from accepted personal use into criminal embezzlement? John L. Diamond, Reviving Lenity and Honest Belief at the Boundaries of Criminal Law, 44 U. Mich. J.L. Re-
form 1, 4-5 (2010). How should prosecutors determine when to bring charges in these cases

p. 1026

p. 1027
where the nature of the charge gives them broad discretion? Note that similar concerns are raised in other contexts involving theft, including extortion, bribery, and theft of services. See pp. 1049-1059, 1063-1065 infra. Does this question of line-
drawing exist to the same degree with larceny?

Should these types of theft be criminalized at all? Why might non-criminal remedies be insufficient to address wrongs of this type? For those who favor abolition of prisons, what is an adequate response to thefts if individuals lack the
resources to provide restitution for their harms? What alternatives to liberty deprivation will provide an adequate deterrent for crimes such as these motivated by greed?

NOTES ON APPROPRIATION OF LOST PROPERTY AND PROPERTY TRANSFERRED BY MISTAKE

Sometimes property comes into a defendant's possession through mistake: A delivery person may give a package to a person standing in front of a house, thinking (incorrectly) that the person is the homeowner to whom the package
is addressed. A person may find a wallet containing both cash and a driver's license that shows the owner’s name and address. In these cases, the person who comes into possession of the property may dishonestly decide to keep it. Yet in these
situations there seems to be no trespass that interferes with possession, as is required for larceny. Nor is there the employee or fiduciary relationship or the “entrusting” required by the usual embezzlement statute. Of what crime, if any, should the
dishonest person be convicted?

1. Finders of tangible property. As for tangible property found by a person who fails to retum it, an early partial solution was the distinction between lost property (property unintentionally placed where found) and mislaid property
(property deliberately placed where found, the owner forgetting where it was placed). In the latter case, the courts often found that “possession” never left the owner, so that when the finder appropriated it, the finder “took” it from the owner's
possession. Even as to the former, however, it was eventually determined that the finder took the property from the constructive possession of the owner; and if at the time the finder appropriated the lost property there was an intent to convert it,
even though the finder might be able to discover the owner’s identity, the finder was guilty of larceny. Penny v. State, 159 S.W. 1127 (Ark. 1913). It is generally held, however, that the felonious intent to appropriate must accompany the original find-
ing and appropriation — otherwise there is no felonious taking. Long v. State, 33 So. 2d 382 (Ala. Ct. App. 1948).

Should the law criminalize the appropriation of found property? What, for example, should be done when an individual finds cash that was apparently left behind in a store by another customer? In an Ohio case, a person in line at the
grocery store noticed an unmarked envelope on the checkout counter with more than $1,900 in cash inside. A surveillance tape showed the person opening the envelope, moving it out of the view of the cashier, and leaving the store with it. At trial,
the defendant argued that the surveillance tape provided no insight into his thinking, and because there was no other evidence to show he believed the owner of the property could be found, he argued the evidence was insufficient to prove

p. 1027
p. 1028

larceny. The Ohio Court of Appeals disagreed because the money was found in the checkout lane of a grocery store, not on the street, thus meeting the state’s test that “when, at the time [a defendant] finds it, he has reasonable ground to believe,
from the nature of the property, or the circumstance under which it was found, that if he does not conceal but deals honestly with it, the owner will appear or be ascertained.” State v. Morock, 2015 WL 4660026 (Ohio Ct. App. Aug. 6, 2015).

In an Indiana case involving similar facts (though a lesser dollar amount), the defendant took $83 that a prior customer had left behind in a grocery store self-checkout station. The appellate court reversed the conviction, holding that
because the state legislature had repealed its statute criminalizing the taking of lost or mislaid property some 40 years before, Indiana's general theft statute could not sustain the conviction on its own. Williams v. State, 158 N.E.3d 817 (Ind. Ct.
App. 2020). Is this approach better than Ohio's?

Consider the MPC’s approach to found property in §223.5, which many states now adopt:

A person who comes into control of property of another that he knows to have been lost, mislaid, or delivered under a mistake as to the nature or amount of the property or the identity of the recipient is guilty of theft if, with

purpose to deprive the owner thereof, he fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to a person entitled to have it.

See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §223.5 at 228 (1980):

The common-law view of larceny as an infringement of the possession of another required a determination of the actor's state of mind at the moment of finding. . . . The search for an initial fraudulent intent appears to be

largely fictional, and in any event poses the wrong question. The realistic objective in this area is not to prevent initial appropriation but to compel subsequent acts to restore to the owner. The section therefore permits con-

viction even where the original taking was honest in the sense that the actor then intended to restore; if he subsequently changes his mind and determines to keep the property, he will then be guilty of theft.

QUESTIONS: How does this square with the general view that omissions cannot form the basis of criminal liability? Does a law like this effectively create a duty to act because it requires someone who finds property to make a reasonable effort to
return it or risk criminal liability? If so, is this an inappropriate use of the criminal sanction?

2. Finders of intangible property. In 2010, an Apple engineer left a prototype of the soon-to-be-released iPhone 4 at a California bar. Brian Hogan found the prototype and brought it home. Weeks later, Hogan sold the prototype to
Gizmodo.com, a tech website, for $5,000; Gizmodo published a preview of the device, and the story spread like wildfire across the Internet. (The iPhone 4 was correctly expected to be extraordinarily popular: When the phone was released two
months later, Apple sold more than 1 million phones on the first day.) When the story ran, Apple claimed the story was damaging to the company because customers did not purchase its existing phones and instead opted to wait for the iPhone 4.
Gizmodo later returned the phone to Apple. The gist of Hogan's and Gizmodo’s

p. 1028
p. 1029
misappropriation therefore was not the taking of the physical phone itself but the taking of the confidential information they were able to glean from it.

Hogan was subsequently charged with misdemeanor theft; he pleaded no contest and received probation. Gizmodo was not charged. Even if one assumes the appropriation of lost physical property should be criminalized, should
information be treated differently? Would you have brought charges against either Hogan or Gizmodo? On what theory? What precisely did Hogan (mis)appropriate? See also Section B.2, Theft of Information, beginning on p. 1066 infra.

3. Abandoned property. How should the law address situations where defendants claim that they believed the property they found was abandoned, as opposed to lost or mislaid? Recall that in Morissette, p. 331 supra, the Supreme
Court held that an honest, though mistaken, belief that property was abandoned is a defense to larceny. This is a well-settled position, because larceny requires an intent to take property from its owner. For a decision reaffirming this conventional
view, see Commonwealth v. Liebenow, 470 Mass. 151 (2014).

As always, whether a defendant can succeed on an honest-belief defense depends on the facts of each case and how prosecutors and jurors assess the evidence. In People v. Thorne, 912 N.W.2d 560 (Mich. Ct. App. 2017), the defen-
dant was in a casino, playing slots next to the victim. The victim got up and walked away, leaving behind a cashable casino ticket worth $40, which the defendant promptly took. Appealing a subsequent conviction for theft, the defendant claimed
to have an honest belief that the victim had abandoned the ticket. The appellate court soundly rejected that argument, noting that the $40 ticket was far from “unwanted junk,” that the defendant had taken the ticket only 30 seconds after the victim
left it behind, and that the defendant had lied to both the victim and authorities about the ticket’s disappearance. Which of the facts in Thorne seem most crucial to the finding that the defendant lacked an honest belief? If the defendant took the

ticket within 30 seconds after the victim left but then, when asked, truthfully admitted taking it, would the timing alone be enough to find a lack of honest belief? What if the defendant had not taken the ticket until several hours later, but then, when
asked, lied about its disappearance? Recall that in the early development of the law of theft, the asportation requirement played an important role as a visible marker of probable wrongful intent. What facts can play a comparable role when the gist
of the alleged wrong is not the defendant's overt actions but rather (a) the intentions of the property's prior owner (whether to deliberately abandon it) and (b) the defendant's awareness of those intentions? Will juries and prosecutors do a good job
sifting through facts to accurately identify when someone has an honest belief in the intentions of someone else?
4, Misdelivered property. In the case of dishonest appropriation of property delivered by mistake, there is again a twofold problem: first, finding the necessary taking from possession, and second, finding a felonious intent coincident
with the taking. The supporting Commentary to MPC §223.5 states as follows (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §223.5 at 225-226 (1980):
[O]ne who accepts a $10 bill knowing that the other person thinks he is handing over a $1 bill acquires it without trespass or false pretense. Moreover, he may not be in any of the employee or fiduciary relations that were
enumerated in the typical older embezzlement statutes. Consequently,
p. 1029
Tn 91080
special legislation or judicial sleight-of-hand was required to reach persons taking advantage of such mistakes. . . . Yet the recipient, knowing that the transfer to him is inadvertent, is in a moral and physical situation with
respect to the property much like that of the finder of lost property. Moreover, he knows who is rightfully entitled to the property and can easily take steps to restore the property. Accordingly, Section 223.5 imposes theft
sanctions against one in this situation who fails to take reasonable measures to restore. . . .
Itis necessary to limit the reach of Section 223.5, on the other hand, in order to avoid impinging on certain types of tolerated sharp trading. For example, it is not proposed to punish the purchase of another's
property at a bargain price on a mere showing that the buyer was aware that the seller was misinformed regarding the value of what he sold. The language of Section 223.5 is accordingly limited to situations where the mis-
take is as to “the nature or amount of the property or the identity of the recipient.”
PROBLEM
The San Francisco Chronicle, Nov. 14, 1964, at 4, contained the following story:
MONTGOMERY, Ala. — A man who withdrew $43,000 mistakenly credited to his bank account and refused to give it back was convicted yesterday by a jury in Federal Court. .. . It was Thaggard’s second trial. The first
ended with a deadlocked jury.
Thaggard was tried under a Federal law which prohibits taking anything worth more than $100 from a bank “with intent to steal or purloin.”. . .
The dispute began in March 1963 when the Union Bank & Trust Co. erroneously credited a $43,000 deposit to the account of Alabama Motors, a used car business operated by Thaggard. The money belonged to
Alabama Power Co.
On March 6, Thaggard asked for his balance, then drew out the $43,000 after the teller had three times verified the amount, at his request.
He finally signed a withdrawal slip and tellers spent 30 minutes counting out the bills and putting them in a brown paper sack.
In the first trial, Thaggard’s lawyer, Ira De Ment, contended his client was not guilty of larceny since the money was voluntarily handed over. “I'm not saying he did right. I'm saying he’s not guilty of larceny,” De
Ment said.
U.S. Attorney Ben Hardeman said, “Cotton Thaggard entered that bank with a heart full of larceny and left there with a sack full of money.”. ..

Thaggard was first arrested on a state charge of false pretense. But that charge was dropped when the State Supreme Court ruled that it wasn’t false pretense to get the money after three times asking the bank
to recheck his balance.
Later, a Federal grand jury indicted Thaggard on a larceny charge involving a bank whose funds were insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
p. 1030
p. 1031
The bank has won a civil judgment against Thaggard in state court and some $10,575 worth of property belonging to him has been sold to satisfy the judgment.
QUESTION: Was the criminal conviction appropriate as well?
State v. Riggins
‘Supreme Court of Illinois
132 N.E.2d 519 (lll. 1956)

HersHey, C.J. [The defendant was convicted by a jury of embezzlement and sentenced to a term of not less than two nor more than seven years.]

[The defendant was the owner and operator of a collection agency . . . and during 1953 and 1954 had a clientele of some 500 persons and firms for whom he collected delinquent accounts.

In February, 1953, he called on the complaining witness, Dorothy Tarrant, who operated a firm known as Cooper's Music and Jewelry. He said he was in the collection business and asked to collect the firm’s delinquent accounts. As a
result, they reached an oral agreement whereby the defendant was to undertake the collections. By this agreement, the defendant was to receive one third on city accounts and one half on out-of-city accounts. It was further agreed that he need
not account for the amounts collected until a bill was paid in full, at which time he was to remit by check.

There is a conflict in the evidence as to whether the defendant was to give a check for the whole amount collected and then receive his commission, or whether he was authorized to deduct his commission and account only for the net
amount due.

It was further agreed that the defendant would be liable for court costs in the event he chose to file suit on any of the accounts, but the first money collected was to be applied to those costs. If no collection was made, however, the
defendant was to stand the loss.

The parties operated under this agreement for almost two years. During that time the complaining witness exercised no control over the defendant as to the time or manner of collecting the accounts, and with her knowledge he com-
mingled funds collected for all his clients in a single bank account. He also used this as a personal account, from which he drew for business, family and personal expenses.

In October, 1954, the complaining witness became aware that the defendant had collected several accounts for her in full, but had not accounted to her. . . . Thereafter, the complaining witness preferred the charges against the defen-
dant which resulted in his indictment and conviction for embezzlement.

To decide whether the defendant, a collection agent, can be guilty of embezzlement in Illinois, it is helpful to consider our embezzlement statutes in the historical context of this crime.

Embezzlement, unknown at common law, is established by statute, and its scope, therefore, is limited to those persons designated therein. . .

[Olur laws relating to embezzlement are broad and comprehensive. The following persons are included in those statutes making the crime of embezzlement a felony: “Whoever embezzles or fraudulently converts to his own use” (lll. Rev.
Stat.

p. 1031
p. 1032

1953, chap. 38, par. 207); “a clerk, agent, servant or apprentice of any person” (par. 208); “any banker or broker, or his agent or servant, or any officer, agent or servant of any banking company, or incorporated bank” (par. 209); “any clerk, agent,
servant, solicitor, broker, apprentice or officer . . . receiving any money . . . in his fiduciary capacity” (par. 210); public officers (par. 214); administrators, guardians, conservators and other fiduciaries (par. 216); and certain members and officers of
fraternal societies (par. 218). . ..

In this instance, we are particularly interested in the general embezzlement statute (par. 208), and the special statute under which defendant was indicted (par. 210). The former, applying to any “clerk, agent, servant or apprentice of any
person,” was originally enacted in 1827, and has existed in its present form since 1874. [Par. 210] was not passed until 1919. For present purposes, this latter enactment is very significant, for it also provides as follows: such person

shall be punished as provided by the criminal statutes of this state for the punishment of larceny, irrespective of whether any such officer, agent, clerk, servant, solicitor, broker or apprentice has or claims to have any commis-

sion or interest in such money, substitute for money, or thing of value so received by him.

(Italics added.)

[A] 1903 decision of this court reversed the conviction of an agent who was employed to solicit subscriptions on commission and who was authorized to deduct her commissions from the amounts collected, for the reason that she was
joint owner with the principal in the amounts collected. McElroy v. People, 66 N.E. 1058 (lll. 1903). ..

Briefly, then, this was the status of the law in 1919 when the special statute (par. 210) . . . expressly abrogated [that] doctrine... ..

[The defendant acted as agent for the complaining witness in collecting her accounts. . .. He had no right to collect from anyone except as authorized by her and was required to render a full account of all matters entrusted to him, the
same as any agent. . . . The prevailing view of the courts in construing embezzlement statutes is succinctly expressed in 18 Am. Jur., Embezzlement, §30, as follows: “The term ‘agent’ as used in embezzlement statutes is construed in its popular
sense as meaning a person who undertakes to transact some business or to manage some affair for another by the latter's authority and to render an account of such business or affair... .”

We conclude that the defendant was an “agent” of the complaining witness, receiving money in a “fiduciary capacity” and, therefore, within the purview of said embezzlement statute. . . .

Reversed [on other grounds].

Schaerer, J., dissenting. . .. The critical question is whether the defendant was the agent of the complaining witness. Upon the record it seems to me that he was not. He maintained his own office, had his own employees, and collected

p. 1032

p. 1033
accounts for approximately 500 other individuals and firms. He was subject to no control whatsoever by any of his customers in making his collections. His customers knew that he kept all of his collections in a single account. That the defendant
was not an agent would be clear, | think, if vicarious liability was sought to be asserted against Dorothy Tarrant on account of the defendant's conduct in the course of his collection activities.

The conclusion of the majority that the defendant was an agent rests upon the assertion that “[tJhe term ‘agent’ as used in embezzlement statutes is construed in its popular sense. . . .” That generalization runs counter to the basic rule
that criminal statutes are strictly construed.

. .. The statute under which the defendant was indicted refers to “any clerk, agent, servant, solicitor, broker, apprentice, or officer.” If “agent” has the broad meaning which the majority gives it, each of the other terms is superfluous
because all are embraced within the single term “agent.” Many of the specific enumerations in the other statutes referred to by the majority likewise become largely, if not entirely, meaningless, for the particular relationships they seek to reach are
also swallowed up in the expanded definition of the term “agent.”

Itis arguable of course that the conduct of the defendant in this case should be regarded as criminal. The General Assembly might wish to make it so. But it might not. It might regard the collection agency as a desirable service enter-
prise which should not be made unduly perilous. If the defendant in this case, with his little agency, is guilty of one embezzlement, he is guilty of 500. The General Assembly might not want to make the enterprise so hazardous. It has not done so,
in my opinion, by the statute before us.°

Model Penal Code
§223.8. Theft by Failure to Make Required Dispositions of Funds Received

[See the Appendix.]

MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT to §223.8 at 256-262 (1980): The challenge... . is to distinguish default that should be assimilated to theft from non-performance that should be left to the traditional remedies for breach of
contract.

The difficulty that has troubled courts in the past may be illustrated by the decisions in Commonwealth v. Mitchneck 1 and State v. Polzin2 The Mitchneck case involved a mine operator whose employees signed written authorizations
for him to deduct from their wages the amounts of their grocery bills. Mitchneck made the deductions but failed to pay the grocer. He was convicted under the Pennsylvania fraudulent-conversion statute, which at the time covered anyone who

p. 1033
p. 1094
having received or having possession, in any capacity or by any means or manner whatever, of any money or property, of any kind whatsoever, of or belonging to any other person, firm, or corporation, or which any other

person, firm, or corporation is entitled to receive and have, who fraudulently withholds, converts, or applies the same, or any part thereof, . . . to and for his own use and benefit, or to and for the use and benefit of any other

person.

The conviction was reversed on the ground that Mitchneck did not have in his possession any money belonging to his employees. True he owed them money. . . . Defendant's liability for the unpaid wages due his employees was, and
remained, civil, not criminal. His liability for the amount due [the grocer] after his agreement to accept or honor the assignments of his employees’ wages was likewise civil and not criminal.

If the miners in the Mitchneck case had drawn their pay at one window and passed part of it back to Mitchneck’s cashier at the next window, conviction for embezzlement or fraudulent conversion could have been obtained. The
premise of Section 223.8 is that liability should also follow on the facts of the case as they occurred. The bookkeeping shortcut actually used hardly serves as a rational basis for exculpating Mitchneck from criminal liability. . . .

The Polzin case presents a more complex variation of the same situation. Polzin was a money lender who took a note from a Mrs. Braseth under an arrangement by which, instead of paying the cash to her, he agreed to pay off certain
of her creditors. Instead of doing so, he made out a check to a collection agency which he owned. He then approached the creditors with a proposal to act for them in collecting their claim from Mrs. Braseth for a 33 percent collection fee. They ac-
cepted the arrangement, after which Polzin paid the creditors and withheld $19 as his agreed-upon collection fee.

Polzin was convicted of petty larceny, the jury having evidently taken the view that what was stolen was the $19 fee which Polzin had withheld. The Supreme Court of Washington reversed the conviction. The court held first that there
could be no misappropriation of any “property” belonging to Mrs. Braseth, because she never gave Polzin anything other than her note. Since Polzin held no “property” belonging to Mrs. Braseth but had merely promised to make certain payments,
he was her debtor rather than her trustee. Second, with respect to the $19 withheld from the creditors, Mrs. Braseth “lost nothing”; the bills had been completely discharged and Polzin had therefore performed his agreement as far as she was
concerned.

Section 223.8 was designed in part to provide a theory for reaching cases like Mitchneck and Polzin. Both were thought to illustrate situations that properly should be assimilated to theft rather than treated as mere breach of
contract. ...

There is a long tradition, deriving to some extent from the harsh days of the debtors’ prison and to some extent enshrined in constitutional provisions, against enforcing individual consensual obligations by criminal sanctions. ... Among
the valid objections[!] that the invocation of criminal sanctions in cases of non-performance involves the impairment of the incentive to make wise risk selections and thus impairment of the social functions of contract-making . . . ; the unlikelihood
of deterring honest insolvency by criminal threats, since insolvency is so often a result of factors beyond the control of the individual; the dangers, in attempting

p. 1094

p. 1035
to punish insolvency for which the actor may properly be viewed as at fault, of discouraging the kind of speculation that is properly a part of a free-enterprise system and of securing unjust convictions by hindsight; and the futility, from the credi-
tors’ standpoint, of imprisoning a debtor who is unable to pay.

None of the foregoing considerations was thought applicable to cases such as Mitchneck and Polzin. In neither of those cases was there an ordinary credit transaction or an understanding that involves an assessment of risks at some
future date. Mitchneck and Polzin were not supposed to use the funds in any way for their own purposes nor even to retain them for any substantial period. They were merely conduits for the transmission of money to persons designated by the
real owner of the money. ..

It should be noted, however, that the Mitchneck and Polzin situations are not free from difficulty even under such a formulation as Section 223.8. The text of the offense requires that the actor “obtain” property from another. The term
“obtain” is defined in Section 223.0(6) to mean, in relation to property, “to bring about a transfer or purported transfer of a legal interest in the property, whether to the obtainer or another.” The problem in both Mitchneck and Polzin was that the
defendant was not perceived as having “obtained” anything from the victim in this sense, and that perception might be no less applicable to Section 223.8. Indeed, if the property were regarded as having been “obtained” as that term is defined,
Section 223.2(1) would be an adequate basis for prosecution. If Mitchneck and Polzin obtained property of another under an understanding and then “exercised unlawful control over” that property, there would seem to be no bar to an ordinary
embezzlement prosecution. Even if this is true, however, there may be an important value in addressing a specific formulation to situations of this kind. Convictions of embezzlement are not easily obtained under the broader standards embodied
in the general definition of theft.

Itis important, nevertheless, to emphasize the point that Section 223.8 must not be construed so broadly that a bright line between theft and breach of contract is obscured. [Consider] credit-card purchases, a practice that has as-
sumed enormous proportions in today's economy. Typically, the purchaser of goods “obtains” property by becoming the drawee-acceptor of a draft, drawn by the merchant in favor of the credit-card company as payee. If unauthorized use of the
card is involved, or if forged or stolen cards are used, Section 224.6 is adequate to handle the problem. If the actor intended from the beginning not to pay, Section 223.3 covers the situation. But if the actor . . . simply cannot pay his bills, itis in-
appropriate to make him a thief; the risk that he cannot pay is a cost of doing business that credit-card companies should assume. . ..

The path to avoiding such undue extensions of Section 223.8 is to accord proper weight to the limitation embodied in the words “to be reserved,” so that Section 223.8 is deemed applicable only in cases of a promise to turn over prop-
erty actually received in kind or an equivalent sum of money specifically reserved in the sense that a trustee reserves a fiduciary account. It is true that such a construction would seem to limit Section 223.8 to classic instances of embezzlement.
[There may be some cases beyond ordinary embezzlement to which the provision could be applied by a broad construction of “obtains” to deal with situations where property was not physically exchanged. But in order to eliminate application of
the section to cases where civil remedies alone should be permitted, something approaching an explicit agreement to “reserve” would seem to be required.

p. 1035

p. 1036
NOTES

1. Resistance to the MPC approach. Only nine states followed the MPC’s approach in this section. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §223.8 at 26 (1980). What might be the reasons for the reluctance?

2. Wage theft. What if the Mitchneck case did not involve pre-authorized deductions from wages, but instead an employer who simply paid employees less than what they were owed, for example by deliberately undercounting their
hours or failing to pay overtime to which they were entitled? This scenario is similar to the actual Mitchneck case in that the employer would have kept funds owed but not yet transferred to the employees. Thus, under the view articulated in Mitch-
neck, the legal outcome would also be the same — no liability. Even though the employer owed the employees the wages unlawfully withheld, that was a debt not yet paid; the employees never took possession of the money, so the employer would
not be guilty of misappropriating property that had become theirs. See César F. Rosado Marzan, Wage Theft as Crime: An Institutional View, 20 J.L. in Soc'y 300, 303 (2020).

Wage theft is a huge problem in the United States. Looking only at minimum wage violations, for example, one study estimates that employers take roughly $15 billion from their employees each year. See David Cooper & Teresa
Kroeger, Economic Policy Institute, Employers Steal Billions from Workers’ Paychecks Each Year, May 10, 2017, https://files.epi.org/pdf/1251 16.pdf. Moreover, the harms of wage theft fall disproportionately on already marginalized groups, in-

cluding people of color and immigrant workers. Because it is such a significant problem, many jurisdictions have sought to use criminal penalties as a deterrent. Many states have theft laws that are broadly worded so that they can plausibly be
invoked against wage theft. See Jennifer J. Lee & Annie Smith, Regulating Wage Theft, 94 Wash. L. Rev. 759, 776 (2019); Rita J. Verga, An Advocate’s Toolkit: Using Criminal “Theft of Service” Laws to Enforce Workers’ Right to Be Paid, 8 N.Y. City
L. Rev. 283, 284, 288 n.20 (2005). But prosecutors have been reluctant to charge wage theft under general theft provisions, so some states have enacted specialized laws that single out wage theft as a crime. The District of Columbia, for instance,
imposes criminal penalties on employers who fail to “pay all wages earned.” D.C. Code Ann. §32-1302, 1307 (2021). New York likewise authorizes criminal charges against any employer who “does not pay the wages of all his employees.” N.Y.
Labor Law §198-a (2021). Similarly, the federal Fair Labor Standards Act authorizes criminal penalties for employers who willfully or repeatedly fail to pay employees minimum wages or required overtime, 29 U.S.C. §216(a).

Even where wage theft is criminalized, prosecutions are rare. Lee and Smith posit that “some local police or district attorneys may not view combatting wage theft as part of their job or may be reluctant to impose criminal charges
against businesses.” Lee & Smith, supra, at 796. There are some exceptions, however. Philadelphia district attorney Larry Krasner, who ran on a platform promising to address issues like this, established a “Wage Protection Unit” that brought its
first wage theft case in 2021.1 Given the scope of the problem and the vulnerability of

p. 1036
p. 1037
workers, should prosecutors make this area a priority and seek harsh punishments to deter it and express its seriousness? Can those who oppose carceral solutions for violent crimes consistently argue that wage theft, in contrast, warrants impris-
onment? For a discussion of this question, see Benjamin Levin, Wage Theft Criminalization, 54 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1429, 1454 (2021). If prosecutors do prioritize these cases in general, and assuming that owners of both large and small business
‘engage in this practice, which owners are the most likely targets for prosecution? Will prosecutors avoid wealthier owners because they have more resources to fight the government? For a discussion of some of the difficulties associated with the
prosecution of companies (as opposed to individuals), see pp. 770-774 supra.
3. Fraud
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The hallmark of theft by fraud is the use of deception to obtain either possession or title of another’s property. The difficulty is drawing a line between deception that rises to the level of criminality and, as Samuel W. Buell puts it,
“acceptable behavior in the rough-and-tumble of markets.” Buell, Good Faith and Law Evasion, 58 UCLA L. Rev. 611, 638 (2011). See also Stuart P. Green, Lying, Cheating, and Stealing: A Moral Theory of White Collar Crime (2006). Even after con-
duct is identified as falling on the criminal side of the line, there remains a similarly complex question of how it stacks up against other criminal frauds and should be graded for punishment.

Here, too, history plays an important role in making sense of the current state of the law. The early common law, influenced by the ethic of caveat emptor, did not criminalize situations in which a person acquired another's property
through simple deception. The classic justification was given by Lord Chief Justice John Holt in 1703: “[Wle are not to indict one man for making a fool of another.” Regina v. Jones, 91 Eng. Rep. 330.2 But through the development of common-law
“cheats,” the principle was modified as to certain kinds of fraud aimed indiscriminately at any member of the public rather than at a particular person, when ordinary prudence was an insufficient protection: for example, using false tokens, weights,
‘or measures. See Rex v. Wheatley, 97 Eng. Rep. 746, 748-749 (1761).

Amore far-reaching innovation came in 1757 with the enactment of what became the prototype false pretense statute, 30 Geo. Il, ch. 24, making it a misdemeanor to obtain “money, goods, wares or merchandizes” by false pretenses
with intent to cheat or defraud. There was originally some doubt whether the false pretense statute reached any and all misrepresentations or was to be narrowly read. It was not until 1789 that the broader meaning was established. See Jerome
Hall, Theft, Law and Society 45-52 (2d ed. 1952). In a false pretenses case, ownership of the property transfers, not merely possession.

p. 1037
p. 1038

In the meantime, the landmark case of The King v. Pear, decided in 1779, 1 Leach 212, 168 Eng. Rep. 208, created what came to be known as “larceny by trick” as a distinct form of common-law larceny where possession of property
is obtained by trickery. The defendant was indicted for stealing Finch’s horse. Finch was a stablekeeper, and the defendant hired a horse from him, claiming he would return later that same day. In fact, he did not return but instead sold the horse.
The following report of the case is taken from 168 Eng. Rep. 208:

The learned Judge said: There had been different opinions on the law of this class of cases; that the general doctrine then was that if a horse be let for a particular portion of time, and after that time is expired, the party hiring,

instead of returning the horse to its owner, sell it and convert the money to his own use, it is felony, because there is then no privity of contract subsisting between the parties. . .. He therefore left it with the Jury to consider,

Whether the prisoner meant at the time of the hiring to take such journey, but was afterwards tempted to sell the horse? for if so he must be acquitted; but that if they were of opinion that at the time of the hiring the journey

was a mere pretense to get the horse into his possession, and he had no intention to take such journey but intended to sell the horse, they would find that fact specially for the opinion of the Judges.

The Jury found that the facts above stated were true; and also that the prisoner had hired the horse with a fraudulent view and intention of selling it immediately.

The question was referred to the Judges, Whether the delivery of the horse by the prosecutor to the prisoner, had so far changed the possession of the property, as to render the subsequent conversion of it a
mere breach of trust, or whether the conversion was felonious?

The Judges differed greatly in opinion on this case. . . . The majority of them thought, That the question, as to the original intention of the prisoner in hiring the horse, had been properly left to the jury; and as they

had found, that his view in so doing was fraudulent, the parting with the property had not changed the nature of the possession, but that it remained unaltered in the prosecutor at the time of the conversion; and that the pris-

oner was therefore guilty of felony.

The court therefore relied on the notion that possession does not pass to a fraudulent bailee to stretch the concept of larceny to include an act otherwise not subject to proper criminal sanction. Jerome Hall, Theft, Law and Society 42
(2d ed. 1952).

When the false pretense statute was subsequently extended to all misrepresentations of fact, regardless of the technique of deception, there were two crimes, larceny by trick (a felony) and statutory false pretenses (only a misde-
meanor), covering much the same conduct but distinguished on whether possession (larceny by trick) or ownership (false pretenses) was transferred.

QUESTIONS: Why should it be a more serious crime to trick someone into transferring possession of property temporarily than to trick someone into parting with something greater, namely the ownership of it? Does it make sense to use criminal
p. 1038
p. 1039
law in this context? If so, do the same arguments for criminalizing this behavior extend to situations where people use fraud as a means to obtain sex? See pp. 429-435 supra. Are there meaningful distinctions? If not, does that suggest both types
of fraud should be criminalized or neither should?
Hufstetler v. State
Alabama Court of Appeals
63 So. 2d 730 (Ala. Ct. App. 1953)

Carr, J. The accused was convicted by the court without a jury on a charge of petit larceny. The property involved was 6 1/2 gallons of gasoline. [The defendant drove up to a gas station and asked the owner of the station to “fill it up.”
After the owner put 6 1/2 gallons in the car, the defendant asked for a quart of oil and drove off when the attendant left to get it without paying the $1.94 for the gas.]

The only question of critical concern is whether, on the basis of the above proof, the judgment of conviction can be sustained. . . .

Confusion sometimes arises in an effort to distinguish the kindred criminal offenses of larceny, false pretenses, and embezzlement.

The Massachusetts Supreme Court in Commonwealth v. Barry, 124 Mass. 325, gave a distinction that is clear and comprehensive:

Ifa person honestly receives the possession of the goods, chattels or money of another upon any trust, express or implied, and, after receiving them, fraudulently converts them to his own use, he may be guilty of the crime

of embezzlement, but cannot be of that of larceny, except as embezzlement is by statute made larceny. If the possession of such property is obtained by fraud, and the owner of it intends to part with his title as well as

his possession, the offence is that of obtaining property by false pretenses, provided the means by which they are acquired are such as, in law, are false pretenses. If the possession is fraudulently obtained, with intent on

the part of the person obtaining it, at the time he receives it, to convert the same to his own use, and the person parting with it intends to part with his possession merely, and not with his title to the property, the offence is

larceny.

In the case at bar the circumstances disclose that . . . appellant secured the possession of the gasoline by a trick or fraud. The obtaining of the property by the consent of the owner under such conditions will not necessarily prevent the
taking from being larceny. In other words, an actual trespass is not always required to be proven. The trick or fraud vitiates the transaction, and it will be deemed that the owner still retained the constructive possession.

What we have said relates to the possession. It is certainly a logical conclusion that [the gas station owner] had no intention of parting with the ownership of the property until he had received pay therefor. The element of the intent of the
appellant is inferable from the factual background. . . .

Affirmed. . ..

p. 1039
p. 1040
Graham v. United States
United States Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit

187 F.2d 87 (1950)

WasHINaTON, J. The appellant, an attorney, was indicted in two counts for grand larceny under section 2201 of Title 22 of the District of Columbia Code. . . . He appeals from a judgment and conviction entered upon a verdict of guilty.

The complaining witness, Francisco Gal, consulted appellant in his professional capacity. Gal had been arrested and charged with disorderly conduct, and had forfeited $25 as collateral. He was seeking American citizenship and was
apprehensive that the arrest would impede or bar his attainment of that goal. An immigrant employed as a cook, his command of the English language was far from complete. He testified that appellant Graham told him that he wasn't sure what he
could do, that Graham would “have to talk to the policeman. You have to pay money for that, because the money is talk.” He further testified that Graham told him he would charge him $200 for a fee; that he would have to pay an additional $2,000
for the police; that Graham said “don’t mention the money for nobody and for the police either.” As a result, Gal testified that he paid the appellant $300 on February 2, 1950 (of which, he said, $200 was paid as a legal fee), and $1,900 on February
3, 1950. The police officer who originally had arrested Gal testified that he came to appellant's office, and after talking with Graham, told Gal that he wasn't in any trouble. . . . The officer testified that Graham did not then or at any other time offer
or give him money. The appellant testified that the entire payment was intended as a fee for legal services; that he had never mentioned money for the police; that no part of the money was in fact paid to the police or anyone else, but was kept by
the appellant. ..

Section 2201 of Title 22 of the District of Columbia Code provides as follows:

Whoever shall feloniously take and carry away anything of value of the amount or value of $50 or upward, including things savoring of the realty, shall suffer imprisonment of not less than one nor more than ten years.

Interpreting this statute, this court has held that “one who obtains money from another upon the representation that he will perform certain service therewith for the latter, intending at the time to convert the money, and actually convert-
ing it, to his own use, is guilty of larceny.” In classic terminology, “the distinction drawn by the common law is between the case of one who gives up possession of a chattel for a special purpose to another who by converting it to his own use is
held to have committed a trespass, and the case of one who, although induced by fraud or trick, nevertheless actually intends that title to the chattel shall pass to the wrongdoer.” United States v. Patton, 3 Cir., 1941, 120 F.2d 73, 76.

We now turn to appellant's first contention, that under the evidence in the case the court should have directed a verdict for the defendant. We think this contention without merit. If the jury believed Gal's testimony, and did not believe
that of the defendant, it was possible for the jury to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant fraudulently induced Gal to give him $2,000 to be used for a special purpose, i.e., to bribe the police, that the defendant did not intend so
to use the money, and converted it to his own use. Under the rule stated above, this would be larceny by trick.

p. 1040
p. 1041

Thus, in the Means case [Means v. United States, 65 F.2d 206], the defendant was convicted of the crime of larceny under the following circumstances: After the kidnapping of the infant son of Charles Lindbergh, the defendant in an
interview with Mrs. McLean persuaded her that he could assist in locating and recovering the kidnapped baby, stating that if Mrs. McLean would give him $100,000 he would use that sum to pay the ransom and secure the return of the child. On the
basis of these representations he secured the money from Mrs. McLean. His representations were fraudulent and he intended at the time to convert the money to his own use, and actually so converted it. [U]nder these circumstances “title would
remain in {the complainant] until the accomplishment of the purpose for which she gave [the defendant] the money.”. . .

The judgment of the District Court is affirmed.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Gal's intent. How can the court defend its decision that Gal did not intend to pass his whole interest in the money to the defendant, title and all, when Gal himself testified that he gave the money to the defendant to be given to the
police officer as a bribe? But if the court had held otherwise, thus precluding a larceny-by-trick conviction, could the defendant have been convicted of obtaining money by false pretenses? Note that a false promise is often regarded as inadequate
to sustain a false pretense conviction, although it suffices for larceny by trick. See People v. Ashley, infra.

2. Possession versus ownership. In Bourbonnaise v. State, 248 P.2d 640 (Okla. Crim. App. 1952), the defendant bootlegger obtained money from Bean as payment for a bottle of whiskey that defendant claimed he would buy from
another bootlegger. He said he would return in 30 minutes with the bottle but never did. Affirming a conviction of larceny, the court stated (id. at 642):

This money was not given the defendant to consummate a purchase of liquor represented by defendant to be in his possession. .. . If such had been the case, then the money would have become defendant's money, and if

the defendant had failed to turn over the liquor . .. such facts would have supported a charge of obtaining money under false pretense. But here defendant . . . merely agreed to take Bean's money and go purchase the liquor

from another bootlegger. The money was not his. He was to pay it over for Bean. It was Bean's money until paid over, and then the whiskey would be Bean's.

3. Problem. The defendant went to a car dealership to purchase a new car and lied about both income and employment status on the credit application to finance the car’s purchase. Believing the defendant had sufficient credit to
finance the purchase, the car dealership handed over the car keys, and the defendant drove away. When the dealership later realized that the information on the credit form was false and that no car payments had been made, it sought to get the
car back, but the defendant refused. If the defendant is charged with larceny (and not false pretenses), can the defendant successfully argue there is no basis to convict because the dealer transferred ownership? Is the case distinguishable from
Hufstetler? See Divers v. State, 2015 WL 5968765 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. Aug. 21, 2015); People v. Malach, 507 N.W.2d 834 (Mich. Ct. App. 1993).

p. 1041
p. 1042

People v. Ashley
Supreme Court of California
267 P.2d 271 (Cal. 1954)

Traynor, J... . [Defendant, the business manager of a corporation, was convicted of grand theft under §404 of the California Penal Code. Defendant obtained a loan of $7,200 from an elderly woman, Mrs. Russ, by promising that the
loan would be secured by a first mortgage on property owned by the corporation and that the money would be used to build a theater. In fact, the corporation leased but did not own the property, and no theater was ever built, the money having
been used to meet the corporation's operating expenses. After defendant received the money, Mrs. Russ quarreled with him over his failure to deliver the promised first mortgage. After it became apparent that the loan would not be paid, defen-
dant requested an extension. Mrs. Russ granted the extension after defendant had threatened to kill himself if she refused, so that she might be paid from the proceeds of his life insurance policies.

[Defendant also obtained $13,590 from a Mrs. Neal, representing that the corporation intended to use the money to buy a theater. She was initially told that the loan would be secured by a trust deed on the theater and that she would
have good security for her loan because the corporation was worth a half million dollars. Subsequently, she loaned the corporation an additional $4,470. Mrs. Neal testified that when she hesitated in making the additional loan, defendant placed
a gun on his desk and said: “Now look here, Mrs. Neal, | don’t want no monkey business out of you. Do you understand that?” The corporation did not buy the theater; Mrs. Neal never received the trust deed; and the money was deposited to the
corporation's account.]

Although the crimes of larceny by trick and device and obtaining property by false pretenses are much alike, they are aimed at different criminal acquisitive techniques. Larceny by trick and device is the appropriation of property, the
possession of which was fraudulently acquired; obtaining property by false pretenses is the fraudulent or deceitful acquisition of both title and possession. . . . In the present case, it is clear from the record that each of the prosecuting witnesses
intended to pass both title and possession, and that the type of theft, if any, in each case, was that of obtaining property by false pretenses. [Defendant's] defense was not based on distinctions between title and possession, but rather he contends
that there was no unlawful taking of any sort.

To support a conviction of theft for obtaining property by false pretenses, it must be shown that the defendant made a false pretense or representation with intent to defraud the owner of his property, and that the owner was in fact
defrauded. It is unnecessary to prove that the defendant benefited personally from the fraudulent acquisition. The false pretense or representation must have materially influenced the owner to part with his property, but the false pretense need not
be the sole inducing cause. If the conviction rests primarily on the testimony of a single witness that the false pretense was made, the making of the pretense must be corroborated. . ..

[Olur statute, like those of most American states, is directly traceable to 30 Geo. II, ch. 24, section 1. In an early Crown Case Reserved, Rex v. Goodhall, Russ. & Ry. 461 (1821), the defendant obtained a quantity of meat from a merchant
by

p. 1042

p. 1043
promising to pay at a future day. The jury found that the promise was made without intention to perform. The judges concluded, however, that the defendant's conviction was erroneous because the pretense “was merely a promise of future
conduct, and common prudence and caution would have prevented any injury arising from it.”. . . By stating that the “promise of future conduct” was such that “common prudence and caution” could prevent any injury arising therefrom, the new
offense was confused with the old common law “cheat.” [This opinion] was completely misinterpreted in the case of Commonwealth v. Drew, 1837, 19 Pick. 179, 185, 36 Mass. 179, 185, in which the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts
declared by way of dictum, that under the statute “naked lies” could not be regarded as “false pretences.” On the basis of these two questionable decisions, Wharton formulated the following generalization: “. . . the false pretense to be within the
statute, must relate to a state of things averred to be at the time existing, and not to a state of things thereafter to exist.” Wharton, American Criminal Law 542 [1st ed. 1846]. This generalization has been followed in the majority of American cases,
almost all of which can be traced to reliance on Wharton or the two cases mentioned above. [But] other courts have repudiated the majority rule. . ..2

The Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia has, however, advanced the following reasons in defense of the majority rule: “. . . [WJhere, as here, the act complained of — namely, failure to repay money or use it as specified at the
time of borrowing — is as consonant with ordinary commercial default as with criminal conduct, the danger of applying this technique to prove the crime is quite apparent. Business affairs would be materially incumbered by the ever present threat

that a debtor might be subjected to criminal penalties if the prosecutor and jury were of the view that at the time of borrowing he was mentally a cheat. The risk of prosecuting one who is guilty of nothing more than a failure or inability to pay his
debts is a very real consideration. . ..” Chaplin v. United States, 157 F.2d 697, 698-699.

. . We do not find this reasoning persuasive. In this state, and in the majority of American states as well as in England, false promises can provide the foundation of a civil action for deceit. In such actions something more than nonper-
formance is required to prove the defendant's intent not to perform his promise. Nor is proof of nonperformance alone sufficient in criminal prosecutions based on false promises. In such prosecutions the People must . . . prove [the defendant's
fraudulent intent] beyond a reasonable doubt. . . . Moreover, in cases of obtaining property by false pretenses, it must be proved that any misrepresentations of fact alleged by the People were made knowingly and with intent to deceive. . ..

If false promises were not false pretenses, the legally sophisticated, without fear of punishment, could perpetrate on the unwary fraudulent schemes like that divulged by the record in this case. . . . The inclusion of false promises within
sections 484 and 532 of the Penal Code will not “materially encumber” business affairs... .

p. 1043
p. 1044

The judgment and the order denying the motion for a new trial are affirmed.

Schauer, J. | concur in the judgment solely on the ground that the evidence establishes, with ample corroboration, the making by the defendant of false representations as to existing facts. On that evidence the convictions should be
sustained pursuant to long accepted theories of law. . . . | dissent from all that portion of the opinion which discusses and pronounces upon the theories which in my view are extraneous to the proper disposition of any issue actually before us. . ..

Ina prosecution for obtaining property by the making of a false promise, knowingly and with intent to deceive, the matter to be proved . . . is purely subjective. It is not, like the specific intent in such a crime as burglary, a mere element
of the crime; itis, in any significant sense, all of the crime. The proof will necessarily be of objective acts, entirely legal in themselves, from which inferences as to the ultimate illegal subjective fact will be drawn. But, whereas in burglary the proof
of the subjective element is normally as strong and reliable as the proof of any objective element, in this type of activity the proof of such vital element can almost never be reliable; it must inevitably (in the absence of confession or something
tantamount thereto) depend on inferences drawn by creditors, prosecutors, jurors, and judges from facts and circumstances which by reason of their nature cannot possibly exclude innocence with any certainty. . .. | am unwilling to accept as a
premise the scholastic redaction of the majority that rules of proof may be set aside because appellate judges will always know when a jury has been misled and the proof is not sufficient... .

With the rule that the majority opinion now enunciates, no man, no matter how innocent his intention, can sign a promise to pay in the future, or to perform an act at a future date, without subjecting himself to the risk that at some later
date others, in the light of differing perspectives, philosophies and subsequent events, may conclude that, after all, the accused should have known that at the future date he could not perform as he promised — and if he, as a “reasonable” man
from the point of view of the creditor, district attorney and a grand or trial jury — should have known, then, it may be inferred, he did know. And if it can be inferred that he knew, then this court and other appellate courts will be bound to affirm a
conviction. . ..

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. False promises. In accord with Ashley, see People v. Zeller, 151 A.D.3d 1272 (N.Y. App. Div. 2017); Commonwealth v. Parker, 564 A.2d 246 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1989). Some jurisdictions that allow false promises to form the basis of a
theft charge will nonetheless rule the evidence to be legally insufficient if the breach of performance occurs after rather than prior to the taking of the property. Frazier v. State, 114 So. 3d 461 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2013). In contrast, some courts con-
tinue to hold that a false promise cannot constitute false pretenses. E.g., Commonwealth v. Henson, 79 N.E.3d 1110 (Mass. App. Ct. 2017); Holt v. Commonwealth, 783 S.E.2d 546 (Va. Ct. App. 2016).

2. Federal fraud statutes. In its original 1872 enactment, the federal mail fraud statute criminalized use of the mails to advance “any scheme or artifice to defraud.” McNally v. United States, 483 U.S. 350, 356 (1987). Congress subse-
quently expanded the statute to cover an even wider range of conduct, and enacted

p. 1044
p. 1045

the federal wire fraud statute, 18 U.S.C. §1343, to proscribe fraud conducted over interstate telecommunications in addition to mail. The modern mail fraud statute, 18 U.S.C. §1341, reads:

Whoever, having devised or intending to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud, or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises . . . for the purpose of executing

such scheme or artifice or attempting so to do . . . [causes] any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by the Postal Service, or [causes] any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by any private or com-

mercial interstate carrier . . . shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both.

The breadth of the mail fraud statute's coverage to include false promises and “any scheme or artifice to defraud” that involves the use of federal mail — a sweeping expansion of federal jurisdiction over fraud — has led one federal
prosecutor (and now federal judge) to call §1341 the white collar prosecutor's “true love.” Jed S. Rakoff, The Federal Mail Fraud Statute (Part |), 18 Dug. L. Rev. 771, 771 (1980). Why might fraud statutes be more ambiguous than other criminal
statutes? See Samuel W. Buell, Novel Criminal Fraud, 81 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1971 (2006). Other aspects of the federal mail and wire fraud statutes are discussed beginning on p. 1076 infra. For a comprehensive overview, see Elizabeth Wagner Pittman,
Mail and Wire Fraud, 47 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 797 (2010).

Recall Judge Schauer's concern in dissent that an action based on false promises could potentially turn any breach of a promise into a crime. The federal statute by its terms makes no effort to police against such an outcome, but other
statutory schemes use more care. Consider, for example, N.Y. Penal Law §155.05(2)(d), which makes clear that “the defendant's intention or belief that the promise would not be performed may not be established by or inferred from the fact alone
that such promise was not performed. Such a finding may be based only upon evidence establishing that the facts and circumstances of the case are wholly consistent with guilty intent or belief and wholly inconsistent with innocent intent or belief,
and excluding to a moral certainty every hypothesis except that of the defendant's intention or belief that the promise would not be performed. . . .” Section 223.3(1) of the MPC similarly provides that “deception as to a person's intention to per-
form a promise shall not be inferred from the fact alone that he did not subsequently perform the promise.”

As you read the following case, consider whether these evidentiary rules are necessary or advisable to ensure that theft based on false promises does not sweep too broadly.

Nelson v. United States
United States Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit
227 F.2d 21 (1955)
DANAHER, J. This is an appeal from a conviction for obtaining goods by false pretenses in violation of D.C. Code §22-1301 (1951). The trial court entered judgment of acquittal on a second count charging grand larceny. Evidence was
p. 1045
p. 1046
offered to show that appellant from time to time over a period of months, for purposes of resale, had purchased merchandise from Potomac Distributors. . . . By September 18, 1952, his account was said to be in arrears more than thirty days.
Late that afternoon, appellant sought immediate possession of two television sets and a washing machine, displayed his customers’ purchase contracts to support his statement that he had already sold such merchandise and had taken payment
therefor, and told one Schneider, secretary-treasurer of Potomac Distributors, “I promised delivery tonight.” Appellant was told no further credit could be extended to him because of his overdue indebtedness in excess of $1,800, whereupon ap-
pellant offered to give security for the desired items as well as for the delinquent account. He represented himself as the owner of a Packard car for which he had paid $4,260.50, but failed to disclose an outstanding prior indebtedness on the car of
$3,028.08 secured by a chattel mortgage in favor of City Bank. Instead, he represented that he owed only one payment of some $56, not then due. Relying upon such representations, Potomac Distributors delivered to appellant two television sets
each worth $136, taking in return a demand note for the entire indebtedness, past and present, in the total, $2,047.37, secured by a chattel mortgage on the Packard and the television sets. Appellant promised to make a cash payment on the note
within a few days for default of which the holder was entitled to demand full payment. When the promised payment was not forthcoming, Schneider, by telephone calls and a personal visit to appellant's home, sought to locate appellant but learned
he had left town. The Packard about that time was in a collision, incurring damage of about $1,000, and was thereupon repossessed in behalf of the bank which held the prior lien for appellant's car purchase indebtedness. . . .

Appellant argues that Potomac Distributors could not have been defrauded for the car on September 18, 1952, “had an equity of between $900 and $1,000 and roughly five times the value of the two television sets.” That fact is
immaterial. ...

This appellant has sold two television sets, and apparently had taken payment therefor although he had no television sets to deliver to his customers. He could not get the sets from Potomac Distributors without offering security for his
past due account as well as for his present purchase. In order to get them he lied. He represented that his car acquired at a cost of more than $4,000 required only one further payment of $55. He now complains because his victim believed him
when he lied. He argues that the misrepresentations were not material although the victim testified, and the jury could properly find, that he would not have parted with his goods except in reliance upon appellant's statements. . .

He argues that there was no proof of an intent upon his part to defraud his victim.

Wrongful acts knowingly or intentionally committed can neither be justified nor excused on the ground of innocent intent. . . . The intent to injure or defraud is presumed when the unlawful act, which results in loss or injury, is

proved to have been knowingly committed. It is a well-settled rule, which the law applies in both criminal and civil cases, that the intent is presumed and inferred from the result of the action.

This quotation from a challenged charge was found by the Supreme Court to be “unexceptionable as matter of law” in Agnew v. United States, 1897, 165 U.S. 36, 53....

p. 1046
p. 1047

Affirmed.

Mier, J. (dissenting). . . . Nelson did make a false representation; but the question is whether there was evidence from which the jury could properly be permitted to infer that he intended to defraud, and to conclude that Potomac was
thereby defrauded. . ..

Differing definitions of the word “defraud” probably cause the difference in opinion between the majority and me. They seem to think it means, in connection with a purchase, to make a false pretense in the process of obtaining goods
even though the purchase price is well secured. | think the word means, in connection with a purchase, to make a false pretense as a result of which the seller is deprived of his goods or of the purchase price. . .. A purchaser can be said to have
defrauded the seller of his goods only if he intended to defraud him of the purchase price for which the seller was willing to exchange them. It seems to me to follow that a purchaser who makes a false statement in buying on credit has not de-
frauded the seller of his goods if he nevertheless amply secures the debt. . .

In considering the criminality vel non of the false statement, it must be remembered that the past due indebtedness of $1,697.87 is to play no part. That credit had already been extended generally, and with respect to it Potomac parted
with nothing on September 18. Nelson was only charged with defrauding Potomac by obtaining through false pretense the articles then delivered, which had a total value of only $349.50.

What was the actual value on September 18 of the property upon which Potomac took a lien, on the strength of which it parted with property worth $349.50? The bank collection manager, testifying for the Government, said that
although on September 18 Nelson still owed the bank $3,028.08, he had on that day an equity in the car worth from $900 to $1,000. The mortgaged television sets were, | suppose, worth their price of $272. Adding to this the minimum equity in the
automobile proved by the prosecution, it appears that Potomac had a lien on property worth at least $1,172 to protect a debt of $349.50. The proportion was more than three to one.

Such is the evidence as to what happened September 18, from which the jury was permitted to infer that Nelson then intended to defraud. [I]t is wholly irrational to presume or infer that one intends to defraud when he buys goods on
credit and safeguards that credit by giving more than triple security for it — no matter if he does falsely pretend that the security is even greater. It is equally illogical to conclude that the creditor was thereby defrauded. For that reason, my opinion
is that the proof | have outlined — which was the only pertinent proof — did not warrant the trial court in submitting the case to the jury... .

Nelson was guilty of a moral wrong in falsely and grossly misrepresenting his debt to the bank, but in the circumstances he should not have been indicted and convicted because of it. The . . . statute under which he was prosecuted
does not make mere falsehood felonious; it only denounces as criminal a false pretense which was intended to defraud and which in fact had that result. Even a liar is entitled to the full protection of the law. | am afraid a grave injustice has been
done in this case.

p. 1047

nnn 108
PROBLEM

In United States v. Regent Office Supply Co., 421 F.2d 1174 (2d Cir. 1970), the defendant company sold business supplies through agents who solicited orders by telephone. In order to get secretaries to put their calls through to the
purchasing agents of potential customers, and in order to get the purchasing agents to listen to their pitch, Regent's sales agents told secretaries and purchasing agents a variety of lies, stating, for example, that they had been referred by one of
the customer company’s officers or that they had a large volume of supplies that needed to be disposed of because of the death of another customer. These tactics generated a substantial volume of sales, but there was no claim that the merchan-
dise sold by Regent was in any way unacceptable to the purchasers. The government conceded that sales agents always discussed the price and quality of the merchandise honestly, and that customers were free to return any goods found to be
unsatisfactory.

Regent was convicted of mail fraud under 18 U.S.C. §1341. Regent argued that its misrepresentations merely deceived but did not “defraud” the customers. The court of appeals agreed and reversed the conviction, stating:

We do not . . . condone the deceitfulness such business practices represent nor do we approve [Regent's] cynical view . . . that such blatant dishonesty should be encouraged by reason of its “social utility” and . . “worthy

competitive enterprise.”. . . We find these “white lies” repugnant. . . . Nevertheless, the facts . . . do not, in our view, constitute a scheme to defraud. . ..

[We have said that “it is not essential that the Government allege or prove that purchasers were in fact defrauded.” [T]he government cannot escape the burden of showing that some actual harm or injury was

contemplated by the schemer. . . . Where the false representations are directed to the quality, adequacy or price of the goods themselves, . . . the intent of the schemer is to injure another to his own advantage by withholding

or misrepresenting material facts. Although proof that the injury was accomplished is not required to convict under §1341, we believe the statute does require evidence from which it may be inferred that some actual injury to

the victim, however slight, is a reasonably probable result of the deceitful representations if they are successful. [Blecause the falsity of [Regent's] representations was not shown to be capable of affecting the customer's un-

derstanding of the bargain, . . . no injury was shown to flow from the deception.
QUESTIONS: Do you agree? When does lying become fraud? Consider the contrasting implications of the court’s approach and the alternative position advanced by the government:

(a) The government's view. Suppose that storeowners in an area frequented by tourists post this sign in their window: “GOING OUT OF BUSINESS. ALL MERCHANDISE MUST GO.” In fact, the store is not going out of business, and the
sign has been in its window for more than a year. If the conviction had been upheld in Regent Office Supply, would the storeowners be guilty of obtaining money by fraud? Should she be?

(b) The court's view. Suppose that students go door-to-door selling magazine subscriptions, and tell potential customers that they are donating half of their commissions on each sale to an agency that helps famine victims in Africa.
The

p. 1048
p. 1049

subscription prices are the same as those available elsewhere, and subscribers have the right to cancel their subscriptions, for a full refund, after receiving the first issue of the magazine. The students, however, keep all of the commission for
themselves. Under Regent Office Supply, are they guilty of obtaining money by fraud? Should they be?

Suppose that a resort development company offers “beautiful designer luggage worth $500” to each prospective customer who attends a “brief, one-hour” sales talk about new condominiums the company is offering for sale in the
Caribbean. In fact, the sales talk lasts all day (with a break for lunch), customers cannot claim their gift of luggage unless they stay to the end of the presentation, and the luggage turns out to be a single cheap suitcase worth no more than $50.
Apart from these facts, no customer is pressured to buy a condo, customers who do sign a purchase contract are given the right to revoke it within 30 days (with a full refund of their deposit), and no customer who made a purchase has expressed
any regret. Under Regent Office Supply, is the development company guilty of obtaining money by fraud? Should it be?

Alternatively, could we say that the resort development company (or the sales company in Regent Office Supply) perpetrated a “scheme to defraud” by obtaining the potential purchasers’ time under false pretenses? (For further consid-

eration of the kinds of interests that constitute “property” protected by the law of theft, see pp. 1062-1085 infra.)
(c) The Model Penal Code approach. How would the preceding cases be decided under MPC §223.3 (Theft by Deception)?
For helpful discussions of the scope of the legal concept of fraud, see Buell, Novel Criminal Fraud, supra; Ellen S. Podgor, Criminal Fraud, 48 Am. U. L. Rev. 729 (1999). Differences between varying forms of dishonesty and the relation-
ship of moral to legal norms are explored in Stuart P. Green, Lying, Cheating, and Stealing: A Moral Theory of White Collar Crime (2006).
(a) Lying. False pretenses and fraud are theft crimes where lying is critical to culpability. Should lying that causes “egregious social harm” be criminalized even when it does not involve the appropriation of property? For an affirmative
argument, see Bryan H. Druzin & Jessica Li, The Criminalization of Lying: Under What Circumstances, If Any, Should Lies Be Made Criminal?, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 529 (2011). What problems would such an offense present?
4. Blackmail
State v. Harrington
‘Supreme Court of Vermont
260 A.2d 692 (Vt. 1969)
HotoeNn, C.J. [The respondent, John B. Harrington, was an attorney retained by Mrs. Norma Morin to obtain a divorce from her husband, Mr. Armand Morin. As Mrs. Morin was without funds, respondent agreed to work on a contingent
fee basis. The couple owned assets worth approximately $500,000, including a motel in New Hampshire where the two had previously lived.
p. 1049
p. 1050
[Together with his client, Harrington arranged to obtain evidence of Mr. Morin’s infidelity by hiring a woman, armed with a tape recorder, to entice him into having sex with her in one of his motel rooms. She succeeded, and at the appro-
priate moment Harrington and his associates entered the room and took pictures of Mr. Morin and the woman naked in bed.
[Several days later Harrington, in the presence of Mrs. Morin, dictated a letter to Mr. Morin proposing a settlement of the divorce action in which Mrs. Morin would receive her divorce, give up her interest in the marital assets, waive
alimony, and receive a lump sum of $175,000. The letter also provided that
any such settlement would include the return to you of all tape recordings, all negatives, all photographs and copies of photographs that might in any way, bring discredit upon yourself. Finally, there would be an absolute
undertaking on the part of your wife not to divulge any information of any kind or nature which might be embarrassing to you in your business life, your personal life, your financial life, or your life as it might be affected by the
Internal Revenue Service, the United States Customs Service, or any other governmental agency.
The letter stressed Mrs. Morin’s current state of insolvency, and requested a prompt reply. The letter went on to say that:]
Unless the writer has heard from you on or before March 22, we will have no alternative but to withdraw the offer and bring immediate divorce proceedings. . . . If we were to proceed under New Hampshire laws, without any
stipulation, it would be necessary to allege, in detail, all of the grounds that Mrs. Morin has in seeking the divorce. The writer is, at present, undecided as to advising Mrs. Morin whether or not to file for “informer fees” with
respect to the Internal Revenue Service and the United States Customs Service. In any event, we would file, alleging adultery, including affidavits, alleging extreme cruelty and beatings, and asking for a court order enjoining
you from disposing of any property, including your stock interests, during the pendency of the proceeding. . .. With absolutely no other purpose than to prove to you that we have all of the proof necessary to prove adultery

beyond a reasonable doubt, we are enclosing a photograph taken by one of my investigators on the early morning of March 8. The purpose of enclosing the photograph as previously stated, is simply to show you that cam-

eras and equipment were in full operating order.

18 V.S.A. §1701 provides: “A person who maliciously threatens to accuse another of a crime or offense, or with an injury to his person or property, with intent to extort money or other pecuniary advantage, or with intent to compel the
person so threatened to do an act against his will, shall be imprisoned in the state prison not more than two years or fined not more than $500.00.” ..

[he respondent maintains his letter does not constitute a threat to accuse Morin of the crime of adultery. He argues the implicit threats contained in the communication were “not to accuse of the CRIME of adultery but to bring an
embarrassing, reputation-ruining divorce proceeding in Mr. Morin’s county of residence unless a stipulation could be negotiated.”

p. 1050
p. 1051

In dealing with a parallel contention in State v. Louanis, 79 Vt. 463, 467, 65 A. 532, 533, the Court answered the argument in an opinion by Chief Judge Rowell. “The statute is aimed at blackmailing, and a threat of any public accusation
is as much within the reason of the statute as a threat of a formal complaint, and is much easier made, and may be quite as likely to accomplish its purpose. There is nothing in the statute that requires such a restricted meaning of the word ‘ac-
cuse’; and to restrict it thus, would well nigh destroy the efficacy of the act.”

The letter, marked “personal and confidential,” makes a private accusation of adultery in support of a demand for a cash settlement. An incriminating photograph was enclosed for the avowed purpose of demonstrating “we have all of
the proof necessary to prove adultery beyond a reasonable doubt.” According to the writing itself, cost of refusal will be public exposure of incriminating conduct in the courts of New Hampshire where the event took place.

In further support of motion for acquittal, the respondent urges that the totality of the evidence does not exclude the inference that he acted merely as an attorney, attempting to secure a divorce for his client on the most favorable terms
possible. ...

At the time of the writing, the respondent was undecided whether to advise his client to seek “informer fees.” One of the advantages tendered to Morin for a “quiet” and “undamaging” divorce is an “absolute undertaking” on the part
of the respondent's client not to inform against him in any way. The Internal Revenue Service, the United States Customs Service and other governmental agencies are suggested as being interested in such information. Quite clearly, these veiled
threats exceeded the limits of the respondent's representation of his client in the divorce action. Although these matters were not specified in the indictment, they have a competent bearing on the question of intent.

Apart from this, the advancement of his client's claim to the marital property, however well founded, does not afford legal cause for the trial court to direct a verdict of acquittal in the background and context of his letter to Morin. A
demand for settlement of a civil action, accompanied by a malicious threat to expose the wrongdoer's criminal conduct, if made with intent to extort payment, against his will, constitutes the crime alleged in the indictment.

The evidence at hand establishes beyond dispute the respondent's participation was done with preconceived design. The incriminating evidence which his letter threatens to expose was wilfully contrived and procured by a temptress
hired for that purpose. These factors in the proof are sufficient to sustain a finding that the respondent acted maliciously and without just cause, within the meaning of our criminal statutes. The sum of the evidence supports the further inference
that the act was done with intent to extort a substantial contingent fee to the respondent's personal advantage. . . . The evidence of guilt is ample to support the verdict and the trial was free from errors in law.

Judgment affirmed.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. The nature of the threat. Consider whether the Vermont statute quoted in the principal case makes criminal the following threats:

p. 1051
p. 1052
(a) Employee, who has been directing a crucial project for employer, to employer: “Give me a raise, or | will quit.” Without the employee the project will likely fail, possibly placing employer in bankruptcy.

(b) A to live-in lover B: “If you stop having sexual relations with me, | will require that you leave my house and sue you for all of that money you owe me.” See Lovely v. Cunningham, 796 F.2d 1 (1st Cir. 1986).

(c) Storeowner to shoplifter: “I saw you steal that radio last week. Pay me the $50 it costs, or I'll report you to the police.” See People v. Fichtner, 118 N.Y.S.2d 392 (1952), reprinted infra p. 1055.

(d) Storeowner to shoplifter: “I saw you steal that radio last week. Pay me the $50 it costs, plus a $350 fine, or I'll post your picture on the store's ‘wall of shame.”” See Corey Kilgannon & Jeffrey E. Singer, Shoplifting Suspects’ Choice:
Pay or Be Shamed, N.Y. Times, June 22, 2010, at A1.

(e) Customer to online retailer: “Every time | buy one of your appliances, it breaks within two weeks. Now my dishwasher has broken down so many times, it's worthless. Give me a new one, or I'll post negative comments about the
product I've purchased from you in my online review on your website and blog about how awful you have been, and you'll never see another customer.”

2. Model Penal Code. Consider how the foregoing hypotheticals and the Harrington case would come out under Model Penal Code §223.4, in the Appendix in this book, and the California Penal Code, pp. 1022-1023 supra.

3. Blackmail and the practice of law. Consider the following criticism of the decision in Harrington (Joseph M. Livermore, Lawyer Extortion, 20 Ariz. L. Rev. 403, 406 (1978)):

[Mery serious problems are created for every lawyer. Any time a cause of action involves behavior that is either criminal or embarrassing, a threat to bring the action would be extortionate. Obviously this would effectively

preclude many lawyer demand letters. Anomalously, it would be permissible to destroy reputation by bringing suit but not to allow the defendant to avoid that destruction by paying the claim. Not only would this mean a net

loss to the privacy that the extortion statute is, in part, aimed at protecting, but it would also involve significantly expanded litigation costs and burdens on efficient utilization of judicial resources. So read, the Harrington tule

is obviously absurd.
QUESTION: Could Harrington be read more narrowly to avoid this criticism?

4, Victims who threaten lawsuits. Should what Harrington did be considered a crime, or merely aggressive advancement of his client's interests? Consider Rex v. Dymond, [1920] 2 K.B. 260, where defendant, who had been sexually
assaulted, demanded that her attacker pay her reparations upon threat of “letiting] the town knowed alll about your going on.” Glanville Williams criticized her conviction for blackmail in Blackmail, [1954] Crim. L. Rev. 162, 165-166:

[HJow fine is the line dividing proper from improper threats. Dymond was an illiterate girl, trying to obtain what she may have believed to be her rights without legal aid. Had she the [money] . .. with which to consult a solicitor,

instead of writing herself, he would have written a letter

p. 1052
p. 1053

to the [attacker] on her behalf in something like the following terms. “Dear Sir, We have been consulted by . . . who states that. . . Our client claims . . . compensation for the wrong committed against her, and unless we have

your cheque for [the requested] amount we are instructed to commence legal proceedings against you.” Such a letter would not constitute a criminal offense.

Williams suggests that had Dymond simply hired a lawyer who threatened to sue, the resulting settlement would not be subject to criminal sanction. Does this suggest that blackmail charges will disproportionately fall on the poor who
are unable to obtain legal counsel to assist with their claims? Can a threat to sue sometimes be extortionate even when made by a lawyer?

The answer may turn on statutory construction. In State v. Rendelman, 947 A.2d 546, 547 (Md. 2008), the court held that threats of litigation were not “wrongful” within the meaning of the state extortion statute, regardless of bad faith or
legal merit. Other states follow the Rendelman approach and require “wrongful” or “unlawful” conduct beyond the mere threat to sue. See People v. Knox, 467 P.3d 1218, 1227-1228 (Colo. App. 2019). But in State v. Hynes, 978 A.2d 264, 271, 275
(N.H. 2009), the court distinguished Rendelman because its state extortion statute did not require “wrongful” means, but rather a comparison of the harm to the recipient against the benefit to the threatener. Under the analysis in Hynes, a threat to
sue can be extortion if the action threatened fails to provide “actual advantage that is real and definite.” Like Rendelman, the federal extortion statute, 18 U.S.C. §1951, requires “wrongful” conduct, but determining what is “wrongful” is a matter of
continuing dispute. See United States v. Pendergraft, 297 F.3d 1198 (11th Cir. 2002). How should that prerequisite to criminal liability be defined?

5. Statutory variation. Blackmail (often termed extortion) statutes vary a great deal. A useful review may be found in the Commentaries to Model Penal Code §223.4 at 201-224 (1980). There are important variations in the types of
threats required. Threats of personal and property injury or to accuse of crime are always sufficient. Also commonly included are threats to make disclosures that would defame the victim. But what about threats to expose matters that are not

defamatory? Some statutes include threats of this nature. See, e.g., Cal. Penal Code §519 (2021) (threats to expose any secret affecting the victim); Il Comp. Stat. ch. 720, 5/15-5 (2021) (threats to reveal any information sought to be concealed by
the victim). The MPC would seem to exclude such threats, unless they are picked up in the catchall provision that includes “any other harm which would not benefit the actor.” Should they be excluded?

Statutes also vary in how they define what the blackmailer seeks to obtain by the threats. Many statutes, like the MPC, limit the purpose of the threats to obtaining property or other things of value and rely on other code provisions to
deal with the use of coercive threats to obtain other benefits for the person who threatens. See, e.g., Model Penal Code §212.5 (criminal coercion offense that covers threats made with the “purpose unlawfully to restrict another's freedom of action
to his detriment”). Some statutes, on the other hand, define the object of the threat more comprehensively. E.g., Minn. Penal Code §609.27 (2021) (threats that cause another against his will to do any act or forbear doing a lawful act).

p. 1053
p. 1054

Should the criminal law recognize a form of blackmail that includes the destruction of one’s own property under certain circumstances? Of course, the essence of blackmail is the threat to do something that the actor normally has a
perfect right to do in the absence of a threat (for example, to publicly disclose truthful facts about someone who is not asked to buy the actor's silence). Should the law of blackmail therefore prohibit threats to destroy one's own property? Consider
the case of Toby the bunny. Toby's owner posted pictures of Toby on his website and announced that he would have a butcher kill Toby (which the owner could lawfully do) so he could eat him, unless his website's readers sent $50,000 to save
Toby's life. Aren't there some social interests that might be served by expanding blackmail statutes to cover threats against the actor's own property? Or would doing so punish conduct that should not be criminalized? For an argument in favor of
a “tight to destroy,” see Stephen E. Sachs, Comment, Saving Toby: Extortion, Blackmail, and the Right to Destroy, 24 Yale L. & Pol’y Rev. 251 (2006).

6. First Amendment concerns. A constituent sent an e-mail to a state senator saying the senator should “get that bill heard or | will make sure you regret not doing it” by “makling] you the laughing stock of the Senate” and “digiging]
into your past, your family, your associates and once we start on you there will be no end to it.” The constituent was charged with blackmail under the state law and argued in defense that the e-mail contained constitutionally protected speech.
The reviewing court held that the state law was unconstitutional as applied to that case, finding the e-mail to be “the kind of vehement, caustic and unpleasantly sharp political speech protected by the First Amendment.” Gerhart v. State, 360 P.3d
1194 (Okla. Crim. App. 2015). The court stated the result would have been different if the e-mail threatened to accuse the senator of a crime or stated specific conduct that the constituent would make public. See id. at 1199. Why should the level
of specificity determine when the line is crossed from protected speech to blackmail?

The Minnesota Supreme Court recently struck down part of its extortion statute as unconstitutionally overbroad. In State v. Jorgenson, 946 N.W.2d 596 (Minn. 2020), the defendant threatened to release an incriminating video of his
partner's father talking about smoking marijuana unless the father paid the defendant $25,000. He was charged with attempted coercion under Minn. Penal Code §609.26, subd. 1(4), which made it a crime to threaten to expose “a secret or defor-
mity, publish a defamatory statement, or otherwise to expose any person to disgrace or ridicule” in an attempt to cause another to do any act against their will. The defendant argued that this provision was unconstitutionally overbroad because it
criminalized a substantial amount of protected speech. The court agreed with the defendant's facial attack and struck down the statutory provision, concluding that a substantial number of the statute's applications were unconstitutional in relation
to its legitimate sweep. Id. at 602. The court posed several hypotheticals to show that the statute reached too far, including the following:

— Alaw student who had been sexually harassed by a professor states: “Professor, you have a choice, either resign or | will report and publicize the fact that you sexually harassed me.”
— Aschool bus driver says to a student: “It's illegal for underage persons to smoke cigarettes. Give me those smokes or | will tell your parents that you're smoking.”
p. 1054
p. 1055
— Awoman, seeing a man she knew was a child pornographer and sexual abuser preparing to move in with her sister and her nieces, promises: “If you don't break up with my sister and leave town, I'll report what | know to my sister and the
authorities.”
If the court is correct that these hypotheticals should not be criminalized, does that suggest that most extortion law sweeps too broadly? Do legislators have enough guidance to draw the line between protected speech and unlawful threats, or are
the examples in Jorgenson insufficiently distinguishable from cases where courts have upheld convictions?

People v. Fichtner
New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division, Second Department
118 N.Y.S.2d 392 (N.Y. App. Div. 1952), aff'd without opinion, 114 N.E.2d 212 (N.Y. 1953)

JOHNSTON, J. Section 850 of the Penal Law provides: “Extortion is the obtaining of property from another, . . . with his consent, induced by a wrongful use of . . . fear. . ..” Section 851 of the Penal Law provides:

Fear, such as will constitute extortion, may be induced by an oral or written threat: . ..2. To accuse him, or any relative of his or any member of his family, of any crime; or, 3. To expose, or impute to him, or any of them,

any... disgrace. ...

Defendant Fichtner is the manager, and defendant McGuinness the assistant manager, of the Hill Supermarket. . .. [Defendants were charged] with the crime of extortion in that on January 18, 1951, defendants, aiding and abetting
each other, obtained $25 from one Smith, with his consent, which consent defendants induced by a wrongful use of fear by threatening to accuse Smith of the crime of petit larceny, and to expose and impute to him a disgrace unless Smith paid
them $25.

Smith testified that on January 18, 1951, he purchased a number of articles in the Hill store for a total of about $12, but left the store without paying for a fifty-three-cent jar of coffee, which he had concealed in his pocket. After Smith left
the store he returned at defendant Fichtner’s request. Defendants then threatened to call a policeman, to arrest Smith for petit larceny, with resulting publicity in the newspapers and over the radio, unless he paid $75 and signed a paper admitting
that during the course of several months he had unlawfully taken merchandise from the store in that amount. Although Smith admitted he had shopped in Hill's [stores for years and on numerous occasions], he insisted that the only merchandise he
had ever stolen was the fifty-three-cent jar of coffee on the evening in question, and a sixty-five-cent roll of bologna one week previously. However, he finally signed the paper admitting that he had unlawfully taken $50 worth of merchandise from
the store during a period of four months. That evening Smith paid $25 in cash and promised to pay the balance in weekly installments of $5. He testified he was induced to sign the paper and make the payment because defendants threatened to
accuse him of petit larceny and to expose him to the disgrace of the criminal charge and the resulting publicity. It is not disputed that the $25 taken from

p. 1055

p. 1056
Smith was “rung up” on the store register; that the money went into the company funds and that defendants received no part of the money. During the following week Smith reported the incident to the police, and defendants were arrested on
January 25, 1951, when Smith, accompanied by a detective, returned to the store and paid the first $5 installment.

Defendants testified that over the course of several weeks, they saw Smith steal merchandise amounting to $5.61, and they honestly believed that during the several months that Smith had been shopping, he had stolen merchandise of
the value of $75; that on January 18, 1951, Smith freely admitted that during the four-month period he stole merchandise of the value of $50, and that he voluntarily signed the paper admitting thefts in that amount; that on that date he paid $25 on
account and promised to pay the balance in weekly installments.

That the Smith incident was not an isolated one, but rather part of a course of conduct pursued by defendants, even after warning by the police to discontinue the practice, was not only clearly established but admitted by defendant
Fichtner... .

In my opinion, the verdict is amply supported by the evidence. Implicit in the verdict is a finding that Smith stole only $1.18 in merchandise as he admitted, or at most the $5.61 which defendants claimed they actually saw him steal, and
that he was induced to pay the $25 on January 18, 1951, by defendants’ threats to accuse him of crime and to expose him to disgrace. By its verdict, the jury rejected defendants’ contention that Smith voluntarily admitted having stolen $50 worth
of merchandise and that they demanded from Smith only what was rightfully due.

Defendants requested the court to charge that

if in the judgment of the jury the defendants honestly believed that the amount which the complainant paid or agreed to pay represented the approximate amount of the merchandise which he .. . had previously stolen from

the Hill Supermarket, then the defendants must be acquitted.

. .. [Wle believe that the portion of the main charge to the effect that, under the circumstances of this case, extortion is committed only when one obtains property from another by inducing fear in that other by threatening to accuse him
of crime unless he pays an amount over and above what was rightfully due was more favorable to defendants than that which they were entitled to receive. In our opinion, the extortion statutes were intended to prevent the collection of money by
the use of fear induced by means of threats to accuse a debtor of crime, and it makes no difference whether the debtor stole any goods, nor how much he stole, and that defendants may properly be convicted even though they believed that the
complainant was guilty of the theft of their employer's goods in an amount either equal to or less, or greater than any sum of money obtained from the complainant. Nor is defendants’ good faith in thus enforcing payment of the money alleged to
be due to their employer a defense. . . .

The law does not authorize the collection of just debts by threatening to accuse the debtor of crime, even though the complainant is in fact guilty of the crime. In my opinion, it makes no difference whether the indebtedness for which a
defendant demands repayment is one arising out of the crime for the prosecution of which he threatens the complainant, or is entirely independent and having no connection with the crime which forms the basis of the accusation. The result in

p. 1056
p. 1087
both cases is the concealment and compounding of a felony to the injury of the State. It is that result which the extortion statutes were intended to prevent.

[Conviction affirmed]

Wenzet, J. (dissenting). [T]he jury was permitted to convict defendants of the crime of extortion on proof that they had induced complainant, by the threats alleged, to pay to defendants more than he rightfully owed for goods which he
had stolen, even though defendants might have honestly believed that the amount demanded from complainant was the amount which he rightfully owed. In my opinion, although the question is one as to which there is a conflict of authority, if
defendants, acting without malice and in good faith, made an honest mistake, they were not guilty of the crime charged. There would then be no criminal intent. The defendants were not acting in their own behalf but in that of their employer, in re-
covering what they believed to be rightfully due it... .

NOTE

Under the New York Penal Law enacted subsequent to Fichtner, extortion remains excluded from the class of larceny-type crimes for which a claim of right is a defense. See People v. Reid, p. 1091 infra. However, a special provision
applicable to extortion, N.Y. Penal Law §155.15(2) (2021), provides:

In any prosecution for larceny by extortion committed by instilling in the victim a fear that he or another person would be charged with a crime, it is an affirmative defense that the defendant reasonably believed the threat-

ened charge to be true and that his sole purpose was to compel or induce the victim to take reasonable action to make good the wrong which was the subject of such threatened charge.

Section 215.45(2) provides:

In any prosecution under this section, it is an affirmative defense that the benefit did not exceed an amount which the defendant reasonably believed to be due as restitution or indemnification for harm caused by the crime.

PROBLEM

Many retailers have opted to address the problem of shoplifting by using the services of a company like the Corrective Education Company (CEC). After someone has been caught shoplifting in a store, the store does not call the police
but instead calls in CEC. CEC, in tum, gives those individuals a choice. They can either pay $400 and enroll in CEC’s anti-shoplifting “restorative justice course,” or CEC will call the police. CEC claims the course is educational and offers online
lectures and a life coach to help them address the underlying issues that prompted them to steal. One California court, however, concluded that this scheme amounted to extortion. Is this properly characterized as extortion, or is this a restorative
justice option that helps to reduce the criminal law's footprint? For an in-depth discussion of these issues, see John Rappaport, Criminal Justice, Inc., 118 Colum. L. Rev. 2251 (2018).

p. 1087
p. 1058
NOTE ON THE RATIONALE OF BLACKMAIL

In Unraveling the Paradox of Blackmail, 84 Colum. L. Rev. 670, 670 (1984), James Lindgren identifies the puzzle about blackmail in statutes where the underlying threat is to do something legal:

[Bllackmail is unique among major crimes: no one has yet figured out why it ought to be illegal. [T]he heart of the problem is that two separate acts, each of which is a moral and legal right, can combine to make a moral and

legal wrong. For example, if | threaten to expose a criminal act unless | am paid money, | have committed blackmail. Or if | threaten to expose a sexual affair unless | am given a job, once again | have committed blackmail.

Ihave a legal right to expose or threaten to expose the crime or affair, and | have a legal right to seek a job or money, but if | combine these rights it is blackmail. If both a person's ends — seeking a job or money — and his

means — threatening to expose — are otherwise legal, why is it illegal to combine them? Therein lies what has been called the “paradox of blackmail.”

Consider the following attempts to explain this paradox.

JAMES LINDGREN, UNRAVELING THE PARADOX OF BLACKMAIL, 84 COLUM. L. REV. 670, 672 (1984): [T]he key to the wrongfulness of the blackmail transaction is its triangular structure. The transaction implicitly involves not only the blackmailer
and his victim but always a third party as well. This third party may be, for example, the victim's spouse or employer, the authorities or even the public at large. . . . If the blackmail victim pays the blackmailer, it is to avoid the harm that those others
would inflict. Thus blackmail is a way that one person requests something in return for suppressing the actual or potential interests of others. . . . Selling the right to go to the police involves suppressing the state's interests. Selling the right to tell a
tort victim who committed the tort involves suppressing the tort victim’s interests. . . . [T]he criminalization of informational and noninformational blackmail represents a principled decision that advantages may not be gained by extra leverage be-
longing more to a third party than to the threatener.
GEORGE P. FLETCHER, BLACKMAIL: THE PARADIGMATIC CRIME, 141 U. PA. L. REV. 1617, 1626 (1993): The proper test, | submit, is whether the transaction with the suspected blackmailer generates a relationship of dominance and subordination.
If V's paying money or rendering a service to D creates a situation in which D can or does dominate V, then the action crosses the line from permissible commerce to criminal wrongdoing. The essence of D's dominance over Vis the prospect of
repeated demands. . . . Blackmail occurs when, by virtue of the demand and the action satisfying the demands, the blackmailer knows that she can repeat the demand in the future. Living with that knowledge puts the victim of blackmail in a per-
manently subordinate position.
DOUGLAS H. GINSBURG & PAUL SHECHTMAN, BLACKMAIL: AN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF THE LAW, 141 U. PA. L. REV. 1849, 1873-1874 (1993): [T]he apparent paradox of blackmail, that one may not threaten to do what one has a lawful right to do,
is an economically rational rule. If such threats were lawful, there would be an incentive
p. 1058
p. 1059
for people to expend resources to develop embarrassing information about others in the hope of then selling their silence. In that case, some people would be deterred from engaging in embarrassing (but lawful) conduct, while some others who
were undeterred would find that their business or social acquaintances or family were informed of their activity. Neither such deterrence nor such information can be counted as a good in many situations, however. These particularly include social

and family relations in which the concern of one individual for another is altruistic rather than self-interested; i.e., where one might be distressed to learn another's secret, but was not harmed by ignorance of it. It is precisely these relationships that
are threatened with disruption by the prototypical blackmail threat, and that would be protected by an economically rational law. The general principle of the Model Penal Code closely approximates this result by prohibiting threats that it would not
benefit the actor to carry out.

WENDY J. GORDON, TRUTH AND CONSEQUENCES: THE FORCE OF BLACKMAIL'S CENTRAL CASE, 141 U. PA. L. REV. 1741, 1758, 1770, 1776-1777 (1993): [P]olicymakers prohibit blackmail less because of economic waste or inefficiency than
because they perceive the act of blackmail to be wrong in itself. . .. One person deliberately seeks to harm another to serve her own ends — to exact money or other advantage — and does so in a context where she has no conceivable justifica-
tion for her act... .

Libertarians who recommend the legalization of blackmail sometimes claim that there is no way to distinguish blackmail from an ordinary commercial transaction. . . . | suggest [these] distinctions . . . : first, that the blackmailer intends
to harm; and second, that regardless of intent, the buyer of silence in an extortion transaction suffers a net harm, while the buyer in an ordinary commercial transaction is benefitted. . . .

It is important to note that criminalization also has an impact on blackmail victims, providing them with . . . tools to encourage and assist them in resisting the blackmailer’s demands. . . . By threatening to go to the authorities if and only
if disclosure is made, victims can discourage blackmailers from disclosing the contested information. This is what Joel Feinberg terms “counterblackmail.”

For a careful critique of the preceding arguments, see Mitchell N. Berman, The Evidentiary Theory of Blackmail: Taking Motives Seriously, 65 U. Chi. L. Rev. 795 (1998). Professor Berman argues that none of these efforts provides a
persuasive account of why blackmail is a crime. He notes, however, that unconditional disclosure of information ordinarily is not illegal because it may be done for legitimate reasons. In contrast, he argues, a conditional threat to disclose (in the
‘event of nonpayment) is made illegal because it provides strong evidence that any disclosure would be morally blameworthy — “the actor would be inflicting harm knowingly and without good motives.” Id. at 848. An empirical study of subjects’
intuitions about hypothetical blackmail scenarios suggests that Berman’s account of blackmail most closely mirrors people’s moral intuitions about when threats should be criminalized. Paul H. Robinson et al., Competing Theories of Blackmail:
An Empirical Research Critique of Criminal Law Theory, 89 Tex. L. Rev. 291, 339-340 (2010). There is strong evidence that people draw sharp moral distinctions between threats that are unlawful and those that are not unlawful, even though many
blackmail laws often include both kinds of threats. Stuart P. Green, Thirteen Ways to Steal a Bicycle 63 (2012).

p. 1059
p. 1060

5. Consolidation
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Insofar as the pattern of discrete theft offenses covering fundamentally similar kinds of acquisitive conduct has left gaps in the law, only legislative or judicial revision of the definitions of criminal conduct can supply an effective remedy.
Another and more direct consequence of this condition of the law of theft is procedural in character. A defendant convicted of one of these theft offenses, say, embezzlement, may be able to obtain a reversal on appeal through the curious device
of proving that the evidence technically established another offense, say, larceny. See, e.g., Nolan v. State, p. 1024 supra. This possibility is a constant threat to the efficient administration of criminal law. Yet the distinctions between many of the
separate theft offenses (1) are without criminological significance, and (2) turn on highly technical legal characterizations of basically similar fact situations rather than real differences in conduct, so that in many cases defendants are not likely to be
prejudiced (though they may be) by a variance between charge and proof.

The principal means of reform, which has gained widespread acceptance, is to consolidate the variety of common-law forms of wrongful acquisition of another's property into one single crime, which might be called “theft” or “larceny,”
and to deprive of any legal significance the differences in modes of acquisition. Some examples of consolidation statutes follow.

MODEL PENAL CODE $223.1: Consolidation of Theft Offenses; Grading; Provisions Applicable to Theft Generally. [See the Appendix.]

NEW YORK PENAL LAW $155.05 (2021): Larceny; Defined.
1. A person steals property and commits larceny when, with intent to deprive another of property or to appropriate the same to himself or to a third person, he wrongfully takes, obtains or withholds such property from an owner
thereof.
2. Larceny includes a wrongful taking, obtaining or withholding of another's property, with the intent prescribed in subdivision one of this section, committed in any of the following ways:
(a) By conduct heretofore defined or known as common law larceny by trespassory taking, common law larceny by trick, embezzlement, or obtaining property by false pretenses;
(b) By acquiring lost property. . . .
(c) By committing the crime of issuing a bad check. . . .
(d) By false promise. . . .
(e) By extortion... .
NEW YORK PENAL LAW $155.45 (2021): Larceny; Pleading and Proof.
1. Where it is an element of the crime charged that property was taken from the person or obtained by extortion, an indictment for larceny must so specify. In all other cases, an indictment, information or complaint for larceny is
sufficient
p. 1060
p.1061
if it alleges that the defendant stole property of the nature or value required for the commission of the crime charged without designating the particular way or manner in which such property was stolen or the particular theory of larceny involved.
2. Proof that the defendant engaged in any conduct constituting larceny as defined in section 155.05 is sufficient to support any indictment, information or complaint for larceny other than one charging larceny by extortion. An indict-
ment charging larceny by extortion must be supported by proof establishing larceny by extortion.
ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES CHAPTER 720, SECTION 5/16-1 (2021): Theft.
(a) A person commits theft when he or she knowingly:
(1) Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
(2) Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
(3) Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
(4) Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him or her to believe that the property was stolen. . ..
CALIFORNIA PENAL CODE $484(A) (2021): Every person who shall feloniously steal, take, carry, lead, or drive away the personal property of another, or who shall fraudulently appropriate property which has been entrusted to him or her, or who
shall knowingly and designedly, by any false or fraudulent representation or pretense, defraud any other person of money, labor or real or personal property, . . . is guilty of theft.
CALIFORNIA PENAL CODE $952 (2021): In charging an offense, each count shall contain, and shall be sufficient if it contains in substance, a statement that the accused has committed some public offense therein specified. . . . In charging theft it
shall be sufficient to allege that the defendant unlawfully took the labor or property of another.

Eighteen states have consolidated “all of the traditional species of theft (larceny, embezzlement, false pretenses, extortion, receiving stolen property, failure to return lost property, and unauthorized use)” into a single theft offense.
Another 20 states have partially consolidated their theft offenses by combining larceny, false pretenses, and embezzlement. Stuart P. Green, Thirteen Ways to Steal a Bicycle 63 (2012). Stuart Green criticizes these efforts because they not only
dispensed with “morally irrelevant” concepts like asportation or distinctions between possession, title, and custody, but they also “did away with morally salient distinctions such as those among theft by stealth (larceny), theft by deception (false
pretenses), and theft by coercion (extortion).” Id. at 9. Green points to empirical evidence showing that people make distinctions among theft types that these laws often ignore. Id. at 68.

p.1061
p. 1062
B. THE PROPERTY SUBJECT TO THEFT

1. Traditional Theft

State v. Miller
‘Supreme Court of Oregon
233 P.2d 786 (Or. 1951)

Lusk, J. [Defendant induced complaining witness to agree to guarantee his indebtedness to another on his false representation that he owned a tractor free of encumbrance and on his executing a chattel mortgage thereto as security.
In fact, defendant was purchasing the tractor under a conditional sales contract. He was convicted of obtaining property (the complaining witness's guaranty) by false pretenses.

[Defendant was charged under §23-537, 0.C.L.A‘]

If any person shall, by any false pretenses or by any privity [sic] or false token, and with intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain, from any other person any money or property whatsoever, or shall obtain or attempt to

obtain with the like intent the signature of any person to any writing, the false making whereof would be punishable as forgery, such person, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment.

. .. Reduced to its simplest terms, this indictment means that by false pretenses the defendant induced the Hub Lumber Company to agree to pay his indebtedness to the Howard Cooper Corporation if he should fail to pay it. The
question is whether this amounts to an allegation that, in the sense of the statute, the defendant obtained “any property” from the Hub Lumber Company... .

The source of the false pretenses statute in this country is the common law and the statute law of England. The English courts hold that the thing obtained must be the subject of larceny at common law, and accordingly a conviction for
obtaining two dogs by false pretenses was quashed because at common law dog stealing is not larceny; so likewise of an indictment for obtaining food and lodging by false pretenses. Under statutes like ours many of the courts of this country take
the same view of the law. The California statute covers “money or property.” Pen. Code, §532. The court in People v. Cummings, 46 P. 284, in holding that the word “property” did not include real property [relied on the fact that real property was
not recognized under the English law as the subject of false pretenses.].. .

It should be observed at this point that our statute in respect of the present question is not as broad as those in some of the other states. It reads “any money or property whatsoever.” In some of the states, as stated in Burdick [Law
of Crime], 481, §640, the statutes, “after enumerating various classes of personal property, conclude the list with what is apparently intended as an all inclusive term, such as ‘other things of value,’ ‘any other valuable thing,’ or ‘any other valuable
thing or effects whatsoever.” The Kansas statute includes “any money, personal property, right in action, or any other valuable thing or effects whatsoever.” G.S. 1949, 21-551 Notwithstanding the comprehensiveness of this provision, the [Kansas]
court held, in the light of the origin and history of the crime of false pretenses, that obtaining an extension of time in which to pay a matured debt was not a “valuable

p. 1062

p. 1063
thing” within the meaning of the section. [State v. Tower, 251 Pac. 401.] The term “personal property” was said “to denote personal movable things generally.” “Mere pecuniary advantage, devoid of any physical attribute of money, chattel, or
valuable security, in the sense of the English statute, was not included.”

[Similarly, in] State v. Eicher, 140 So. 498, 499, . . . the court [said] that “The privilege of having a note renewed or the time of its payment extended may be and frequently is a valuable one to the debtor. But such privilege or advantage
is neither money nor property in the sense those terms are ordinarily used and understood.” The court further said: “‘Property’ . . . means worldly goods or possessions, tangible things, and things which have an exchangeable or commercial
value.”...

The provisions of the statute which make unlawful the obtaining of the signature of any person with intent to defraud . . . rather definitely indicate that such an intangible thing as credit was not considered by the legislature to be
property.

Moreover, this court [has] recognized that “property” under the statute must be something capable of being possessed and the title to which can be transferred. . .. It need hardly be said that the thing which the defendant is charged
with obtaining in the present indictment, the guaranty, or, to be more accurate, the benefit of the guaranty which the Hub Lumber Company gave to the Howard Cooper Corporation, could not be possessed, and that there could be no such thing
as holding title to it.

Had the indictment alleged that the defendant obtained the signature of the Hub Lumber Company or its agent to a guaranty of the defendant's indebtedness, we would have had an entirely different question. The failure so to allege
was not due to an oversight of the pleader but to the facts themselves, for the proof is that no written guaranty was ever executed but merely an oral one. . . .

Itis doubtless true, as the state's brief asserts, that “a guaranty is a chose in action, a right to indemnity from the guarantor,” but it is the right of the creditor who extends credit on the faith of the guaranty, not of the debtor to whom
credit is given. The defendant did not receive even a chose in action from the Hub Lumber Company... .

The state argues that . . . the obtaining of a loan by fraud is a violation of the statute and asserts that this is a similar case. But in the loan cases, as the state’s brief itself points out, the victim parts with his money. And, while it is true
{although not alleged in the indictment) that, just as in the loan cases, the accused obtained credit, he obtained it, not from the victim of his false representations, but from another.

The state's argument of “policy” that the public are entitled to the protection of the law against immoral and reprehensible conduct such as that with which the accused was charged, and of which, no doubt, he was guilty, is appealing,
but should be addressed to the legislature, not to the courts. The legislature has not undertaken to make every fraud a crime, but has set boundaries around the crime of false pretenses which the courts must respect and have no authority to
pass...

[T]he judgment must therefore be reversed and the action dismissed.

NOTES
1. The traditional approach. The Supreme Court took a similar approach to the Miller court when it faced the question whether the defendant, a partner in an investment firm, was guilty of extortion under the Hobbs Act for threaten-
ing to
p. 1063
p. 1064
expose an affair by the general counsel of a retirement fund if the general counsel did not change his recommendation against investing in the defendant's firm. The Court concluded that the recommendation of an investment was not “property”
because “t]he property extorted must . . . be transferable — that is, capable of passing from one person to another.” Sekhar v. United States, 570 U.S. 729 (2013).
2. The Model Penal Code approach. On the facts of Miller, what would be the result if the applicable definition of “property” were that set forth in MPC §223.0(6)?

3. Theft of services. In Chappell v. United States, 270 F.2d 274 (9th Cir. 1959), the defendant, an Air Force sergeant, was convicted of knowingly converting property of the United States by making use of the services and labor of an
airman to paint his own private dwellings during the airman’s on-duty hours. The statute, 18 U.S.C. §641, making it criminal to knowingly convert to one’s own use anything of value of the United States, was construed as intending no such revolu-
tionary change in the common law as would be entailed, in the Ninth Circuit's view, in holding that an employee's services were property that could be stolen. The conviction was reversed.

The Seventh Circuit reached a contrary conclusion in a case involving a professor who used the services of a research assistant, paid for out of his grant from the Environmental Protection Agency, to perform work for him on a research
contract unrelated to his EPA grant. United States v. Croft, 750 F.2d 1354 (7th Cir. 1984). Affirming his conviction under 18 U.S.C. §641, the court held that the section is designed to punish “intentional conduct by which a person either misappro-
priates or obtains a wrongful advantage from government property,” and that the defendant “obtained a wrongful advantage by converting and misappropriating the services of [the assistant] for his personal research project while allowing those
services to be paid for by the EPA.” Id. at 1362. In United States v. Schwartz, 785 F.2d 673, 681 n.4 (9th Cir. 1986), the Ninth Circuit expressed agreement with Croft and overruled its earlier decision in Chappell. For a criticism of such results as an
unwarranted judicial extension of a statute concerned with traditional property offenses, see Ralph G. Picardi, Comment, Theft of Employee Services Under the United States Penal Code, 23 San Diego L. Rev. 897 (1986).

With respect to theft of services, see MPC §223.7, in the Appendix in this book. Under Ill. Comp. Stat. ch. 720, 5/16-3 (2021), people commit theft of services when they obtain “labor or services of another which are available only for
hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the . . . labor or services.” In People v. Davis, 561 N.E.2d 165 (Ill. 1990), the defendants were city officials who were supervising a con-
struction project being performed for the city by an independent contractor. They were responsible for giving job assignments to the contractor's employees when the employees reported for work. The defendants asked several of the employees
to participate in political campaigning instead of working on the construction project. The employees willingly agreed to do so, but their employer was not aware of the arrangement and lost the value of their services. Are the defendants guilty of
theft under the Illinois statute? The court held in the negative. Was there any way, under this statute, to support the opposite result? The Illinois Supreme Court thought so, overruling Davis in People v. Perry, 864 N.E.2d 196 (Ill. 2007).

p. 1064
p. 1065

4, Theft of use of property. In State v. McGraw, 480 N.E.2d 552 (Ind. 1985), a city employee used a city computer and services for his personal business and was convicted of theft under Ind. Code §35-43-4-2: “A person who
knowingly or intentionally exerts unauthorized control over property of another person, with intent to deprive the other person of its value or use, commits theft. . ..” It appeared that the defendant's unauthorized use cost the city nothing, since the
computer service was leased at a fixed charge and the tapes and discs he used could be erased and reused. The court held that these facts could not support a conviction, even assuming arguendo that the use of the computer was “property”
under the theft statute. The court reasoned that the city was not deprived of any part of the value or use of the property. The court said: “Defendant has likened his conduct to the use of an employer's vacant bookshelf, for the temporary storage of
one’s personal items, and to the use of an employer's telephone facilities for toll-free calls. The analogies appear to us to be appropriate.” Id. at 554.

QUESTIONS:

(a) What should be the result under the MPC?

(b) How should courts treat the unauthorized use of real property? Consider the situation that arises when people who lack a stable place of residence seek shelter in an unoccupied house or apartment without the owner's permission.
Can they be convicted for theft of the use of the property? Generally, courts hold that people in these situations must do something more than merely stay in the home for their actions to constitute theft. One defendant in Tennessee, for instance,
occupied an empty house, posted “Keep Out” signs, changed the locks, and filed false papers with the local deed office claiming to own it. The Tennessee Supreme Court upheld a conviction for theft of real property, emphasizing that the defen-
dant's actions went far beyond those of person who was merely seeking temporary shelter. State v. Gentry, 538 S.W.3d 413, 427 (Tenn. 2017). Many jurisdictions set an even higher bar to conviction in these situations. Several states follow the
MPC approach and limit theft of real property to cases where the defendant unlawfully transfers the property, such as fraudulently inducing a transfer of title. See, e.g., MPC §223.1, Explanatory Note; N.J. Stat. Ann. §2C:20-3 (2020); 18 Pa. Cons.
Stat. Ann. §3921 (2021). Other states go further and do not consider that immovable property can ever be the subject of theft. Ala. Code §13A-8-1(11) (2021); Ark. Code Ann. §5-36-101(8) (2021); Del. Code Ann. tit. 11, §857(6) (2021).

Even without the extra actions that the Gentry court held necessary for conviction of theft, defendants in these situations often can be convicted of a much less serious crime, such as trespass. On the possibility of raising an economic
necessity defense to a trespass charge, see p. 885 supra. But absent economic necessity, when defendants in effect “steal” part of the economic value of the real property they occupy, shouldn't the offense be considered more serious than a
mere trespass? Notice that an inherent feature of the law of theft, because it protects “property,” is that its immediate beneficiaries are “haves” rather than “have-nots.” Does this feature undermine the legitimacy of any law against theft? (Would

you want to live in a society that did not protect property rights at all?) Whatever we may think of anti-theft laws generally, their impact is especially profound in a society with stark wealth inequalities, where many people lack the basic necessities
of life and have no guaranteed right to shelter. Is it nonetheless necessary to permit enforcement of anti-theft laws against people in that situation? Or should the law of theft be inapplicable?
p. 1065
p. 1066

Should it matter that in contrast to a traditional theft, people who move into unoccupied homes aren't depriving the owners of any use of the property the owners themselves want to make? If that distinction is important, should it also
apply when defendants use intellectual property without paying its owner? On this last question, see pp. 1068-1073 infra.

(c) How should the law treat the unauthorized use, termed “joyriding,” of unsecured wireless networks? Consider the case of Benjamin Smith, who was arrested and charged after twice parking his SUV outside a stranger's house in
order to access the Internet. See Matthew Bierlein, Policing the Wireless World: Access Liability in the Open Wi-Fi Era, 67 Ohio St. LJ. 1123, 1123-1125 (2006). New York criminal law makes it a misdemeanor to “knowingly use[], cause[] to be used,
or access|] a . . . computer network without authorization,” N.Y. Penal Law §156.05 (2021), and defines “without authorization” to mean that the criminal defendant either knew she lacked permission to access the network or that the defendant
knowingly circumvented an installed security measure. See, e.g., People v. Klapper, 902 N.Y.S.2d 305, 309 (Crim. Ct. 2010). Could a prosecutor show that Smith knew he lacked permission to access the network by virtue of the fact that Smith had
no preexisting relationship with the resident of the house? Should the default rule be that one acts without authorization whenever there is no affirmative grant of permission? Or should the doctrine of consent protect the joyrider if the resident of
the house chose not to set up the wireless network with password protection to prevent others from using it? And does the consent problem change if the joyrider’s operating system is configured to connect automatically to unsecured networks?
Who is the victim of the potential theft — the resident who set up the unsecured network or the Internet Service Provider (ISP) who is likely missing out on additional subscription revenues? See S. Gregory Herman, One or More Wireless Networks
Are Available: Can ISPs Recover for Unauthorized Wi-Fi Use Under Cable Television Piracy Laws?, 55 Cath. U. L. Rev. 1095 (2006).

5. Sex as property. Recall that false representations to induce consent to sex generally cannot be the basis for criminal liability, pp. 429-435 supra. Courts that have rejected sex as “property” under federal extortion statutes have
focused on the fact that a sexual act is not an “alienable economic or contractual right that carries forward into the future.” United States v. Warme, 2010 WL 125846 (W.D.N.Y. Jan. 7, 2010). Is this the right definition of property for purposes of
criminal law?

2. Theft of Information
United States v. Girard
United States Court of Appeals, Second Circuit
601 F.2d 69 (1979)
VAN GRAAFEILAND, J. Appellants have appealed from judgments convicting them of the unauthorized sale of government property (18 U.S.C. §641) and of conspiring to accomplish the sale (18 U.S.C. §371)....
In May 1977, appellant Lambert was an agent of the Drug Enforcement Administration, and Girard was a former agent. During that month, Girard and
p. 1066
p. 1067
‘one James Bond began to discuss a proposed illegal venture that involved smuggling a planeload of marijuana from Mexico into the United States. Girard told Bond that for $500 per name he could, through an inside source, secure reports from
the DEA files that would show whether any participant in the proposed operation was a government informant. Unfortunately for Mr. Girard, Bond himself became an informant and disclosed his conversations with Girard to the DEA. . .. Bond

asked Girard to secure reports on four men whose names were furnished him by DEA agents. DEA records are kept in computerized files, and the DEA hoped to identify the inside source by monitoring access to the four names in the computer
bank. In this manner, the DEA learned that Girard’s informant was Lambert, who obtained the reports through a computer terminal located in his office. The convictions . . . are based on the sale of this information.

Section 641, so far as pertinent, provides that whoever without authority sells any “record . . . or thing of value” of the United States or who “receives . . . the same with intent to convert it to his use or gain, knowing it to have been
embezzled, stolen, purloined or converted,” shall be guilty of a crime. Appellants contend that the statute covers only tangible property or documents and therefore is not violated by the sale of information. [The district court rejected this argument,
and we agree]

[We are impressed by Congress’ repeated use of the phrase “thing of value” in section 641 and its predecessors. These words are found in so many criminal statutes throughout the United States that they have in a sense become
words of art. The word “thing” notwithstanding, the phrase is generally construed to cover intangibles as well as tangibles. For example, amusement is held to be a thing of value under gambling statutes. Sexual intercourse, or the promise of sex-
ual intercourse, is a thing of value under a bribery statute. So also are a promise to reinstate an employee and an agreement not to run in a primary election. The testimony of a witness is a thing of value under 18 U.S.C. §876. . ..

The existence of a property in the contents of unpublished writings was judicially recognized long before the advent of copyright laws. . . . Although we are not concerned here with the laws of copyright, we are satisfied, nonetheless,
that the Government has a property interest in certain of its private records which it may protect by statute as a thing of value. It has done this by the enactment of section 641. [If] conversion is the “misuse or abuse of property” or its use “in an
unauthorized manner,” the defendants herein could properly be found to have converted DEA’s computerized records.

The District Judge also rejected appellants’ constitutional challenge to section 641 based upon alleged vagueness and overbreadth, and again we agree with his ruling. Appellants, at the time of the crime a current and a former em-
ployee of the DEA, must have known that the sale of DEA confidential law enforcement records was prohibited. The DEA’s own rules and regulations forbidding such disclosure may be considered as both a delimitation and a clarification of the
conduct proscribed by the statute. Where, as here, we are not dealing with defendants’ exercise of a First Amendment freedom, we should not search for statutory vagueness that did not exist for the defendants themselves. Neither should we find
a constitutional infirmity simply because the statute might conceivably trespass upon the First Amendment rights of others. In view of the statute's plainly legitimate sweep in regulating conduct, . . . any overbreadth that may exist [can] be cured on
acase by case basis... .

p. 1067
p. 1068
The judgments .. . are affirmed.
NOTES

1. An Official Secrets Act? Anthony Lewis of the New York Times had some harsh things to say about such an interpretation of §641. Speaking about the same theory sanctioned by a federal trial court in another case, he said (Whisper
Who Dares, N.Y. Times, June 19, 1978, at A19):

The two men were charged — and convicted — under Section 641... . What was the property? The Justice Department said it was information, and Judge Albert v. Bryan ur. followed that view of the law when he charged the

jury.

“Information may be government property,” the judge said, “apart from the document or the sheets of paper themselves.” Thus it does not matter if the original government document remains in the files. Anyone
who copies it or makes notes from it without official approval has still stolen “property.”
For advocates of secrecy, the beauty of that legal theory is that it applies no matter what kind of government information is involved. National security need not have a thing to do with it. The price of food in the

White House mess, the Amtrak deficit — any fact that leaked could be the subject of a criminal prosecution.

In short, the government property theory of information would give this country an Official Secrets Act. It would be potentially as devastating to the press and public knowledge as much-criticized Britain's secrecy
law.

2. Copies. In United States v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389 (2d Cir. 1966), the defendants purchased documents, for ultimate export to Europe, from several former employees of Lederle Laboratories, knowing that the employees had tempo-
rarily removed and copied the documents. The documents described secret processes for manufacturing antibiotics. The court upheld their convictions on a charge of violating 18 U.S.C. §2314, which prohibits transporting in interstate or foreign
commerce “any goods, wares, merchandise, securities or money, of the value of $5,000 or more, knowing the same to have been stolen, converted or taken by fraud.” The court, per Judge Henry Friendly, said (id. at 393-394):

The serious question is whether, on the facts of this case, the papers showing Lederle processes . . . were “goods” which had been “stolen, converted or taken by fraud” in view of the lack of proof that any of the physical

materials so transported came from Lederle’s possession. The standard procedure was for [the defendants] to remove documents from Lederle’s files . . . take these . . . home within New York state, make photocopies, mi-

crofilms or notes, and then restore the purloined papers to the files; only the copies and notes moved or were intended to move in interstate or foreign commerce. . .

To be sure, where no tangible objects were ever taken or transported, a court would be hard pressed to conclude that “goods” had been stolen and transported within the meaning of §2314; the statute would
p. 1068
p. 1069
presumably not extend to the case where a carefully guarded secret formula was memorized, carried away in the recesses of a thievish mind and placed in writing only after a boundary had been crossed. The situation, how-

ever, is quite different where tangible goods are stolen and transported and the only obstacle to condemnation is a clever intermediate transcription or use of a photocopy machine. In such a case, when the physical form

of the stolen goods is secondary in every respect to the matter recorded in them, the transformation of the information in the stolen papers into a tangible object never possessed by the original owner should be deemed

immaterial. It would offend common sense to hold that these defendants fall outside the statute simply because, in efforts to avoid detection, their confederates were at pains to restore the original papers to Lederle's files

and transport only copies or notes, although an oversight would have brought them within it.

Does the same logic apply when, instead of making photocopies of documents, someone makes digital copies of digital files? Consider the facts in United States v. Zhang, 995 F. Supp. 2d 340 (E.D. Pa. 2014). Zhang worked as a
computer systems manager for a company and copied thousands of confidential digital files from the company to his desktop computer and then ultimately to storage websites overseas. Like the defendants in Bottone, Zhang was charged with
violating 18 U.S.C. §2314. But unlike the defendants in Bottone, Zhang's charges were dismissed because the court held that the statute does not cover the theft of intangible property in an intangible form. The court found the statute to be am-
biguous (and noted other courts have read it not to require a tangibility requirement), but it concluded that, pursuant to the rule of lenity, it had to read it in favor of the defendant.

3. Confidential business information. In Carpenter v. United States, 484 U.S. 19 (1987), the Supreme Court upheld the view, reflected in cases like Girard and Bottone, that confidential information can be protected by the law of
theft. Carpenter involved a Wall Street Journal column that regularly spotlighted particular companies, whose stock prices were often affected after a column appeared. Because of the column’s market impact, Journal policy was to keep the
contents of the column strictly confidential prior to publication. Nonetheless, the column's reporter provided advance information about upcoming columns to two stockbrokers, who reaped (and shared with the reporter) large profits from trades
in soon-to-be-featured stocks whose prices were affected when the columns appeared. The reporter and the two brokers were convicted of violating the federal mail and wire fraud statutes, on the theory that they had deprived the Journal of its
“property” interest in the information about the content of upcoming columns. For many observers, the bottom-line convictions seem intuitively fair. But consider John C. Coffee, Jr., Hushl: The Criminal Status of Confidential Information After Mc-
Nally and Carpenter and the Enduring Problem of Overcriminalization, 26 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 121, 122-123, 140, 142 (1988):

[These cases rest] on an analogy that broadly characterizes the unauthorized communication of trade secrets as equivalent to the crime of embezzlement. [This view of “confidential information” as a form of property cov-

ered by the laws against larceny is (a) historically unsound, [and] (b) inconsistent with most statutory law dealing with the subject of trade

p. 1069
p. 1070
secrets. [The] logic [of these cases] has the potential to alter significantly the relationship between employers and employees across the landscape of American business life. ...

To see this, consider the case of . . . a broker at a major securities firm [who] is fired [and told that] he may not take with him any list or address book listing his clients, as such information is a trade secret belong-
ing to the firm. As a practical matter, if this broker cannot contact his former clients, he is unemployable with other firms and forfeits valuable “human capital” that he may have developed over a career. [It is clear as a civil
law matter that the customer lists are confidential trade secrets. To criminalize this civil law rule then effectively arms the employer with a weapon that the legislature never intended to grant... .

[It] is not just that civil wrongs are being casually converted into criminal offenses, but that the equivalent of a covenant not to compete is being created by operation of law. [S]uch covenants are . . . generally
enforceable only if they have a brief duration and limited scope. [If Carpenter and similar cases] mean that, in order to avoid potential entanglement with the criminal law, the employee . . . must desist from using any partic-
ularized knowledge about his customers that he gained in his former employment, then [these cases have] given the employer a very powerful weapon to stifle competition. . .

[Another] illustration raises an even darker prospect. . .. Suppose a corporate employee reveals to the press that internal corporate studies show some serious environmental consequences of a specific corporate
activity. [Glood motives do not excuse embezzlement. Under [the] logic [of these cases] the employee is arguably in the same position as if he stole corporate funds to aid a worthy cause.

[Mlost adult Americans are employees; most possess some form of confidential information about their employer; and most will at some point in their careers change employers. Do all departing employees po-

tentially face entanglement with the federal criminal law?

Professor Coffee observes that using the criminal law to protect confidential business information can effectively create “a covenant not to compete.” The Biden Administration is so concerned with the proliferation of actual covenants not to
compete that it issued an executive order urging the Federal Trade Commission to ban or limit them. According to the Administration, roughly half of private sector businesses require employees to sign non-compete agreements, affecting 35
to 60 million people. The White House, Fact Sheet: Executive Order on Promoting Competition in the American Economy, July 9, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/07/09/fact-sheet-executive-order-on-
promoting-competition-in-the-american-economy/. The Administration wants to limit the use of these agreements because of its concern that they limit employee mobility and their ability to get better paying jobs.

Some lawyers who specialize in trade secrets and employment law have expressed concer that the order will hinder the ability of small businesses to protect their trade secrets and could lead to businesses trying to poach employees
from their competitors. President Biden resolved these policy questions in favor of

p. 1070

p.1071
employees, but how should courts resolve these issues when faced with the question of whether a general theft statute covers confidential information? Should courts take these concems into account because this is relevant context for interpret-
ing statutory language and deciding what legislators intended to include? Or is this beside the point if the plain meaning of “property” includes this information? For a discussion of competing theories of statutory interpretation, see pp. 1072-1073
infra. Is it likely legislatures meant to include confidential business information in these broadly worded statutes without any debate over the competing claims of employees and business owners? Should legislators treat confidential business in-
formation like any other form of property or goods for purposes of criminal laws against theft?

4, Problems: (a) Jones was visiting the United States Attorney's office when he overheard conversations between government personnel concerning an ongoing criminal investigation of an employee at Barclays Bank. The conversa-
tions took place in a reception area and in an individual office. Jones subsequently told officials at Barclays that he had information relating to a criminal investigation and offered to sell it to them for $100; ultimately he received $60 for revealing
what he knew. The court held that these facts were sufficient to support an indictment for larceny under 18 U.S.C. §641. United States v. Jones, 677 F. Supp. 238 (S.D.N.Y. 1988). Do you agree?

(b) Dreiman repeatedly called and harassed his ex-girlfriend. In defense she obtained an unlisted telephone number. Dreiman then broke into her trailer, so that he could copy down the unlisted number. He was convicted of burglary, on
the theory that he had entered with the intent to commit a crime (larceny). The court held that copying the unlisted number constituted larceny, and it therefore upheld the burglary conviction. Dreiman v. State, 825 P.2d 758 (Wyo. 1992). Is the re-
sult sound? If so, does the same principle justify the results in Girard and Jones, or are those situations distinguishable?

(©) While making repairs in a woman's apartment, the defendant picked up intimate photographs he found in her bedroom, scanned them into his computer, and quickly returned the photographs to their original location. Though he
obviously borrowed the photographs temporarily, did he permanently take any “property of another”? Of what, if anything, did he deprive the victim? See State v. Nelson, 842 A.2d 83 (N.H. 2004).

(d) Blaszozak and other hedge fund personnel induced a federal employee to give them advance information about forthcoming Medicare and Medicaid regulations. Their hedge funds then used the information to get an advantage
trading in the stock of affected companies. Should that information be deemed U.S. government “property” under 18 U.S.C. §641? The Second Circuit, over one dissent, relied on Carpenter, p. 1069 supra, to conclude that the defendants had
taken the government's “property.” United States v. Blaszczak, 947 F.3d 19 (2d Cir. 2019).2 Do you agree? Or is Carpenter distinguishable?

Recall that in Carpenter, the defendants’ scheme took from the Wall Street Journal some of the economic value to its business of the articles it published. In

p.1071

p. 1072
Blaszczak, there was no suggestion that the information leaked in advance caused the U.S. government to suffer any economic loss or lose any expected economic benefit. Should that difference matter? In what sense did Blaszczak take govern-
ment property? Would he have stolen government property if, instead of trading on the information, he had published an article criticizing the forthcoming regulations and arguing that they should not be issued?

5, Statutory interpretation. The criminality of dishonest appropriation can depend on distinctions in statutory wording. The statute involved in Girard, 18 U.S.C. §641, broadly protects tangible and intangible property, including any
“record . . . or thing of value,” but the property involved must belong to the U.S. government. Taking information from a private firm may or may not violate state laws against theft, depending on the extent to which those laws protect intangibles.
The statute involved in Bottone, 18 U.S.C. §2314, may apply, but that statute only protects “goods, wares, merchandise, securities or money.” To take another example, a computer password is protected by an Oregon statute that punishes “theft
of proprietary information,” State v. Schwartz, 21 P.3d 1128 (Or. Ct. App. 2001). A PIN code is considered “property” under California laws prohibiting extortion. People v. Kozlowski, 96 Cal. App. 4th 853 (2002). But a similar password does not
qualify as “goods, wares [or] merchandise” protected under §2314; in United States v. Stafford, 136 F.3d 1109, 1115 (7th Cir. 1998), the court said: “Given the [1934] statute's age . . . and wording, and the principle that the definition of federal
crimes is a legislative rather than a judicial function . .. we don’t think the [wording] of section 2314 will stretch this far.” For examination of these issues, see Geraldine Szott Moohr, Federal Criminal Fraud and the Development of Intangible Prop-
erty Rights in Information, 2000 U. Il. L. Rev. 683.

The limits of statutory language were on display when federal prosecutors tried to secure a conviction of Sergey Aleynikov, a former Goldman Sachs computer programmer. On his final day at Goldman, Aleynikov covertly uploaded onto
a German server the source code for Goldman's high-frequency trading algorithm. He then redownloaded the code on his home computer and used it when he began a new position at another trading firm. Prosecutors charged him under both
§2814 and the Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (EEA). The EEA as it was then written made it a crime for someone to “convert a trade secret that is related to or included in a product that is produced for or placed in interstate or foreign commerce
to the benefit of anyone other than the owner.” 18 U.S.C. §1832. Trade secrets under the EEA include “all forms and types of financial, business, scientific, technical, economic, or engineering information.” Id. §1839(3).

The district court concluded the code was “produced for” interstate commerce because it facilitated rapid trading on financial markets like the New York Stock Exchange, and that the code was a “good” under §2314 because, although
it was intangible, it was “valuable for any firm seeking to launch, or enhance a high-frequency trading business.” United States v. Aleynikov, 676 F.3d 71, 75 (2d Cir. 2012). The Second Circuit disagreed on both counts and reversed Aleynikov's
federal conviction. The Second Circuit held that the stolen code was not a “good” under the meaning of §2314 because no tangible good of any kind was taken, thus distinguishing Aleynikov's case from Bottone’s. It also reversed the conviction
under the EEA because it concluded that the source code was “neither ‘produced for’ nor ‘placed in’ interstate or foreign commerce”

p. 1072
p. 1073
because “Goldman had no intention of selling its high-frequency trading system or licensing it to anyone.” Id. at 82. Did the district court or the Second Circuit have the better reading of these statutes?

State prosecutors had better luck. After the federal case collapsed, New York charged Aleynikov under N.Y. Penal Law §165.07, enacted in response to Bottone, which prohibits making “a tangible reproduction or representation” of
secret scientific material without a right to do so. Initially, the trial court set aside Aleynikov's guilty verdict because the duplicated source code was incapable of being “touched” and thus was not a “tangible reproduction or representation” under
§165.07. People v. Aleynikov, 49 Misc. 3d 286, 310 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 2015). But the New York Court of Appeals reversed and reinstated the conviction. People v. Aleynikov, 104 N.E.3d 687 (N.Y. 2018). It first distinguished §165.07 from the federal
statutes, 18 U.S.C. §1832 and §2314, because the New York provision used broad language that explicitly covered “electronically producing or recording material.” The New York Court of Appeals concluded that language was intended to cover
not only Bottone's paper copies but also digital copies made with “new forms of technology unforeseen in the 1960s.” The court went on to explain that electronic data — such as files stored on a hard drive — therefore qualified as “tangible” mate-

rial under §165.07. Even if the source code was intangible when Aleynikov first accessed it at his Goldman terminal, the court concluded that he had reproduced the code in tangible form by uploading a copy onto the German server. Does it make
sense for the line between criminal and non-criminal behavior to turn on such distinctions?

6. Statutory reform. Intellectual property theft is a significant problem for the economy because intellectual capital represents a third of the total value of American business, and intellectual capital is the fastest growing sector of
the U.S. economy. The misappropriation of intellectual property costs American businesses several hundred billion dollars every year. Green, supra, at 204. The Aleynikov case illustrates the difficulty in using existing conceptions of “property” to
address new technologies.‘ The failed federal prosecution of Aleynikov prompted Congress to amend the EEA to cover trade secrets that are related to a “product or service that is used or intended for use in interstate or foreign commerce.” 18
U.S.C. §1832 (emphasis added). Is it realistic to expect legislatures to continually amend statutes to cover unanticipated situations, with impunity for clever schemes perpetrated before Congress acts? Or is there a catch-all concept that can cover
these kinds of practices without overcriminalization?

PROBLEM: The defendant, a paralegal working for a firm representing plaintiffs in a class action suit, e-mailed to opposing attorneys an excerpt from the plaintiff firm's 400-page “trial plan,” and offered to sell them the entire plan for $2 million.
The opposing attorneys contacted the FBI, and an undercover agent arranged a meeting that led to the defendant's arrest. Could the defendant be charged with violating the Economic Espionage Act, on the theory that the trial plan excerpt was
“business [or] economic . . . information”? Or could the government prosecute under §2314, on the theory that the defendant's e-mail message transmitted
p. 1073
p.1074
“goods, wares [or] merchandise”? See United States v. Farraj, 142 F. Supp. 2d 484 (S.D.N.Y. 2001).

7. Identity theft. Identity theft — the unauthorized use of identifying information such as a person's name, social security number, or credit — has been one of the top consumer fraud complaints over the last two decades.° The federal
aggravated identity theft statute, 18 U.S.C. §1028A, imposes additional penalties on an individual who, during the commission of certain crimes, “knowingly transfers, possesses, or uses, without lawful authority, a means of identification of another
person.” Conviction requires that the defendant know that the identification actually belongs to someone else (and is not fake, for instance). Thus, the Supreme Court reversed the conviction of a Mexican citizen in the United States who presented
a counterfeit social security card whose number, allegedly unbeknownst to the defendant, belonged to someone else. Flores-Figueroa v. United States, 556 U.S. 646 (2009). In the ordinary prosecution, of course, proof of knowledge is easy
because the defendant's aim was precisely to exploit the victim's real identity. But consider United States v. Blixt, 548 F.3d 882 (9th Cir. 2008), where an employee forged her employer's signature on 352 bank checks. The court upheld the aggra-
vated identity theft conviction for the forgery on the theory that forging another person's signature is the use of that person's name and therefore a “means of identification.” Should the theft of identify be recognized as a form of property crime?
Regina v. Stewart

‘Supreme Court of Canada
1988 50 D.L.R.4th 1, 41 C.C.C.3d 481

Lawer, J.:... A union attempting to organize the approximately 600 [hotel] employees . . . was unable to obtain the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the employees because of a hotel policy that such information be treated
as confidential. .. . The appellant, Wayne John Stewart, a self-employed consultant, was hired by somebody he assumed to be acting for the union to obtain the [employee information]. Stewart offered a security guard [Hart] at the hotel a fee to
obtain this information. . .. The security guard reported the offer to his security chief and the police; as a result, a subsequent telephone conversation between Hart and Stewart was recorded, and Stewart was indicted for, [inter alia, counseling the
offense of theft, defined in §283 of the Criminal Code as the taking of “anything whether animate or inanimate” with the required intention. The accused was acquitted by a single-judge court, but on appeal the Ontario Court of Appeal reversed and
entered a verdict of conviction.¢ The defendant then appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada.]

p. 1074
p. 1075

We are here dealing not with the theft of a list or any other tangible object containing confidential information, but with the theft of confidential information per se, a pure intangible. [The meaning of “anything”] must be determined within
the context of §283 of the Code.

[lit is clear that to be the object of theft, “anything” must be property in the sense that to be stolen, it has to belong in some way to someone. For instance, no conviction for theft would arise out of a taking or converting of the air that we
breathe, because air is not property. ..

Itis possible that, with time, confidential information will come to be considered as property in the civil law or even be granted special legal protection by statutory enactment. Even if confidential information were to be considered as
property under civil law, it does not, however, automatically follow that it qualifies as property for the purposes of criminal law. Conversely, the fact that something is not property under civil law is likewise not conclusive for the purpose of criminal
law...

[he qualification of confidential information as property must be done in each case by examining the purposes and context of the civil and criminal law. It is understandable that one who possesses valuable information would want
to protect it from unauthorized use and reproduction. In civil litigation, this protection can be afforded by the courts because they simply have to balance the interests of the parties involved. However, criminal law is designed to prevent wrongs
against society as a whole. From a social point of view, whether confidential information should be protected requires a weighing of interests much broader than those of the parties involved. As opposed to the alleged owner of the information,
society's best advantage may well be to favour the free flow of information and greater accessibility by all. Would society be willing to prosecute the person who discloses to the public a cure for cancer, although its discoverer wanted to keep it
confidential?

The criminalization of certain types of conduct should not be done lightly. If the unauthorized appropriation of confidential information becomes a criminal offence, there would be farreaching consequences that the courts are not in a
position to contemplate. For instance, the existence of such an offence would have serious implications with respect to the mobility of labour. . . .

Moreover, because of the inherent nature of information, treating confidential information as property simpliciter for the purposes of the law of theft would create a host of practical problems. For instance, what is the precise definition
of “confidential information”? Is confidentiality based on the alleged owner's intent or on some objective criteria? . . . Should only confidential information be protected under the criminal law, or any type of information deemed to be of some com-
mercial value? . . . The choices to be made rest upon political judgments that, in my view, are matters of legislative action and not of judicial decision. . .

Appeal allowed; acquittal restored.

NOTE

In Oxford v. Moss, [1978] 68 Crim. App. 183 (B.D), the defendant, an engineering student, managed to obtain the page proofs to the civil engineering exam to be given at his university the following month. He was caught and charged

with theft. It was stipulated that the defendant intended only to “borrow” the proofs and hoped

p. 1075

p. 1076
to return them undetected after acquiring advance knowledge of the questions to be asked. Section 1(1) of the English Theft Act of 1968 provided that “[a] person is guilty of theft if he dishonestly appropriates property belonging to another with the
intention of permanently depriving the other of it.” Section 4(1) defined “property” to include “money and all other property, real or personal, including things in action and other intangible property.” The court held that the confidential information
contained in the exam paper was not “intangible property” within the meaning of the statute. As the Girard case indicates, however, the result could be different in the United States, at least if the test had been sponsored by a federal agency.
QUESTIONS: Are the Oxford v. Moss and Stewart cases distinguishable? What is the appropriate scope of the criminal law in policing the misappropriation of information or intellectual property? Should it be as broad as it is in the case of physical
property? If not, what are the relevant differences? Should it matter that there is some empirical evidence that people generally rank the theft of goods as more serious than the theft of intangible property? Green, supra, at 143.

3. Honest Services

The federal mail fraud statute, 18 U.S.C. §1341, as noted above, p. 1044, prohibits “any scheme or artifice to defraud, or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises” using the
U.S. mail.£ Over time, courts interpreted §1341’s “any scheme or artifice to defraud” language to cover the deprivation of not just tangible property, but also the deprivation of intangible rights and fiduciary duties by public and corporate officials.
The Supreme Court described these cases as follows in McNally v. United States, 483 U.S. 350, 362 (1987):

In the public sector . . . officials have secretly made governmental decisions with the objective of benefiting themselves or promoting their own interests, instead of fulfilling their legal commitment to provide the citizens of

the State or local government with their loyal service and honest government. . . . In the private sector, purchasing agents, brokers, union leaders, and others with clear fiduciary duties to their employers or unions have been

found guilty of defrauding their employers or unions by accepting kickbacks or selling confidential information. In other cases, defendants have been found guilty of using the mails to defraud individuals of their rights to pri-

vacy and other nonmonetary rights.

The victims in these cases — shareholders or the public — do not lose tangible property or money, but their right to honest services. Courts have accepted this loss of intangible rights as a substitute for economic loss. In addition,
although the defendants in many of these cases did not typically engage in express deceit or misrepresentation, courts have found the element of fraud satisfied through a failure to disclose their dishonest or corrupt actions. Courts have justified
the honest

p. 1076

p.1077
services doctrine “by positing that the public has an intangible right to the honest services of government officials,” such that the “official’s failure to disclose his crookedness may then constitute the basis of a mail fraud conviction.” Thomas J.
Miles, Dupes and Losers in Mail Fraud, 77 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1111, 1135 (2010). For example, in United States v. Margiotta, 688 F.2d 108 (2d Cir. 1982), the Second Circuit affirmed the mail fraud conviction of a local chair of a political party committee
who distributed thousands of dollars in insurance commissions to numerous brokers, lawyers, and friends who failed to do legitimate work. The court held that Margiotta breached a fiduciary duty owed to the public by failing to disclose material
information about the commissions. Judge Winter's dissent criticized the sweep of the honest services theory: “[T]here is no end to the common political practices which may now be swept within the ambit of mail fraud,” including “[a]n elected
official who for political purposes performs an act imposing unnecessary costs on taxpayers” without making disclosure, “[a] partisan political leader who throws decisive support behind a candidate known to the leader to be less qualified than his
or her opponent,” and “[a] partisan political leader who causes elected officials to fail to modernize government to retain jobs for the party faithful.” Id. at 140 (Winter, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).

In the private context, honest services cases included violations of duties of loyalty, such as securities brokers trading for their own accounts based on their employer's information. Miles, supra, at 1135-1136. This, too, sparked
criticism, with some courts concluding that honest services was “problematic” in the private sector because it could potentially turn any kind of dishonesty by an employee into a crime. These courts thus demanded a showing of some risk of eco-
nomic harm to the party to whom the duty of honest services was owed. See, e.g., United States v. Frost, 125 F.3d 346 (6th Cir. 1997).

The Supreme Court rejected the broad reading of honest services in 1987 in McNally, concluding that a deprivation of money or tangible property was necessary under §1341. Justice Stevens dissented and questioned the logic of
criminalizing schemes to defraud that involved trivial sums of money but not allowing prosecutions to go forward when citizens were deprived of honest government. 483 U.S. at 366 (Stevens, J., dissenting). Congress seemed to agree with Justice
Stevens, for it quickly responded by passing a revised statute, 18 U.S.C. §1346, that expressly stated that the “‘scheme or artifice to defraud’ includes a scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services.” In the wake of
that statute, courts continued to recognize honest services deprivation as a form of mail and wire fraud. But the scope of §1346 raised questions of its own, which are addressed in the following case.

Skilling v. United States

Supreme Court of the United States
561 U.S. 358 (2010)
GinsBure, J., delivered the opinion of the Court.
Founded in 1985, Enron Corporation grew . . . into one of the world’s leading energy companies. [Defendant] Skilling steadily rose through the corporation's ranks, serving as president and chief operating officer, and then, beginning
p.1077
p. 1078
in February 2001, as chief executive officer. Six months later, on August 14, 2001, Skilling resigned from Enron.

Less than four months after Skilling's departure, Enron spiraled into bankruptcy. The company’s stock, which had traded at $90 per share in August 2000, plummeted to pennies per share in late 2001. Attempting to comprehend what
caused the corporation's collapse, the U.S. Department of Justice formed an Enron Task Force, comprising prosecutors and FBI agents from around the Nation. The Government's investigation uncovered an elaborate conspiracy to prop up En-
ron’s short-run stock prices by overstating the company’s financial well-being. In the years following Enron’s bankruptcy, the Government prosecuted dozens of Enron employees who participated in the scheme. In time, the Government worked
its way up the corporation’s chain of command: On July 7, 2004, a grand jury indicted Skilling, [Ken Lay, the CEO,] and Richard Causey, Enron's former chief accounting officer.

These three defendants, the indictment alleged, “engaged in a wide-ranging scheme to deceive the investing public, including Enron's shareholders, . . . about the true performance of Enron's businesses by: (a) manipulating Enron's
publicly reported financial results; and (b) making public statements and representations about Enron's financial performance and results that were false and misleading.”

Skilling and his co-conspirators, the indictment continued, “enriched themselves as a result of the scheme through salary, bonuses, grants of stock and stock options, other profits, and prestige.”

Count 1 of the indictment charged Skilling with conspiracy to commit securities and wire fraud{, alleging] that Skilling had sought to “deprivfe] Enron and its shareholders of the intangible right of [his] honest services.” The indictment
further charged Skilling with more than 25 substantive counts of securities fraud, wire fraud, making false representations to Enron's auditors, and insider trading. . .

Following a 4-month trial and nearly five days of deliberation, the jury found Skilling guilty of 19 counts, including the honest-services-fraud conspiracy charge. . . . [The court of appeals affirmed the conviction, finding that the jury was
entitled to convict] “on these elements”: “(1) a material breach of a fiduciary duty . . . (2) that results in a detriment to the employer,” including one occasioned by an employee's decision to “withhold material information, i.e., information that he had
reason to believe would lead a reasonable employer to change its conduct.”

Was Skilling's conspiracy conviction . . . premised on an improper theory of honest-services wire fraud[?] The honest-services statute, §1346, Skilling maintains, is unconstitutionally vague. Alternatively, he contends that his conduct
does not fall within the statute's compass.

To place Skilling's constitutional challenge in context, we first review the origin and subsequent application of the honest-services doctrine.

Enacted in 1872, the original mail-fraud provision, the predecessor of the modem-day mail- and wire-fraud laws, proscribed, without further elaboration, use of the mails to advance “any scheme or artifice to defraud.”. . . In 1909, Con-
gress amended the statute to prohibit, as it does today, “any scheme or artifice to

p. 1078

p. 1079
defraud, or for obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises.” §1341 (emphasis added). Emphasizing Congress’ disjunctive phrasing, the Courts of Appeals, one after the other, interpreted the
term “scheme or artifice to defraud” to include deprivations not only of money or property, but also of intangible rights.

In an opinion credited with first presenting the intangible-rights theory, Shushan v. United States, 117 F.2d 110 (1941), the Fifth Circuit reviewed the mail-fraud prosecution of a public official who allegedly accepted bribes from
entrepreneurs in exchange for urging city action beneficial to the bribe payers. “It is not true that because the [city] was to make and did make a saving by the operations there could not have been an intent to defraud,” the Court of Appeals

maintained. “A scheme to get a public contract on more favorable terms than would likely be got otherwise by bribing a public official,” the court observed, “would not only be a plan to commit the crime of bribery, but would also be a scheme to
defraud the public.”

The Fifth Circuit's opinion in Shushan stimulated the development of an “honest-services” doctrine. Unlike fraud in which the victim's loss of money or property supplied the defendant's gain, with one the mirror image of the other, the
honest-services theory targeted corruption that lacked similar symmetry. While the offender profited, the betrayed party suffered no deprivation of money or property; instead, a third party, who had not been deceived, provided the enrichment. For
example, if a city mayor (the offender) accepted a bribe from a third party in exchange for awarding that party a city contract, yet the contract terms were the same as any that could have been negotiated at arm’s length, the city (the betrayed party)
would suffer no tangible loss. Even if the scheme occasioned a money or property gain for the betrayed party, courts reasoned, actionable harm lay in the denial of that party's right to the offender's “honest services.”

[Clourts also recognized private-sector honest-services fraud. In perhaps the earliest application of the theory to private actors, a District Court, reviewing a bribery scheme, explained:

“When one tampers with [the employer-employee] relationship for the purpose of causing the employee to breach his duty [to his employer,] he in effect is defrauding the employer of a lawful right. The actual deception that

is practiced is in the continued representation of the employee to the employer that he is honest and loyal to the employer's interests.” United States v. Procter & Gamble Co., 47 F. Supp. 676, 678 (D. Mass. 1942).

. . . [Bly 1982, all Courts of Appeals had embraced the honest-services theory of fraud.

In 1987, this Court, in McNally v. United States, stopped the development of the intangible-tights doctrine in its tracks. McNally involved a state officer who, in selecting Kentucky's insurance agent, arranged to procure a share of the
agent's commissions via kickbacks paid to companies the official partially controlled. The prosecutor did not charge that, “in the absence of the alleged scheme|,] the Commonwealth would have paid a lower premium or secured better insurance.”
Instead, the prosecutor maintained that the kickback scheme “defraud|ed] the citizens and government of Kentucky of their right to have the Commonwealth's affairs conducted honestly.”

p. 1079
p. 1080

We held that the scheme did not qualify as mail fraud. “Rather than construfing] the statute in a manner that leaves its outer boundaries ambiguous and involves the Federal Government in setting standards of disclosure and good
government for local and state officials,” we read the statute “as limited in scope to the protection of property rights.” “If Congress desires to go further,” we stated, “it must speak more clearly.”

. .. The following year, [Congress] enacted a new statute “specifically to cover one of the ‘intangible rights’ that lower courts had protected . . . prior to McNally: ‘the intangible right of honest services.” Cleveland v. United States, 531
USS. 12, 19-20 (2000)... .

Congress, Skilling charges, reacted quickly but not clearly: He asserts that §1346 is unconstitutionally vague. . . . We [believe] that §1346 should be construed rather than invalidated. First, we look to the doctrine developed in pre-
McNally cases in an endeavor to ascertain the meaning of the phrase “the intangible right of honest services.” Second, to preserve what Congress certainly intended the statute to cover, we pare that body of precedent down to its core: In the
main, the pre-McNally cases involved fraudulent schemes to deprive another of honest services through bribes or kickbacks supplied by a third party who had not been deceived. Confined to these paramount applications, §1346 presents no
vagueness problem.

There is no doubt that Congress intended §1346 to refer to and incorporate the honest-services doctrine recognized in Courts of Appeals’ decisions before McNally derailed the intangible-rights theory of fraud. . .. [W]e acknowledge
that Skilling's vagueness challenge has force, for honest-services decisions preceding McNally were not models of clarity or consistency. . . .

Although some applications of the pre-McNally honest-services doctrine occasioned disagreement among the Courts of Appeals, these cases do not cloud the doctrine’s solid core: The “vast majority” of the honest-services cases
involved offenders who, in violation of a fiduciary duty, participated in bribery or kickback schemes.

. . . In view of this history, there is no doubt that Congress intended §1346 to reach at least bribes and kickbacks. Reading the statute to proscribe a wider range of offensive conduct, we acknowledge, would raise the due process
concerns underlying the vagueness doctrine. To preserve the statute without transgressing constitutional limitations, we now hold that §1346 criminalizes only the bribe-and-kickback core of the pre-McNally case law.

The Government urges us to go further by locating within §1346’s compass another category of proscribed conduct: “undisclosed self-dealing by a public official or private employee — i.e., the taking of official action by the employee
that furthers his own undisclosed financial interests while purporting to act in the interests of those to whom he owes a fiduciary duty.”

[We are not] persuaded that the pre-McNally conflict-of-interest cases constitute core applications of the honest-services doctrine. Although the Courts of Appeals upheld honest-services convictions for “some schemes of non-
disclosure and concealment of material information,” they reached no consensus on which schemes qualified. In light of the relative infrequency of conflict-of-interest prosecutions in comparison to bribery and kickback charges, and the intercir-
cuit inconsistencies they produced, we conclude that a reasonable limiting construction of §1346 must exclude this amorphous category of cases. .. .

p. 1080
p. 1081

Scauia, J., with whom Justice THomas joins, and with whom Justice KENNEDY joins except as to Part Ill, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.

. .. The Court maintains that “the intangible right of honest services” means the right not to have one’s fiduciaries accept “bribes or kickbacks.”. . . | agree that Congress used the novel phrase to adopt the lower-court case law that had
been disapproved by McNally — what the Court calls “the pre-McNally honest-services doctrine.” The problem is that that doctrine . . . is not limited to “bribes or kickbacks.”

[T)he first step in the Court's analysis — holding that “the intangible right of honest services” refers to “the honest-services doctrine recognized in Court of Appeals’ decisions before McNally” — is a step out of the frying pan into the
fire. The pre-McNally cases provide no clear indication of what constitutes a denial of the right of honest services. The possibilities range from any action that is contrary to public policy or otherwise immoral, to only the disloyalty of a public official
or employee to his principal, to only the secret use of a perpetrator’s position of trust in order to harm whomever he is beholden to. The duty probably did not have to be rooted in state law, but maybe it did. It might have been more demanding in
the case of public officials, but perhaps not. At the time §1346 was enacted there was no settled criterion for choosing among these options, for conclusively settling what was in and what was out.

[Justice Scalia went on to criticize the Court's approach as failing to address the vagueness argument, noting that the Court's approach] would not solve the most fundamental indeterminacy: the character of the “fiduciary capacity” to
which the bribery and kickback restriction applies. Does it apply only to public officials? Or in addition to private individuals who contract with the public? Or to everyone, including the corporate officer here? The pre-McNally case law does not
provide an answer. Thus, even with the bribery and kickback limitation the statute does not answer the question “What is the criterion of guilt?”

[Wustice Alito’s concurrence is omitted]

NOTES

1. Corruption as theft. As the Court observes in Skilling, the honest services doctrine grew out of a desire to promote good government and business behavior by targeting corrupt behavior on the part of public officials and corporate
officers in situations where “the offender profited, [but] the betrayed party suffered no deprivation of money or property; instead, a third party, who had not been deceived, provided the enrichment.” Defining what, exactly, the betrayed party has
lost when there is no tangible property or money loss therefore presents difficult definitional questions and explains the ongoing dialogue between the Supreme Court and Congress over the sweep of the theory of honest services. The Court in
Skilling opted to limit the statute to bribes and kickbacks, relying heavily on an amicus brief by Albert W. Alschuler submitted in a companion case that explained this limiting principle as follows:

[Limiting honest-services liability to quid pro quo bribes and kickbacks would] obviate the need for a distinction between public-sector and private-sector cases — a distinction that only some circuits have found appropriate.

Because accepting bribes and kickbacks constitutes hard-core

p. 1081
p. 1082

corruption whether the recipients are public officials or private fiduciaries, there would be no need to distinguish between these classes of defendants. . . . [This standard would also] effectively resolve a circuit conflict over

whether the law of honest-services fraud should focus on gain to the defendant or economic harm to the victim. . . . Under the statute, a person who has taken a bribe or kickback cannot assert as a defense that his wrong-

ful act caused no economic harm.2

For an example of a classic bribery/kickback case at the core of §1346 involving a public official, see Woodward v. United States, 905 F.3d 40 (1st Cir. 2018); for a similar case involving the private sector, see United States v. Tanner, 942 F.3d 60
(2d Cir. 2019).

Although in the wake of Skilling the Senate passed a bill that would cover undisclosed self-dealing, the legislation never made it out for a floor vote in the House. The limits established in Skilling therefore remain.

2. The scope of honest services. Is capturing a broader notion of honest services than the one acknowledged by the Court — bribes and kickbacks — important as a matter of public policy? To some extent, the answer depends on
how broadly the courts view bribery and kickbacks. In McDonnell v. United States, 136 S. Ct. 2355 (2016), the Supreme Court took a narrow view of what is covered by the federal bribery statute, 18 U.S.C. §201, which prohibits a public official
from “receiv[ing] or accepting] anything of value” in return for being “influenced in the performance of any official act.” The Court concluded that “official act” means “a formal exercise of governmental power” that is “specific and focused,” in-
volving a matter that is “pending” or “may by law be brought” before a public official. Id. at 2372. It is not bribery, the Court held, if the official accepts something of value merely in exchange for access — “s]etting up a meeting, talking to another
official, or organizing an event (or agreeing to do so).” Id. The Court adopted this reading of the statute in part because it was concerned that a broader view “could cast a pall of potential prosecution” over commonplace interactions between pub-
lic officials and their constituents. Id. For a critique of this view, see Deborah Hellman, A Theory of Bribery, 38 Cardozo L. Rev. 1947 (2017).

The Second Circuit considered the scope of McDonnell in a case involving Sheldon Silver, the former Speaker of the New York State Assembly. United States v. Silver, 948 F.3d 538 (2d Cir. 2020). While serving as Speaker, Silver
engineered two bribery schemes to channel referral fees to his law firm: In one, Silver's official acts benefited a doctor who referred cancer patients to his law firm, and in another, his acts benefited real estate developers who channeled referral
fees to Silver. The government argued that Silver had committed bribery by making an open-ended promise to aid the bribe payor through Silver's later official acts — that is, as the opportunities arose. After conviction, Silver argued on appeal that
McDonnell foreclosed this flexible theory of bribery. The Second Circuit held that an official need not promise a particular act but must at least promise to influence a specific question or matter. The Second Circuit upheld the conviction for the real
estate

p. 1082

p. 1083
scheme using that standard because Silver had pledged to influence a particular real estate matter — several tax abatement and rent stabilization programs — but it vacated the conviction involving the scheme with the doctor because Silver had
made only loose promises to aid the doctor on unspecified issues.

Whatever the scope of bribery and kickbacks, some element of undisclosed self-dealing will fall outside their purview. Imagine, for example, that A, the CEO of Acme, owns zero shares in Acme but 40 percent of the shares of Acme’s
supplier, Widget. A convinces the board of Acme to acquire Widget, even though A knows Widget is having issues with some of its other customers, who may not renew their contracts next year. A does not disclose 4’s financial interest in the
transaction, and Acme buys Widget. Because A breached 4’s fiduciary duty to Acme, A could be subject to criminal liability under the self-dealing theory, but could not be charged under a notion of honest services that is limited to bribes or
kickbacks.

If the law seeks to target the breach of a duty to disclose self-dealing, where is the content of that duty to be located for public officials? For private actors? Apart from written contracts, where are the courts supposed to look to
determine what the employee's duty of loyalty entails? For example, should it be deemed fraud for an employee to use the Internet for personal reasons during job hours without disclosing it to his or her employer? As Samuel W. Buell points out,
the scope of fiduciary duties admits of no easy answer. Buell, The Court's Fraud Dud, 6 Duke J. Const. L. & Pub. Pol'y 31, 38-39 (2010). The Court in Skilling, 561 U.S. at 411 n.44, sounded a note of caution should Congress opt to amend §1346 in
the wake of the decision to include undisclosed self-dealing:

If Congress were to take up the enterprise of criminalizing “undisclosed self-dealing by a public official or private employee,” it would have to employ standards of sufficient definiteness and specificity to overcome due

process concems. The Government proposes a standard that prohibits the “taking of official action by the employee that furthers his own undisclosed financial interests while purporting to act in the interests of those to

whom he owes a fiduciary duty,” so long as the employee acts with a specific intent to deceive and the undisclosed conduct could influence the victim to change its behavior. That formulation, however, leaves many ques-

tions unanswered. How direct or significant does the conflicting financial interest have to be? To what extent does the official action have to further that interest in order to amount to fraud? To whom should the disclosure be

made and what information should it convey?

Vagueness concerns thus continue to cast a shadow over congressional efforts in this area. A penetrating assessment of the expansion of mail fraud as a threat to rule-of-law values may be found in two articles by Professor John Coffee: From Tort
to Crime: Some Reflections on the Criminalization of Fiduciary Breaches and the Problematic Line Between Law and Ethics, 19 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 117 (1981), and The Metastasis of Mail Fraud: The Continuing Story of the “Evolution” of a White-Col-
lar Crime, 21 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1 (1983).

3. The line between politics and fraud. McNally, Skilling, and McDonnell refined the distinction between politics and crime: To qualify as federal fraud, the official must either ()) deprive a victim of money or property, or (i) engage in
concrete

p. 1083

p. 1084
bribery to deprive the public of honest services. Where does that leave public officials who perpetrate dishonest schemes against their political opponents? Kelly v. United States, 140 S. Ct. 1565 (2020), involved what was known as the Bridgegate
scandal: Aides to then-New Jersey governor Chris Christie impeded traffic from Fort Lee, New Jersey, to Manhattan, allegedly because the mayor of Fort Lee refused to endorse Christie's reelection bid. The government charged the defendants
with wire fraud under §1343 and argued that the deprivation of property element was satisfied by orders that blocked physical space — the commuter lanes from Fort Lee to the bridge into Manhattan. The Supreme Court disagreed and reversed
the convictions, concluding that closing the commuter lanes was a normal exercise of regulatory power that did not count as a taking of property. Id. at 1572.

A further aspect of the case was that, in an alleged attempt to cover up the scheme, aides to Christie had employees at the Port Authority spend time studying the flow of traffic to the bridge. The government argued that this effort
deprived the public of property, namely the labor of the Port Authority employees. But the Court held that this deprivation could support a property fraud conviction only when the object of a defendant's fraud was to take the property. Because
here the aides’ alleged object was to retaliate against a political opponent by causing gridlock, the misappropriated Port Authority labor was merely an “incidental byproduct” of the scheme, id. at 1572, and therefore not a sufficient basis to sup-
port a wire fraud conviction.

Though the Court condemned the scheme as an “abuse of power,” it concluded by emphasizing that federal prosecutors cannot use property fraud statutes to set the standards of “good government.” Id. at 1574. Where does this leave
the line between politics and fraud? Could federal prosecutors convict a city parks commissioner who sent out on-the-clock employees to do gardening work for the commissioner's political donors? See United States v. Delano, 55 F.3d 720 (2d
Cir. 1995). What if the commissioner sent the gardeners not to the donor's private residence but to a public park in the commissioner's neighborhood? What if the commissioner had agreed to help the donor before receiving a contribution? What
types of agreement would make this honest services fraud under McDonnell and Silver?

4, Prosecutorial discretion. Given its breadth of coverage, even as limited by Skilling, the mail fraud statute vests prosecutors with tremendous discretion. Consider Francis A. Allen, The Erosion of Legality in American Criminal Jus-
tice: Some Latter-Day Adventures of the Nulla Poena Principle, 29 Ariz. L. Rev. 387, 407-409 (1987):

The expansion of coverage of the Mail Fraud Act by the courts . . . exacerbates the problems of prosecutorial discretion . . . [which is] particularly troublesome . . . in cases involving immoral and corrupt behavior by persons

engaged in state and local governments. The incidents of serious improprieties in these areas are so numerous and ubiquitous that federal prosecution is incapable of responding to more than a small fraction of the total.

Because choosing cases for prosecution must necessarily be highly selective, there is the ever-present danger of choices being made that promise the greatest political advantage to the national administration or to political

and economic groups at the local level. Almost equally serious, suspicions of politicizing the processes of justice are engendered, whether or not justified in the particular case.

p. 1084
p. 1085
Does §1346 sweep too broadly, as Allen argues, or does it need to be that broad to allow prosecutors to reach the variety of self-dealing behaviors that deprive voters and shareholders of the services to which they are entitled?

C. MENS REA
People v. Brown
Supreme Court of California

38 P. 518 (Cal. 1894)

Garoure, J. [Appellant, a 17-year-old, was convicted of burglary on an information charging that he entered a house with intent to commit larceny. He entered an acquaintance’s house and took a bicycle. He testified: “I didn’t intend
to keep it. | just wanted to get even with him. The boy was throwing oranges at me in the evening, and he would not stop when | told him to, and it made me mad... . intended to take it back Sunday night; but, before I got back, they caught me.”]

[he court gave the jury the following instruction: . . .

In defining to you the crime of grand larceny, [defense counsel says] that you must find that the taker intended to deprive him of it permanently. | do not think that is the law. | think in this case, for example, if the defendant

took this bicycle, we will say for the purpose of riding twenty-five miles, for the purpose of enabling him to get away, and then left it for another to get it, and intended to do nothing else except to help himself away for a cer-

tain distance, it would be larceny, just as much as though he intended to take it all the while... . He converts it to that extent to his own use and purpose feloniously.

This instruction is erroneous, and demands a reversal of the judgment. If the boy's story be true, he is not guilty of larceny in taking the machine. . . . The court told the jury that larceny may be committed, even though it was only the
intent of the party taking the property to deprive the owner of it temporarily. We think the authorities form an unbroken line to the effect that the felonious intent must be to deprive the owner of the property permanently. [If the defendant] did not
intend so to do, there is no felonious intent, and his acts constitute but a trespass. While the felonious intent of the party taking need not necessarily be an intention to convert the property to his own use, still it must in all cases be an intent to
wholly and permanently deprive the owner thereof.

For the foregoing reasons, it is ordered that the judgment and order be reversed, and the cause remanded for a new trial.

NOTE
Some limited exceptions to the requirement of an intent to take permanently have been made judicially and by statute. Early on, courts found that, where the taker of property recklessly exposed it to loss or abandoned it, this fact was.
not only evidence of an intent to cause a permanent deprivation but would sustain larceny
p. 1085
p. 1086
even if a permanent taking was not the object of the defendant's acts. State v. Davis, 38 N.J.L. 176 (1875). See N.Y. Penal Law §155.00(3) (2021): “To ‘deprive’ another of property means . . . to dispose of the property in such manner or under
such circumstances as to render it unlikely that an owner will recover such property.” Similarly, courts and statutes commonly provide that the requirement of an intent to deprive permanently can be satisfied by an intent to take the property for an
extended period sufficient to deprive the owner of a major portion of the item’s value. E.g., People v. Avery, 38 P.3d 1 (Cal. 2002). Thus, a defendant who “borrows” a season pass to her team’s home baseball games could not defend on the ground
that she had retumed the pass after the season was over. See also MPC §223.0(1).

Significant gaps remain when a defendant keeps the property for a significant period but nonetheless brings it back in time for the owner to benefit from it in the future. To fill part of this gap, many states have long enacted “joy ride”
statutes, which make criminal the temporary taking of an automobile and sometimes other vehicles. See, e.g., Cal. Penal Code §499b (2021).

QUESTION: Why should the law of theft confine itself to cases where the intent of the taker is to effect a permanent deprivation? As Holmes observed (The Common Law 71 (1881): “A momentary loss of possession is not what has been guarded
against with such severe penalties. What the law means to prevent is the loss of it wholly and forever. . ..” But should interference with possession that is more than momentary, though less than permanent, be protected against by the law of
theft? Following MPC §223.0(1), N.Y. Penal Law §155.00(8) (2021) now provides: “To ‘deprive’ another of property means (a) to withhold it or cause it to be withheld . . . for so extended a period or under such circumstances that the major portion
of its economic value or benefit is lost to him. . ..” Section 155.00(4) provides: “To ‘appropriate’ property of another to oneself or a third person means (a) to exercise control over it .. . permanently or for so extended a period or under such circum-
stances as to acquire the major portion of its economic value or benefit. .. .” These provisions were construed in the following case.

PEOPLE v. JENNINGS, 504 N.E.2d 1079 (N.Y. 1986): [Defendants, Sentry Armored Courier Corp. and its officers, had an agreement with Chemical Bank to pick up, “fine count,” and deliver Chemicals bulk deposits to Chemical’s account at the
Federal Reserve Bank within 72 hours. Since it took only 24 hours to count the money, defendants used the extra 48 hours to obtain interest on the money by arrangement with the Hudson Valley Bank. The scheme involved little risk, since the
“loan” to Hudson, which was a key element in the arrangement, was secured by A-rated bonds. The majority found these facts not to constitute a deprivation or appropriation of Chemical’s money.]

What is lacking here . . . is evidence demonstrating an “intent to deprive . . . or to appropriate.” The gist of the People’s claim is that by investing Chemicals money for periods up to 48 hours, defendants evinced an intent to deprive its
true owner of the money's “economic value or benefit,” that is, the interest that the money was capable of generating. The mens rea element of larceny, however, is simply not satisfied by an intent temporarily to use property without the owner's
permission, or even an intent to appropriate outright the benefits of the property's short-term use.

p. 1086
p. 1087

. [T]he evidence ... . indicates only that defendants exercised control over Chemical’s money to the extent of using it to make short-term, profitable investments and, as a result, appropriated some portion of its economic benefit for
themselves. However, in light of the fact that their unauthorized use of Chemical’s money extended over no more than a series of discrete 48-hour periods, the proof was insufficient to show that they intended to use Chemical’s money “for so ex-
tended a period or under such circumstances as to acquire the major portion of its economic value or benefit” (emphasis supplied).

Moreover, [inasmuch as Chemical had ceded possession of its money to Sentry for various 72-hour periods, it had no legal rights during those periods to the money’s “economic value or benefit,” which is an incident of possession. . ..
It is clear that an individual who “joy-rides” and thereby deprives the automobile’s owner of the value arising from its temporary use is not liable in larceny for stealing that intangible “value” under article 155 of the Penal Law. By parity of reasoning,
an individual who temporarily invests another's money and thereby gains interest or profit cannot be deemed guilty of larceny for appropriating that interest or profit. ..

Finally, we note that neither Sentry's patently false response to Chemical’s inquiry concerning the rerouting of its money through Hudson nor Sentry’s disobedience when ordered by Chemical to deliver the money directly are sufficient
to establish that Sentry was acting with the larcenous intent required by Penal Law §155.00(3), (4) and §155.05(1). At worst, Sentry’s conduct demonstrates its unwillingness to relinquish what was obviously a profitable short-term use of Chem-
ical’s money. It does not, however, alter the inescapable and uncontradicted inference that Sentry was merely emulating the behavior of many reputable financial institutions by taking advantage of the “float” on the temporarily idle money in its
possession.

. .. [Hlowever unethical defendants’ conduct may have been, it did not constitute the crimes of larceny . . . [and] the indictments charging those crimes were properly dismissed.

Regina v. Feely
Court of Appeal
[1973] Q.B. 530, 2 W.L.R. 201

Lawton, LJ... . The appeal raises an important point of law, namely, can it be a defence in law for a man charged with theft and proved to have taken money to say that when he took the money he intended to repay it and had reason-
able grounds for believing and did believe that he would be able to do so.

[Defendant was a branch manager for a firm of bookmakers. In September 1971, the firm sent a circular to all branch managers that the practice of borrowing from tills was to stop. Defendant nevertheless took about £30 from a branch
safe on October 4. When discovered, he said he borrowed the £30 intending to pay it back and that his employers owed him about £70 from which he wanted them to deduct the money. Trial testimony showed that the firm did owe him that
amount. He was convicted of theft of the £30.]

p. 1087
p. 1088

[The trial judge directed the jury] that if the defendant had taken the money from either the safe or the till . . . it was no defence for him to say that he had intended to repay it and that his employers owed him more than enough to cover
what he had taken. The trial judge put his direction in stark terms: . .

As a matter of law, members of the jury, | am bound to direct you, even if he were prepared to pay back the following day and even if he were a millionaire, it makes no defence in law to this offence. If he took the money, that

is the essential matter for you to decide.

At no stage of his summing up did he leave the jury to decide whether the prosecution had proved that the defendant had taken the money dishonestly. This was because he seems to have thought that he had to decide as a matter of
law what amounted to dishonesty and he expressed his concept of dishonesty as follows: “. . . if someone does something deliberately knowing that his employers are not prepared to tolerate it, is that not dishonest?”

Should the jury have been left to decide whether the defendant had acted dishonestly? The search for an answer must start with the Theft Act 1968, under section 1 of which the defendant had been indicted. . .. [Under the Act] nearly
all the old legal terms to describe offences of dishonesty have been left behind; larceny, embezzlement and fraudulent conversion have become theft. . .. Words in everyday use have replaced legal jargon in many parts of the Act... .

“Theft” . . .is defined . . . as follows: “A person is guilty of theft if he dishonestly appropriates property belonging to another with the intention of permanently depriving the other of it... .”

In section 1(1) of the Act of 1968, the word “dishonestly” can only relate to the state of mind of the person who does the act which amounts to appropriation. . .. The Crown did not dispute this proposition, but it was submitted that in
some cases (and this, it was said, was such a one) it was necessary for the trial judge to define “dishonestly.”.. .

We do not agree that judges should define what “dishonestly” means. . . . Jurors, when deciding whether an appropriation was dishonest can be reasonably expected to, and should, apply the current standards of ordinary decent
people.

[T]he jury should have been left to decide whether the defendant's alleged taking of the money had been dishonest. . . .

This would suffice for the appeal were it not for . .. Reg. v. Williams [1953] 1 Q.B. 660, [where] the two appellants, who were husband and wife, carried on a general shop, part of which was a sub-post office. The wife was the sub-
postmistress. The business of the shop got into difficulties and in order to get out of them the wife . . . took money from the Post Office til to discharge some of the debts of the business. [S]he said that she thought she would be able to repay the
money out of her salary from the Post Office and from sales from the business. The husband said that he knew it was wrong to do what they had done, but he thought that it would all come right in the end. They were found guilty on a number of
counts and in respect of two the jury added a rider that the appellants had intended to repay the money and honestly believed that they would be able to do so... .

The question in the case which is relevant for the purposes of this appeal was whether the facts found by the jury and recorded in their riders afforded any defence. [The court held they did not, stating]: “They knew that they had no right

p. 1088
p. 1089
to take the money which they knew was not their money. The fact that they may have had a hope or expectation in the future of repaying that money is a matter which at most can go to mitigation and does not amount to a defence.”. ..

We find it impossible to accept that a conviction for stealing, whether it be called larceny or theft, can reveal no moral obloquy. A man so convicted would have difficulty in persuading his friends and neighbours that his reputation had
not been gravely damaged. . .

If the principle enunciated in [Williams] was right, there would be a strange divergence between the position of a man who obtains cash by passing a cheque on an account which has no funds to meet it and one who takes money from
till. The man who passes the cheque is deemed in law not to act dishonestly if he genuinely believes on reasonable grounds that when it is presented to the paying bank there will be funds to meet it. But, according to [Williams], the man who
takes money from a till intending to put it back and genuinely believing on reasonable grounds that he will be able to do so should be convicted of theft. Lawyers may be able to appreciate why one man should be adjudged to be a criminal and the
other not; but we doubt whether anyone else would. People who take money from tills and the like without permission are usually thieves; but if they do not admit that they are by pleading guilty, it is for the jury, not the judge, to decide whether
they have acted dishonestly. . ..

For these reasons we allowed the appeal.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS ON INTENT TO RESTORE OR PAY

1. Intent to restore and embezzlement. In State v. Pratt, 220 P. 505, 506-507 (Kan. 1923), the defendant was convicted of embezzlement on the following facts:

[he Building & Loan Association purchased $10,000 worth [of bonds], which passed into the custody of the appellant as secretary-treasurer of the association. Without any authority to do so, and without the knowledge of

the directors and other officers of the association, appellant sold these bonds in January, 1920. . . . The money was not used for the benefit of the association. In fact, appellant concealed his disposition of these bonds from

the association until some time in May or June, 1921.

On appeal the defendant contended “that before he could be convicted of the crime of embezzlement the state must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that at the time he wrongfully converted the bonds he had the intent to deprive the
‘owner, not temporarily, but permanently, of its property,” and that error was committed in refusing evidence of his intent to restore the bonds or their equivalent and in failing to instruct that such an intent was a good defense. The court affirmed,
resting on the weight of authority that as long as “the money of the principal is knowingly used by the agent in violation of his duty,” itis still embezzlement even if “at the time he intended to restore it.” Similarly, in People v. Sisuphan, 104 Cal. Rptr.
3d 654, 662 (Ct. App. 2010), the court held that the intent to restore is not a defense, even if it is present at the time the property is taken and the property is restored before criminal charges are filed.

p. 1089
p. 1090

2. Intent to restore and false pretenses. The intent to restore is likewise held to be no defense to a false pretense charge. See People v. Weiger, 34 P. 826 (Cal. 1893). The defendant obtained goods on credit from the complaining
witness on false representations concerning his financial position. The court affirmed a conviction of obtaining by false pretenses, holding it immaterial that the defendant intended to pay for the goods he purchased.

QUESTIONS: Suppose the goods the defendant obtained in Weiger were a set of law books and that his defense was that he was an attorney expecting a visit from a potential client of substance whom he wanted to impress. He obtained the
books for this purpose, fully intending to ship them back to the seller after the client's visit. Would it follow from Weiger that he would be guilty of obtaining by false pretenses? If so, consider the liability of the attorney if he secretly removed the
books from another attorney's office for the same purpose and with the same intent to return them after the client’s visit. This, presumably, would be a temporary taking, a circumstance inconsistent with larceny. Why should he have a defense if
charged with physically taking the books by stealth but not if charged with obtaining the books by a false representation?

3. Intent to restore and federal law. Courts have concluded that the intent to repay is irrelevant when defendants are charged with federal statutes prohibiting “conversion” and “stealling].” United States v. Van Elsen, 652 F.3d 955,
961 (8th Cir. 2011). In Van Elsen, the defendant's intent to repay funds misappropriated from his employer's retirement accounts did not preclude his conviction under 18 U.S.C. §664, which imposes criminal liability on “[aJny person who embez-
zles, steals, or unlawfully and willfully abstracts or converts to his own use or to the use of another, any of the moneys, funds, securities, premiums, credits, property or other assets of any employee welfare benefit plan or employee pension benefit

plan, or of any fund connected therewith.” Likewise, intent to repay is not a defense to fraud or embezzlement. United States v. Miller, 953 F.3d 1095 (9th Cir. 2020) (federal wire fraud); United States v. Baker, 928 F.3d 291 (8d Cir. 2019) (federal em-
bezzlement and theft of public money).

4, The Model Penal Code. In connection with these issues, consider the following observations in Model Penal Code §206.1(2)(c), Comment at 72-73 (Tentative Draft No. 1, 1953):

Deprivation accompanied by an intent to make good later, by payment of money or by the actor's repurchasing an equivalent article for restoration to the owner, is quite different in effect from the taking of a thing for tempo-

rary use of the taker. In the latter situation, the actor's retention of the property offers some assurance of his ability to restore, beyond his general credit. In the former situation, the man who takes money intending to repay or

the broker who sells his client's bonds meaning to repurchase and restore the bonds later, substitutes his own credit for the owner's property in hand. Even if the actor carries out his intent to restore, he is simply paying off

alliability from his own assets, rather than restoring property which has continued to belong to the owner during the interval of deprivation.

p. 1090

p. 1091
QUESTIONS: Does this account suffice to explain why the young attorney who obtains a discrete item of physical property under false pretenses should not have a defense when she intends to restore the property after a brief interval? Does it
explain why a person does have a defense if she steals cash and spends it, but can prove that she intended to repay the money later?

The MPC addresses these issues by defining theft by unlawful taking in slightly different terms from those used to define theft by deception. The former offense is committed when the defendant has a purpose to “deprive” owners of
their property, while the latter offense is committed when the defendant purposely “obtains” another person's property. See Model Penal Code §§223.2, 223.3. The definitions of “deprive” and “obtain” are distinct. See Model Penal Code §223.0(1),
(6). Consider how these provisions apply to the case of the young attorney who dishonestly acquires a set of law books for temporary use, intending to return them. If he secretly removes the books from another office, is he guilty of theft by unlaw-
ful taking? If he tricks a distributor into selling them to him under false pretenses, is he guilty of theft by deception?

People v. Reid
New York Court of Appeals
508 N.E.2d 661 (N.Y. 1987)

Simons, J. [Appellants Reid and Riddles were convicted of armed robberies of money from their victims, despite evidence that they were only trying to recover money owed to them. In one case, the trial court, conducting a trial without
a jury, stated that it credited the testimony of defendant that he had taken the money to satisfy a debt, but the court denied him the defense of claim of right because he used force.]

The common issue presented by these two appeals is whether a good-faith claim of right, which negates larcenous intent in certain thefts . .. also negates the intent to commit robbery by a defendant who uses force to recover cash
allegedly owed him. We hold that it does not [and affirm the convictions]. . . .

Apperson “commits robbery when, in the course of committing a larceny, he uses or threatens the immediate use of physical force.” The larceny statute, in turn, provides that an assertion that “property was appropriated under a claim
of right made in good faith” is a defense to larceny. Since a good-faith claim of right is a defense to larceny, and because robbery is defined as forcible larceny, defendants contend that claim of right is also a defense to robbery. They concede the
culpability of their forcible conduct, but maintain that because they acted under a claim of right to recover their own property, they were not guilty of robbery, but only some lesser crime, such as assault or unlawful possession of a weapon.

[Lower courts in New York] have uniformly ruled that claim of right is not a defense to robbery . . . based upon the interpretation of the applicable statutes and a policy decision to discourage self-help and . . . consistent with what ap-
pears to be the emerging trend of similar appellate court decisions from other jurisdictions. For similar reasons, we conclude that the claim of right defense is not available in

p. 1091
p. 1092

these cases. We need not decide the quite different question of whether an individual who uses force to recover a specific chattel which he owns may be convicted of robbery. It should be noted, however, that because taking property “from an
‘owner thereof” is an element of robbery, a person who recovers property which is his own (as compared to the fungible cash taken to satisfy a claimed debt in the cases before us) may not be guilty of robbery.

The claim of right defense is found in the larceny article of the Penal Law, . . . (see Penal Law §155.15[1])? [but it] does not apply to all forms of larceny. For example, extortion is a form of larceny, but the Legislature, consistent with a
prior decision of this court, has not authorized a claim of right defense to extortion (see People v. Fichtner, 118 N.Y.S.2d 159). The exception is significant for extortion entails the threat of actual or potential force or some form of coercion. Thus, the
inference may reasonably be drawn that in failing to authorize a claim of right defense for extortion in Penal Law §155.15(1), and by failing to incorporate it in article 160 of the statute, which governs robbery, the Legislature recognized that an ac-
cused should not be permitted to invoke it in crimes involving force. We assume that if the Legislature intended to excuse forcible taking, it would have said so.

Our decision also rests upon policy considerations against expanding the area of permissible self-help. . . .[Florcible conduct is not merely a transgression against property, but also entails the risk of physical or mental injury to individ-
uals, [and] it should be subjected to criminal sanctions. Consequently, we find the courts in both [cases] correctly denied defendants’ requests to assert claim of right defenses.

NOTES

1. Chattels versus cash. In accord with Reid, courts routinely distinguish between the use of force to reclaim a specific chattel and the use of force to obtain cash as repayment for an alleged debt, normally allowing a claim-of-right
defense in the former situation but not the latter. See People v. Tufunga, 987 P.2d 168 (Cal. 1999).

2. The Model Penal Code. MPC §223.1(3)(b) provides a claim-of-right defense that is available to all forms of theft, including robbery and extortion, and regardless of whether the property appropriated is money or a discrete physical
item. The Commentaries offer this justification for allowing claim of right as a defense to robbery (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §223.1(3) at 157 n.99 (1980):

[llt should be emphasized that the provisions of Article 211 dealing with assault and Section 212.5 dealing with criminal coercion would be fully applicable to such conduct. . . . It ought to be the objective of the criminal law

to describe the character deficiencies of those subjected to it in accord with the propensities that they actually manifest. One who is prepared to use violence to regain what he regards as his own property is, properly

p. 1092
p. 1098

viewed, one who should be subjected to the laws designed to regulate violence and not to the laws designed to regulate the misappropriation of property of another.

That view has not proved popular, though there are jurisdictions that follow the same line of reasoning. E.g., Pena Pinedo v. Commonwealth, 841 S.E.2d 371 (Va. Ct. App. 2020); State v. Smith, 317 Conn. 338 (2015). The New Jersey
Supreme Court in State v. Mejia, 662 A.2d 308, 319 (N.J. 1995), rejected the claim-of-right defense, in a robbery case because that view

has no place in an ordered and orderly society such as ours, which eschews self-help through violence. Adoption of the proposition would be but one step short of accepting lawless reprisal as an appropriate means of

redressing grievances, real or fancied.

Who has the better of the argument? See Danielle R. Newton, Comment, What's Right with a Claim of Right?, 33 U.S.F. L. Rev. 673 (1999).

‘a, Many cases have taken the view that, even absent such a specific statute, the fact that a collector is entitled to deduct a commission out of the funds collected does not preclude an embezzlement conviction for appropriation of the entire proceeds. — EDs.
b. The statutes at issue in Riggins have been replaced by section 5/16-1 of the Illinois Revised Criminal Code, reprinted at p. 1061 infra. — Eps.
1,198 A. 463 (Pa, Super. Ct. 1938).

2.85 P.2d 1057 (Wash. 1939).
1. See DAO Worker Protection Unit Charges Plumbing Contractor for Misappropriating Union Fees (Jan. 25, 2021), https://medium.com/philadelphia-|ustice/dao-worker-protection-unit-charges-plumbing-contractor-for-misappropriating-union-fees-21b5t521b4a3.
2. Cf. 1 W. Hawkins, Pleas of the Crown 344 (6th ed. 1788): “[It is] needless to provide severe laws for such mischiefs, against which common prudence and caution may be a sufficient security.”
3. The majority rule was also rejected by the United States Supreme Court in the construction of the federal mail fraud statute. See Durland v. United States, 161 U.S. 306, 313...
3. Vacated and remanded by Olan v. United States, 2021 U.S. LEXIS 93 (U.S. Jan. 11, 2021).
4. For a helpful overview of Congress's response to the Aleynikov case, see Robert Damion Jurrens, Fool Me Once: U.S. v. Aleynikov and the Theft of Trade Secrets Clarification Act of 2012, 28 Berkeley Tech. LJ. 83 (2013).
5. New Data Shows FTC Received 2.2 Million Fraud Reports from Consumers in 2020, Feb. 4, 2021, available at https:/;www ftc.qov/news-events/press-releases/202 1/02/new-data-shows-fto-received-2-2-million-fraud-reports-consumers?utm_source=govdelivery.
a. In Canada, unlike the United States, a prosecutor may appeal such an acquittal and have the appellate court enter a judgment of conviction. — EDs.
6. The wire fraud statute, 18 U.S.C. §1343, contains comparable language, and the legal analysis for both is largely the same. Margaret Ryznar, The Honest-Services Doctrine in White-Collar Criminal Law, 34 Hamline L. Rev. 83 n.6 (2010).
‘a. Skilling's “compensation was tied directly to the value of the company’s stock.” Brief for the United States at 2, Skiing v. United States, 561 U.S. 358 (2010). — Eos.
7. Brief of Albert W. Alschuler as Amicus Curiae in Support of Neither Party at 29, 32, Weyrauch v. United States, 561 U.S. 358 (2009).
a. N.Y. Penal Law §155.15(1) provides: “1. In any prosecution for larceny committed by trespassory taking or embezzlement, it is an affirmative defense that the property was appropriated under a claim of right made in good faith.” — EDs.
p. 1098,
