Restat 2d of Contracts, § Scope
          Restatement of the Law, Contracts 2d - Official Text          >            Chapter 4- Formation of 
Contracts -- Consideration          >            Topic 1- The Requirement of Consideration        
Introductory Note
An obligee's assent to discharge a duty that he is owed may take the form of a promise to discharge that duty in 
the future or of a present discharge.  A promise to discharge the duty must, like any other promise, be 
supported by consideration or one of its substitutes in order to be enforceable.  The common law carried over 
this requirement to a present discharge, even though it involved no promise.  Such a discharge was not 
effective unless supported by consideration or one of its substitutes.  This requirement is stated in § 273.  It 
applies to the traditional transactions dealt with in Topics 2 and 3, including discharge by substituted 
performance or contract, accord, agreement of rescission, release and contract not to sue.  It also applies to 
transactions involving discharge that do not take one of these traditional forms.
The wisdom of applying to a present discharge the rules developed for the enforceability of promises has been 
questioned, however, particularly since the seal has been deprived of its effect in most states.  Exceptions have 
developed judicially and these are supplemented by statutes in some states.  Rules stating these exceptions 
are also collected in this Topic.  Section 274 deals with cancellation, destruction or surrender, an exception 
applicable to writings that are symbolic or evidentiary of the duty discharged.  Sections 275 and 276 deal with 
assent to discharge duties of return performance and duties to transfer property, two exceptions derived by 
analogy from the law relating to gifts of tangible property.  Section 277 deals with the renunciation of a duty to 
pay damages for a breach of contract, an exception that is based in part on the Uniform Commercial Code.
Any transaction involving discharge by the obligee's assent, however, is subject to the general rules on 
effectiveness of assent that are set out in this Restatement.  Even if the rule stated in § 273 does not apply, the 
obligee can set up any of the other defenses generally available to a promisor, such as those based on lack of 
capacity, mistake, misrepresentation, duress, unconscionability, public policy or the Statute of Frauds.  
Furthermore, the power of the obligee, even with the assent of the obligor, to vary a duty to an intended 
beneficiary is limited by the rule stated in § 311
REPORTER'S NOTES
Section 273 makes express a fundamental principle that was implicit in former Chapter 13.  The rest of this 
Topic is based on Topic 13, Discharge by Cancellation or Surrender, and Topic 8, Discharge by Renunciation 
or Executed Gift, of former Chapter 13.  Former § 410, which dealt with assent to discharge of a duty to pay 
damages for total breach, has been replaced by § 346(1), based on Uniform Commercial Code § 1-107.  
Former § 412, which dealt with discharge by retention of goods, has been left to Uniform Commercial Code § 2-
607.  Former § 413, which dealt with discharge by acceptance of a deed of conveyance of land, has been left to 
Comment.  Former § 415, which dealt with discharge by refusal to receive performance, has been left to the 
Introductory Note to Topic 3.
Restatement of the Law, Second, Contracts
Copyright (c) 1981, The American Law Institute
End of Document