U.C.C. § 1-308
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS          >            
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES        
§ 1-308. PERFORMANCE OR ACCEPTANCE UNDER RESERVATION OF 
RIGHTS
(a)  A party that with explicit reservation of rights performs or promises performance or assents to 
performance in a manner demanded or offered by the other party does not thereby prejudice the rights 
reserved. Such words as "without prejudice," "under protest," or the like are sufficient.
(b)  Subsection (a) does not apply to an accord and satisfaction.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
   Source: Former Section 1-207.
   Changes from former law: This section is identical to former Section 1-207.
   1. This section provides machinery for the continuation of performance along the lines contemplated by the 
contract despite a pending dispute, by adopting the mercantile device of going ahead with delivery, acceptance, or 
payment "without prejudice," "under protest," "under reserve," "with reservation of all our rights," and the like. All of 
these phrases completely reserve all rights within the meaning of this section. The section therefore contemplates 
that limited as well as general reservations and acceptance by a party may be made "subject to satisfaction of our 
purchaser," "subject to acceptance by our customers," or the like.
   2. This section does not add any new requirement of language of reservation where not already required by law, 
but merely provides a specific measure on which a party can rely as that party makes or concurs in any interim 
adjustment in the course of performance. It does not affect or impair the provisions of this Act such as those under 
which the buyer's remedies for defect survive acceptance without being expressly claimed if notice of the defects is 
given within a reasonable time. Nor does it disturb the policy of those cases which restrict the effect of a waiver of a 
defect to reasonable limits under the circumstances, even though no such reservation is expressed.
   The section is not addressed to the creation or loss of remedies in the ordinary course of performance but rather 
to a method of procedure where one party is claiming as of right something which the other believes to be 
unwarranted.
   3. Subsection (b) states that this section does not apply to an accord and satisfaction. Section 3-311 governs if an 
accord and satisfaction is attempted by tender of a negotiable instrument as stated in that section. If Section 3-311 
does not apply, the issue of whether an accord and satisfaction has been effected is determined by the law of 
contract. Whether or not Section 3-311 applies, this section has no application to an accord and satisfaction.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document