U.C.C. § 1-204
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS          >            
PART 2. GENERAL DEFINITIONS AND PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION        
§ 1-204. VALUE
Except as otherwise provided in Articles 3, 4, [and] 5, [and 6], a person gives value for rights if the person 
acquires them:
(1)  in return for a binding commitment to extend credit or for the extension of immediately available 
credit, whether or not drawn upon and whether or not a charge-back is provided for in the event of 
difficulties in collection;
(2)  as security for, or in total or partial satisfaction of, a preexisting claim;
(3)  by accepting delivery under a preexisting contract for purchase; or
(4)  in return for any consideration sufficient to support a simple contract.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
   Source: Former Section 1-201(44).
   Changes from former law: Unchanged from former Section 1-201, which was derived from Sections 25, 26, 27, 
191, Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law; Section 76, Uniform Sales Act; Section 53, Uniform Bills of Lading Act; 
Section 58, Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act; Section 22(1), Uniform Stock Transfer Act; Section 1, Uniform Trust 
Receipts Act. These provisions are substantive rather than purely definitional. Accordingly, they have been 
relocated from former Section 1-201 to this section.
   1. All the Uniform Acts in the commercial law field (except the Uniform Conditional Sales Act) have carried 
definitions of "value." All those definitions provided that value was any consideration sufficient to support a simple 
contract, including the taking of property in satisfaction of or as security for a pre-existing claim. Subsections (1), 
(2), and (4) in substance continue the definitions of "value" in the earlier acts. Subsection (3) makes explicit that 
"value" is also given in a third situation: where a buyer by taking delivery under a pre-existing contract converts a 
contingent into a fixed obligation.
   This definition is not applicable to Articles 3 and 4, but the express inclusion of immediately available credit as 
value follows the separate definitions in those Articles. See Sections 4-208, 4-209, 3-303. A bank or other financing 
agency which in good faith makes advances against property held as collateral becomes a bona fide purchaser of 
that property even though provision may be made for charge-back in case of trouble. Checking credit is 
"immediately available" within the meaning of this section if the bank would be subject to an action for slander of 
credit in case checks drawn against the credit were dishonored, and when a charge-back is not discretionary with 
the bank, but may only be made when difficulties in collection arise in connection with the specific transaction 
involved.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 1-204. VALUE
Page 2 of 2
End of Document