U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2-326
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
2-326. SALE ON APPROVAL AND SALE OR RETURN; RIGHTS OF 
CREDITORS
(1)  Unless otherwise agreed, if delivered goods may be returned by the buyer even though they conform to 
the contract, the transaction is
(a)  a "sale on approval" if the goods are delivered primarily for use, and
(b)  a "sale or return" if the goods are delivered primarily for resale.
(2)  Goods held on approval are not subject to the claims of the buyer's creditors until acceptance; goods 
held on sale or return are subject to such claims while in the buyer's possession.
(3)  Any "or return" term of a contract for sale is to be treated as a separate contract for sale within the 
statute of frauds section of this Article ( Section 2-201) and as contradicting the sale aspect of the contract 
within the provisions of this Article on parol or extrinsic evidence ( Section 2-202).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Both a "sale on approval" and a "sale or return" should be distinguished from other types of transactions with 
which they frequently have been confused. A "sale on approval," sometimes also called a sale "on trial" or "on 
satisfaction," deals with a contract under which the seller undertakes a risk in order to satisfy its prospective buyer 
with the appearance or performance of the goods that are sold. The goods are delivered to the proposed purchaser 
but they remain the property of the seller until the buyer accepts them. The price has already been agreed. The 
buyer's willingness to receive and test the goods is the consideration for the seller's engagement to deliver and sell. 
A "sale or return," on the other hand, typically is a sale to a merchant whose unwillingness to buy is overcome by 
the seller's engagement to take back the goods (or any commercial unit of goods) in lieu of payment if they fail to be 
resold. A sale or return is a present sale of goods which may be undone at the buyer's option. Accordingly, 
subsection (2) provides that goods delivered on approval are not subject to the prospective buyer's creditors until 
acceptance, and goods delivered in a sale or return are subject to the buyer's creditors while in the buyer's 
possession.
   These two transactions are so strongly delineated in practice and in general understanding that every 
presumption runs against a delivery to a consumer being a "sale or return" and against a delivery to a merchant for 
resale being a "sale on approval."
   2. The right to return goods for failure to conform to the contract of sale does not make the transaction a "sale on 
approval" or "sale or return" and has nothing to do with this section or Section 2-327. This section is not concerned 
with remedies for breach of contract. It deals instead with a power given by the contract to turn back the goods even 
though they are wholly as warranted. This section nevertheless presupposes that a contract for sale is 
contemplated by the parties, although that contract may be of the particular character that this section addresses 
(i.e., a sale on approval or a sale or return).

 2-326. SALE ON APPROVAL AND SALE OR RETURN; RIGHTS OF CREDITORS
Page 2 of 2
    If a buyer's obligation as a buyer is conditioned not on its personal approval but on the article's passing a 
described objective test, the risk of loss by casualty pending the test is properly the seller's and proper return is at 
its expense. On the point of "satisfaction" as meaning "reasonable satisfaction" when an industrial machine is 
involved, this Article takes no position.
   3. Subsection (3) resolves a conflict in the pre-UCC case law by recognizing that an "or return" provision is so 
definitely at odds with any ordinary contract for sale of goods that if a written agreement is involved the "or return" 
term must be contained in a written memorandum. The "or return" aspect of a sales contract must be treated as a 
separate contract under the Statute of Frauds section and as contradicting the sale insofar as questions of parol or 
extrinsic evidence are concerned.
   4. Certain true consignment transactions were dealt with in former Sections 2-326(3) and 9-114. These provisions 
have been deleted and have been replaced by new provisions in Article 9. See, e.g., Sections 9-109(a)(4); 9-
103(d); 9-319.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document