U.C.C. § 2-107
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 1. 
SHORT TITLE, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND SUBJECT MATTER        
§ 2-107. Goods to Be Severed From Realty: Recording.
(1)  A contract for the sale of minerals or the like (including oil and gas) or a structure or its materials to be 
removed from realty is a contract for the sale of goods within this Article if they are to be severed by the 
seller but until severance a purported present sale thereof which is not effective as a transfer of an interest 
in land is effective only as a contract to sell.
(2)  A contract for the sale apart from the land of growing crops or other things attached to realty and 
capable of severance without material harm thereto but not described in subsection (1) or of timber to be 
cut is a contract for the sale of goods within this Article whether the subject matter is to be severed by the 
buyer or by the seller even though it forms part of the realty at the time of contracting, and the parties can 
by identification effect a present sale before severance.
(3)  The provisions of this section are subject to any third party rights provided by the law relating to realty 
records, and the contract for sale may be executed and recorded as a document transferring an interest in 
land and shall then constitute notice to third parties of the buyer's rights under the contract for sale.
As amended in 1972.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See Section 76, Uniform Sales Act on prior policy; Section 7, Uniform Conditional 
Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1). Notice that this subsection applies only if the minerals or structures "are to be severed by the 
seller".  If the buyer is to sever, such transactions are considered contracts affecting land and all problems of the 
Statute of Frauds and of the recording of land rights apply to them.  Therefore, the Statute of Frauds section of this 
Article does not apply to such contracts though they must conform to the Statute of Frauds affecting the transfer of 
interests in land.
2. Subsection (2). "Things attached" to the realty which can be severed without material harm are goods within this 
Article regardless of who is to effect the severance.  The word "fixtures" has been avoided because of the diverse 
definitions of this term, the test of "severance without material harm" being substituted.
The provision in subsection (3) for recording such contracts is within the purview of this Article since it is a means of 
preserving the buyer's rights under the contract of sale.
3. The security phases of things attached to or to become attached to realty are dealt with in the Article on Secured 
Transactions (Article 9) and it is to be noted that the definition of goods in that Article differs from the definition of 
goods in this Article.

§ 2-107. Goods to Be Severed From Realty: Recording.
Page 2 of 2
However, both Articles treat as goods growing crops and also timber to be cut under a contract of severance.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-201.
Point 2: Section 2-105.
Point 3: Articles 9 and 9-105.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale".  Section 2-106.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Present sale".  Section 2-106.
"Rights".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document