U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 5-118
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
5-118. SECURITY INTEREST OF ISSUER OR NOMINATED PERSON
(a)  An issuer or nominated person has a security interest in a document presented under a letter of credit 
to the extent that the issuer or nominated person honors or gives value for the presentation.
(b)  So long as and to the extent that an issuer or nominated person has not been reimbursed or has not 
otherwise recovered the value given with respect to a security interest in a document under subsection (a), 
the security interest continues and is subject to Article 9, but:
(1)  a security agreement is not necessary to make the security interest enforceable under Section 9-
203(b)(3);
(2)  if the document is presented in a medium other than a written or other tangible medium, the 
security interest is perfected; and
(3)  if the document is presented in a written or other tangible medium and is not a certificated security, 
chattel paper, a document of title, an instrument, or a letter of credit, the security interest is perfected 
and has priority over a conflicting security interest in the document so long as the debtor does not have 
possession of the document.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section gives the issuer of a letter of credit or a nominated person thereunder an automatic perfected 
security interest in a "document" (as that term is defined in Section 5-102(a)(6)). The security interest arises only if 
the document is presented to the issuer or nominated person under the letter of credit and only to the extent of the 
value that is given. This security interest is analogous to that awarded to a collecting bank under Section 4-210. 
Subsection (b) contains special rules governing the security interest arising under this section. In all other respects, 
a security interest arising under this section is subject to Article 9. See Section 9-109. Thus, for example, a security 
interest arising under this section may give rise to a security interest in proceeds under Section 9-315.
   2. Subsection (b)(1) makes a security agreement unnecessary to the creation of a security interest under this 
section. Under subsection (b)(2), a security interest arising under this section is perfected if the document is 
presented in a medium other than a written or tangible medium. Documents that are written and that are not an 
otherwise-defined type of collateral under Article 9 (e.g., an invoice or inspection certificate) may be goods, in which 
an issuer or nominated person could perfect its security interest by possession. Because the definition of document 
in Section 5-102(a)(6) includes records (e.g., electronic records) that may not be goods, subsection (b)(2) provides 
for automatic perfection (i.e., without filing or possession).
   Under subsection (b)(3), if the document (i) is in a written or tangible medium, (ii) is not a certificated security, 
chattel paper, a document of title, an instrument, or a letter of credit, and (iii) is not in the debtor's possession, the 
security interest is perfected and has priority over a conflicting security interest. If the document is a type of tangible 
collateral that subsection (b)(3) excludes from its perfection and priority rules, the issuer or nominated person must 
comply with the normal method of perfection (e.g., possession of an instrument) and is subject to the applicable 

 5-118. SECURITY INTEREST OF ISSUER OR NOMINATED PERSON
Page 2 of 2
Article 9 priority rules. Documents to which subsection (b)(3) applies may be important to an issuer or nominated 
person. For example, a confirmer who pays the beneficiary must be assured that its rights to all documents are not 
impaired. It will find it necessary to present all of the required documents to the issuer in order to be reimbursed. 
Moreover, when a nominated person sends documents to an issuer in connection with the nominated person's 
reimbursement, that activity is not a collection, enforcement, or disposition of collateral under Article 9.
   One purpose of this section is to protect an issuer or nominated person from claims of a beneficiary's creditors. It 
is a fallback provision inasmuch as issuers and nominated persons frequently may obtain and perfect security 
interests under the usual Article 9 rules, and, in many cases, the documents will be owned by the issuer, nominated 
person, or applicant.
   UCC Article 6, Alternative A:
   Legislative Note: To take account of differences between former Article 9 and revised Article 9, a State that 
repeals Article 6 after revised Article 9 takes effect must make the following changes to Alternative A. First, 
inasmuch as revised Article 9 contains no counterpart of former Section 9-111, the reference to that section in 
Section 1 of the repealer should be deleted, and Section 4 of the repeal bill should allude to former Section 9-111. 
Second, the last entry in Section 1-105(2) should be amended as shown above in this Appendix.
   UCC Article 6, Alternative B:
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document