U.C.C. § 5-113
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT        
§ 5-113. TRANSFER BY OPERATION OF LAW
(a)  A successor of a beneficiary may consent to amendments, sign and present documents, and receive 
payment or other items of value in the name of the beneficiary without disclosing its status as a successor.
(b)  A successor of a beneficiary may consent to amendments, sign and present documents, and receive 
payment or other items of value in its own name as the disclosed successor of the beneficiary. Except as 
otherwise provided in subsection (e), an issuer shall recognize a disclosed successor of a beneficiary as 
beneficiary in full substitution for its predecessor upon compliance with the requirements for recognition by 
the issuer of a transfer of drawing rights by operation of law under the standard practice referred to in 
Section 5-108(e) or, in the absence of such a practice, compliance with other reasonable procedures 
sufficient to protect the issuer.
(c)  An issuer is not obliged to determine whether a purported successor is a successor of a beneficiary or 
whether the signature of a purported successor is genuine or authorized.
(d)  Honor of a purported successor's apparently complying presentation under subsection (a) or (b) has 
the consequences specified in Section 5-108(i) even if the purported successor is not the successor of a 
beneficiary. Documents signed in the name of the beneficiary or of a disclosed successor by a person who 
is neither the beneficiary nor the successor of the beneficiary are forged documents for the purposes of 
Section 5-109.
(e)  An issuer whose rights of reimbursement are not covered by subsection (d) or substantially similar law 
and any confirmer or nominated person may decline to recognize a presentation under subsection (b).
(f)  A beneficiary whose name is changed after the issuance of a letter of credit has the same rights and 
obligations as a successor of a beneficiary under this section.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   This section affirms the result in Pastor v. Nat. Republic Bank of Chicago, 76 Ill.2d 139, 390 N.E.2d 894 (Ill. 1979) 
and Federal Deposit Insurance Co. v. Bank of Boulder, 911 F.2d 1466 (10th Cir. 1990). Both electronic and tangible 
documents may be signed.
   An issuer's requirements for recognition of a successor's status might include presentation of a certificate of 
merger, a court order appointing a bankruptcy trustee or receiver, a certificate of appointment as bankruptcy 
trustee, or the like. The issuer is entitled to rely upon such documents which on their face demonstrate that 
presentation is made by a successor of a beneficiary. It is not obliged to make an independent investigation to 
determine the fact of succession.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 5-113. TRANSFER BY OPERATION OF LAW
Page 2 of 2
End of Document