U.C.C. § 7-601
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 6. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS        
§ 7-601. LOST, STOLEN, OR DESTROYED DOCUMENTS OF TITLE
(a)  If a document of title is lost, stolen, or destroyed, a court may order delivery of the goods or issuance of 
a substitute document and the bailee may without liability to any person comply with the order. If the 
document was negotiable, a court may not order delivery of the goods or issuance of a substitute document 
without the claimant's posting security unless it finds that any person that may suffer loss as a result of 
nonsurrender of possession or control of the document is adequately protected against the loss. If the 
document was nonnegotiable, the court may require security. The court may also order payment of the 
bailee's reasonable costs and attorney's fees in any action under this subsection.
(b)  A bailee that, without a court order, delivers goods to a person claiming under a missing negotiable 
document of title is liable to any person injured thereby. If the delivery is not in good faith, the bailee is liable 
for conversion. Delivery in good faith is not conversion if the claimant posts security with the bailee in an 
amount at least double the value of the goods at the time of posting to indemnify any person injured by the 
delivery which files a notice of claim within one year after the delivery.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-601.
   Changes: To accommodate electronic documents; to provide flexibility to courts similar to the flexibility in Section 
3-309; to update to the modern era of deregulation; and for style.
Purposes:
   1. Subsection (a) authorizes courts to order compulsory delivery of the goods or compulsory issuance of a 
substitute document. Compare Section 7-402. Using language similar to that found in Section 3-309, courts are 
given discretion as to what is adequate protection when the lost, stolen or destroyed document was negotiable or 
whether security should be required when the lost, stolen or destroyed document was nonnegotiable. In 
determining whether a party is adequately protected against loss in the case of a negotiable document, the court 
should consider the likelihood that the party will suffer a loss. The court is also given discretion as to the bailee's 
costs and attorney fees. The rights and obligations of a bailee under this section depend upon whether the 
document of title is lost, stolen or destroyed and is in addition to the ability of the bailee to bring an action for 
interpleader. See Section 7-603.
   2. Courts have the authority under this section to order a substitute document for either tangible or electronic 
documents. If the substitute document will be in a different medium than the original document, the court should 
fashion its order in light of the requirements of Section 7-105.
   3. Subsection (b) follows prior Section 7-601 in recognizing the legality of the well established commercial 
practice of bailees making delivery in good faith when they are satisfied that the claimant is the person entitled 
under a missing (i.e. lost, stolen, or destroyed) negotiable document. Acting without a court order, the bailee 

§ 7-601. LOST, STOLEN, OR DESTROYED DOCUMENTS OF TITLE
Page 2 of 2
remains liable on the original negotiable document and, to avoid conversion liability, the bailee may insist that the 
claimant provide an indemnity bond. Cf. Section 7-403.
   4. Claimants on non-negotiable instruments are permitted to avail themselves of the subsection (a) procedure 
because straight (non-negotiable) bills of lading sometimes contain provisions that the goods shall not be delivered 
except upon production of the bill. If the carrier should choose to insist upon production of the bill, the consignee 
should have some means of compelling delivery on satisfactory proof of entitlement. Without a court order, a bailee 
may deliver, subject to Section 7-403, to a person claiming goods under a non-negotiable document that the same 
person claims is lost, stolen, or destroyed.
   5. The bailee's lien should be protected when a court orders delivery of the goods pursuant to this section.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 3-309, 7-402 and 7-603.
Point 2: Section 7-105.
Point 3: Section 7-403.
Point 4: Section 7-403.
Point 5: Sections 7-209 and 7-307.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Good faith". Section 1-201 [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document