U.C.C. § 8-506
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS        
§ 8-506. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO EXERCISE RIGHTS AS 
DIRECTED BY ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
A securities intermediary shall exercise rights with respect to a financial asset if directed to do so by an 
entitlement holder. A securities intermediary satisfies the duty if:
(1)  the securities intermediary acts with respect to the duty as agreed upon by the entitlement holder 
and the securities intermediary; or
(2)  in the absence of agreement, the securities intermediary either places the entitlement holder in a 
position to exercise the rights directly or exercises due care in accordance with reasonable commercial 
standards to follow the direction of the entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Another of the core elements of the securities account relationships for which the Part 5 rules were designed is 
that although the intermediary may, by virtue of the structure of the indirect holding system, be the party who has 
the power to exercise the corporate and other rights that come from holding the security, the intermediary exercises 
these powers as representative of the entitlement holder rather than at its own discretion. This characteristic is one 
of the things that distinguishes a securities account from other arrangements where one person holds securities "on 
behalf of" another, such as the relationship between a mutual fund and its shareholders or a trustee and its 
beneficiary.
   2. The fact that the intermediary exercises the rights of security holding as representative of the entitlement holder 
does not, of course, preclude the entitlement holder from conferring discretionary authority upon the intermediary. 
Arrangements are not uncommon in which investors do not wish to have their intermediaries forward proxy 
materials or other information. Thus, this section provides that the intermediary shall exercise corporate and other 
rights "if directed to do so" by the entitlement holder. Moreover, as with the other Part 5 duties, the "agreement/due 
care" formulation is used in stating how the intermediary is to perform this duty. This section also provides that the 
intermediary satisfies the duty if it places the entitlement holder in a position to exercise the rights directly. This is to 
take account of the fact that some of the rights attendant upon ownership of the security, such as rights to bring 
derivative and other litigation, are far removed from the matters that intermediaries are expected to perform.
   3. This section, and the two that follow, deal with the aspects of securities holding that are related to investment 
decisions. For example, one of the rights of holding a particular security that would fall within the purview of this 
section would be the right to exercise a conversion right for a convertible security. It is quite common for investors 
to confer discretionary authority upon another person, such as an investment adviser, with respect to these rights 
and other investment decisions. Because this section, and the other sections of Part 5, all specify that a securities 
intermediary satisfies the Part 5 duties if it acts in accordance with the entitlement holder's agreement, there is no 
inconsistency between the statement of duties of a securities intermediary and these common arrangements.
   4. Section 8-509 also applies to the Section 8-506 duty, so that compliance with applicable regulatory 
requirements constitutes compliance with this duty. This is quite important in this context, since the federal 

§ 8-506. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO EXERCISE RIGHTS AS DIRECTED BY 
ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
Page 2 of 2
securities laws establish a comprehensive system of regulation of the distribution of proxy materials and exercise of 
voting rights with respect to securities held through brokers and other intermediaries. By virtue of Section 8-509(a), 
compliance with such regulatory requirement constitutes compliance with the Section 8-506 duty.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Agreement"
   Section 1-201(3)
   "Entitlement holder"
   Section 8-102(a)(7)
   "Financial asset"
   Section 8-102(a)(9)
   "Securities intermediary"
   Section 8-102(a)(14)
   "Security entitlement"
   Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document