U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-102
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
8-102. DEFINITIONS
 * * *
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   * * *
   7. "Entitlement holder." This term designates those who hold financial assets through intermediaries in the indirect 
holding system. Because many of the rules of Part 5 impose duties on securities intermediaries in favor of 
entitlement holders, the definition of entitlement holder is, in most cases, limited to the person specifically 
designated as such on the records of the intermediary. The last sentence of the definition covers the relatively 
unusual cases where a person may acquire a security entitlement under Section 8-501 even though the person 
may not be specifically designated as an entitlement holder on the records of the securities intermediary.
   A person may have an interest in a security entitlement, and may even have the right to give entitlement orders to 
the securities intermediary with respect to it, even though the person is not the entitlement holder. For example, a 
person who holds securities through a securities account in its own name may have given discretionary trading 
authority to another person, such as an investment adviser. Similarly, the control provisions in Section 8-106 and 
the related provisions in Article 9 are designed to facilitate transactions in which a person who holds securities 
through a securities account uses them as collateral in an arrangement where the securities intermediary has 
agreed that if the secured party so directs the intermediary will dispose of the positions. In such arrangements, the 
debtor remains the entitlement holder but has agreed that the secured party can initiate entitlement orders. 
Moreover, an entitlement holder may be acting for another person as a nominee, agent, trustee, or in another 
capacity. Unless the entitlement holder is itself acting as a securities intermediary for the other person, in which 
case the other person would be an entitlement holder with respect to the securities entitlement, the relationship 
between an entitlement holder and another person for whose benefit the entitlement holder holds a securities 
entitlement is governed by other law.
   8. "Entitlement order." This term is defined as a notification communicated to a securities intermediary directing 
transfer or redemption of the financial asset to which an entitlement holder has a security entitlement. The term is 
used in the rules for the indirect holding system in a fashion analogous to the use of the terms "indorsement" and 
"instruction" in the rules for the direct holding system. If a person directly holds a certificated security in registered 
form and wishes to transfer it, the means of transfer is an indorsement. If a person directly holds an uncertificated 
security and wishes to transfer it, the means of transfer is an instruction. If a person holds a security entitlement, the 
means of disposition is an entitlement order. An entitlement order includes a direction under Section 8-508 to the 
securities intermediary to transfer a financial asset to the account of the entitlement holder at another financial 
intermediary or to cause the financial asset to be transferred to the entitlement holder in the direct holding system 
(e.g., the delivery of a securities certificate registered in the name of the former entitlement holder). As noted in 
Comment 7, an entitlement order need not be initiated by the entitlement holder in order to be effective, so long as 
the entitlement holder has authorized the other party to initiate entitlement orders. See Section 8-107(b).

 8-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 2
   * * *
   13. "Registered form." The definition of "registered form" is substantially the same as in the prior version of Article 
8. Like the definition of bearer form, it serves primarily to distinguish Article 8 securities from instruments governed 
by other law, such as Article 3.
   Contrary to the holding in Highland Capital Management LP v. Schneider, 8 N.Y.3d 406 (2007), the registrability 
requirement in the definition of "registered form," and its parallel in the definition of "security," are satisfied only if 
books are maintained by or on behalf of the issuer for the purpose of registration of transfer, including the 
determination of rights under Section 8-207(a) (or if, in the case of a certificated security, the security certificate so 
states). It is not sufficient that the issuer records ownership, or records transfers thereof, for other purposes. Nor is 
it sufficient that the issuer, while not in fact maintaining books for the purpose of registration of transfer, could do so, 
for such is always the case.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document