U.C.C. § 9-709
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 7. TRANSITION        
§ 9-709. PRIORITY
(a) [Law governing priority.]  This [Act] determines the priority of conflicting claims to collateral. However, 
if the relative priorities of the claims were established before this [Act] takes effect, [former Article 9] 
determines priority.
(b) [Priority if security interest becomes enforceable under   Section 9-203.] For purposes of Section 
9-322(a), the priority of a security interest that becomes enforceable under Section 9-203 of this [Act] dates 
from the time this [Act] takes effect if the security interest is perfected under this [Act] by the filing of a 
financing statement before this [Act] takes effect which would not have been effective to perfect the security 
interest under [former Article 9]. This subsection does not apply to conflicting security interests each of 
which is perfected by the filing of such a financing statement.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Law Governing Priority. Ordinarily, this Article determines the priority of conflicting claims to collateral. 
However, when the relative priorities of the claims were established before this Article takes effect, former Article 9 
governs.
   Example 1: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in a right to payment for goods sold ("account"). SP-1 fails to 
file a financing statement. This Article takes effect on July 1, 2001. Thereafter, on August 1, 2001, D creates a 
security interest in the same account in favor of SP-2, who files a financing statement. This Article determines the 
relative priorities of the claims. SP-2's security interest has priority under Section 9-322(a)(1).
   Example 2: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in a right to payment for goods sold ("account"). SP-1 fails to 
file a financing statement. In 2000, D creates a security interest in the same account in favor of SP-2, who likewise 
fails to file a financing statement. This Article takes effect on July 1, 2001. Because the relative priorities of the 
security interests were established before the effective date of this Article, former Article 9 governs priority, and SP-
1's security interest has priority under former Section 9-312(5)(b).
   Example 3: The facts are as in Example 2, except that, on August 1, 2001, SP-2 files a proper financing 
statement under this Article. Until August 1, 2001, the relative priorities of the security interests were established 
before the effective date of this Article, as in Example 2. However, by taking the affirmative step of filing a financing 
statement, SP-2 established anew the relative priority of the conflicting claims after the effective date. Thus, this 
Article determines priority. SP-2's security interest has priority under Section 9-322(a)(1).
   As Example 3 illustrates, relative priorities that are "established" before the effective date do not necessarily 
remain unchanged following the effective date. Of course, unlike priority contests among unperfected security 
interests, some priorities are established permanently, e.g., the rights of a buyer of property who took free of a 
security interest under former Article 9.

§ 9-709. PRIORITY
Page 2 of 3
   One consequence of the rule in subsection (a) is that the mere taking effect of this Article does not of itself 
adversely affect the priority of conflicting claims to collateral.
   Example 4: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in a right to payment for lottery winnings (a "general 
intangible" as defined in former Article 9 but an "account" as defined in this Article). SP-1's security interest is 
unperfected because its filed financing statement covers only "accounts." In 2000, D creates a security interest in 
the same right to payment in favor of SP-2, who files a financing statement covering "accounts and general 
intangibles." Before this Article takes effect on July 1, 2001, SP-2's perfected security interest has priority over SP-
1's unperfected security interest under former 9-312(5). Because the relative priorities of the security interests were 
established before the effective date of this Article, former Article 9 continues to govern priority after this Article 
takes effect. Thus, SP-2's priority is not adversely affected by this Article's having taken effect.
   Note that were this Article to govern priority, SP-2 would become subordinated to SP-1 under Section 9-322(a)(1), 
even though nothing changes other than this Article's having taken effect. Under Section 9-704, SP-1's security 
interest would become perfected; the financing statement covering "accounts" adequately covers the lottery 
winnings and complies with the other perfection requirements of this Article, e.g., it is filed in the proper office.
   Example 5: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in a right to payment for lottery winnings--a "general 
intangible" (as defined under former Article 9). SP-1's security interest is unperfected because its filed financing 
statement covers only "accounts." In 2000, D creates a security interest in the same right to payment in favor of SP-
2, who makes the same mistake and also files a financing statement covering only "accounts." Before this Article 
takes effect on July 1, 2001, SP-1's unperfected security interest has priority over SP-2's unperfected security 
interest, because SP-1's security interest was the first to attach. See former Section 9-312(5)(b). Because the 
relative priorities of the security interests were established before the effective date of this Article, former Article 9 
continues to govern priority after this Article takes effect. Although Section 9-704 makes both security interests 
perfected for purposes of this Article, both are unperfected under former Article 9, which determines their relative 
priorities.
   2. Financing Statements Ineffective Under Former Article 9 but Effective Under This Article. If this Article 
determines priority, subsection (b) may apply. It deals with the case in which a filing that occurs before the effective 
date of this Article would be ineffective to perfect a security interest under former Article 9 but effective under this 
Article. For purposes of Section 9-322(a), the priority of a security interest that attaches after this Article takes effect 
and is perfected in this manner dates from the time this Article takes effect.
   Example 6: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in D's existing and after-acquired instruments and files a 
financing statement covering "instruments." In 2000, D grants a security interest in its existing and after-acquired 
accounts in favor of SP-2, who files a financing statement covering "accounts." After this Article takes effect on July 
1, 2001, one of D's account debtors gives D a negotiable note to evidence its obligation to pay an overdue account. 
Under the first-to-file-or-perfect rule in Section 9-322(a), SP-1 would have priority in the instrument, which 
constitutes SP-2's proceeds. SP-1's filing in 1999 was earlier than SP-2's in 2000. However, subsection (b) 
provides that, for purposes of Section 9-322(a), SP-1's priority dates from the time this Article takes effect (July 1, 
2001). Under Section 9-322(b), SP-2's priority with respect to the proceeds (instrument) dates from its filing as to 
the original collateral (accounts). Accordingly, SP-2's security interest would be senior.
   Subsection (b) does not apply to conflicting security interests each of which is perfected by a pre-effective-date 
filing that was not effective under former Article 9 but is effective under this Article.
   Example 7: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in D's existing and after-acquired instruments and files a 
financing statement covering "instruments." In 2000, D grants a security interest in its existing and after-acquired 
instruments in favor of SP-2, who files a financing statement covering "instruments." After this Article takes effect on 
July 1, 2001, one of D's account debtors gives D a negotiable note to evidence its obligation to pay an overdue 
account. Under the first-to-file-or-perfect rule in Section 9-322(a), SP-1 would have priority in the instrument. Both 
filings are effective under this Article, see Section 9-705(b), and SP-1's filing in 1999 was earlier than SP-2's in 
2000. Subsection (b) does not change this result.

§ 9-709. PRIORITY
Page 3 of 3
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document