U.C.C. § 2-304
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 3. 
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-304. Price Payable in Money, Goods, Realty, or Otherwise.
(1)  The price can be made payable in money or otherwise.  If it is payable in whole or in part in goods each 
party is a seller of the goods which he is to transfer.
(2)  Even though all or part of the price is payable in an interest in realty the transfer of the goods and the 
seller's obligations with reference to them are subject to this Article, but not the transfer of the interest in 
realty or the transferor's obligations in connection therewith.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsections (2) and (3) of Section 9, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section corrects the phrasing of the Uniform Sales Act so as to avoid misconstruction and produce greater 
accuracy in commercial result.  While it continues the essential intent and purpose of the Uniform Sales Act it 
rejects any purely verbalistic construction in disregard of the underlying reason of the provisions.
2. Under subsection (1) the provisions of this Article are applicable to transactions where the "price" of goods is 
payable in something other than money.  This does not mean, however, that this whole Article applies automatically 
and in its entirety simply because an agreed transfer of title to goods is not a gift.  The basic purposes and reasons 
of the Article must always be considered in determining the applicability of any of its provisions.
3. Subsection (2) lays down the general principle that when goods are to be exchanged for realty, the provisions of 
this Article apply only to those aspects of the transaction which concern the transfer of title to goods but do not 
affect the transfer of the realty since the detailed regulation of various particular contracts which fall outside the 
scope of this Article is left to the courts and other legislation.  However, the complexities of these situations may be 
such that each must be analyzed in the light of the underlying reasons in order to determine the applicable 
principles.  Local statutes dealing with realty are not to be lightly disregarded or altered by language of this Article.  
In contrast, this Article declares definite policies in regard to certain matters legitimately within its scope though 
concerned with real property situations, and in those instances the provisions of this Article control.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 1-102.
Point 3: Sections 1-102, 1-103, 1-104 and 2-107.
Definitional Cross References:

§ 2-304. Price Payable in Money, Goods, Realty, or Otherwise.
Page 2 of 2
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Money".  Section 1-201.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document