U.C.C. § 2-610
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 6. 
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE        
§ 2-610. Anticipatory Repudiation.
When either party repudiates the contract with respect to a performance not yet due the loss of which will 
substantially impair the value of the contract to the other, the aggrieved party may
(a)  for a commercially reasonable time await performance by the repudiating party; or
(b)  resort to any remedy for breach ( Section 2-703 or Section 2-711), even though he has notified the 
repudiating party that he would await the latter's performance and has urged retraction; and
(c)  in either case suspend his own performance or proceed in accordance with the provisions of this 
Article on the seller's right to identify goods to the contract notwithstanding breach or to salvage 
unfinished goods ( Section 2-704).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See Sections 63(2) and 65, Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes: To make it clear that:
1. With the problem of insecurity taken care of by the preceding section and with provision being made in this Article 
as to the effect of a defective delivery under an installment contract, anticipatory repudiation centers upon an overt 
communication of intention or an action which renders performance impossible or demonstrates a clear 
determination not to continue with performance.
Under the present section when such a repudiation substantially impairs the value of the contract, the aggrieved 
party may at any time resort to his remedies for breach, or he may suspend his own performance while he 
negotiates with, or awaits performance by, the other party.  But if he awaits performance beyond a commercially 
reasonable time he cannot recover resulting damages which he should have avoided.
2. It is not necessary for repudiation that performance be made literally and utterly impossible.  Repudiation can 
result from action which reasonably indicates a rejection of the continuing obligation.  And, a repudiation 
automatically results under the preceding section on insecurity when a party fails to provide adequate assurance of 
due future performance within thirty days after a justifiable demand therefor has been made.  Under the language of 
this section, a demand by one or both parties for more than the contract calls for in the way of counter-performance 
is not in itself a repudiation nor does it invalidate a plain expression of desire for future performance.  However, 
when under a fair reading it amounts to a statement of intention not to perform except on conditions which go 
beyond the contract, it becomes a repudiation.
3. The test chosen to justify an aggrieved party's action under this section is the same as that in the section on 
breach in installment contracts-namely the substantial value of the contract.  The most useful test of substantial 

§ 2-610. Anticipatory Repudiation.
Page 2 of 2
value is to determine whether material inconvenience or injustice will result if the aggrieved party is forced to wait 
and receive an ultimate tender minus the part or aspect repudiated.
4. After repudiation, the aggrieved party may immediately resort to any remedy he chooses provided he moves in 
good faith (see Section 1-203).  Inaction and silence by the aggrieved party may leave the matter open but it cannot 
be regarded as misleading the repudiating party.  Therefore the aggrieved party is left free to proceed at any time 
with his options under this section, unless he has taken some positive action which in good faith requires 
notification to the other party before the remedy is pursued.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-609 and 2-612.
Point 2: Section 2-609.
Point 3: Section 2-612.
Point 4: Section 1-203.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party".  Section 1-201.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Remedy".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document