U.C.C. § 3-308
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS        
§ 3-308. PROOF OF SIGNATURES AND STATUS AS HOLDER IN DUE 
COURSE
(a)  In an action with respect to an instrument, the authenticity of, and authority to make, each signature on 
the instrument is admitted unless specifically denied in the pleadings. If the validity of a signature is denied 
in the pleadings, the burden of establishing validity is on the person claiming validity, but the signature is 
presumed to be authentic and authorized unless the action is to enforce the liability of the purported signer 
and the signer is dead or incompetent at the time of trial of the issue of validity of the signature. If an action 
to enforce the instrument is brought against a person as the undisclosed principal of a person who signed 
the instrument as a party to the instrument, the plaintiff has the burden of establishing that the defendant is 
liable on the instrument as a represented person under Section 3-402(a).
(b)  If the validity of signatures is admitted or proved and there is compliance with subsection (a), a plaintiff 
producing the instrument is entitled to payment if the plaintiff proves entitlement to enforce the instrument 
under Section 3-301, unless the defendant proves a defense or claim in recoupment. If a defense or claim 
in recoupment is proved, the right to payment of the plaintiff is subject to the defense or claim, except to the 
extent the plaintiff proves that the plaintiff has rights of a holder in due course which are not subject to the 
defense or claim.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Section 3-308 is a modification of former Section 3-307. The first two sentences of subsection (a) are a 
restatement of former Section 3-307(1). The purpose of the requirement of a specific denial in the pleadings is to 
give the plaintiff notice of the defendant's claim of forgery or lack of authority as to the particular signature, and to 
afford the plaintiff an opportunity to investigate and obtain evidence. If local rules of pleading permit, the denial may 
be on information and belief, or it may be a denial of knowledge or information sufficient to form a belief. It need not 
be under oath unless the local statutes or rules require verification. In the absence of such specific denial the 
signature stands admitted, and is not in issue. Nothing in this section is intended, however, to prevent amendment 
of the pleading in a proper case.
   The question of the burden of establishing the signature arises only when it has been put in issue by specific 
denial. "Burden of establishing" is defined in Section 1-201. The burden is on the party claiming under the 
signature, but the signature is presumed to be authentic and authorized except as stated in the second sentence of 
subsection (a). "Presumed" is defined in Section 1-201 and means that until some evidence is introduced which 
would support a finding that the signature is forged or unauthorized, the plaintiff is not required to prove that it is 
valid. The presumption rests upon the fact that in ordinary experience forged or unauthorized signatures are very 
uncommon, and normally any evidence is within the control of, or more accessible to, the defendant. The defendant 
is therefore required to make some sufficient showing of the grounds for the denial before the plaintiff is required to 
introduce evidence. The defendant's evidence need not be sufficient to require a directed verdict, but it must be 
enough to support the denial by permitting a finding in the defendant's favor. Until introduction of such evidence the 
presumption requires a finding for the plaintiff. Once such evidence is introduced the burden of establishing the 

§ 3-308. PROOF OF SIGNATURES AND STATUS AS HOLDER IN DUE COURSE
Page 2 of 2
signature by a preponderance of the total evidence is on the plaintiff. The presumption does not arise if the action is 
to enforce the obligation of a purported signer who has died or become incompetent before the evidence is 
required, and so is disabled from obtaining or introducing it. "Action" is defined in Section 1-201 and includes a 
claim asserted against the estate of a deceased or an incompetent.
   The last sentence of subsection (a) is a new provision that is necessary to take into account Section 3-402(a) that 
allows an undisclosed principal to be liable on an instrument signed by an authorized representative. In that case 
the person enforcing the instrument must prove that the undisclosed principal is liable.
   2. Subsection (b) restates former Section 3-307(2) and (3). Once signatures are proved or admitted a holder, by 
mere production of the instrument, proves "entitlement to enforce the instrument" because under Section 3-301 a 
holder is a person entitled to enforce the instrument. Any other person in possession of an instrument may recover 
only if that person has the rights of a holder. Section 3-301. That person must prove a transfer giving that person 
such rights under Section 3-203(b) or that such rights were obtained by subrogation or succession.
   If a plaintiff producing the instrument proves entitlement to enforce the instrument, either as a holder or a person 
with rights of a holder, the plaintiff is entitled to recovery unless the defendant proves a defense or claim in 
recoupment. Until proof of a defense or claim in recoupment is made, the issue as to whether the plaintiff has rights 
of a holder in due course does not arise. In the absence of a defense or claim in recoupment, any person entitled to 
enforce the instrument is entitled to recover. If a defense or claim in recoupment is proved, the plaintiff may seek to 
cut off the defense or claim in recoupment by proving that the plaintiff is a holder in due course or that the plaintiff 
has rights of a holder in due course under Section 3-203(b) or by subrogation or succession. All elements of 
Section 3-302(a) must be proved.
   Nothing in this section is intended to say that the plaintiff must necessarily prove rights as a holder in due course. 
The plaintiff may elect to introduce no further evidence, in which case a verdict may be directed for the plaintiff or 
the defendant, or the issue of the defense or claim in recoupment may be left to the trier of fact, according to the 
weight and sufficiency of the defendant's evidence. The plaintiff may elect to rebut the defense or claim in 
recoupment by proof to the contrary, in which case a verdict may be directed for either party or the issue may be for 
the trier of fact. Subsection (b) means only that if the plaintiff claims the rights of a holder in due course against the 
defense or claim in recoupment, the plaintiff has the burden of proof on that issue.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document