U.C.C. § 3-410
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES        
§ 3-410. ACCEPTANCE VARYING DRAFT
(a)  If the terms of a drawee's acceptance vary from the terms of the draft as presented, the holder may 
refuse the acceptance and treat the draft as dishonored. In that case, the drawee may cancel the 
acceptance.
(b)  The terms of a draft are not varied by an acceptance to pay at a particular bank or place in the United 
States, unless the acceptance states that the draft is to be paid only at that bank or place.
(c)  If the holder assents to an acceptance varying the terms of a draft, the obligation of each drawer and 
indorser that does not expressly assent to the acceptance is discharged.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section is a restatement of former Section 3-412. It applies to conditional acceptances, acceptances for 
part of the amount, acceptances to pay at a different time from that required by the draft, or to the acceptance of 
less than all of the drawees. It applies to any other engagement changing the essential terms of the draft. If the 
drawee makes a varied acceptance the holder may either reject it or assent to it. The holder may reject by insisting 
on acceptance of the draft as presented. Refusal by the drawee to accept the draft as presented is dishonor. In that 
event the drawee is not bound by the varied acceptance and is entitled to have it canceled.
   If the holder assents to the varied acceptance, the drawee's obligation as acceptor is according to the terms of the 
varied acceptance. Under subsection (c) the effect of the holder's assent is to discharge any drawer or indorser who 
does not also assent. The assent of the drawer or indorser must be affirmatively expressed. Mere failure to object 
within a reasonable time is not assent which will prevent the discharge.
   2. Under subsection (b) an acceptance does not vary from the terms of the draft if it provides for payment at any 
particular bank or place in the United States unless the acceptance states that the draft is to be paid only at such 
bank or place. Section 3-501(b)(1) states that if an instrument is payable at a bank in the United States presentment 
must be made at the place of payment (Section 3-111) which in this case is at the designated bank.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document