U.C.C. § 3-401
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES        
§ 3-401. SIGNATURE
(a)  A person is not liable on an instrument unless (i) the person signed the instrument, or (ii) the person is 
represented by an agent or representative who signed the instrument and the signature is binding on the 
represented person under Section 3-402.
(b)  A signature may be made (i) manually or by means of a device or machine, and (ii) by the use of any 
name, including a trade or assumed name, or by a word, mark, or symbol executed or adopted by a person 
with present intention to authenticate a writing.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Obligation on an instrument depends on a signature that is binding on the obligor. The signature may be made 
by the obligor personally or by an agent authorized to act for the obligor. Signature by agents is covered by Section 
3-402. It is not necessary that the name of the obligor appear on the instrument, so long as there is a signature that 
binds the obligor. Signature includes an indorsement.
   2. A signature may be handwritten, typed, printed or made in any other manner. It need not be subscribed, and 
may appear in the body of the instrument, as in the case of "I, John Doe, promise to pay ***" without any other 
signature. It may be made by mark, or even by thumbprint. It may be made in any name, including any trade name 
or assumed name, however false and fictitious, which is adopted for the purpose. Parol evidence is admissible to 
identify the signer, and when the signer is identified the signature is effective. Indorsement in a name other than 
that of the indorser is governed by Section 3-204(d).
   This section is not intended to affect any other law requiring a signature by mark to be witnessed, or any signature 
to be otherwise authenticated, or requiring any form of proof.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document