U.C.C. § 4-108
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 4-108. TIME OF RECEIPT OF ITEMS
(a)  For the purpose of allowing time to process items, prove balances, and make the necessary entries on 
its books to determine its position for the day, a bank may fix an afternoon hour of 2 P.M. or later as a cutoff 
hour for the handling of money and items and the making of entries on its books.
(b)  An item or deposit of money received on any day after a cutoff hour so fixed or after the close of the 
banking day may be treated as being received at the opening of the next banking day.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Each of the huge volume of checks processed each day must go through a series of accounting procedures 
that consume time. Many banks have found it necessary to establish a cutoff hour to allow time for these 
procedures to be completed within the time limits imposed by Article 4. Subsection (a) approves a cutoff hour of this 
type provided it is not earlier than 2 P.M. Subsection (b) provides that if such a cutoff hour is fixed, items received 
after the cutoff hour may be treated as being received at the opening of the next banking day. If the number of items 
received either through the mail or over the counter tends to taper off radically as the afternoon hours progress, a 2 
P.M. cutoff hour does not involve a large portion of the items received but at the same time permits a bank using 
such a cutoff hour to leave its doors open later in the afternoon without forcing into the evening the completion of its 
settling and proving process.
   2. The provision in subsection (b) that items or deposits received after the close of the banking day may be 
treated as received at the opening of the next banking day is important in cases in which a bank closes at twelve or 
one o'clock, e.g., on a Saturday, but continues to receive some items by mail or over the counter if, for example, it 
opens Saturday evening for the limited purpose of receiving deposits and cashing checks.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document