U.C.C. § 4-301
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 3. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: PAYOR BANKS        
§ 4-301. POSTING; RECOVERY OF PAYMENT BY RETURN OF ITEMS; TIME 
OF DISHONOR; RETURN OF ITEMS BY PAYOR BANK
(a)  If a payor bank settles for a demand item other than a documentary draft presented otherwise than for 
immediate payment over the counter before midnight of the banking day of receipt, the payor bank may 
revoke the settlement and recover the settlement if, before it has made final payment and before its 
midnight deadline, it
(1)  returns the item;
(2)  returns an image of the item, if the party to which the return is made has entered into an agreement 
to accept an image as a return of the item and the image is returned in accordance with that 
agreement; or
(3)  sends a record providing notice of dishonor or nonpayment if the item is unavailable for return.
(b)  If a demand item is received by a payor bank for credit on its books, it may return the item or send 
notice of dishonor and may revoke any credit given or recover the amount thereof withdrawn by its 
customer, if it acts within the time limit and in the manner specified in subsection (a).
(c)  Unless previous notice of dishonor has been sent, an item is dishonored at the time when for purposes 
of dishonor it is returned or notice sent in accordance with this section.
(d)  An item is returned:
(1)  as to an item presented through a clearing house, when it is delivered to the presenting or last 
collecting bank or to the clearing house or is sent or delivered in accordance with clearing-house rules; 
or
(2)  in all other cases, when it is sent or delivered to the bank's customer or transferor or pursuant to 
instructions.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. The term "deferred posting" appears in the caption of Section 4-301. This refers to the practice permitted by 
statute in most of the states before the UCC under which a payor bank receives items on one day but does not post 
the items to the customer's account until the next day. Items dishonored were then returned after the posting on the 
day after receipt. Under Section 4-301 the concept of "deferred posting" merely allows a payor bank that has settled 
for an item on the day of receipt to return a dishonored item on the next day before its midnight deadline, without 
regard to when the item was actually posted. With respect to checks Regulation CC Section 229.30(c) extends the 
midnight deadline under the UCC under certain circumstances. See the Commentary to Regulation CC Section 
229.38(d) on the relationship between the UCC and Regulation CC on settlement.

§ 4-301. POSTING; RECOVERY OF PAYMENT BY RETURN OF ITEMS; TIME OF DISHONOR; RETURN OF 
ITEMS BY PAYOR BANK
Page 2 of 3
   2. The function of this section is to provide the circumstances under which a payor bank that has made timely 
settlement for an item may return the item and revoke the settlement so that it may recover any settlement made. 
These circumstances are: (1) the item must be a demand item other than a documentary draft; (2) the item must be 
presented otherwise than for immediate payment over the counter; and (3) the payor bank must return the item (or 
give notice if the item is unavailable for return) before its midnight deadline and before it has paid the item. With 
respect to checks, see Regulation CC Section 229.31(f) on notice in lieu of return and Regulation CC Section 
229.33 as to the different requirement of notice of nonpayment. An instance of when an item may be unavailable for 
return arises under a collecting bank check retention plan under which presentment is made by a presentment 
notice and the item is retained by the collecting bank. Section 4-215(a)(2) provides that final payment occurs if the 
payor bank has settled for an item without a right to revoke the settlement under statute, clearing-house rule or 
agreement. In any case in which Section 4-301(a) is applicable, the payor bank has a right to revoke the settlement 
by statute; therefore, Section 4-215(a)(2) is inoperable, and the settlement is provisional. Hence, if the settlement is 
not over the counter and the payor bank settles in a manner that does not constitute final payment, the payor bank 
can revoke the settlement by returning the item before its midnight deadline.
   3. The relationship of Section 4-301(a) to final settlement and final payment under Section 4-215 is illustrated by 
the following case. Depositary Bank sends by mail an item to Payor Bank with instructions to settle by remitting a 
teller's check drawn on a bank in the city where Depositary Bank is located. Payor Bank sends the teller's check on 
the day the item was presented. Having made timely settlement, under the deferred posting provisions of Section 4-
301(a), Payor Bank may revoke that settlement by returning the item before its midnight deadline. If it fails to return 
the item before its midnight deadline, it has finally paid the item if the bank on which the teller's check was drawn 
honors the check. But if the teller's check is dishonored there has been no final settlement under Section 4-213(c) 
and no final payment under Section 4-215(b). Since the Payor Bank has neither paid the item nor made timely 
return, it is accountable for the item under Section 4-302(a).
   4. The time limits for action imposed by subsection (a) are adopted by subsection (b) for cases in which the payor 
bank is also the depositary bank, but in this case the requirement of a settlement on the day of receipt is omitted.
   5. Subsection (c) fixes a base point from which to measure the time within which notice of dishonor must be 
given. See Section 3-503.
   6. Subsection (d) leaves banks free to agree upon the manner of returning items but establishes a precise time 
when an item is "returned." For definition of "sent" as used in paragraphs (1) and (2) see Section 1-201(38). 
Obviously the subsection assumes that the item has not been "finally paid" under Section 4-215(a). If it has been, 
this provision has no operation.
   7. The fact that an item has been paid under proposed Section 4-215 does not preclude the payor bank from 
asserting rights of restitution or revocation under Section 3-418.  National Savings and Trust Co. v. Park Corp., 722 
F.2d 1303 (6th Cir.1983), cert. denied, 466 U.S. 939 (1984), is the correct interpretation of the present law on this 
issue.
   8. Paragraph (a)(2) is designed to facilitate electronic check-processing by authorizing the payor bank to return an 
image of the item instead of the actual item. It applies only when the payor bank and the party to which the return 
has been made have agreed that the payor bank can make such a return and when the return complies with the 
agreement. The purpose of the paragraph is to prevent third parties (such as the depositor of the check) from 
contending that the payor bank missed its midnight deadline because it failed to return the actual item in a timely 
manner. If the payor bank missed its midnight deadline, payment would have become final under Section 4-215 and 
the depositary bank would have lost its right of chargeback under Section 4-214. Of course, the depositary bank 
might enter into an agreement with its depositor to resolve that problem, but it is not clear that agreements by banks 
with their customers can resolve all such issues. In any event, paragraph (a)(2) should eliminate the need for such 
agreements. The provision rests on the premise that it is inappropriate to penalize a payor bank simply because it 
returns the actual item a few business days after the midnight deadline of the payor bank sent notice before that 
deadline to a collecting bank that had agreed to accept such notices..

§ 4-301. POSTING; RECOVERY OF PAYMENT BY RETURN OF ITEMS; TIME OF DISHONOR; RETURN OF 
ITEMS BY PAYOR BANK
Page 3 of 3
   Nothing in paragraph (a)(2) authorizes the payor bank to destroy the check.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document