U.C.C. § 4A-108
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS          >            
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 4A-108. RELATIONSHIP TO ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER ACT.
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), this Article does not apply to a funds transfer any part of which is 
governed by the Electronic Fund Transfer Act of 1978 (Title XX, Public Law 95-630, 92 Stat. 3728, 15 
U.S.C. § 1693 et seq.) as amended from time to time.
(b)  This Article applies to a funds transfer that is a remittance transfer as defined in the Electronic Fund 
Transfer Act (15 U.S.C.  Sec. 1693o-1) as amended from time to time, unless the remittance transfer is an 
electronic fund transfer as defined in the Electronic Fund Transfer Act ( 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1693a) as 
ammended from time to time.
(c)  In a funds transfer to which this Article applies, in the event of an inconsistency between an applicable 
provision of this Article and an applicable provision of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the provision of the 
Electronic Fund transfer Act governs to the extent of the inconsistency.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment1.  The Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA), implemented by Regulation E, 12 C.F.R. Part 1005, 
is a federal statute that covers aspects of electronic fund transfers involving consumers.  EFTA also governs 
remittance transfers, defined in 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1693o-1, which involve transfers of funds through electronic means 
by consumers to recipients in another country through persons or financial institutions that provide such transfers in 
the normal course of their business.  Not all "remittance transfers" as defined in EFTA, however, qualify as 
"electronic fund transfers" as defined under the EFTA, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1693a(7).  While Section 4A-108(a) broadly 
states that Article 4A does not apply to any funds transfer that is governed in any part by EFTA, subsection (b) 
provides an exception.  The purpose of Section 4A-108(b) is to allow this Article to apply to a funds transfer as 
defined in Section 4A-104(a) (see Section 4A-102) that also is a remittance transfer as defined in EFTA, so long as 
that remittance transfer is not an electronic fund transfer as defined in EFTA.  If the resulting application of this 
Article to an EFTA-defined "remittance transfer" that is not an EFTA-defined "electronic fund transfer" creates an 
inconsistency between an applicable provision of this Article and an applicable provision of EFTA, then, as a matter 
of federal supremacy, the provision of EFTA governs to the extent of the inconsistency.  Section 4A-108(c).  Of 
course, in the case of a funds transfer that also relates to another jurisdiction, the forum's conflict of laws principles 
determine whether it will apply the law in effect in this State (including this Article and EFTA) or the law of another 
jurisdiction to all or any part of the funds transfer.  See Section 4A-507.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document