U.C.C. § 6-103
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES          >            
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]        
§ 6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (3), this Article applies to a bulk sale if:
(a)  the seller's principal business is the sale of inventory from stock; and
(b)  on the date of the bulk-sale agreement the seller is located in this state or, if the seller is located in 
a jurisdiction that is not a part of the United States, the seller's major executive office in the United 
States is in this state.
(2)  A seller is deemed to be located at his [or her] place of business.  If a seller has more than one place of 
business, the seller is deemed located at his [or her] chief executive office.
(3)  This Article does not apply to:
(a)  a transfer made to secure payment or performance of an obligation;
(b)  a transfer of collateral to a secured party pursuant to Section 9-609;
(c)  a disposition of collateral pursuant to Section 9-610;
(d)  retention of collateral pursuant to Section 9-620;
(e)  a sale of an asset encumbered by a security interest or lien if (i) all the proceeds of the sale are 
applied in partial or total satisfaction of the debt secured by the security interest or lien or (ii) the 
security interest or lien is enforceable against the asset after it has been sold to the buyer and the net 
contract price is zero;
(f)  a general assignment for the benefit of creditors or to a subsequent transfer by the assignee;
(g)  a sale by an executor, administrator, receiver, trustee in bankruptcy, or any public officer under 
judicial process;
(h)  a sale made in the course of judicial or administrative proceedings for the dissolution or 
reorganization of an organization;
(i)  a sale to a buyer whose principal place of business is in the United States and who:
(i)  not earlier than 21 days before the date of the bulk sale, (A) obtains from the seller a verified 
and dated list of claimants of whom the seller has notice three days before the seller sends or 
delivers the list to the buyer or (B) conducts a reasonable inquiry to discover the claimants;
(ii)  assumes in full the debts owed to claimants of whom the buyer has knowledge on the date the 
buyer receives the list of claimants from the seller or on the date the buyer completes the 
reasonable inquiry, as the case may be;
(iii)  is not insolvent after the assumption; and
(iv)  gives written notice of the assumption not later than 30 days after the date of the bulk sale by 
sending or delivering a notice to the claimants identified in subparagraph (ii) or by filing a notice in 
the office of the [Secretary of State];
(j)  a sale to a buyer whose principal place of business is in the United States and who:

§ 6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
Page 2 of 5
(i)  assumes in full the debts that were incurred in the seller's business before the date of the bulk 
sale;
(ii)  is not insolvent after the assumption; and
(iii)  gives written notice of the assumption not later than 30 days after the date of the bulk sale by 
sending or delivering a notice to each creditor whose debt is assumed or by filing a notice in the 
office of the [Secretary of State];
(k)  a sale to a new organization that is organized to take over and continue the business of the seller 
and that has its principal place of business in the United States if:
(i)  the buyer assumes in full the debts that were incurred in the seller's business before the date of 
the bulk sale;
(ii)  the seller receives nothing from the sale except an interest in the new organization that is 
subordinate to the claims against the organization arising from the assumption; and
(iii)  the buyer gives written notice of the assumption not later than 30 days after the date of the 
bulk sale by sending or delivering a notice to each creditor whose debt is assumed or by filing a 
notice in the office of the [Secretary of State];
(l)  a sale of assets having:
(i)  a value, net of liens and security interests, of less than $10,000.  If a debt is secured by assets 
and other property of the seller, the net value of the assets is determined by subtracting from their 
value an amount equal to the product of the debt multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is 
the value of the assets on the date of the bulk sale and the denominator of which is the value of all 
property securing the debt on the date of the bulk sale; or
(ii)  a value of more than $25,000,000
on the date of the bulk-sale agreement; or
(m)  a sale required by, and made pursuant to, statute.
(4)  The notice under subsection (3)(i)(iv) must state: (i) that a sale that may constitute a bulk sale has been 
or will be made; (ii) the date or prospective date of the bulk sale; (iii) the individual, partnership, or corporate 
names and the addresses of the seller and buyer; (iv) the address to which inquiries about the sale may be 
made, if different from the seller's address; and (v) that the buyer has assumed or will assume in full the 
debts owed to claimants of whom the buyer has knowledge on the date the buyer receives the list of 
claimants from the seller or completes a reasonable inquiry to discover the claimants.
(5)  The notice under subsections (3)(j)(iii) and (3)(k)(iii) must state: (i) that a sale that may constitute a bulk 
sale has been or will be made; (ii) the date or prospective date of the bulk sale; (iii) the individual, 
partnership, or corporate names and the addresses of the seller and buyer; (iv) the address to which 
inquiries about the sale may be made, if different from the seller's address; and (v) that the buyer has 
assumed or will assume the debts that were incurred in the seller's business before the date of the bulk 
sale.
(6)  For purposes of subsection (3)(l), the value of assets is presumed to be equal to the price the buyer 
agrees to pay for the assets.  However, in a sale by auction or a sale conducted by a liquidator on the 
seller's behalf, the value of assets is presumed to be the amount the auctioneer or liquidator reasonably 
estimates the assets will bring at auction or upon liquidation.
As amended in 1999
See Appendix I contained within revised Article 9 for material relating to changes made in text in 1999.
Annotations

§ 6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
Page 3 of 5
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 6-102 and 6-103 (1987 Official Text).
Changes: New choice-of-law provision; exclusions from the Article clarified, revised, and expanded.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1.  Subsection (1)(a) follows Section 6-102(3) of the 1987 Official Text and makes Article 6 applicable only when the 
seller's principal business is the sale of inventory from stock.  This Article does not apply to a sale by a seller whose 
principal business is the sale of goods other than inventory, e.g., a farmer, is the sale of inventory not from stock, 
e.g., a manufacturer who produces goods to order, or is the sale of services, e.g., a dry cleaner, barber, or operator 
of a hotel, tavern, or restaurant.
2.  The choice-of-law rule in subsections (1)(b) and (2) derives from Section 9-103(3) and should be interpreted 
consistently with the Official Comment and case law construing that Section.  Any agreement between the buyer 
and the seller with regard to the law governing a bulk sale does not affect the choice-of-law rule in this Article.
3.  Some of the transactions excluded by subsection (3), e.g., those excluded by subsection (3)(a), may not be bulk 
sales.  This Article nevertheless specifically excludes them in order to allay any doubts about the Article's 
applicability.  Certain transactions, e.g., the sale of fully encumbered inventory that remains subject to a security 
interest, may be excluded by more than one subsection.
4.  Subsections (3)(a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) derive from subsections (1) and (3) of Section 6-103 (1987 Official Text).
5.  Subsections (3)(f), (g), and (h) restate subsections (2), (4), and (5) of Section 6-103 with minor changes.
6.  Subsections (3)(i), (j), and (k) relate to sales in which the buyer assumes specified debts of the seller.  A bulk 
sale does not fall within any of these subsections unless the buyer's assumption of debts is binding and irrevocable.
Subsection (3)(j) derives from subsection (6) of Section 6-103 (1987 Official Text) and is available to buyers who 
are not insolvent (as defined in Section 1-201(23)), assume all the seller's business debts in full, and give notice of 
the assumption.  Subsection (3)(k) derives from subsection (7) of Section 6-103 (1987 Official Text) and excludes 
transactions in which the risks to creditors are minimal.  Like subsection (3)(j), this subsection applies only if the 
buyer assumes all the seller's business debts in full and gives notice of the assumption.  In addition, the buyer must 
be a new organization that is organized to take over and continue the seller's business, the seller must receive 
nothing from the sale other than an interest in the new organization, and the seller's interest must be subordinate to 
the claims arising from the assumption.  Sales that may qualify for the exclusion include the incorporation of a 
partnership or sole proprietorship.
Buyers often are reluctant to assume debts of which they have no knowledge.  Subsection (3)(i), which is new, 
permits a qualifying buyer to exclude a sale from this Article by assuming only those debts owed to claimants of 
whom the buyer has knowledge after the buyer either conducts a reasonable inquiry to discover claimants or 
obtains a list of claimants from the seller.  A buyer who takes a verified list from the seller is held to have knowledge 
of the claimants on the list and is entitled to rely in good faith on the list without making further inquiry.  The 
protection afforded by the assumption of these debts, while not perfect, is sufficiently great to eliminate the need for 
compliance with Article 6.
7.  Subsection (3)(l) is new.  Although the bulk sale of even a very small business may be of concern to some 
creditors, losses to creditors from sales of assets in which the seller's equity is less than $10,000 are not likely to 
justify the costs of complying with this Article.  Sales of assets having a value of more than $25,000,000 have not 
presented serious risks to creditors.  Publicity normally attends sales of that magnitude, and the sellers are unlikely 

§ 6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
Page 4 of 5
to be able successfully to remove the proceeds from the reach of creditors.  As used in this subsection, "price" 
includes all consideration for the assets, not only new consideration.  Compare "Net contract price" (Section 6-
102(1)(k)).  If the auctioneer or liquidator does not make an estimation, then no presumption arises.
8.  Subsection (3)(m) is new.  This Article assumes that creditors are aware of statutes that may require their 
debtors to conduct bulk sales under specified circumstances, e.g., upon the termination of a franchise or of a 
contract between a dealer and supplier, and are able to take account of any risk that those sales may impose.
Cross-References:
Point 1: Section 9-109.
Point 2: Sections 1-105 and 9-103.
Point 3: Section 6-102.
Point 4: Sections 9-111, 9-503, 9-504, and 9-505.
Point 6: Sections 1-201 and 1-203.
Point 7: Section 6-102.
Definitional Cross-References:
"Asset".  Section 6-102.
"Auctioneer".  Section 6-102.
"Bulk sale".  Section 6-102.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Claimant".  Section 6-102.
"Collateral".  Section 9-105.
"Date of the bulk sale".  Section 6-102.
"Date of the bulk-sale agreement".  Section 6-102.
"Debt".  Section 6-102.
"Insolvent".  Section 1-201.
"Inventory".  Section 9-109.
"Knowledge".  Section 1-201.
"Liquidator".  Section 6-102.
"Net contract price".  Section 6-102.
"Notice".  Section 1-201.
"Organization".  Section 1-201.
"Presumed".  Section 1-201.

§ 6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
Page 5 of 5
"Proceeds".  Section 9-306.
"Sale".  Section 2-106.
"Secured party".  Section 9-105.
"Security interest".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Send".  Section 1-201.
"United States".  Section 6-102.
"Value".  Section 6-102.
"Verified".  Section 6-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document