U.C.C. § 7-102
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 1. GENERAL        
§ 7-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
(a)  In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
(1)  "Bailee" means a person that by a warehouse receipt, bill of lading, or other document of title 
acknowledges possession of goods and contracts to deliver them.
(2)  "Carrier" means a person that issues a bill of lading.
(3)  "Consignee" means a person named in a bill of lading to which or to whose order the bill promises 
delivery.
(4)  "Consignor" means a person named in a bill of lading as the person from which the goods have 
been received for shipment.
(5)  "Delivery order" means a record that contains an order to deliver goods directed to a warehouse, 
carrier, or other person that in the ordinary course of business issues warehouse receipts or bills of 
lading.
(6)  "Good faith" means honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair 
dealing.
(7)  "Goods" means all things that are treated as movable for the purposes of a contract for storage or 
transportation.
(8)  "Issuer" means a bailee that issues a document of title or, in the case of an unaccepted delivery 
order, the person that orders the possessor of goods to deliver. The term includes a person for which 
an agent or employee purports to act in issuing a document if the agent or employee has real or 
apparent authority to issue documents, even if the issuer did not receive any goods, the goods were 
misdescribed, or in any other respect the agent or employee violated the issuer's instructions.
(9)  "Person entitled under the document" means the holder, in the case of a negotiable document of 
title, or the person to which delivery of the goods is to be made by the terms of, or pursuant to 
instructions in a record under, a nonnegotiable document of title.
(10)  "Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an 
electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.
(11)  "Sign" means, with present intent to authenticate or adopt a record:
(A)  to execute or adopt a tangible symbol; or
(B)  to attach to or logically associate with the record an electronic sound, symbol, or process.
(12)  "Shipper" means a person that enters into a contract of transportation with a carrier.
(13)  "Warehouse" means a person engaged in the business of storing goods for hire.
(b)  Definitions in other articles applying to this article and the sections in which they appear are:
(1)  "Contract for sale", Section 2-106.
(2)  "Lessee in ordinary course", Section 2A-103.
(3)  "Receipt" of goods, Section 2-103.

§ 7-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 3
(c)  In addition, Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation 
applicable throughout this article.
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: If the state has enacted Revised Article 1, the definitions of "good faith" in subsection (a)(6) and 
"record" in (a)(10) need not be enacted in this section as they are contained in Article 1, Section 1-201. These 
subsections should be marked as "reserved" in order to provide for uniform numbering of subsections.
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-102.
   Changes: New definitions of "carrier," "good faith," "record," "sign," and "shipper." Other definitions revised to 
accommodate electronic mediums.
Purposes:
   1. "Bailee" is used in this Article as a blanket term to designate carriers, warehousemen and others who normally 
issue documents of title on the basis of goods which they have received. The definition does not, however, require 
actual possession of the goods. If a bailee acknowledges possession when it does not have possession, the bailee 
is bound by sections of this Article which declare the "bailee's" obligations. (See definition of "Issuer" in this section 
and Sections 7-203 and 7-301 on liability in case of non-receipt.) A "carrier" is one type of bailee and is defined as a 
person that issues a bill of lading. A "shipper" is a person who enters into the contract of transportation with the 
carrier. The definitions of "bailee," "consignee," "consignor," "goods", and "issuer", are unchanged in substance 
from prior law. "Document of title" is defined in Article 1, and may be in either tangible or electronic form.
   2. The definition of warehouse receipt contained in the general definitions section of this Act (Section 1-201) does 
not require that the issuing warehouse be "lawfully engaged" in business or for profit. The warehouse's compliance 
with applicable state regulations such as the filing of a bond has no bearing on the substantive issues dealt with in 
this Article. Certainly the issuer's violations of law should not diminish its responsibility on documents the issuer has 
put in commercial circulation. But it is still essential that the business be storing goods "for hire" (Section 1-201 and 
this section). A person does not become a warehouse by storing its own goods.
   3. When a delivery order has been accepted by the bailee it is for practical purposes indistinguishable from a 
warehouse receipt. Prior to such acceptance there is no basis for imposing obligations on the bailee other than the 
ordinary obligation of contract which the bailee may have assumed to the depositor of the goods. Delivery orders 
may be either electronic or tangible documents of title. See definition of "document of title" in Section 1-201.
   4. The obligation of good faith imposed by this Article and by Article 1, Section 1-304 includes the observance of 
reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing.
   5. The definitions of "record" and "sign" are included to facilitate electronic mediums. See comment 9 to Section 
9-102 discussing "record" and the comment to amended Section 2-103 discussing "sign."
   6. "Person entitled under the document" is moved from former Section 7-403.
   7. These definitions apply in this Article unless the context otherwise requires. The "context" is intended to refer to 
the context in which the defined term is used in the Uniform Commercial Code. The definition applies whenever the 
defined term is used unless the context in which the defined term is used in the statute indicates that the term was 
not used in its defined sense. See comment to Section 1-201.
Cross References:

§ 7-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 3 of 3
Point 1: Sections 1-201, 7-203 and 7-301.
Point 2: Sections 1-201 and 7-203.
Point 3: Section 1-201.
Point 4: Section 1-304.
Point 5: Section 9-102 and 2-103.
See general comment to document of title in Section 1-201.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchase". Section 1-201.
"Receipt of goods". Section 2-103.
"Right". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document