U.C.C. § 7-301
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS        
§ 7-301. LIABILITY FOR NONRECEIPT OR MISDESCRIPTION; "SAID TO 
CONTAIN"; "SHIPPER'S WEIGHT, LOAD, AND COUNT"; IMPROPER 
HANDLING
(a)  A consignee of a nonnegotiable bill of lading which has given value in good faith, or a holder to which a 
negotiable bill has been duly negotiated, relying upon the description of the goods in the bill or upon the 
date shown in the bill, may recover from the issuer damages caused by the misdating of the bill or the 
nonreceipt or misdescription of the goods, except to the extent that the bill indicates that the issuer does not 
know whether any part or all of the goods in fact were received or conform to the description, such as in a 
case in which the description is in terms of marks or labels or kind, quantity, or condition or the receipt or 
description is qualified by "contents or condition of contents of packages unknown", "said to contain", 
"shipper's weight, load, and count," or words of similar import, if that indication is true.
(b)  If goods are loaded by the issuer of a bill of lading;
(1)  the issuer shall count the packages of goods if shipped in packages and ascertain the kind and 
quantity if shipped in bulk; and
(2)  words such as "shipper's weight, load, and count," or words of similar import indicating that the 
description was made by the shipper are ineffective except as to goods concealed in packages.
(c)  If bulk goods are loaded by a shipper that makes available to the issuer of a bill of lading adequate 
facilities for weighing those goods, the issuer shall ascertain the kind and quantity within a reasonable time 
after receiving the shipper's request in a record to do so. In that case, "shipper's weight" or words of similar 
import are ineffective.
(d)  The issuer of a bill of lading, by including in the bill the words "shipper's weight, load, and count," or 
words of similar import, may indicate that the goods were loaded by the shipper, and, if that statement is 
true, the issuer is not liable for damages caused by the improper loading. However, omission of such words 
does not imply liability for damages caused by improper loading.
(e)  A shipper guarantees to an issuer the accuracy at the time of shipment of the description, marks, 
labels, number, kind, quantity, condition, and weight, as furnished by the shipper, and the shipper shall 
indemnify the issuer against damage caused by inaccuracies in those particulars. This right of indemnity 
does not limit the issuer's responsibility or liability under the contract of carriage to any person other than 
the shipper.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-301.
   Changes: Changes for clarity, style and to recognize deregulation in the transportation industry.

§ 7-301. LIABILITY FOR NONRECEIPT OR MISDESCRIPTION; "SAID TO CONTAIN"; "SHIPPER'S WEIGHT, 
LOAD, AND COUNT"; IMPROPER HANDLING
Page 2 of 3
Purposes:
   1. This section continues the rules from former Section 7-301 with one substantive change. The obligations of the 
issuer of the bill of lading under former subsections (2) and (3) were limited to issuers who were common carriers. 
Subsections (b) and (c) apply the same rules to all issuers not just common carriers. This section is compatible with 
the policies stated in the federal Bills of Lading Act, 49 U.S.C. § 80113 (2000).
   2. The language of the pre-Code Uniform Bills of Lading Act suggested that a carrier is ordinarily liable for 
damage caused by improper loading, but may relieve itself of liability by disclosing on the bill that shipper actually 
loaded. A more accurate statement of the law is that the carrier is not liable for losses caused by act or default of 
the shipper, which would include improper loading.  D. H. Overmyer Co. v. Nelson Brantley Glass Go., 168 S.E.2d 
176 (Ga. Ct. App. 1969). There was some question whether under pre-Code law a carrier was liable even to a good 
faith purchaser of a negotiable bill for such losses, if the shipper's faulty loading in fact caused the loss. Subsection 
(d) permits the carrier to bar, by disclosure of shipper's loading, liability to a good faith purchaser. There is no 
implication that decisions such as Modern Tool Corp. v. Pennsylvania R. Co., 100 F.Supp. 595 (D.N.J.1951), are 
disapproved.
   3. This section is a restatement of existing law as to the method by which a bailee may avoid responsibility for the 
accuracy of descriptions which are made by or in reliance upon information furnished by the depositor or shipper. 
The wording in this section - "contents or condition of contents of packages unknown" or "shipper's weight, load and 
count" - to indicate that the shipper loaded the goods or that the carrier does not know the description, condition, or 
contents of the loaded packages continues to be appropriate as commonly understood in the transportation 
industry. The reasons for this wording are as important in 2002 as when the prior section initially was approved. The 
issuer is liable on documents issued by an agent, contrary to instructions of his principal, without receiving goods. 
No disclaimer of this liability is permitted since it is not a matter either of the care of the goods or their description.
   4. The shipper's erroneous report to the carrier concerning the goods may cause damage to the carrier. 
Subsection (e) therefore provides appropriate indemnity.
   5. The word "freight" in the former Section 7-301 has been changed to "goods" to conform to international and 
domestic land transport usage in which "freight" means the price paid for carriage of the goods and not the goods 
themselves. Hence, changing the word "freight" to the word "goods" is a clarifying change that fits both international 
and domestic practice.
   Cross References: Sections 7-203, 7-309 and 7-501.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Consignee". Section 7-102.
"Document of Title". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Good faith". Section 1-201. [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Holder". Section 1-201.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Notice". Section 1-202.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser." Section 1-201.

§ 7-301. LIABILITY FOR NONRECEIPT OR MISDESCRIPTION; "SAID TO CONTAIN"; "SHIPPER'S WEIGHT, 
LOAD, AND COUNT"; IMPROPER HANDLING
Page 3 of 3
"Receipt of Goods". Section 2-103.
"Value". Section 1-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document