U.C.C. § 8-116
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS        
§ 8-116. SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY AS PURCHASER FOR VALUE
 A securities intermediary that receives a financial asset and establishes a security entitlement to the financial asset 
in favor of an entitlement holder is a purchaser for value of the financial asset. A securities intermediary that 
acquires a security entitlement to a financial asset from another securities intermediary acquires the security 
entitlement for value if the securities intermediary acquiring the security entitlement establishes a security 
entitlement to the financial asset in favor of an entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section is intended to make explicit two points that, while implicit in other provisions, are of sufficient 
importance to the operation of the indirect holding system that they warrant explicit statement. First, it makes clear 
that a securities intermediary that receives a financial asset and establishes a security entitlement in respect thereof 
in favor of an entitlement holder is a "purchaser" of the financial asset that the securities intermediary received. 
Second, it makes clear that by establishing a security entitlement in favor of an entitlement holder a securities 
intermediary gives value for any corresponding financial asset that the securities intermediary receives or acquires 
from another party, whether the intermediary holds directly or indirectly.
   In many cases a securities intermediary that receives a financial asset will also be transferring value to the person 
from whom the financial asset was received. That, however, is not always the case. Payment may occur through a 
different system than settlement of the securities side of the transaction, or the securities might be transferred 
without a corresponding payment, as when a person moves an account from one securities intermediary to another. 
Even though the securities intermediary does not give value to the transferor, it does give value by incurring 
obligations to its own entitlement holder. Although the general definition of value in Section 1-201(44)(d) should be 
interpreted to cover the point, this section is included to make this point explicit.
   2. The following examples illustrate the effect of this section:
   Example 1. Buyer buys 1000 shares of XYZ Co. common stock through Buyer's broker Able & Co. to be held in 
Buyer's securities account. In settlement of the trade, the selling broker delivers to Able a security certificate in 
street name, indorsed in blank, for 1000 shares XYZ Co. stock, which Able holds in its vault. Able credits Buyer's 
account for securities in that amount. Section 8-116 specifies that Able is a purchaser of the XYZ Co. stock 
certificate, and gave value for it. Thus, Able can obtain the benefit of Section 8-303, which protects purchasers for 
value, if it satisfies the other requirements of that section.
   Example 2. Buyer buys 1000 shares XYZ Co. common stock through Buyer's broker Able & Co. to be held in 
Buyer's securities account. The trade is settled by crediting 1000 shares XYZ Co. stock to Able's account at 
Clearing Corporation. Able credits Buyer's account for securities in that amount. When Clearing Corporation credits 
Able's account, Able acquires a security entitlement under Section 8-501. Section 8-116 specifies that Able 
acquired this security entitlement for value. Thus, Able can obtain the benefit of Section 8-502, which protects 
persons who acquire security entitlements for value, if it satisfies the other requirements of that section.
   Example 3. Thief steals a certificated bearer bond from Owner. Thief sends the certificate to his broker Able & Co. 
to be held in his securities account, and Able credits Thief's account for the bond. Section 8-116 specifies that Able 

§ 8-116. SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY AS PURCHASER FOR VALUE
Page 2 of 2
is a purchaser of the bond and gave value for it. Thus, Able can obtain the benefit of Section 8-303, which protects 
purchasers for value, if it satisfies the other requirements of that section.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Financial asset"
   Section 8-102(a)(9)
   "Securities intermediary"
   Section 8-102(a)(14)
   "Security entitlement"
   Section 8-102(a)(17)
   "Entitlement holder"
   Section 8-102(a)(7)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document