U.C.C. § 8-508
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS        
§ 8-508. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO CHANGE ENTITLEMENT 
HOLDER'S POSITION TO OTHER FORM OF SECURITY HOLDING
A securities intermediary shall act at the direction of an entitlement holder to change a security entitlement 
into another available form of holding for which the entitlement holder is eligible, or to cause the financial 
asset to be transferred to a securities account of the entitlement holder with another securities intermediary. 
A securities intermediary satisfies the duty if:
(1)  the securities intermediary acts as agreed upon by the entitlement holder and the securities 
intermediary; or
(2)  in the absence of agreement, the securities intermediary exercises due care in accordance with 
reasonable commercial standards to follow the direction of the entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section states another aspect of the duties of securities intermediaries that make up security entitlements -
- the obligation of the securities intermediary to change an entitlement holder's position into any other form of 
holding for which the entitlement holder is eligible or to transfer the entitlement holder's position to an account at 
another intermediary. This section does not state unconditionally that the securities intermediary is obligated to turn 
over a certificate to the customer or to cause the customer to be registered on the books of the issuer, because the 
customer may not be eligible to hold the security directly. For example, municipal bonds are now commonly issued 
in "book-entry only" form, in which the only entity that the issuer will register on its own books is a depository.
   If security certificates in registered form are issued for the security, and individuals are eligible to have the security 
registered in their own name, the entitlement holder can request that the intermediary deliver or cause to be 
delivered to the entitlement holder a certificate registered in the name of the entitlement holder or a certificate 
indorsed in blank or specially indorsed to the entitlement holder. If security certificates in bearer form are issued for 
the security, the entitlement holder can request that the intermediary deliver or cause to be delivered a certificate in 
bearer form. If the security can be held by individuals directly in uncertificated form, the entitlement holder can 
request that the security be registered in its name. The specification of this duty does not determine the pricing 
terms of the agreement in which the duty arises.
   2. The same "agreement/due care" formula is used in this section as in the other Part 5 sections on the duties of 
intermediaries. So too, the rules of Section 8-509 apply to the Section 8-508 duty.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Agreement"
   Section 1-201(3)
   "Entitlement holder"
   Section 8-102(a)(7)

§ 8-508. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO CHANGE ENTITLEMENT HOLDER'S POSITION TO 
OTHER FORM OF SECURITY HOLDING
Page 2 of 2
   "Financial asset"
   Section 8-102(a)(9)
   "Securities intermediary"
   Section 8-102(a)(14)
   "Security entitlement"
   Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document