U.C.C. § 9-205
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY 
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT          >            SUBPART 1. 
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT        
§ 9-205. USE OR DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL PERMISSIBLE
(a) [When security interest not invalid or fraudulent.]  A security interest is not invalid or fraudulent 
against creditors solely because:
(1)  the debtor has the right or ability to:
(A)  use, commingle, or dispose of all or part of the collateral, including returned or repossessed 
goods;
(B)  collect, compromise, enforce, or otherwise deal with collateral;
(C)  accept the return of collateral or make repossessions; or
(D)  use, commingle, or dispose of proceeds; or
(2)  the secured party fails to require the debtor to account for proceeds or replace collateral.
(b) [Requirements of possession not relaxed.]  This section does not relax the requirements of 
possession if attachment, perfection, or enforcement of a security interest depends upon possession of the 
collateral by the secured party.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-205.
   2. Validity of Unrestricted "Floating Lien." This Article expressly validates the "floating lien" on shifting 
collateral. See Sections 9-201, 9-204 and Comment 2. This section provides that a security interest is not invalid or 
fraudulent by reason of the debtor's liberty to dispose of the collateral without being required to account to the 
secured party for proceeds or substitute new collateral. As did former Section 9-205, this section repeals the rule of 
Benedict v. Ratner, 268 U.S. 353 (1925), and other cases which held such arrangements void as a matter of law 
because the debtor was given unfettered dominion or control over collateral. The Benedict rule did not effectively 
discourage or eliminate security transactions in inventory and receivables. Instead, it forced financing arrangements 
to be self-liquidating. Although this section repeals Benedict, the filing and other perfection requirements (see Part 
3, Subpart 2, and Part 5) provide for public notice that overcomes any potential misleading effects of a debtor's use 
and control of collateral. Moreover, nothing in this section prevents the debtor and secured party from agreeing to 
procedures by which the secured party policies or monitors collateral or to restrictions on the debtor's dominion. 
However, this Article leaves these matters to agreement based on business considerations, not on legal 
requirements.

§ 9-205. USE OR DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL PERMISSIBLE
Page 2 of 2
   3. Possessory Security Interests. Subsection (b) makes clear that this section does not relax the requirements 
for perfection by possession under Section 9-315. If a secured party allows the debtor access to and control over 
collateral its security interest may be or become unperfected.
   4. Permissible Freedom for Debtor to Enforce Collateral. Former Section 9-205 referred to a debtor's "liberty . 
. to collect or compromise accounts or chattel paper." This section recognizes the broader rights of a debtor to 
"enforce," as well as to "collect" and "compromise" collateral. This section's reference to collecting, compromising, 
and enforcing "collateral" instead of "accounts or chattel paper" contemplates the many other types of collateral that 
a debtor may wish to "collect, compromise, or enforce": e.g., deposit accounts, documents, general intangibles, 
instruments, investment property, and letter-of-credit rights.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document