U.C.C. § 9-304
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY          >            SUBPART 1. LAW GOVERNING 
PERFECTION AND PRIORITY        
§ 9-304. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY 
INTERESTS IN DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS
(a) [Law of bank's jurisdiction governs.]  The local law of a bank's jurisdiction governs perfection, the 
effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a security interest in a deposit account maintained 
with that bank.
(b) [Bank's jurisdiction.]  The following rules determine a bank's jurisdiction for purposes of this part:
(1)  If an agreement between the bank and the debtor governing the deposit account expressly 
provides that a particular jurisdiction is the bank's jurisdiction for purposes of this part, this article, or 
[the Uniform Commercial Code], that jurisdiction is the bank's jurisdiction.
(2)  If paragraph (1) does not apply and an agreement between the bank and its customer governing 
the deposit account expressly provides that the agreement is governed by the law of a particular 
jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the bank's jurisdiction.
(3)  If neither paragraph (1) nor paragraph (2) applies and an agreement between the bank and its 
customer governing the deposit account expressly provides that the deposit account is maintained at 
an office in a particular jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the bank's jurisdiction.
(4)  If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the bank's jurisdiction is the jurisdiction in which the 
office identified in an account statement as the office serving the customer's account is located.
(5)  If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the bank's jurisdiction is the jurisdiction in which the 
chief executive office of the bank is located.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New; derived from Section 8-110(e) and former Section 9-103(6).
   2. Deposit Accounts. Under this section, the law of the "bank's jurisdiction" governs perfection and priority of a 
security interest in deposit accounts. Subsection (b) contains rules for determining the "bank's jurisdiction." The 
substance of these rules is substantially similar to that of the rules determining the "security intermediary's 
jurisdiction" under former Section 8-110(e), except that subsection (b)(1) provides more flexibility than the 
analogous provision in former Section 8-110(e)(1). Subsection (b)(1) permits the parties to choose the law of one 
jurisdiction to govern perfection and priority of security interests and a different governing law for other purposes. 
The parties' choice is effective, even if the jurisdiction whose law is chosen bears no relationship to the parties or 
the transaction. Section 8-110(e)(1) has been conformed to subsection (b)(1) of this section, and Section 9-
305(b)(1), concerning a commodity intermediary's jurisdiction, makes a similar departure from former Section 9-
103(6)(e)(i).

§ 9-304. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN DEPOSIT 
ACCOUNTS
Page 2 of 2
   3. Change in Law Governing Perfection. When the bank's jurisdiction changes, the jurisdiction whose law 
governs perfection under subsection (a) changes, as well. Nevertheless, the change will not result in an immediate 
loss of perfection. See Section 9-316(f), (g).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document