U.C.C. § 9-310
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY          >            SUBPART 2. PERFECTION        
§ 9-310. WHEN FILING REQUIRED TO PERFECT SECURITY INTEREST OR 
AGRICULTURAL LIEN; SECURITY INTERESTS AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS 
TO WHICH FILING PROVISIONS DO NOT APPLY
(a) [General rule: perfection by filing.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) and Section 9-
312(b), a financing statement must be filed to perfect all security interests and agricultural liens.
(b) [Exceptions: filing not necessary.]  The filing of a financing statement is not necessary to perfect a 
security interest:
(1)  that is perfected under Section 9-308(d), (e), (f), or (g);
(2)  that is perfected under Section 9-309 when it attaches;
(3)  in property subject to a statute, regulation, or treaty described in Section 9-311(a);
(4)  in goods in possession of a bailee which is perfected under Section 9-312(d)(1) or (2);
(5)  in certificated securities, documents, goods, or instruments which is perfected without filing, control, 
or possession under Section 9-312(e), (f), or (g);
(6)  in collateral in the secured party's possession under Section 9-313;
(7)  in a certificated security which is perfected by delivery of the security certificate to the secured party 
under Section 9-313;
(8)  in deposit accounts, electronic chattel paper, electronic documents, investment property, or letter-
of-credit rights which is perfected by control under Section 9-314;
(9)  in proceeds which is perfected under Section 9-315; or
(10)  that is perfected under Section 9-316.
(c) [Assignment of perfected security interest.]  If a secured party assigns a perfected security interest 
or agricultural lien, a filing under this article is not required to continue the perfected status of the security 
interest against creditors of and transferees from the original debtor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-302(1), (2).
   2. General Rule. Subsection (a) establishes a central Article 9 principle: Filing a financing statement is necessary 
for perfection of security interests and agricultural liens. However, filing is not necessary to perfect a security 
interest that is perfected by another permissible method, see subsection (b), nor does filing ordinarily perfect a 
security interest in a deposit account, letter-of-credit right, or money. See Section 9-312(b). Part 5 of the Article 
deals with the office in which to file, mechanics of filing, and operations of the filing office.

§ 9-310. WHEN FILING REQUIRED TO PERFECT SECURITY INTEREST OR AGRICULTURAL LIEN; 
SECURITY INTERESTS AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS TO WHICH FILING PROVISIONS DO NOT APP....
Page 2 of 2
   3. Exemptions from Filing. Subsection (b) lists the security interests for which filing is not required as a condition 
of perfection, because they are perfected automatically upon attachment (subsections (b)(2) and (b)(9)) or upon the 
occurrence of another event (subsections (b)(1), (b)(5), and (b)(9)), because they are perfected under the law of 
another jurisdiction (subsection (b)(10)), or because they are perfected by another method, such as by the secured 
party's taking possession or control (subsections (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5), (b)(6), (b)(7), and (b)(8)).
   4. Assignments of Perfected Security Interests. Subsection (c) concerns assignment of a perfected security 
interest or agricultural lien. It provides that no filing is necessary in connection with an assignment by a secured 
party to an assignee in order to maintain perfection as against creditors of and transferees from the original debtor.
   Example 1: Buyer buys goods from Seller, who retains a security interest in them. After Seller perfects the 
security interest by filing, Seller assigns the perfected security interest to X. The security interest, in X's hands and 
without further steps on X's part, continues perfected against Buyer's transferees and creditors.
   Example 2: Dealer creates a security interest in specific equipment in favor of Lender. After Lender perfects the 
security interest in the equipment by filing, Lender assigns the chattel paper (which includes the perfected security 
interest in Dealer's equipment) to X. The security interest in the equipment, in X's hands and without further steps 
on X's part, continues perfected against Dealer's transferees and creditors. However, regardless of whether Lender 
made the assignment to secure Lender's obligation to X or whether the assignment was an outright sale of the 
chattel paper, the assignment creates a security interest in the chattel paper in favor of X. Accordingly, X must take 
whatever steps may be required for perfection in order to be protected against Lender's transferees and creditors 
with respect to the chattel paper.
   Subsection (c) applies not only to an assignment of a security interest perfected by filing but also to an 
assignment of a security interest perfected by a method other than by filing, such as by control or by possession. 
Although subsection (c) addresses explicitly only the absence of an additional filing requirement, the same result 
normally will follow in the case of an assignment of a security interest perfected by a method other than by filing. 
For example, as long as possession of collateral is maintained by an assignee or by the assignor or another person 
on behalf of the assignee, no further perfection steps need be taken on account of the assignment to continue 
perfection as against creditors and transferees of the original debtor. Of course, additional action may be required 
for perfection of the assignee's interest as against creditors and transferees of the assignor.
   Similarly, subsection (c) applies to the assignment of a security interest perfected by compliance with a statute, 
regulation, or treaty under Section 9-311(b), such as a certificate-of-title statute. Unless the statute expressly 
provides to the contrary, the security interest will remain perfected against creditors of and transferees from the 
original debtor, even if the assignee takes no action to cause the certificate of title to reflect the assignment or to 
cause its name to appear on the certificate of title. See PEB Commentary No. 12, which discusses this issue under 
former Section 9-302(3). Compliance with the statute is "equivalent to filing" under Section 9-311(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document