U.C.C. § 9-407
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES        
§ 9-407. RESTRICTIONS ON CREATION OR ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY 
INTEREST IN LEASEHOLD INTEREST OR IN LESSOR'S RESIDUAL 
INTEREST
(a) [Term restricting assignment generally ineffective.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), 
a term in a lease agreement is ineffective to the extent that it:
(1)  prohibits, restricts, or requires the consent of a party to the lease to the assignment or transfer of, 
or the creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of a security interest in, an interest of a party 
under the lease contract or in the lessor's residual interest in the goods; or
(2)  provides that the assignment or transfer or the creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of 
the security interest may give rise to a default, breach, right of recoupment, claim, defense, termination, 
right of termination, or remedy under the lease.
(b) [Effectiveness of certain terms.]  Except as otherwise provided in Section 2A-303(7), a term 
described in subsection (a)(2) is effective to the extent that there is:
(1)  a transfer by the lessee of the lessee's right of possession or use of the goods in violation of the 
term; or
(2)  a delegation of a material performance of either party to the lease contract in violation of the term.
(c) [Security interest not material impairment.]  The creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of 
a security interest in the lessor's interest under the lease contract or the lessor's residual interest in the 
goods is not a transfer that materially impairs the lessee's prospect of obtaining return performance or 
materially changes the duty of or materially increases the burden or risk imposed on the lessee within the 
purview of Section 2A-303(4) unless, and then only to the extent that, enforcement actually results in a 
delegation of material performance of the lessor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Section 2A-303.
   2. Restrictions on Assignment Generally Ineffective. Under subsection (a), as under former Section 2A-
303(3), a term in a lease agreement which prohibits or restricts the creation of a security interest generally is 
ineffective. This reflects the general policy of Section 9-406(d) and former Section 9-318(4). This section has been 
conformed in several respects to analogous provisions in Sections 9-406, 9-408, and 9-409, including the 
substitution of "ineffective" for "not enforceable" and the substitution of "assignment or transfer of, or the* creation, 
attachment, perfection, or enforcement of a security interest" for "creation or enforcement of a security interest." 
*Amendments in italics approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code October 20, 
1999.

§ 9-407. RESTRICTIONS ON CREATION OR ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST IN LEASEHOLD 
INTEREST OR IN LESSOR'S RESIDUAL INTEREST
Page 2 of 2
   3. Exceptions for Certain Transfers and Delegations. Subsection (b) provides exceptions to the general 
ineffectiveness of restrictions under subsection (a). A term that otherwise is ineffective under subsection (a)(2) is 
effective to the extent that a lessee transfers its right to possession and use of goods or if either party delegates 
material performance of the lease contract in violation of the term. However, under subsection (c), as under former 
Section 2A-303(3), a lessor's creation of a security interest in its interest in a lease contract or its residual interest in 
the leased goods is not a material impairment under Section 2A-303(4) (former Section 2A-303(5)), absent an 
actual delegation of the lessor's material performance. The terms of the lease contract determine whether the 
lessor, in fact, has any remaining obligations to perform. If it does, it is then necessary to determine whether there 
has been an actual delegation of "material performance." See Section 2A-303, Comments 3 and 4.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document