U.C.C. § 9-522
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE        
§ 9-522. MAINTENANCE AND DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS
[Alternative A]
(a) [Post-lapse maintenance and retrieval of information.]  The filing office shall maintain a record 
of the information provided in a filed financing statement for at least one year after the effectiveness of 
the financing statement has lapsed under Section 9-515 with respect to all secured parties of record. 
The record must be retrievable by using the name of the debtor and by using the file number assigned 
to the initial financing statement to which the record relates.
[Alternative B]
(a) [Post-lapse maintenance and retrieval of information.]  The filing office shall maintain a record 
of the information provided in a filed financing statement for at least one year after the effectiveness of 
the financing statement has lapsed under Section 9-515 with respect to all secured parties of record. 
The record must be retrievable by using the name of the debtor and:
(1)  if the record was filed [or recorded] in the filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(1), by using 
the file number assigned to the initial financing statement to which the record relates and the date 
[and time] that the record was filed [or recorded]; or
(2)  if the record was filed in the filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(2), by using the file 
number assigned to the initial financing statement to which the record relates.
[End of Alternatives]
(b) [Destruction of written records.]  Except to the extent that a statute governing disposition of 
public records provides otherwise, the filing office immediately may destroy any written record 
evidencing a financing statement. However, if the filing office destroys a written record, it shall maintain 
another record of the financing statement which complies with subsection (a).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Legislative Note: States whose real-estate filing offices require additional information in amendments and cannot 
search their records by both the name of the debtor and the file number should enact Alternative B to Sections 9-
512(a), 9-518(b), 9-518(d), 9-519(f) and 9-522(a).
   1. Source. Former Section 9-403(3), revised substantially.
   2. Maintenance of Records. Section 9-523 requires the filing office to provide information concerning certain 
lapsed financing statements. Accordingly, subsection (a) requires the filing office to maintain a record of the 
information in a financing statement for at least one year after lapse. During that time, the filing office may not 
delete any information with respect to a filed financing statement; it may only add information. This approach 
relieves the filing office from any duty to determine whether to substitute or delete information upon receipt of an 

§ 9-522. MAINTENANCE AND DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS
Page 2 of 2
amendment. It also assures searchers that they will receive all information with respect to financing statements filed 
against a debtor and thereby be able themselves to determine the state of the public record.
   The filing office may maintain this information in any medium. Subsection (b) permits the filing office immediately 
to destroy written records evidencing a financing statement, provided that the filing office maintains another record 
of the information contained in the financing statement as required by subsection (a).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document