U.C.C. § 9-801
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 8. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR 2010 AMENDMENTS        
§ 9-801. EFFECTIVE DATE
 This [Act] takes effect on July 1, 2013.
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: Because these amendments change the proper place in which to file to perfect certain security 
interests, it is particularly important that States adopt a uniform effective date. Otherwise, the status of a particular 
security interest as perfected or unperfected would depend on whether the matter was litigated in a State in which 
the amendments were in effect or a State in which the amendments were not in effect. Any one State's failure to 
adopt the uniform effective date will significantly increase the cost and uncertainty surrounding the affected 
transactions.
Official Comment
   These transition provisions largely track the provisions of Part 7, which govern the transition to the 1998 revision 
of this Article. The Comments to the sections of Part 7 generally are relevant to the corresponding sections of Part 
8. The 2010 amendments are less far-reaching than the 1998 revision. Although Part 8 does not carry forward 
those Part 7 provisions that clearly would have no application to the transition to the amendments, as a matter of 
prudence Part 8 does carry forward all Part 7 provisions that are even arguably relevant to the transition.
   The most significant transition problem raised by the 2010 amendments arises from changes to Section 9-503(a), 
concerning the name of the debtor that must be provided for a financing statement to be sufficient. Sections 9-805 
and 9-806 address this problem.
   Example: On November 8, 2012, Debtor, an individual whose "individual name" is "Lon Debtor" and whose 
principal residence is located in State A, creates a security interest in certain manufacturing equipment. On 
November 15, 2012, SP perfects a security interest in the equipment under Article 9 (as in effect prior to the 2010 
amendments) by filing a financing statement against "Lon Debtor" in the State A filing office. On July 1, 2013, the 
2010 amendments, including Alternative A to Section 9-503(a), take effect in State A. Debtor's unexpired State A 
driver's indicates that Debtor's name is "Polonius Debtor." Assuming that a search under "Polonius Debtor" using 
the filing office's standard search logic would not disclose the filed financing statement, the financing statement 
would be insufficient under amended Section 9-503(a)(4) (Alt. A). However, Section 9-805(b) provides that the 2010 
amendments do not render the financing statement ineffective. Rather, the financing statement remains effective--
even if it has become seriously misleading--until it would have ceased to be effective had the amendments not 
taken effect. See Section 9-805(b)(1). SP can continue the effectiveness of the financing statement by filing a 
continuation statement with the State A filing office. To do so, however, SP must amend Debtor's name on the 
financing statement to provide the name that is sufficient under Section 9-503(a)(4) (Alt. A) at the time the 
continuation statement is filed. See Section 9-805(c), (e).
   The most significant transition problem addressed by the 1998 revision arose from the change in the choice-of-
law rules governing where to file a financing statement. The 2010 amendments do not change the choice-of-law 
rules. Even so, the amendments will change the place to file in a few cases, because certain entities that were not 
previously classified as "registered organizations" would fall within that category under the amendments.

§ 9-801. EFFECTIVE DATE
Page 2 of 2
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document