U.C.C. § 2-725
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 7. 
REMEDIES        
§ 2-725. Statute of Limitations in Contracts for Sale.
(1)  An action for breach of any contract for sale must be commenced within four years after the cause of 
action has accrued.  By the original agreement the parties may reduce the period of limitation to not less 
than one year but may not extend it.
(2)  A cause of action accrues when the breach occurs, regardless of the aggrieved party's lack of 
knowledge of the breach.  A breach of warranty occurs when tender of delivery is made, except that where 
a warranty explicitly extends to future performance of the goods and discovery of the breach must await the 
time of such performance the cause of action accrues when the breach is or should have been discovered.
(3)  Where an action commenced within the time limited by subsection (1) is so terminated as to leave 
available a remedy by another action for the same breach such other action may be commenced after the 
expiration of the time limited and within six months after the termination of the first action unless the 
termination resulted from voluntary discontinuance or from dismissal for failure or neglect to prosecute.
(4)  This section does not alter the law on tolling of the statute of limitations nor does it apply to causes of 
action which have accrued before this Act becomes effective.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To introduce a uniform statute of limitations for sales contracts, thus eliminating the jurisdictional 
variations and providing needed relief for concerns doing business on a nationwide scale whose contracts have 
heretofore been governed by several different periods of limitation depending upon the state in which the 
transaction occurred.  This Article takes sales contracts out of the general laws limiting the time for commencing 
contractual actions and selects a four year period as the most appropriate to modern business practice.  This is 
within the normal commercial record keeping period.
Subsection (1) permits the parties to reduce the period of limitation.  The minimum period is set at one year.  The 
parties may not, however, extend the statutory period.
Subsection (2), providing that the cause of action accrues when the breach occurs, states an exception where the 
warranty extends to future performance.
Subsection (3) states the saving provision included in many state statutes and permits an additional short period for 
bringing new actions, where suits begun within the four year period have been terminated so as to leave a remedy 
still available for the same breach.
Subsection (4) makes it clear that this Article does not purport to alter or modify in any respect the law on tolling of 
the Statute of Limitations as it now prevails in the various jurisdictions.

§ 2-725. Statute of Limitations in Contracts for Sale.
Page 2 of 2
Definitional Cross References:
"Action".  Section 1-201.
"Aggrieved party".  Section 1-201.
"Agreement".  Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale".  Section 2-106.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Remedy".  Section 1-201.
"Term".  Section 1-201.
"Termination".  Section 2-106.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document