U.C.C. § 2-713
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 7. 
REMEDIES        
§ 2-713. Buyer's Damages for Non-delivery or Repudiation.
(1)  Subject to the provisions of this Article with respect to proof of market price ( Section 2-723), the 
measure of damages for non-delivery or repudiation by the seller is the difference between the market price 
at the time when the buyer learned of the breach and the contract price together with any incidental and 
consequential damages provided in this Article ( Section 2-715), but less expenses saved in consequence 
of the seller's breach.
(2)  Market price is to be determined as of the place for tender or, in cases of rejection after arrival or 
revocation of acceptance, as of the place of arrival.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 67(3), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To clarify the former rule so that:
1. The general baseline adopted in this section uses as a yardstick the market in which the buyer would have 
obtained cover had he sought that relief.  So the place for measuring damages is the place of tender (or the place 
of arrival if the goods are rejected or their acceptance is revoked after reaching their destination) and the crucial 
time is the time at which the buyer learns of the breach.
2. The market or current price to be used in comparison with the contract price under this section is the price for 
goods of the same kind and in the same branch of trade.
3. When the current market price under this section is difficult to prove the section on determination and proof of 
market price is available to permit a showing of a comparable market price or, where no market price is available, 
evidence of spot sale prices is proper.  Where the unavailability of a market price is caused by a scarcity of goods 
of the type involved, a good case is normally made for specific performance under this Article.  Such scarcity 
conditions, moreover, indicate that the price has risen and under the section providing for liberal administration of 
remedies, opinion evidence as to the value of the goods would be admissible in the absence of a market price and 
a liberal construction of allowable consequential damages should also result.
4. This section carries forward the standard rule that the buyer must deduct from his damages any expenses saved 
as a result of the breach.
5. The present section provides a remedy which is completely alternative to cover under the preceding section and 
applies only when and to the extent that the buyer has not covered.
Cross References:

§ 2-713. Buyer's Damages for Non-delivery or Repudiation.
Page 2 of 2
Point 3: Sections 1-106, 2-716 and 2-723.
Point 5: Section 2-712.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document