U.C.C. § 4-101
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 4-101. SHORT TITLE
 This Article may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code--Bank Deposits and Collections.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. The great number of checks handled by banks and the country-wide nature of the bank collection process 
require uniformity in the law of bank collections. There is needed a uniform statement of the principal rules of the 
bank collection process with ample provision for flexibility to meet the needs of the large volume handled and the 
changing needs and conditions that are bound to come with the years. This Article meets that need.
   2. In 1950 at the time Article 4 was drafted, 6.7 billion checks were written annually. By the time of the 1990 
revision of Article 4 annual volume was estimated by the American Bankers Association to be about 50 billion 
checks. The banking system could not have coped with this increase in check volume had it not developed in the 
late 1950s and early 1960s an automated system for check collection based on encoding checks with machine-
readable information by Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR). An important goal of the 1990 revision of 
Article 4 is to promote the efficiency of the check collection process by making the provisions of Article 4 more 
compatible with the needs of an automated system and, by doing so, increase the speed and lower the cost of 
check collection for those who write and receive checks. An additional goal of the 1990 revision of Article 4 is to 
remove any statutory barriers in the Article to the ultimate adoption of programs allowing the presentment of checks 
to payor banks by electronic transmission of information captured from the MICR line on the checks. The potential 
of these programs for saving the time and expense of transporting the huge volume of checks from depositary to 
payor banks is evident.
   3. Article 4 defines rights between parties with respect to bank deposits and collections. It is not a regulatory 
statute. It does not regulate the terms of the bank-customer agreement, nor does it prescribe what constraints 
different jurisdictions may wish to impose on that relationship in the interest of consumer protection. The revisions in 
Article 4 are intended to create a legal framework that accommodates automation and truncation for the benefit of 
all bank customers. This may raise consumer problems which enacting jurisdictions may wish to address in 
individual legislation. For example, with respect to Section 4-401(c), jurisdictions may wish to examine their unfair 
and deceptive practices laws to determine whether they are adequate to protect drawers who postdate checks from 
unscrupulous practices that may arise on the part of persons who induce drawers to issue postdated checks in the 
erroneous belief that the checks will not be immediately payable. Another example arises from the fact that under 
various truncation plans customers will no longer receive their cancelled checks and will no longer have the 
cancelled check to prove payment. Individual legislation might provide that a copy of a bank statement along with a 
copy of the check is prima facie evidence of payment.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 4-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 2 of 2
End of Document