U.C.C. § 4-503
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 5. COLLECTION OF DOCUMENTARY DRAFTS        
§ 4-503. RESPONSIBILITY OF PRESENTING BANK FOR DOCUMENTS AND 
GOODS; REPORT OF REASONS FOR DISHONOR; REFEREE IN CASE OF 
NEED
Unless otherwise instructed and except as provided in Article 5, a bank presenting a documentary draft:
(1)  must deliver the documents to the drawee on acceptance of the draft if it is payable more than 
three days after presentment; otherwise, only on payment; and
(2)  upon dishonor, either in the case of presentment for acceptance or presentment for payment, may 
seek and follow instructions from any referee in case of need designated in the draft or, if the 
presenting bank does not choose to utilize the referee's services, it must use diligence and good faith to 
ascertain the reason for dishonor, must notify its transferor of the dishonor and of the results of its effort 
to ascertain the reasons therefor, and must request instructions.
However the presenting bank is under no obligation with respect to goods represented by the documents 
except to follow any reasonable instructions seasonably received; it has a right to reimbursement for any 
expense incurred in following instructions and to prepayment of or indemnity for those expenses.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section states the rules governing, in the absence of instructions, the duty of the presenting bank in case 
either of honor or of dishonor of a documentary draft. The section should be read in connection with Section 2-514 
on when documents are deliverable on acceptance, when on payment. In the case of a dishonor of the draft, the 
bank, subject to Section 4-504, must return possession or control of the documents to its principal.
   2. If the draft is drawn under a letter of credit, Article 5 controls. See Sections 5-109 through 5-114.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document