U.C.C. § 7-402
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 4. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: GENERAL OBLIGATIONS        
§ 7-402. DUPLICATE DOCUMENT OF TITLE; OVERISSUE
 A duplicate or any other document of title purporting to cover goods already represented by an outstanding 
document of the same issuer does not confer any right in the goods, except as provided in the case of tangible bills 
of lading in a set of parts, overissue of documents for fungible goods, substitutes for lost, stolen, or destroyed 
documents, or substitute documents issued pursuant to Section 7-105. The issuer is liable for damages caused by 
its overissue or failure to identify a duplicate document by a conspicuous notation.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-402.
   Changes: Changes to accommodate electronic documents.
Purposes:
   1. This section treats a duplicate which is not properly identified as a duplicate like any other overissue of 
documents: a purchaser of such a document acquires no title but only a cause of action for damages against the 
person that made the deception possible, except in the cases noted in the section. But parts of a tangible bill 
lawfully issued in a set of parts are not "overissue" (Section 7-304). Of course, if the issuer has clearly indicated that 
a document is a duplicate so that no one can be deceived by it, and in fact the duplicate is a correct copy of the 
original, the issuer is not liable for preparing and delivering such a duplicate copy.
   Section 7-105 allows documents of title to be reissued in another medium. Re-issuance of a document in an 
alternative medium under Section 7-105 requires that the original document be surrendered to the issuer in order to 
make the substitute document the effective document. If the substitute document is not issued in compliance with 
section 7-105, then the document should be treated as a duplicate under this section.
   2. The section applies to nonnegotiable documents to the extent of providing an action for damages for one who 
acquires an unmarked duplicate from a transferor who knew the facts and would therefore have had no cause of 
action against the issuer of the duplicate. Ordinarily the transferee of a nonnegotiable document acquires only the 
rights of its transferor.
   3. Overissue is defined so as to exclude the common situation where two valid documents of different issuers are 
outstanding for the same goods at the same time. Thus freight forwarders commonly issue bills of lading to their 
customers for small shipments to be combined into carload shipments for which the railroad will issue a bill of lading 
to the forwarder. So also a warehouse receipt may be outstanding against goods, and the holder of the receipt may 
issue delivery orders against the same goods. In these cases dealings with the subsequently issued documents 
may be effective to transfer title; e.g. negotiation of a delivery order will effectively transfer title in the ordinary case 
where no dishonesty has occurred and the goods are available to satisfy the orders. Section 7-503 provides for 
cases of conflict between documents of different issuers.

§ 7-402. DUPLICATE DOCUMENT OF TITLE; OVERISSUE
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 7-105, 7-207, 7-304, and 7-601.
Point 3: Section 7-503.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Conspicuous". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Fungible goods." Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Right". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document