U.C.C. § 8-204
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER        
§ 8-204. EFFECT OF ISSUER'S RESTRICTION ON TRANSFER
A restriction on transfer of a security imposed by the issuer, even if otherwise lawful, is ineffective against a 
person without knowledge of the restriction unless:
(1)  the security is certificated and the restriction is noted conspicuously on the security certificate; or
(2)  the security is uncertificated and the registered owner has been notified of the restriction.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Restrictions on transfer of securities are imposed by issuers in a variety of circumstances and for a variety of 
purposes, such as to retain control of a close corporation or to ensure compliance with federal securities laws. 
Other law determines whether such restrictions are permissible. This section deals only with the consequences of 
failure to note the restriction on a security certificate.
   This section imposes no bar to enforcement of a restriction on transfer against a person who has actual 
knowledge of it.
   2. A restriction on transfer of a certificated security is ineffective against a person without knowledge of the 
restriction unless the restriction is noted conspicuously on the certificate. The word "noted" is used to make clear 
that the restriction need not be set forth in full text. Refusal by an issuer to register a transfer on the basis of an 
unnoted restriction would be a violation of the issuer's duty to register under Section 8-401.
   3. The policy of this section is the same as in Section 8-202. A purchaser who takes delivery of a certificated 
security is entitled to rely on the terms stated on the certificate. That policy obviously does not apply to 
uncertificated securities. For uncertificated securities, this section requires only that the registered owner has been 
notified of the restriction. Suppose, for example, that A is the registered owner of an uncertificated security, and that 
the issuer has notified A of a restriction on transfer. A agrees to sell the security to B, in violation of the restriction. A 
completes a written instruction directing the issuer to register transfer to B, and B pays A for the security at the time 
A delivers the instruction to B. A does not inform B of the restriction, and B does not otherwise have notice or 
knowledge of it at the time B pays and receives the instruction. B presents the instruction to the issuer, but the 
issuer refuses to register the transfer on the grounds that it would violate the restriction. The issuer has complied 
with this section, because it did notify the registered owner A of the restriction. The issuer's refusal to register 
transfer is not wrongful. B has an action against A for breach of transfer warranty, see Section 8-108(b)(4)(iii). B's 
mistake was treating an uncertificated security transaction in the fashion appropriate only for a certificated security. 
The mechanism for transfer of uncertificated securities is registration of transfer on the books of the issuer; handing 
over an instruction only initiates the process. The purchaser should make arrangements to ensure that the price is 
not paid until it knows that the issuer has or will register transfer.
   4. In the indirect holding system, investors neither take physical delivery of security certificates nor have 
uncertificated securities registered in their names. So long as the requirements of this section have been satisfied at 
the level of the relationship between the issuer and the securities intermediary that is a direct holder, this section 
does not preclude the issuer from enforcing a restriction on transfer. See Section 8-202(a) and Comment 2 thereto.

§ 8-204. EFFECT OF ISSUER'S RESTRICTION ON TRANSFER
Page 2 of 2
   5. This section deals only with restrictions imposed by the issuer. Restrictions imposed by statute are not affected. 
See Quiner v. Marblehead Social Co., 10 Mass. 476 (1813); Madison Bank v. Price, 79 Kan. 289, 100 P. 280 
(1909); Healey v. Steele Center Creamery Ass'n, 115 Minn. 451, 133 N.W. 69 (1911). Nor does it deal with private 
agreements between stockholders containing restrictive covenants as to the sale of the security.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Certificated security"
   Section 8-102(a)(4)
   "Conspicuous"
   Section 1-201(10)
   "Issuer"
   Section 8-201
   "Knowledge"
   Section 1-201(25)
   "Notify"   Section 1-201(25)
   "Purchaser"
   Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
   "Security"
   Section 8-102(a)(15)
   "Security certificate"
   Section 8-102(a)(16)
   "Uncertificated security"
   Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document