U.C.C. § 8-401
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 4. REGISTRATION        
§ 8-401. DUTY OF ISSUER TO REGISTER TRANSFER
(a)  If a certificated security in registered form is presented to an issuer with a request to register transfer or 
an instruction is presented to an issuer with a request to register transfer of an uncertificated security, the 
issuer shall register the transfer as requested if:
(1)  under the terms of the security the person seeking registration of transfer is eligible to have the 
security registered in its name;
(2)  the indorsement or instruction is made by the appropriate person or by an agent who has actual 
authority to act on behalf of the appropriate person;
(3)  reasonable assurance is given that the indorsement or instruction is genuine and authorized ( 
Section 8-402);
(4)  any applicable law relating to the collection of taxes has been complied with;
(5)  the transfer does not violate any restriction on transfer imposed by the issuer in accordance with 
Section 8-204;
(6)  a demand that the issuer not register transfer has not become effective under Section 8-403, or the 
issuer has complied with Section 8-403(b) but no legal process or indemnity bond is obtained as 
provided in Section 8-403(d); and
(7)  the transfer is in fact rightful or is to a protected purchaser.
(b)  If an issuer is under a duty to register a transfer of a security, the issuer is liable to a person presenting 
a certificated security or an instruction for registration or to the person's principal for loss resulting from 
unreasonable delay in registration or failure or refusal to register the transfer.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section states the duty of the issuer to register transfers. A duty exists only if certain preconditions exist. If 
any of the preconditions do not exist, there is no duty to register transfer. If an indorsement on a security certificate 
is a forgery, there is no duty. If an instruction to transfer an uncertificated security is not originated by an appropriate 
person, there is no duty. If there has not been compliance with applicable tax laws, there is no duty. If a security 
certificate is properly indorsed but nevertheless the transfer is in fact wrongful, there is no duty unless the transfer is 
to a protected purchaser (and the other preconditions exist).
   This section does not constitute a mandate that the issuer must establish that all preconditions are met before the 
issuer registers a transfer. The issuer may waive the reasonable assurances specified in paragraph (a)(3). If it has 
confidence in the responsibility of the persons requesting transfer, it may ignore questions of compliance with tax 
laws. Although an issuer has no duty if the transfer is wrongful, the issuer has no duty to inquire into adverse 
claims, see Section 8-404.

§ 8-401. DUTY OF ISSUER TO REGISTER TRANSFER
Page 2 of 2
   2. By subsection (b) the person entitled to registration may not only compel it but may hold the issuer liable in 
damages for unreasonable delay.
   3. Section 8-201(c) provides that with respect to registration of transfer, "issuer" means the person on whose 
behalf transfer books are maintained. Transfer agents, registrars or the like within the scope of their respective 
functions have rights and duties under this Part similar to those of the issuer. See Section 8-407.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Appropriate person"
   Section 8-107
   "Certificated security"
   Section 8-102(a)(4)
   "Genuine"
   Section 1-201(18)
   "Indorsement"
   Section 8-102(a)(11)
   "Instruction"
   Section 8-102(a)(12)
   "Issuer"
   Section 8-201
   "Protected purchaser"
   Section 8-303
   "Registered form"
   Section 8-102(a)(13)
   "Uncertificated security"
   Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document