U.C.C. § 9-628
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 6. DEFAULT          >            SUBPART 2. NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE        
§ 9-628. NONLIABILITY AND LIMITATION ON LIABILITY OF SECURED 
PARTY; LIABILITY OF SECONDARY OBLIGOR
(a) [Limitation of liability of secured party for noncompliance with article.]  Unless a secured party 
knows that a person is a debtor or obligor, knows the identity of the person, and knows how to 
communicate with the person:
(1)  the secured party is not liable to the person, or to a secured party or lienholder that has filed a 
financing statement against the person, for failure to comply with this article; and
(2)  the secured party's failure to comply with this article does not affect the liability of the person for a 
deficiency.
(b) [Limitation of liability based on status as secured party.]  A secured party is not liable because of 
its status as secured party:
(1)  to a person that is a debtor or obligor, unless the secured party knows:
(A)  that the person is a debtor or obligor;
(B)  the identity of the person; and
(C)  how to communicate with the person; or
(2)  to a secured party or lienholder that has filed a financing statement against a person, unless the 
secured party knows:
(A)  that the person is a debtor; and
(B)  the identity of the person.
(c) [Limitation of liability if reasonable belief that transaction not a consumer-goods transaction or 
consumer transaction.]  A secured party is not liable to any person, and a person's liability for a 
deficiency is not affected, because of any act or omission arising out of the secured party's reasonable 
belief that a transaction is not a consumer-goods transaction or a consumer transaction or that goods are 
not consumer goods, if the secured party's belief is based on its reasonable reliance on:
(1)  a debtor's representation concerning the purpose for which collateral was to be used, acquired, or 
held; or
(2)  an obligor's representation concerning the purpose for which a secured obligation was incurred.
(d) [Limitation of liability for statutory damages.]  A secured party is not liable to any person under 
Section 9-625(c)(2) for its failure to comply with Section 9-616.
(e) [Limitation of multiple liability for statutory damages.]  A secured party is not liable under Section 9-
625(c)(2) more than once with respect to any one secured obligation.
Annotations
Commentary

§ 9-628. NONLIABILITY AND LIMITATION ON LIABILITY OF SECURED PARTY; LIABILITY OF 
SECONDARY OBLIGOR
Page 2 of 2
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New.
   2. Exculpatory Provisions. Subsections (a), (b), and (c) contain exculpatory provisions that should be read in 
conjunction with Section 9-605. Without this group of provisions, a secured party could incur liability to unknown 
persons and under circumstances that would not allow the secured party to protect itself. The broadened definition 
of the term "debtor" underscores the need for these provisions.
   If a secured party reasonably, but mistakenly, believes that a consumer transaction or consumer-goods 
transaction is a non-consumer transaction or non-consumer-goods transaction, and if the secured party's belief is 
based on its reasonable reliance on a representation of the type specified in subsection (c)(1) or (c)(2), then this 
Article should be applied as if the facts reasonably believed and the representation reasonably relied upon were 
true. For example, if a secured party reasonably believed that a transaction was a non-consumer transaction and its 
belief was based on reasonable reliance on the debtor's representation that the collateral secured an obligation 
incurred for business purposes, the secured party is not liable to any person, and the debtor's liability for a 
deficiency is not affected, because of any act or omission of the secured party which arises out of the reasonable 
belief. Of course, if the secured party's belief is not reasonable or, even if reasonable, is not based on reasonable 
reliance on the debtor's representation, this limitation on liability is inapplicable.
   3. Inapplicability of Statutory Damages to Section 9-616. Subsection (d) excludes noncompliance with Section 
9-616 entirely from the scope of statutory damage liability under Section 9-625(c)(2).
   4. Single Liability for Statutory Minimum Damages. Subsection (e) ensures that a secured party will incur 
statutory damages only once in connection with any one secured obligation.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document