U.C.C. § 9-510
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND 
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT        
§ 9-510. EFFECTIVENESS OF FILED RECORD
(a) [Filed record effective if authorized.]  A filed record is effective only to the extent that it was filed by a 
person that may file it under Section 9-509.
(b) [Authorization by one secured party of record.]  A record authorized by one secured party of record 
does not affect the financing statement with respect to another secured party of record.
(c) [Continuation statement not timely filed.]  A continuation statement that is not filed within the six-
month period prescribed by Section 9-515(d) is ineffective.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New.
   2. Ineffectiveness of Unauthorized or Overbroad Filings. Subsection (a) provides that a filed financing 
statement is effective only to the extent it was filed by a person entitled to file it.
   Example 1: Debtor authorizes the filing of a financing statement covering inventory. Under Section 9-509, the 
secured party may file a financing statement covering only inventory; it may not file a financing statement covering 
other collateral. The secured party files a financing statement covering inventory and equipment. This section 
provides that the financing statement is effective only to the extent the secured party may file it. Thus, the financing 
statement is effective to perfect a security interest in inventory but ineffective to perfect a security interest in 
equipment.
   3. Multiple Secured Parties of Record. Section 9-509(e) permits any secured party of record to authorize the 
filing of most amendments. Subsection (b) of this section prevents a filing authorized by one secured party of record 
from affecting the rights and powers of another secured party of record without the latter's consent.
   Example 2: Debtor creates a security interest in favor of A and B. The filed financing statement names A and B 
as the secured parties. An amendment deleting some collateral covered by the financing statement is filed pursuant 
to B's authorization. Although B's security interest in the deleted collateral becomes unperfected, A's security 
interest remains perfected in all the collateral.
   Example 3: Debtor creates a security interest in favor of A and B. The financing statement names A and B as the 
secured parties. A termination statement is filed pursuant to B's authorization. Although the effectiveness of the 
financing statement terminates with respect to B's security interest, A's rights are unaffected. That is, the financing 
statement continues to be effective to perfect A's security interest.
   4. Continuation Statements. A continuation statement may be filed only within the six months immediately 
before lapse. See Section 9-515(d). The filing office is obligated to reject a continuation statement that is filed 

§ 9-510. EFFECTIVENESS OF FILED RECORD
Page 2 of 2
outside the six-month period. See Sections 9-520(a), 9-516(b)(7). Subsection (c) provides that if the filing office fails 
to reject a continuation statement that is not filed in a timely manner, the continuation statement is ineffective 
nevertheless.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document