U.C.C. § 9-503
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND 
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT        
§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
(a) [Sufficiency of debtor's name.]  A financing statement sufficiently provides the name of the debtor:
(1)  except as otherwise provided in paragraph (3), if the debtor is a registered organization or the 
collateral is held in a trust that is a registered organization, only if the financing statement provides the 
name that is stated to be the registered organization's name on the public organic record most recently 
filed with or issued or enacted by the registered organization's jurisdiction of organization which 
purports to state, amend, or restate the registered organization's name;
(2)  subject to subsection (f), if the collateral is being administered by the personal representative of a 
decedent, only if the financing statement provides, as the name of the debtor, the name of the 
decedent and, in a separate part of the financing statement, indicates that the collateral is being 
administered by a personal representative;
(3)  if the collateral is held in a trust that is not a registered organization, only if the financing statement:
(A)  provides, as the name of the debtor:
(i)  if the organic record of the trust specifies a name for the trust, the name specified; or
(ii)  if the organic record of the trust does not specify a name for the trust, the name of the 
settlor or testator; and
(B)  in a separate part of the financing statement:
(i)  if the name is provided in accordance with subparagraph (A)(i), indicates that the collateral 
is held in a trust; or
(ii)  if the name is provided in accordance with subparagraph (A)(ii), provides additional 
information sufficient to distinguish the trust from other trusts having one or more of the same 
settlors or the same testator and indicates that the collateral is held in a trust, unless the 
additional information so indicates;
[Alternative A]
(4)  subject to subsection (g), if the debtor is an individual to whom this State has issued a [driver's 
license] that has not expired, only if the financing statement provides the name of the individual which 
is indicated on the [driver's license];
(5)  if the debtor is an individual to whom paragraph (4) does not apply, only if the financing statement 
provides the individual name of the debtor or the surname and first personal name of the debtor; and
(6)  in other cases:
(A)  if the debtor has a name, only if the financing statement provides the individual or 
organizational name of the debtor; and
(B)  if the debtor does not have a name, only if it provides the names of the partners, members, 
associates, or other persons comprising the debtor, in a manner that each name provided would be 
sufficient if the person named were the debtor.

§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 2 of 7
(b) [Additional debtor-related information.]  A financing statement that provides the name of the debtor 
in accordance with subsection (a) is not rendered ineffective by the absence of:
(1)  a trade name or other name of the debtor; or
(2)  unless required under subsection (a)(6)(B), names of partners, members, associates, or other 
persons comprising the debtor.
[Alternative B]
(4)  if the debtor is an individual, only if the financing statement:
(A)  provides the individual name of the debtor;
(B)  provides the surname and first personal name of the debtor; or
(C)  subject to subsection (g), provides the name of the individual which is indicated on a [driver's 
license] that this State has issued to the individual and which has not expired; and
(5)  in other cases:
(A)  if the debtor has a name, only if the financing statement provides the organizational name of 
the debtor; and
(B)  if the debtor does not have a name, only if the financing statement provides the names of the 
partners, members, associates, or other persons comprising the debtor, in a manner that each 
name provided would be sufficient if the person named were the debtor.
(b) [Additional debtor-related information.]  A financing statement that provides the name of the debtor 
in accordance with subsection (a) is not rendered ineffective by the absence of:
(1)  a trade name or other name of the debtor; or
(2)  unless required under subsection (a)(5)(B), names of partners, members, associates, or other 
persons comprising the debtor.
[End of Alternatives]
(c) [Debtor's trade name insufficient.]  A financing statement that provides only the debtor's trade name 
does not sufficiently provide the name of the debtor.
(d) [Representative capacity.]  Failure to indicate the representative capacity of a secured party or 
representative of a secured party does not affect the sufficiency of a financing statement.
(e) [Multiple debtors and secured parties.]  A financing statement may provide the name of more than 
one debtor and the name of more than one secured party.
(f) [Name of decedent.]  The name of the decedent indicated on the order appointing the personal 
representative of the decedent issued by the court having jurisdiction over the collateral is sufficient as the 
"name of the decedent" under subsection (a)(2).
[Alternative A]
(g) [Multiple driver's licenses.]  If this State has issued to an individual more than one [driver's license] of 
a kind described in subsection (a)(4), the one that was issued most recently is the one to which subsection 
(a)(4) refers.
[Alternative B]
(g) [Multiple driver's licenses.]  If this State has issued to an individual more than one [driver's license] of 
a kind described in subsection (a)(4)(C), the one that was issued most recently is the one to which 
subsection (a)(4)(C) refers.
[End of Alternatives]

§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 3 of 7
(h) [Definition.]  In this section, the "name of the settlor or testator" means:
(1)  if the settlor is a registered organization, the name that is stated to be the settlor's name on the 
public organic record most recently filed with or issued or enacted by the settlor's jurisdiction of 
organization which purports to state, amend, or restate the settlor's name; or
(2)  in other cases, the name of the settlor or testator indicated in the trust's organic record.
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note:
   1. This Act contains two alternative sets of amendments relating to the names of individual debtors. A State 
should enact the same Alternative, A or B, for both subsections (a) and (i) of Section 9-503. A State that enacts 
Alternative A of the amendments to this section should also enact the amendments to Section 9-502.
   2. Both Alternatives refer, in part, to the name as shown on a debtor's driver's license. The Legislature should be 
aware that, in some States, certain characters that may be used by the State's department of motor vehicles (or 
similar agency) in the name on a driver's license may not be accepted by the State's central or local UCC filing 
offices under current regulations or internal protocols. This may occur because of technological limitations of the 
filing offices or merely as a result of inconsistent procedures. Similar issues may exist for field sizes as well. In 
these situations, perfection of a security interest granted by a debtor with such a driver's license may be impossible 
under Alternative A of the amendments and the utility of Alternative B, under which the name on the driver's license 
is one of the names that is sufficient, may be reduced. Accordingly, the State may wish to determine if one or more 
of these issues exist and, if so, to make certain that such issues have been resolved. A successful resolution might 
be accomplished by statute, agency regulation, or technological change effectuated before or as part of the 
enactment of this Act.
   3. Regardless of which Alternative is enacted, in States in which a single agency issues driver's licenses and non 
driver identification cards as an alternative to a driver's license, such that at any given time an individual may hold 
either a driver's license or an identification card but not both, the State should replace each use of the term "driver's 
license" with a phrase meaning "driver's license or identification card" but containing the analogous terms used in 
the enacting State. In other States, the State should replace the term "driver's license" with the analogous term 
used in the enacting State.
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Subsections (a)(4)(A), (b), and (c) derive from former Section 9-402(7); otherwise, new.
   2. Debtor's Name. The requirement that a financing statement provide the debtor's name is particularly 
important. Financing statements are indexed under the name of the debtor, and those who wish to find financing 
statements search for them under the debtor's name. Subsection (a) explains what the debtor's name is for 
purposes of a financing statement.
   a. Registered Organizations. As a general matter, if if the debtor is a "registered organization" (defined in 
Section 9-102 so as to ordinarily include corporations, limited partnerships, limited liability companies, and statutory 
trusts), then the debtor's name is the name shown on the "public organic record" of the debtor's "jurisdiction of 
organization" (both also defined in Section 9-102).
   b. Collateral Held in a Trust. When a financing statement covers collateral that is held in a trust that is a 
registered organization, subsection (a)(1) governs the name of the debtor. If, however, the collateral is held in a 
trust that is not a registered organization, subsection (a)(3) applies. (As used in this Article, collateral "held in a 

§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 4 of 7
trust" includes collateral as to which the trust is the debtor as well as collateral as to which the trustee is the debtor.) 
This subsection adopts a convention that generally results in the name of the trust or the name of the trust's settlor 
being provided as the name of the debtor on the financing statement, even if, as typically is the case with common-
law trusts, the "debtor" (defined in Section 9-102) is a trustee acting with respect to the collateral. This convention 
provides more accurate information and eases the burden for searchers, who otherwise would have difficulty with 
respect to debtor trustees that are large financial institutions.
   More specifically, if a trust's organic record specifies a name for the trust, subsection (a)(3) requires the financing 
statement to provide, as the name of the debtor, the name for the trust specified in the organic record. In addition, 
the financing statement must indicate, in a separate part of the financing statement, that the collateral is held in a 
trust.
   If the organic record of the trust does not specify a name for the trust, the name required for the financing 
statement is the name of the settlor or, in the case of a testamentary trust, the testator, in each case as determined 
under subsection (h). In addition, the financing statement must provide sufficient additional information to 
distinguish the trust from other trusts having one or more of the same settlors or the same testator. In many cases 
an indication of the date on which the trust was settled will satisfy this requirement. If neither the name nor the 
additional information indicates that the collateral is held in a trust, the financing statement must indicate that fact, 
but not as part of the debtor's name.
   Neither the indication that the collateral is held in a trust nor the additional information that distinguishes the trust 
from other trusts having one or more of the same settlors or the same testator is part of the debtor's name. 
Nevertheless, a financing statement that fails to provide, in a separate part of the financing statement, any required 
indication or additional information does not sufficiently provide the name of the debtor under Sections 9-502(a) and 
9-503(a)(3), does not "substantially satisfy[] the requirements" of Part 5 within the meaning of Section 9-506(a), and 
so is ineffective.
   c. Collateral Administered by a Personal Representative. Subsection (a)(2) deals with collateral that is being 
administered by an executor, administrator, or other personal representative of a decedent. Even if, as often is the 
case, the representative is the "debtor" (defined in Section 9-102), the financing statement must provide the name 
of the decedent as the name of the debtor. Subsection (f) provides a safe harbor, under which the name of the 
decedent indicated on the order appointing the personal representative issued by the court having jurisdiction over 
the collateral is sufficient as the name of the decedent. If the order indicates more than one name for the decedent, 
the first name in the list qualifies under subsection (f); however, other names in the list also may qualify as the 
"name of the decedent" within the meaning of subsection (a)(2). In addition to providing the name of the decedent, 
the financing statement must indicate, in a separate part of the financing statement, that the collateral is being 
administered by a personal representative. Although the indication is not part of the debtor's name, a financing 
statement that fails to provide the indication does not sufficiently provide the name of the debtor under Sections 9-
502(a) and 9-503(a)(2), does not "substantially satisfy[] the requirements" of Part 5 within the meaning of Section 9-
506(a), and so is ineffective.
   d. Individuals. This Article provides alternative approaches towards the requirement for providing the name of a 
debtor who is an individual.
   Alternative A. Alternative A distinguishes between two groups of individual debtors. For debtors holding an 
unexpired driver's license issued by the State where the financing statement is filed (ordinarily the State where the 
debtor maintains the debtor's principal residence), Alternative A requires that a financing statement provide the 
name indicated on the license. When a debtor does not hold an unexpired driver's license issued by the relevant 
State, the requirement can be satisfied in either of two ways. A financing statement is sufficient if it provides the 
"individual name" of the debtor. Alternatively, a financing statement is sufficient if it provides the debtor's surname 
(i.e., family name) and first personal name (i.e., first name other than the surname).
   Alternative B. Alternative B provides three ways in which a financing statement may sufficiently provide the name 
of an individual who is a debtor. The "individual name" of the debtor is sufficient, as is the debtor's surname and first 
personal name. If the individual holds an unexpired driver's license issued by the State where the financing 

§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 5 of 7
statement is filed (ordinarily the State of the debtor's principal residence), the name indicated on the driver's license 
also is sufficient.
   Name indicated on the driver's license. A financing statement does not "provide the name of the individual which 
is indicated" on the debtor's driver's license unless the name it provides is the same as the name indicated on the 
license. This is the case even if the name indicated on the debtor's driver's license contains an error.
   Example 1: Debtor, an individual whose principal residence is in Illinois, grants a security interest to SP in certain 
business equipment. SP files a financing statement with the Illinois filing office. The financing statement provides 
the name appearing on Debtor's Illinois driver's license, "Joseph Allan Jones." Regardless of which Alternative is in 
effect in Illinois, this filing would be sufficient under Illinois' Section 9-503(a), even if Debtor's correct middle name is 
Alan, not Allan.
   A filing against "Joseph A. Jones" or "Joseph Jones" would not "provide the name of the individual which is 
indicated" on the debtor's driver's license. However, these filings might be sufficient if Alternative A is in effect in 
Illinois and Jones has no current (i.e., unexpired) Illinois driver's license, or if Illinois has enacted Alternative B.
   Determining the name that should be provided on the financing statement must not be done mechanically. The 
order in which the components of an individual's name appear on a driver's license differs among the States. Had 
the debtor in Example 1 obtained a driver's license from a different State, the license might have indicated the 
name as "Jones Joseph Allan." Regardless of the order on the driver's license, the debtor's surname must be 
provided in the part of the financing statement designated for the surname.
   Alternatives A and B both refer to a license issued by "this State." Perfection of a security interest by filing 
ordinarily is determined by the law of the jurisdiction in which the debtor is located. See Section 9-301(1). 
(Exceptions to the general rule are found in Section 9-301(3) and (4), concerning fixture filings, timber to be cut, and 
as-extracted collateral.) A debtor who is an individual ordinarily is located at the individual's principal residence. See 
Section 9-307(b). (An exception appears in Section 9-307(c).) Thus, a given State's Section 9-503 ordinarily will 
apply during any period when the debtor's principal residence is located in that State, even if during that time the 
debtor holds or acquires a driver's license from another State.
   When a debtor's principal residence changes, the location of the debtor under Section 9-307 also changes and 
perfection by filing ordinarily will be governed by the law of the debtor's new location. As a consequence of the 
application of that jurisdiction's Section 9-316, a security interest that is perfected by filing under the law of the 
debtor's former location will remain perfected for four months after the relocation, and thereafter if the secured party 
perfects under the law of the debtor's new location. Likewise, a financing statement filed in the former location may 
be effective to perfect a security interest that attaches after the debtor relocates. See Section 9-316(h).
   Individual name of the debtor. Article 9 does not determine the "individual name" of a debtor. Nor does it 
determine which element or elements in a debtor's name constitute the surname. In some cases, determining the 
"individual name" of a debtor may be difficult, as may determining the debtor's surname. This is because in the 
case of individuals, unlike registered organizations, there is no public organic record to which reference can be 
made and from which the name and its components can be definitively determined.
   Names can take many forms in the United States. For example, whereas a surname is often colloquially referred 
to as a "last name," the sequence in which the elements of a name are presented is not determinative. In some 
cultures, the surname appears first, while in others it may appear in a location that is neither first nor last. In 
addition, some surnames are composed of multiple elements that, taken together, constitute a single surname. 
These elements may or may not be separated by a space or connected by a hyphen, "i," or "y." In other instances, 
some or all of the same elements may not be part of the surname. In some cases, a debtor's entire name might be 
composed of only a single element, which should be provided in the part of the financing statement designated for 
the surname.
   In disputes as to whether a financing statement sufficiently provides the "individual name" of a debtor, a court 
should refer to any non-UCC law concerning names. However, case law about names may have developed in 
contexts that implicate policies different from those of Article 9. A court considering an individual's name for 

§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 6 of 7
purposes of determining the sufficiency of a financing statement is not necessarily bound by cases that were 
decided in other contexts and for other purposes.
   Individuals are asked to provide their names on official documents such as tax returns and bankruptcy petitions. 
An individual may provide a particular name on an official document in response to instructions relating to the 
document rather than because the name is actually the individual's name. Accordingly, a court should not assume 
that the name an individual provides on an official document necessarily constitutes the "individual name" for 
purposes of the sufficiency of the debtor's name on a financing statement. Likewise, a court should not assume that 
the name as presented on an individual's birth certificate is necessarily the individual's current name.
   In applying non-UCC law for purposes of determining the sufficiency of a debtor's name on a financing statement, 
a court should give effect to the instruction in Section 1-103(a)(1) that the UCC "must be liberally construed and 
applied to promote its underlying purposes and policies," which include simplifying and clarifying the law governing 
commercial transactions. Thus, determination of a debtor's name in the context of the Article 9 filing system must 
take into account the needs of both filers and searchers. Filers need a simple and predictable system in which they 
can have a reasonable degree of confidence that, without undue burden, they can determine a name that will be 
sufficient so as to permit their financing statements to be effective. Likewise, searchers need a simple and 
predictable system in which they can have a reasonable degree of confidence that, without undue burden, they will 
discover all financing statements pertaining to the debtor in question. The court also should take into account the 
purpose of the UCC to make the law uniform among the various jurisdictions. See Section 1-103(a)(3).
   Of course, once an individual debtor's name has been determined to be sufficient for purposes of Section 9-503, 
a financing statement that provides a variation of that name, such as a "nickname" that does not constitute the 
debtor's name, does not sufficiently provide the name of the debtor under this section. Cf. Section 9-503(c) (a 
financing statement providing only a debtor's trade name is not sufficient).
   If there is any doubt about an individual debtor's name, a secured party may choose to file one or more financing 
statements that provide a number of possible names for the debtor and a searcher may similarly choose to search 
under a number of possible names.
   Note that, even if the name provided in an initial financing statement is correct, the filing office nevertheless must 
reject the financing statement if it does not identify an individual debtor's surname (e.g., if it is not clear whether the 
debtor's surname is Perry or Mason). See Section 9-516(b)(3)(C).
   3. Secured Party's Name. New subsection (d) makes clear that when the secured party is a representative, a 
financing statement is sufficient if it names the secured party, whether or not it indicates any representative 
capacity. Similarly, a financing statement that names a representative of the secured party is sufficient, even if it 
does not indicate the representative capacity.
   Example 2: Debtor creates a security interest in favor of Bank X, Bank Y, and Bank Z, but not to their 
representative, the collateral agent (Bank A). The collateral agent is not itself a secured party. See Section 9-102. 
Under Sections 9-502(a) and 9-503(d), however, a financing statement is effective if it names as secured party 
Bank A and not the actual secured parties, even if it omits Bank A's representative capacity.
   Each person whose name is provided in an initial financing statement as the name of the secured party or 
representative of the secured party is a secured party of record. See Section 9-511.
   4. Multiple Names. Subsection (e) makes explicit what is implicit under former Article 9: a financing statement 
may provide the name of more than one debtor and secured party. See Section 1-106 (words in the singular include 
the plural). With respect to records relating to more than one debtor, see Section 9-520(d). With respect to financing 
statements providing the name of more than one secured party, see Sections 9-509(e) and 9-510(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 7 of 7
End of Document