U.C.C. § 9-409
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES        
§ 9-409. RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF LETTER-OF-CREDIT RIGHTS 
INEFFECTIVE
(a) [Term or law restricting assignment generally ineffective.]  A term in a letter of credit or a rule of 
law, statute, regulation, custom, or practice applicable to the letter of credit which prohibits, restricts, or 
requires the consent of an applicant, issuer, or nominated person to a beneficiary's assignment of or 
creation of a security interest in a letter-of-credit right is ineffective to the extent that the term or rule of law, 
statute, regulation, custom, or practice:
(1)  would impair the creation, attachment, or perfection of a security interest in the letter-of-credit right; 
or
(2)  provides that the assignment or the creation, attachment, or perfection of the security interest may 
give rise to a default, breach, right of recoupment, claim, defense, termination, right of termination, or 
remedy under the letter-of-credit right.
(b) [Limitation on ineffectiveness under subsection (a).]  To the extent that a term in a letter of credit is 
ineffective under subsection (a) but would be effective under law other than this article or a custom or 
practice applicable to the letter of credit, to the transfer of a right to draw or otherwise demand performance 
under the letter of credit, or to the assignment of a right to proceeds of the letter of credit, the creation, 
attachment, or perfection of a security interest in the letter-of-credit right:
(1)  is not enforceable against the applicant, issuer, nominated person, or transferee beneficiary;
(2)  imposes no duties or obligations on the applicant, issuer, nominated person, or transferee 
beneficiary; and
(3)  does not require the applicant, issuer, nominated person, or transferee beneficiary to recognize the 
security interest, pay or render performance to the secured party, or accept payment or other 
performance from the secured party.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New.
   2. Purpose and Relevance. This section, patterned on Section 9-408, limits the effectiveness of attempts to 
restrict the creation, attachment, or perfection of a security interest in letter-of-credit rights, whether the restriction 
appears in the letter of credit or a rule of law, custom, or practice applicable to the letter of credit. It protects the 
creation, attachment, and perfection of a security interest while preventing these events from giving rise to a default 
or breach by the assignor or from triggering a remedy or defense of the issuer or other person obligated on a letter 
of credit. Letter-of-credit rights are a type of supporting obligation. See Section 9-102. Under Sections 9-203 and 9-
308, a security interest in a supporting obligation attaches and is perfected automatically if the security interest in 
the supported obligation attaches and is perfected. See Section 9-107, Comment 5. The automatic attachment and 

§ 9-409. RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF LETTER-OF-CREDIT RIGHTS INEFFECTIVE
Page 2 of 2
perfection under Article 9 would be anomalous or misleading if, under other law (e.g., Article 5), a restriction on 
transfer or assignment were effective to block attachment and perfection.
   3. Relationship to Letter-of-Credit Law. Although restrictions on an assignment of a letter of credit are 
ineffective to prevent creation, attachment, and perfection of a security interest, subsection (b) protects the issuer 
and other parties from any adverse effects of the security interest by preserving letter-of-credit law and practice that 
limits the right of a beneficiary to transfer its right to draw or otherwise demand performance (Section 5-112) and 
limits the obligation of an issuer or nominated person to recognize a beneficiary's assignment of letter-of-credit 
proceeds (Section 5-114). Thus, this section's treatment of letter-of-credit rights differs from this Article's treatment 
of instruments and investment property. Moreover, under Section 9-109(c)(4), this Article does not apply to the 
extent that the rights of a transferee beneficiary or nominated person are independent and superior under Section 
5-114, thereby preserving the "independence principle" of letter-of-credit law.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document