U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2-502
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
2-502. BUYER'S RIGHT TO GOODS ON SELLER'S REPUDIATION, FAILURE 
TO DELIVER, OR INSOLVENCY
(1)  Subject to subsections (2) and (3) and even though the goods have not been shipped a buyer who has 
paid a part or all of the price of goods in which he has a special property under the provisions of the 
immediately preceding section may on making and keeping good a tender of any unpaid portion of their 
price recover them from the seller if:
(a)  in the case of goods bought for personal, family, or household purposes, the seller repudiates or 
fails to deliver as required by the contract; or
(b)  in all cases, the seller becomes insolvent within ten days after receipt of the first installment on their 
price.
(2)  The buyer's right to recover the goods under subsection (1)(a) vests upon acquisition of a special 
property, even if the seller had not then repudiated or failed to deliver.
(3)  If the identification creating his special property has been made by the buyer he acquires the right to 
recover the goods only if they conform to the contract for sale.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section gives an additional right to the buyer as a result of identification of the goods to the contract in the 
manner provided in Section 2-501. The buyer is given a right to recover the goods, conditioned upon making and 
keeping good a tender of any unpaid portion of the price, in two limited circumstances. First, the buyer may recover 
goods bought for personal, family, or household purposes if the seller repudiates the contract or fails to deliver the 
goods. Second, in any case, the buyer may recover the goods if the seller becomes insolvent within 10 days after 
the seller receives the first installment on their price. The buyer's right to recover the goods under this section is an 
exception to the usual rule, under which the disappointed buyer must resort to an action to recover damages.
   2. The question of whether the buyer also acquires a security interest in identified goods and has rights to the 
goods when insolvency takes place after the ten-day period provided in this section depends upon compliance with 
the provisions of the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9).
   3. Under subsection (2), the buyer's right to recover consumer goods under subsection (1)(a) vests upon 
acquisition of a special property, which occurs upon identification of the goods to the contract. See Section 2-501. 
Inasmuch as a secured party normally acquires no greater rights in its collateral that its debtor had or had power to 
convey, see Section 2-403(1) (first sentence), a buyer who acquires a right to recover under this section will take 
free of a security interest created by the seller if it attaches to the goods after the goods have been identified to the 
contract. The buyer will take free, even if the buyer does not buy in ordinary course and even if the security interest 
is perfected. Of course, to the extent that the buyer pays the price after the security interest attaches, the payments 
will constitute proceeds of the security interest.

 2-502. BUYER'S RIGHT TO GOODS ON SELLER'S REPUDIATION, FAILURE TO DELIVER, OR 
INSOLVENCY
Page 2 of 2
   4. Subsection (3) is included to preclude the possibility of unjust enrichment, which would exist if the buyer were 
permitted to recover goods even though they were greatly superior in quality or quantity to that called for by the 
contract for sale.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document