U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2-716
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
2-716. BUYER'S RIGHT TO SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OR REPLEVIN
(1)  Specific performance may be decreed where the goods are unique or in other proper circumstances.
(2)  The decree for specific performance may include such terms and conditions as to payment of the price, 
damages, or other relief as the court may deem just.
(3)  The buyer has a right of replevin for goods identified to the contract if after reasonable effort he is 
unable to effect cover for such goods or the circumstances reasonably indicate that such effort will be 
unavailing or if the goods have been shipped under reservation and satisfaction of the security interest in 
them has been made or tendered. In the case of goods bought for personal, family, or household purposes, 
the buyer's right of replevin vests upon acquisition of a special property, even if the seller had not then 
repudiated or failed to deliver.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   * * *
   3. The legal remedy of replevin is given to the buyer in cases in which cover is reasonably unavailable and goods 
have been identified to the contract. This is in addition to the buyer's right to recover identified goods under Section 
2-502. For consumer goods, the buyer's right to replevin vests upon the buyer's acquisition of a special property, 
which occurs upon identification of the goods to the contract. See Section 2-501. Inasmuch as a secured party 
normally acquires no greater rights in its collateral that its debtor had or had power to convey, see Section 2-403(1) 
(first sentence), a buyer who acquires a right of replevin under subsection (3) will take free of a security interest 
created by the seller if it attaches to the goods after the goods have been identified to the contract. The buyer will 
take free, even if the buyer does not buy in ordinary course and even if the security interest is perfected. Of course, 
to the extent that the buyer pays the price after the security interest attaches, the payments will constitute proceeds 
of the security interest.
   * * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document