U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-106
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
8-106. CONTROL
(a)  A purchaser has "control" of a certificated security in bearer form if the certificated security is delivered 
to the purchaser.
(b)  A purchaser has "control" of a certificated security in registered form if the certificated security is 
delivered to the purchaser, and:
(1)  the certificate is indorsed to the purchaser or in blank by an effective indorsement; or
(2)  the certificate is registered in the name of the purchaser, upon original issue or registration of 
transfer by the issuer.
(c)  A purchaser has "control" of an uncertificated security if:
(1)  the uncertificated security is delivered to the purchaser; or
(2)  the issuer has agreed that it will comply with instructions originated by the purchaser without further 
consent by the registered owner.
(d)  A purchaser has "control" of a security entitlement if:
(1)  the purchaser becomes the entitlement holder;
(2)  the securities intermediary has agreed that it will comply with entitlement orders originated by the 
purchaser without further consent by the entitlement holder; or
(3)  another person has control of the security entitlement on behalf of the purchaser or, having 
previously acquired control of the security entitlement, acknowledges that it has control on behalf of the 
purchaser.
(e)  If an interest in a security entitlement is granted by the entitlement holder to the entitlement holder's 
own securities intermediary, the securities intermediary has control.
(f)  A purchaser who has satisfied the requirements of subsection (c) or (d) has control, even if the 
registered owner in the case of subsection (c) or the entitlement holder in the case of subsection (d) retains 
the right to make substitutions for the uncertificated security or security entitlement, to originate instructions 
or entitlement orders to the issuer or securities intermediary, or otherwise to deal with the uncertificated 
security or security entitlement.
(g)  An issuer or a securities intermediary may not enter into an agreement of the kind described in 
subsection (c)(2) or (d)(2) without the consent of the registered owner or entitlement holder, but an issuer or 
a securities intermediary is not required to enter into such an agreement even though the registered owner 
or entitlement holder so directs. An issuer or securities intermediary that has entered into such an 
agreement is not required to confirm the existence of the agreement to another party unless requested to 
do so by the registered owner or entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary

 8-106. CONTROL
Page 2 of 4
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. The concept of "control" plays a key role in various provisions dealing with the rights of purchasers, including 
secured parties. See Sections 8-303 (protected purchasers); 8-503(e) (purchasers from securities intermediaries); 
8-510 (purchasers of security entitlements from entitlement holders); 9-314 (perfection of security interests); 9-328 
(priorities among conflicting security interests).
   Obtaining "control" means that the purchaser has taken whatever steps are necessary, given the manner in which 
the securities are held, to place itself in a position where it can have the securities sold, without further action by the 
owner.
   * * *
   4. Subsection (d) specifies the means by which a purchaser can obtain control of a security entitlement. Three 
mechanisms are possible, analogous to those provided in subsection (c) for uncertificated securities. Under 
subsection (d)(1), a purchaser has control if it is the entitlement holder. This subsection would apply whether the 
purchaser holds through the same intermediary that the debtor used, or has the securities position transferred to its 
own intermediary. Subsection (d)(2) provides that a purchaser has control if the securities intermediary has agreed 
to act on entitlement orders originated by the purchaser if no further consent by the entitlement holder is required. 
Under subsection (d)(2), control may be achieved even though the original entitlement holder remains as the 
entitlement holder. Finally, a purchaser may obtain control under subsection (d)(3) if another person has control and 
the person acknowledges that it has control on the purchaser's behalf. Control under subsection (d)(3) parallels the 
delivery of certificated securities and uncertificated securities under Section 8-301. Of course, the acknowledging 
person cannot be the debtor.
   This section specifies only the minimum requirements that such an arrangement must meet to confer "control"; 
the details of the arrangement can be specified by agreement. The arrangement might cover all of the positions in a 
particular account or subaccount, or only specified positions. There is no requirement that the control party's right to 
give entitlement orders be exclusive. The arrangement might provide that only the control party can give entitlement 
orders, or that either the entitlement holder or the control party can give entitlement orders. See subsection (f).
   The following examples illustrate the application of subsection (d):
   Example 1. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of 
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Alpha also has an account with Able. Debtor 
instructs Able to transfer the shares to Alpha, and Able does so by crediting the shares to Alpha's account. Alpha 
has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1). Although Debtor may have become the beneficial owner of 
the new securities entitlement, as between Debtor and Alpha, Able has agreed to act on Alpha's entitlement orders 
because, as between Able and Alpha Alpha has become the entitlement holder. See Section 8-506.
   Example 2. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of 
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Alpha does not have an account with Able. 
Alpha uses Beta as its securities custodian. Debtor instructs Able to transfer the shares to Beta, for the account of 
Alpha, and Able does so. Alpha has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1). As in Example 1, although 
Debtor may have become the beneficial owner of the new securities entitlement, as between Debtor and Alpha, 
Beta has agreed to act on Alpha's entitlement orders because, as between Beta and Alpha, Alpha has become the 
entitlement holder.
   Example 3. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of 
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Debtor, Able, and Alpha enter into an 
agreement under which Debtor will continue to receive dividends and distributions, and will continue to have the 
right to direct dispositions, but Alpha also has the right to direct dispositions. Alpha has control of the 1000 shares 
under subsection (d)(2).
   Example 4. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that 
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Able causes 

 8-106. CONTROL
Page 3 of 4
Clearing Corporation to transfer the shares into Alpha's account at Clearing Corporation. As in Example 1, Alpha 
has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1).
   Example 5. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that 
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Alpha does 
not have an account with Clearing Corporation. It holds its securities through Beta Bank, which does have an 
account with Clearing Corporation. Able causes Clearing Corporation to transfer the shares into Beta's account at 
Clearing Corporation. Beta credits the position to Alpha's account with Beta. As in Example 2, Alpha has control of 
the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1).
   Example 6. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that 
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Able causes 
Clearing Corporation to transfer the shares into a pledge account, pursuant to an agreement under which Able will 
continue to receive dividends, distributions, and the like, but Alpha has the right to direct dispositions. As in 
Example 3, Alpha has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(2).
   Example 7. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that 
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Able, Alpha, 
and Clearing Corporation enter into an agreement under which Clearing Corporation will act on instructions from 
Alpha with respect to the XYZ Co. stock carried in Able's account, but Able will continue to receive dividends, 
distributions, and the like, and will also have the right to direct dispositions. As in Example 3, Alpha has control of 
the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(2).
   Example 8. Able & Co., a securities dealer, holds a wide range of securities through its account at Clearing 
Corporation. Able enters into an arrangement with Alpha Bank pursuant to which Alpha provides financing to Able 
secured by securities identified as the collateral on lists provided by Able to Alpha on a daily or other periodic basis. 
Able, Alpha, and Clearing Corporation enter into an agreement under which Clearing Corporation agrees that if at 
any time Alpha directs Clearing Corporation to do so, Clearing Corporation will transfer any securities from Able's 
account at Alpha's instructions. Because Clearing Corporation has agreed to act on Alpha's instructions with 
respect to any securities carried in Able's account, at the moment that Alpha's security interest attaches to 
securities listed by Able, Alpha obtains control of those securities under subsection (d)(2). There is no requirement 
that Clearing Corporation be informed of which securities Able has pledged to Alpha.
   Example 9. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of 
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Beta Bank agrees with Alpha to act as Alpha's 
collateral agent with respect to the security entitlement. Debtor, Able, and Beta enter into an agreement under 
which Debtor will continue to receive dividends and distributions, and will continue to have the right to direct 
dispositions, but Beta also has the right to direct dispositions. Because Able has agreed that it will comply with 
entitlement orders originated by Beta without further consent by Debtor, Beta has control of the security entitlement 
(see Example 3). Because Beta has control on behalf of Alpha, Alpha also has control under subsection (d)(3). It is 
not necessary for Able to enter into an agreement directly with Alpha or for Able to be aware of Beta's agency 
relationship with Alpha.
   * * *
   7. The term "control" is used in a particular defined sense. The requirements for obtaining control are set out in 
this section. The concept is not to be interpreted by reference to similar concepts in other bodies of law. In 
particular, the requirements for "possession" derived from the common law of pledge are not to be used as a basis 
for interpreting subsection (c)(2) or (d)(2). Those provisions are designed to supplant the concepts of "constructive 
possession" and the like. A principal purpose of the "control" concept is to eliminate the uncertainty and confusion 
that results from attempting to apply common law possession concepts to modern securities holding practices.
   The key to the control concept is that the purchaser has the ability to have the securities sold or transferred 
without further action by the transferor. There is no requirement that the powers held by the purchaser be exclusive. 
For example, in a secured lending arrangement, if the secured party wishes, it can allow the debtor to retain the 
right to make substitutions, to direct the disposition of the uncertificated security or security entitlement, or otherwise 

 8-106. CONTROL
Page 4 of 4
to give instructions or entitlement orders. (As explained in Section 8-102, Comment 8, an entitlement order includes 
a direction under Section 8-508 to the securities intermediary to transfer a financial asset to the account of the 
entitlement holder at another financial intermediary or to cause the financial asset to be transferred to the 
entitlement holder in the direct holding system (e.g., by delivery of a securities certificate registered in the name of 
the former entitlement holder).) Subsection (f) is included to make clear the general point stated in subsections (c) 
and (d) that the test of control is whether the purchaser has obtained the requisite power, not whether the debtor 
has retained other powers. There is no implication that retention by the debtor of powers other than those 
mentioned in subsection (f) is inconsistent with the purchaser having control. Nor is there a requirement that the 
purchaser's powers be unconditional, provided that further consent of the entitlement holder is not a condition.
   Example 10. Debtor grants to Alpha Bank and to Beta Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that 
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. By agreement among 
the parties, Alpha's security interest is senior and Beta's is junior. Able agrees to act on the entitlement orders of 
either Alpha or Beta. Alpha and Beta each has control under subsection (d)(2). Moreover, Beta has control 
notwithstanding a term of Able's agreement to the effect that Able's obligation to act on Beta's entitlement orders is 
conditioned on Alpha's consent. The crucial distinction is that Able's agreement to act on Beta's entitlement orders 
is not conditioned on Debtor's further consent.
   Example 11. Debtor grants to Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of 
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Able agrees to act on the entitlement orders of 
Alpha, but Alpha's right to give entitlement orders to the securities intermediary is conditioned on the Debtor's 
default. Alternatively, Alpha's right to give entitlement orders is conditioned upon Alpha's statement to Able that 
Debtor is in default. Because Able's agreement to act on Alpha's* entitlement orders is not conditioned on Debtor's 
further consent, Alpha has control of the securities entitlement under either alternative. *Amendments in italics 
approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code January 15, 2000.
   In many situations, it will be better practice for both the securities intermediary and the purchaser to insist that any 
conditions relating in any way to the entitlement holder be effective only as between the purchaser and the 
entitlement holder. That practice would avoid the risk that the securities intermediary could be caught between 
conflicting assertions of the entitlement holder and the purchaser as to whether the conditions in fact have been 
met. Nonetheless, the existence of unfulfilled conditions effective against the intermediary would not preclude the 
purchaser from having control.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document