U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-301
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
8-301. DELIVERY
(a)  Delivery of a certificated security to a purchaser occurs when:
(1)  the purchaser acquires possession of the security certificate;
(2)  another person, other than a securities intermediary, either acquires possession of the security 
certificate on behalf of the purchaser or, having previously acquired possession of the certificate, 
acknowledges that it holds for the purchaser; or
(3)  a securities intermediary acting on behalf of the purchaser acquires possession of the security 
certificate, only if the certificate is in registered form and is (i) registered in the name of the purchaser, 
(ii) payable to the order of the purchaser, or (iii) specially indorsed to the purchaser by an effective 
indorsement and has not been indorsed to the securities intermediary or in blank.
* * *
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   * * *
   2. Subsection (a) defines delivery with respect to certificated securities. Paragraph (1) deals with simple cases 
where purchasers themselves acquire physical possession of certificates. Paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (a) 
specify the circumstances in which delivery to a purchaser can occur although the certificate is in the possession of 
a person other than the purchaser. Paragraph (2) contains the general rule that a purchaser can take delivery 
through another person, so long as the other person is actually acting on behalf of the purchaser or acknowledges 
that it is holding on behalf of the purchaser. Paragraph (2) does not apply to acquisition of possession by a 
securities intermediary, because a person who holds securities through a securities account acquires a security 
entitlement, rather than having a direct interest. See Section 8-501. Subsection (a)(3) specifies the limited 
circumstances in which delivery of security certificates to a securities intermediary is treated as a delivery to the 
customer. Note that delivery is a method of perfecting a security interest in a certificated security. See Section 9-
313(a), (e).
   * * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document