U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-502
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
8-502. ASSERTION OF ADVERSE CLAIM AGAINST ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
 * * *
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   * * *
   3. The following examples illustrate the operation of Section 8-502.
   * * *
   Example 4. Debtor holds XYZ Co. shares in a securities account with Able & Co. As collateral for a loan from 
Bank, Debtor grants Bank a security interest in the security entitlement to the XYZ Co. shares. Bank perfects by a 
method which leaves Debtor with the ability to dispose of the shares. See Section 9-312. In violation of the security 
agreement, Debtor sells the XYZ Co. shares and absconds with the proceeds. Assume -- implausibly -- that Bank is 
able to trace the XYZ Co. shares and show that the "same shares" ended up in Buyer's securities account with 
Baker & Co. Section 8-502 precludes any action by Bank against Buyer, whether framed in constructive trust or 
other theory, provided that Buyer acquired the security entitlement for value and without notice of adverse claims.
   * * *
   Example 6. Debtor grants Alpha Co. a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of XYZ 
Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Alpha also has an account with Able. Debtor 
instructs Able to transfer the shares to Alpha, and Able does so by crediting the shares to Alpha's account. Alpha 
has control of the 1000 shares under Section 8-106(d). (The facts to this point are identical to those in Section 8-
106, Comment 4, Example 1, except that Alpha Co. was Alpha Bank.) Alpha next grants Beta Co. a security interest 
in the 1000 shares included in Alpha's security entitlement. See Section 9-207(c)(3). Alpha instructs Able to transfer 
the shares to Gamma Co., Beta's custodian. Able does so, and Gamma credits the 1000 shares to Beta's account. 
Beta now has control under Section 8-106(d). By virtue of Debtor's explicit permission or by virtue of the permission 
inherent in Debtor's creation of a security interest in favor of Alpha and Alpha's resulting power to grant a security 
interest under Section 9-207, Debtor has no adverse claim to assert against Beta, assuming implausibly that Debtor 
could "trace" an interest to the Gamma account. Moreover, even if Debtor did hold an adverse claim, if Beta did not 
have notice of Debtor's claim, Section 8-502 will preclude any action by Debtor against Beta, whether framed in 
constructive trust or other theory.
   * * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document