U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-510
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
8-510. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER OF SECURITY ENTITLEMENT FROM 
ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
(a)  In a case not covered by the priority rules in Article 9 or the rules stated in subsection (c), an action 
based on an adverse claim to a financial asset or security entitlement, whether framed in conversion, 
replevin, constructive trust, equitable lien, or other theory, may not be asserted against a person who 
purchases a security entitlement, or an interest therein, from an entitlement holder if the purchaser gives 
value, does not have notice of the adverse claim, and obtains control.
(b)  If an adverse claim could not have been asserted against an entitlement holder under Section 8-502, 
the adverse claim cannot be asserted against a person who purchases a security entitlement, or an interest 
therein, from the entitlement holder.
(c)  In a case not covered by the priority rules in Article 9, a purchaser for value of a security entitlement, or 
an interest therein, who obtains control has priority over a purchaser of a security entitlement, or an interest 
therein, who does not obtain control. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), purchasers who have 
control rank according to priority in time of:
(1)  the purchaser's becoming the person for whom the securities account, in which the security 
entitlement is carried, is maintained, if the purchaser obtained control under Section 8-106(d)(1);
(2)  the securities intermediary's agreement to comply with the purchaser's entitlement orders with 
respect to security entitlements carried or to be carried in the securities account in which the security 
entitlement is carried, if the purchaser obtained control under Section 8-106(d)(2); or
(3)  if the purchaser obtained control through another person under Section 8-106(d)(3), the time on 
which priority would be based under this subsection if the other person were the secured party.
(d)  A securities intermediary as purchaser has priority over a conflicting purchaser who has control unless 
otherwise agreed by the securities intermediary.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   * * *
   4. Subsection (c) specifies a priority rule for cases where an entitlement holder transfers conflicting interests in the 
same security entitlement to different purchasers. It follows the same principle as the Article 9 priority rule for 
investment property, that is, control trumps non-control. Indeed, the most significant category of conflicting 
"purchasers" may be secured parties. Priority questions for security interests, however, are governed by the rules in 
Article 9. Subsection (c) applies only to cases not covered by the Article 9 rules. It is intended primarily for disputes 
over conflicting claims arising out of repurchase agreement transactions that are not covered by the other rules set 
out in Articles 8 and 9.
   The following example illustrates subsection (c):

 8-510. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER OF SECURITY ENTITLEMENT FROM ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
Page 2 of 2
   Example 4. Dealer holds securities through an account at Alpha Bank. Alpha Bank in turn holds through a 
clearing corporation account. Dealer transfers securities to RP1 in a "hold in custody" repo transaction. Dealer then 
transfers the same securities to RP2 in another repo transaction. The repo to RP2 is implemented by transferring 
the securities from Dealer's regular account at Alpha Bank to a special account maintained by Alpha Bank for 
Dealer and RP2. The agreement among Dealer, RP2, and Alpha Bank provides that Dealer can make substitutions 
for the securities but RP2 can direct Alpha Bank to sell any securities held in the special account. Dealer becomes 
insolvent. RP1 claims a prior interest in the securities transferred to RP2.
   In this example Dealer remained the entitlement holder but agreed that RP2 could initiate entitlement orders to 
Dealer's security intermediary, Alpha Bank. If RP2 had become the entitlement holder, the adverse claim rule of 
Section 8-502 would apply. Even if RP2 does not become the entitlement holder, the arrangement among Dealer, 
Alpha Bank, and RP2 does suffice to give RP2 control. Thus, under Section 8-510(c), RP2 has priority over RP1, 
because RP2 is a purchaser who obtained control, and RP1 is a purchaser who did not obtain control. The same 
result could be reached under Section 8-510(a) which provides that RP1's earlier in time interest cannot be 
asserted as an adverse claim against RP2. The same result would follow under the Article 9 priority rules if the 
interests of RP1 and RP2 are characterized as "security interests," see Section 9-328(1). The main point of the 
rules of Section 8-510(c) is to ensure that there will be clear rules to cover the conflicting claims of RP1 and RP2 
without characterizing their interests as Article 9 security interests.
   The priority rules in Article 9 for conflicting security interests also include a default temporal priority rule for cases 
where multiple secured parties have obtained control but omitted to specify their respective rights by agreement. 
See Section 9-328(2) and Comment 5 to Section 9-328. Because the purchaser priority rule in Section 8-510(c) is 
intended to track the Article 9 priority rules, it too has a temporal priority rule for cases where multiple non-secured 
party purchasers have obtained control but omitted to specify their respective rights by agreement. The rule is 
patterned on Section 9-328(2).
   5. If a securities intermediary itself is a purchaser, subsection (d) provides that it has priority over the interest of 
another purchaser who has control. Article 9 contains a similar rule. See Section 9-328(3).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document