U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-110
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
8-110. APPLICABILITY; CHOICE OF LAW
* * *
(e)  The following rules determine a "securities intermediary's jurisdiction" for purposes of this section:
(1)  If an agreement between the securities intermediary and its entitlement holder governing the 
securities account expressly provides that a particular jurisdiction is the securities intermediary's 
jurisdiction for purposes of this part, this article, or this [Act], that jurisdiction is the securities 
intermediary's jurisdiction.
(2)  If paragraph (1) does not apply and an agreement between the securities intermediary and its 
entitlement holder governing the securities account expressly provides that the agreement is 
governed by the law of a particular jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the securities intermediary's 
jurisdiction.
(3)  If neither paragraph (1) nor paragraph (2) applies and an agreement between the securities 
intermediary and its entitlement holder governing the securities account expressly provides that the 
securities account is maintained at an office in a particular jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the 
securities intermediary's jurisdiction.
(4)  If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the securities intermediary's jurisdiction is the 
jurisdiction in which the office identified in an account statement as the office serving the 
entitlement holder's account is located.
(5)  If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the securities intermediary's jurisdiction is the 
jurisdiction in which the chief executive office of the securities intermediary is located.
(f)  A securities intermediary's jurisdiction is not determined by the physical location of certificates 
representing financial assets, or by the jurisdiction in which is organized the issuer of the financial asset 
with respect to which an entitlement holder has a security entitlement, or by the location of facilities for 
data processing or other record keeping concerning the account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   * * *
   3. Subsection (b) provides that the law of the securities intermediary's jurisdiction governs the issues concerning 
the indirect holding system that are dealt with in Article 8. Paragraphs (1) and (2) cover the matters dealt with in the 
Article 8 rules defining the concept of security entitlement and specifying the duties of securities intermediaries. 
Paragraph (3) provides that the law of the security intermediary's jurisdiction determines whether the intermediary 
owes any duties to an adverse claimant. Paragraph (4) provides that the law of the security intermediary's 
jurisdiction determines whether adverse claims can be asserted against entitlement holders and others.

 8-110. APPLICABILITY; CHOICE OF LAW
Page 2 of 2
   Subsection (e) determines what is a "securities intermediary's jurisdiction." The policy of subsection (b) is to 
ensure that a securities intermediary and all of its entitlement holders can look to a single, readily-identifiable body 
of law to determine their rights and duties. Accordingly, subsection (e) sets out a sequential series of tests to 
facilitate identification of that body of law. Paragraph (1) of subsection (e) permits specification of the securities 
intermediary's jurisdiction by agreement. In the absence of such a specification, the law chosen by the parties to 
govern the securities account determines the securities intermediary's jurisdiction. See paragraph (2). Because the 
policy of this section is to enable parties to determine, in advance and with certainty, what law will apply to 
transactions governed by this Article, the validation of the parties' selection of governing law by agreement is not 
conditioned upon a determination that the jurisdiction whose law is chosen bear a "reasonable relation" to the 
transaction. See Section 4A-507; compare Section 1-105(1). That is also true with respect to the similar provisions 
in subsection (d) of this section and in Section 9-305. The remaining paragraphs in subsection (e) contain additional 
default rules for determining the securities intermediary's jurisdiction.
   * * *
   5. The following examples illustrate how a court in a jurisdiction which has enacted this section would determine 
the governing law:
   Example 1. John Doe, a resident of Kansas, maintains a securities account with Able & Co. Able is incorporated 
in Delaware. Its chief executive offices are located in Illinois. The office where Doe transacts business with Able is 
located in Missouri. The agreement between Doe and Able specifies that Illinois is the securities intermediary's 
(Able's) jurisdiction. Through the account, Doe holds securities of a Colorado corporation, which Able holds through 
Clearing Corporation. The rules of Clearing Corporation provide that the rights and duties of Clearing Corporation 
and its participants are governed by New York law. Subsection (a) specifies that a controversy concerning the rights 
and duties as between the issuer and Clearing Corporation is governed by Colorado law. Subsections (b) and (e) 
specify that a controversy concerning the rights and duties as between the Clearing Corporation and Able is 
governed by New York law, and that a controversy concerning the rights and duties as between Able and Doe is 
governed by Illinois law.
   * * *
   7. The choice of law provisions concerning security interests in securities and security entitlements are set out in 
Section 9-305.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document