U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-302
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
8-302. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c), a purchaser of a certificated or uncertificated 
security acquires all rights in the security that the transferor had or had power to transfer.
(b)  A purchaser of a limited interest acquires rights only to the extent of the interest purchased.
(c)  A purchaser of a certificated security who as a previous holder had notice of an adverse claim does not 
improve its position by taking from a protected purchaser.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (a) provides that a purchaser of a certificated or uncertificated security acquires all rights that the 
transferor had or had power to transfer. This statement of the familiar "shelter" principle is qualified by the 
exceptions that a purchaser of a limited interest acquires only that interest, subsection (b), and that a person who 
does not qualify as a protected purchaser cannot improve its position by taking from a subsequent protected 
purchaser, subsection (c).
   2. Although this section provides that a purchaser acquires a property interest in a certificated or uncertificated 
security, it does not state that a person can acquire an interest in a security only by purchase. Article 8 also is not a 
comprehensive codification of all of the law governing the creation or transfer of interests in securities by pur*. For 
example, the grant of a security interest is a transfer of a property interest, but the formal steps necessary to 
effectuate such a transfer are governed by Article 9, not by Article 8. Under the Article 9 rules, a security interest in 
a certificated or uncertificated security can be created by execution of a security agreement under Section 9-203 
and can be perfected by filing. A transfer of an Article 9 security interest can be implemented by an Article 8 
delivery, but need not be. *Amendments in italics approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform 
Commercial Code January 15, 2000.
   Similarly, Article 8 does not determine whether a property interest in certificated or uncertificated security is 
acquired under other law, such as the law of gifts, trusts, or equitable remedies. Nor does Article 8 deal with 
transfers by operation of law. For example, transfers from decedent to administrator, from ward to guardian, and 
from bankrupt to trustee in bankruptcy are governed by other law as to both the time they occur and the substance 
of the transfer. The Article 8 rules do, however, determine whether the issuer is obligated to recognize the rights 
that a third party, such as a transferee, may acquire under other law. See Sections 8-207, 8-401, and 8-404.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document