U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. II, § 9-324A
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX II. MODEL PROVISIONS FOR PRODUCTION-MONEY PRIORITY        
[MODEL SECTION 9-324A]. PRIORITY OF PRODUCTION-MONEY SECURITY 
INTERESTS AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (c), (d), and (e), if the requirements of subsection (b) are 
satisfied, a perfected production-money security interest in production-money crops has priority over a 
conflicting security interest in the same crops and, except as otherwise provided in Section 9-327, also has 
priority in their identifiable proceeds.
(b)  A production-money security interest has priority under subsection (a) if:
(1)  the production-money security interest is perfected by filing when the production-money secured 
party first gives new value to enable the debtor to produce the crops;
(2)  the production-money secured party sends an authenticated notification to the holder of the 
conflicting security interest not less than 10 or more than 30 days before the production-money secured 
party first gives new value to enable the debtor to produce the crops if the holder had filed a financing 
statement covering the crops before the date of the filing made by the production-money secured party; 
and
(3)  the notification states that the production-money secured party has or expects to acquire a 
production-money security interest in the debtor's crops and provides a description of the crops.
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) or (e), if more than one security interest qualifies for 
priority in the same collateral under subsection (a), the security interests rank according to priority in time of 
filing under Section 9-322(a).
(d)  To the extent that a person holding a perfected security interest in production-money crops that are the 
subject of a production-money security interest gives new value to enable the debtor to produce the 
production-money crops and the value is in fact used for the production of the production-money crops, the 
security interests rank according to priority in time of filing under Section 9-322(a).
(e)  To the extent that a person holds both an agricultural lien and a production-money security interest in 
the same collateral securing the same obligations, the rules of priority applicable to agricultural liens govern 
priority.]
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Legislative Note: This section is optional. States that enact this section should place it between Sections 9-324 
and 9-325 and number it accordingly, e.g., as Section 9-324A or 9-324.1.
   1. Source. New; replaces former Section 9-312(2).

[MODEL SECTION 9-324A]. PRIORITY OF PRODUCTION-MONEY SECURITY INTERESTS AND 
AGRICULTURAL LIENS
Page 2 of 2
   2. Priority of Production-Money Security Interests and Conflicting Security Interests. This section replaces 
the limited priority in crops afforded by former Section 9-312(2). That priority generally has been thought to be of 
little value for its intended beneficiaries. This section attempts to balance the interests of the production-money 
secured party with those of a secured party who has previously filed a financing statement covering the crops that 
are to be produced. For example, to qualify for priority under this section, the production-money secured party must 
notify the earlier-filed secured party prior to extending the production-money credit. The notification affords the 
earlier secured party the opportunity to prevent subordination by extending the credit itself. Subsection (d) makes 
this explicit. If the holder of a security interest in production-money crops which conflicts with a production-money 
security interest gives new value for the production of the crops, the security interests rank according to priority in 
time of filing under Section 9-322(a).
   3. Multiple Production-Money Security Interests. In the case of multiple production-money security interests 
that qualify for priority under subsection (a), the first to file has priority. See subsection (c). Note that only a security 
interest perfected by filing is entitled to production-money priority. See subsection (b)(1). Consequently, subsection 
(c) does not adopt the first-to-file-or-perfect formulation.
   4. Holder of Agricultural Lien and Production-Money Security Interest. Subsection (e) deals with a creditor 
who holds both an agricultural lien and an Article 9 production-money security interest in the same collateral. In 
these cases, the priority rules applicable to agricultural liens govern. The creditor can avoid this result by waiving its 
agricultural lien.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document