U.C.C. § 1-108
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS          >            
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS        
§ 1-108. RELATION TO ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES IN GLOBAL AND 
NATIONAL COMMERCE ACT
 This [Act] modifies, limits, and supersedes the federal Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, 
( 15 U.S.C. Section 7001, et. seq.) but does not modify, limit, or supersede Section 101(c) of that act ( 15 U.S.C. 
Section 7001(c)) or authorize electronic delivery of any of the notices described in Section 103(b) of that act (15 
U.S.C. Section 103(b)).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
   Source: New
   1. The federal Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, 15 U.S.C. Section 7001 et seq 
became effective in 2000. Section 102(a) of that Act provides that a State statute may modify, limit, or supersede 
the provisions of section 101 of that Act with respect to state law if such statute, inter alia, specifies the alternative 
procedures or requirements for the use or acceptance (or both) of electronic records or electronic signatures to 
establish the legal effect, validity, or enforceability of contracts or other records, and (i) such alternative procedures 
or requirements are consistent with Titles I and II of that Act, (ii) such alternative procedures or requirements do not 
require, or accord greater legal status or effect to, the implementation or application of a specific technology or 
technical specification for performing the functions of creating, storing, generating, receiving, communicating, or 
authenticating electronic records or electronic signatures; and (iii) if enacted or adopted after the date of the 
enactment of that Act, makes specific reference to that Act. Article 1 fulfills the first two of those three criteria; this 
Section fulfills the third criterion listed above.
   2. As stated in this section, however, Article 1 does not modify, limit, or supersede Section 101(c) of the Electronic 
Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (requiring affirmative consent from a consumer to electronic 
delivery of transactional disclosures that are required by state law to be in writing); nor does it authorize electronic 
delivery of any of the notices described in Section 103(b) of that Act.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document