U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I § 1-201
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>             APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES        
§ 1-201. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Subject to additional definitions contained in the subsequent Articles of this Act which are applicable to 
specific Articles or Parts thereof, and unless the context otherwise requires, in this Act:
* * *
(9)  "Buyer in ordinary course of business" means a person that buys goods in good faith, without 
knowledge that the sale violates the rights of another person in the goods, and in the ordinary 
course from a person, other than a pawnbroker, in the business of selling goods of that kind. A 
person buys goods in the ordinary course if the sale to the person comports with the usual or 
customary practices in the kind of business in which the seller is engaged or with the seller's own 
usual or customary practices. A person that sells oil, gas, or other minerals at the wellhead or 
minehead is a person in the business of selling goods of that kind. A buyer in ordinary course of 
business may buy for cash, by exchange of other property, or on secured or unsecured credit, and 
may acquire goods or documents of title under a pre-existing contract for sale. Only a buyer that 
takes possession of the goods or has a right to recover the goods from the seller under Article 2 
may be a buyer in ordinary course of business. A person that acquires goods in a transfer in bulk or 
as security for or in total or partial satisfaction of a money debt is not a buyer in ordinary course of 
business.
  * * *
(32)  "Purchase" includes taking by sale, discount, negotiation, mortgage, pledge, lien, security 
interest, issue or re-issue, gift, or any other voluntary transaction creating an interest in property.
  * * *
(37)  "Security interest" means an interest in personal property or fixtures which secures payment 
or performance of an obligation. The term also includes any interest of a consignor and a buyer of 
accounts, chattel paper, a payment intangible, or a promissory note in a transaction that is subject 
to Article 9. The special property interest of a buyer of goods on identification of those goods to a 
contract for sale under Section 2-401 is not a "security interest", but a buyer may also acquire a 
"security interest" by complying with Article 9. Except as otherwise provided in Section 2-505, the 
right of a seller or lessor of goods under Article 2 or 2A to retain or acquire possession of the goods 
is not a "security interest", but a seller or lessor may also acquire a "security interest" by complying 
with Article 9. The retention or reservation of title by a seller of goods notwithstanding shipment or 
delivery to the buyer ( Section 2-401) is limited in effect to a reservation of a "security interest".
* * *
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   * * *

§ 1-201. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 2
   9. "Buyer in Ordinary Course of Business." From Section 1, Uniform Trust Receipts Act. The definition has been 
expanded to make clear the type of person protected. Its major significance lies in Section 2-403 and in the Article 
on Secured Transactions (Article 9).
   The first sentence of paragraph (9) makes clear that a buyer from a pawnbroker cannot be a buyer in ordinary 
course of business. The second sentence tracks Section 6-102(1)(m). It explains what it means to buy "in the 
ordinary course." The penultimate sentence prevents a buyer that does not have the right to possession as against 
the seller from being a buyer in ordinary course of business. Concerning when a buyer obtains possessory rights, 
see Sections 2-502 and 2-716. However, the penultimate sentence is not intended to affect a buyer's status as a 
buyer in ordinary course of business in cases (such as a "drop shipment") involving delivery by the seller to a 
person buying from the buyer or a donee from the buyer. The requirement relates to whether as against the seller 
the buyer or one taking through the buyer has possessory rights.
   * * *
   32. "Purchase." Section 58, Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act; Section 76, Uniform Sales Act; Section 53, 
Uniform Bills of Lading Act; Section 22, Uniform Stock Transfer Act; Section 1, Uniform Trust Receipts Act. 
Rephrased. With the addition of taking "by . . . security interest," the revised definition makes explicit what formerly 
was implicit.
   * * *
   37. "Security Interest." See Section 1, Uniform Trust Receipts Act. The definition of "security interest" was revised 
in connection with the promulgation of Article 2A and also to take account of the expanded scope of Article 9 as 
revised in the 1998 Official Text. It includes the interest of a consignor and the interest of a buyer of accounts, 
chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes. See Section 9-109. It also makes clear that, with certain 
exceptions, in rem rights of sellers and lessors under Articles 2 and 2A are not "security interests." Among the rights 
that are not security interests are the right to withhold delivery under Section 2-702(1), 2-703(a), or 2A-525, the right 
to stop delivery under Section 2-705 or 2A-526, and the right to reclaim under Section 2-507(2) or 2-702(2).
   * * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document