U.C.C. § 2-205
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 2. 
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-205. Firm Offers.
An offer by a merchant to buy or sell goods in a signed writing which by its terms gives assurance that it will be held 
open is not revocable, for lack of consideration, during the time stated or if no time is stated for a reasonable time, 
but in no event may such period of irrevocability exceed three months; but any such term of assurance on a form 
supplied by the offeree must be separately signed by the offeror.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 1 and 3, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten by this and other sections of this Article.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section is intended to modify the former rule which required that "firm offers" be sustained by consideration 
in order to bind, and to require instead that they must merely be characterized as such and expressed in signed 
writings.
2. The primary purpose of this section is to give effect to the deliberate intention of a merchant to make a current 
firm offer binding.  The deliberation is shown in the case of an individualized document by the merchant's signature 
to the offer, and in the case of an offer included on a form supplied by the other party to the transaction by the 
separate signing of the particular clause which contains the offer.  "Signed" here also includes authentication but 
the reasonableness of the authentication herein allowed must be determined in the light of the purpose of the 
section.  The circumstances surrounding the signing may justify something less than a formal signature or initialing 
but typically the kind of authentication involved here would consist of a minimum of initialing of the clause involved.  
A handwritten memorandum on the writer's letterhead purporting in its terms to "confirm" a firm offer already made 
would be enough to satisfy this section, although not subscribed, since under the circumstances it could not be 
considered a memorandum of mere negotiation and it would adequately show its own authenticity.  Similarly, an 
authorized telegram will suffice, and this is true even though the original draft contained only a typewritten 
signature.  However, despite settled courses of dealing or usages of the trade whereby firm offers are made by oral 
communication and relied upon without more evidence, such offers remain revocable under this Article since 
authentication by a writing is the essence of this section.
3. This section is intended to apply to current "firm" offers and not to long term options, and an outside time limit of 
three months during which such offers remain irrevocable has been set.  The three month period during which firm 
offers remain irrevocable under this section need not be stated by days or by date.  If the offer states that it is 
"guaranteed" or "firm" until the happening of a contingency which will occur within the three month period, it will 
remain irrevocable until that event.  A promise made for a longer period will operate under this section to bind the 
offeror only for the first three months of the period but may of course be renewed.  If supported by consideration it 

§ 2-205. Firm Offers.
Page 2 of 2
may continue for as long as the parties specify.  This section deals only with the offer which is not supported by 
consideration.
4. Protection is afforded against the inadvertent signing of a firm offer when contained in a form prepared by the 
offeree by requiring that such a clause be separately authenticated.  If the offer clause is called to the offeror's 
attention and he separately authenticates it, he will be bound; Section 2-302 may operate, however, to prevent an 
unconscionable result which otherwise would flow from other terms appearing in the form.
5. Safeguards are provided to offer relief in the case of material mistake by virtue of the requirement of good faith 
and the general law of mistake.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 1-102.
Point 2: Section 1-102.
Point 3: Section 2-201.
Point 5: Section 2-302.
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Merchant".  Section 2-104.
"Signed".  Section 1-201.
"Writing".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document