U.C.C. § 2-513
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 5. 
PERFORMANCE        
§ 2-513. Buyer's Right to Inspection of Goods.
(1)  Unless otherwise agreed and subject to subsection (3), where goods are tendered or delivered or 
identified to the contract for sale, the buyer has a right before payment or acceptance to inspect them at 
any reasonable place and time and in any reasonable manner.  When the seller is required or authorized to 
send the goods to the buyer, the inspection may be after their arrival.
(2)  Expenses of inspection must be borne by the buyer but may be recovered from the seller if the goods 
do not conform and are rejected.
(3)  Unless otherwise agreed and subject to the provisions of this Article on C.I.F. contracts (subsection (3) 
of Section 2-321), the buyer is not entitled to inspect the goods before payment of the price when the 
contract provides
(a)  for delivery "C.O.D." or on other like terms; or
(b)  for payment against documents of title, except where such payment is due only after the goods are 
to become available for inspection.
(4)  A place or method of inspection fixed by the parties is presumed to be exclusive but unless otherwise 
expressly agreed it does not postpone identification or shift the place for delivery or for passing the risk of 
loss.  If compliance becomes impossible, inspection shall be as provided in this section unless the place or 
method fixed was clearly intended as an indispensable condition failure of which avoids the contract.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provisions: Section 47(2), (3), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten, Subsections (2) and (3) being new.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter: To correspond in substance with the prior uniform statutory provision and to 
incorporate in addition some of the results of the better case law so that:
1. The buyer is entitled to inspect goods as provided in subsection (1) unless it has been otherwise agreed by the 
parties.  The phrase "unless otherwise agreed" is intended principally to cover such situations as those outlined in 
subsections (3) and (4) and those in which the agreement of the parties negates inspection before tender of 
delivery.  However, no agreement by the parties can displace the entire right of inspection except where the 
contract is simply for the sale of "this thing." Even in a sale of boxed goods "as is" inspection is a right of the buyer, 
since if the boxes prove to contain some other merchandise altogether the price can be recovered back; nor do the 
limitations of the provision on effect of acceptance apply in such a case.
2. The buyer's right of inspection is available to him upon tender, delivery or appropriation of the goods with notice 
to him.  Since inspection is available to him on tender, where payment is due against delivery he may, unless 

§ 2-513. Buyer's Right to Inspection of Goods.
Page 2 of 4
otherwise agreed, make his inspection before payment of the price.  It is also available to him after receipt of the 
goods and so may be postponed after receipt for a reasonable time.  Failure to inspect before payment does not 
impair the right to inspect after receipt of the goods unless the case falls within subsection (4) on agreed and 
exclusive inspection provisions.  The right to inspect goods which have been appropriated with notice to the buyer 
holds whether or not the sale was by sample.
3. The buyer may exercise his right of inspection at any reasonable time or place and in any reasonable manner.  It 
is not necessary that he select the most appropriate time, place or manner to inspect or that his selection be the 
customary one in the trade or locality.  Any reasonable time, place or manner is available to him and the 
reasonableness will be determined by trade usages, past practices between the parties and the other 
circumstances of the case.
The last sentence of subsection (1) makes it clear that the place of arrival of shipped goods is a reasonable place 
for their inspection.
4. Expenses of an inspection made to satisfy the buyer of the seller's performance must be assumed by the buyer 
in the first instance.  Since the rule provides merely for an allocation of expense there is no policy to prevent the 
parties from providing otherwise in the agreement.  Where the buyer would normally bear the expenses of the 
inspection but the goods are rightly rejected because of what the inspection reveals, demonstrable and reasonable 
costs of the inspection are part of his incidental damage caused by the seller's breach.
5. In the case of payment against documents, subsection (3) requires payment before inspection, since shipping 
documents against which payment is to be made will commonly be tendered while the goods are still in transit.  This 
Article recognizes no exception in any peculiar case in which the goods happen to arrive before the documents are 
tendered.  However, where by the agreement payment is to await the arrival of the goods, inspection before 
payment becomes proper since the goods are then "available for inspection."
Where by the agreement the documents are to be tendered after arrival of the goods the buyer is entitled to inspect 
before payment since the goods are then "available for inspection".  Proof of usage is not necessary to establish 
this right, but if inspection before payment is disputed the contrary must be established by usage or by an explicit 
contract term to that effect.
For the same reason, that the goods are available for inspection, a term calling for payment against storage 
documents or a delivery order does not normally bar the buyer's right to inspection before payment under 
subsection (3)(b).  This result is reinforced by the buyer's right under subsection (1) to inspect goods which have 
been appropriated with notice to him.
6. Under subsection (4) an agreed place or method of inspection is generally held to be intended as exclusive.  
However, where compliance with such an agreed inspection term becomes impossible, the question is basically 
one of intention.  If the parties clearly intend that the method of inspection named is to be a necessary condition 
without which the entire deal is to fail, the contract is at an end if that method becomes impossible.  On the other 
hand, if the parties merely seek to indicate a convenient and reliable method but do not intend to give up the deal in 
the event of its failure, any reasonable method of inspection may be substituted under this Article.
Since the purpose of an agreed place of inspection is only to make sure at that point whether or not the goods will 
be thrown back, the "exclusive" feature of the named place is satisfied under this Article if the buyer's failure to 
inspect there is held to be an acceptance with the knowledge of such defects as inspection would have revealed 
within the section on waiver of buyer's objections by failure to particularize.  Revocation of the acceptance is limited 
to the situations stated in the section pertaining to that subject.  The reasonable time within which to give notice of 
defects within the section on notice of breach begins to run from the point of the "acceptance."
7. Clauses on time of inspection are commonly clauses which limit the time in which the buyer must inspect and 
give notice of defects.  Such clauses are therefore governed by the section of this Article which requires that such a 
time limitation must be reasonable.

§ 2-513. Buyer's Right to Inspection of Goods.
Page 3 of 4
8. Inspection under this Article is not to be regarded as a "condition precedent to the passing of title" so that risk 
until inspection remains on the seller.  Under subsection (4) such an approach cannot be sustained.  Issues 
between the buyer and seller are settled in this Article almost wholly by special provisions and not by the technical 
determination of the locus of the title.  Thus "inspection as a condition to the passing of title" becomes a concept 
almost without meaning.  However, in peculiar circumstances inspection may still have some of the consequences 
hitherto sought and obtained under that concept.
9. "Inspection" under this section has to do with the buyer's check-up on whether the seller's performance is in 
accordance with a contract previously made and is not to be confused with the "examination" of the goods or of a 
sample or model of them at the time of contracting which may affect the warranties involved in the contract.
Cross References:
Generally: Sections 2-310(b), 2-321(3) and 2-606(1)(b).
Point 1: Section 2-607.
Point 2: Sections 2-501 and 2-502.
Point 4: Section 2-715.
Point 5: Section 2-321(3).
Point 6: Sections 2-606 to 2-608.
Point 7: Section 1-204.
Point 8: Comment to Section 2-401.
Point 9: Section 2-316(3)(b).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Conform".  Section 2-106.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale".  Section 2-106.
"Document of title".  Section 1-201.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Presumed".  Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time".  Section 1-204.
"Rights".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Send".  Section 1-201.
"Term".  Section 1-201.

§ 2-513. Buyer's Right to Inspection of Goods.
Page 4 of 4
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document