U.C.C. § 2-718
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 7. 
REMEDIES        
§ 2-718. Liquidation or Limitation of Damages; Deposits.
(1)  Damages for breach by either party may be liquidated in the agreement but only at an amount which is 
reasonable in the light of the anticipated or actual harm caused by the breach, the difficulties of proof of 
loss, and the inconvenience or nonfeasibility of otherwise obtaining an adequate remedy.  A term fixing 
unreasonably large liquidated damages is void as a penalty.
(2)  Where the seller justifiably withholds delivery of goods because of the buyer's breach, the buyer is 
entitled to restitution of any amount by which the sum of his payments exceeds
(a)  the amount to which the seller is entitled by virtue of terms liquidating the seller's damages in 
accordance with subsection (1), or
(b)  in the absence of such terms, twenty per cent of the value of the total performance for which the 
buyer is obligated under the contract or $500, whichever is smaller.
(3)  The buyer's right to restitution under subsection (2) is subject to offset to the extent that the seller 
establishes
(a)  a right to recover damages under the provisions of this Article other than subsection (1), and
(b)  the amount or value of any benefits received by the buyer directly or indirectly by reason of the 
contract.
(4)  Where a seller has received payment in goods their reasonable value or the proceeds of their resale 
shall be treated as payments for the purposes of subsection (2); but if the seller has notice of the buyer's 
breach before reselling goods received in part performance, his resale is subject to the conditions laid down 
in this Article on resale by an aggrieved seller ( Section 2-706).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Under subsection (1) liquidated damage clauses are allowed where the amount involved is reasonable in the light 
of the circumstances of the case.  The subsection sets forth explicitly the elements to be considered in determining 
the reasonableness of a liquidated damage clause.  A term fixing unreasonably large liquidated damages is 
expressly made void as a penalty.  An unreasonably small amount would be subject to similar criticism and might 
be stricken under the section on unconscionable contracts or clauses.
2. Subsection (2) refuses to recognize a forfeiture unless the amount of the payment so forfeited represents a 
reasonable liquidation of damages as determined under subsection (1).  A special exception is made in the case of 
small amounts (20% of the price or $500, whichever is smaller) deposited as security.  No distinction is made 

§ 2-718. Liquidation or Limitation of Damages; Deposits.
Page 2 of 2
between cases in which the payment is to be applied on the price and those in which it is intended as security for 
performance.  Subsection (2) is applicable to any deposit or down or part payment.  In the case of a deposit or turn 
in of goods resold before the breach, the amount actually received on the resale is to be viewed as the deposit 
rather than the amount allowed the buyer for the trade in.  However, if the seller knows of the breach prior to the 
resale of the goods turned in, he must make reasonable efforts to realize their true value, and this is assured by 
requiring him to comply with the conditions laid down in the section on resale by an aggrieved seller.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-302.
Point 2: Section 2-706.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party".  Section 1-201.
"Agreement".  Section 1-201.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Notice".  Section 1-201.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Remedy".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Term".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document