U.C.C. § 2-403
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 4. 
TITLE, CREDITORS AND GOOD FAITH PURCHASERS        
§ 2-403. Power to Transfer; Good Faith Purchase of Goods; "Entrusting".
(1)  A purchaser of goods acquires all title which his transferor had or had power to transfer except that a 
purchaser of a limited interest acquires rights only to the extent of the interest purchased.  A person with 
voidable title has power to transfer a good title to a good faith purchaser for value.  When goods have been 
delivered under a transaction of purchase the purchaser has such power even though
(a)  the transferor was deceived as to the identity of the purchaser, or
(b)  the delivery was in exchange for a check which is later dishonored, or
(c)  it was agreed that the transaction was to be a "cash sale", or
(d)  the delivery was procured through fraud punishable as larcenous under the criminal law.
(2)  Any entrusting of possession of goods to a merchant who deals in goods of that kind gives him power 
to transfer all rights of the entruster to a buyer in ordinary course of business.
(3)  "Entrusting" includes any delivery and any acquiescence in retention of possession regardless of any 
condition expressed between the parties to the delivery or acquiescence and regardless of whether the 
procurement of the entrusting or the possessor's disposition of the goods have been such as to be 
larcenous under the criminal law.
[Publisher's Editorial Note: If a state adopts the repealer of Article 6-Bulk Transfers (Alternative A), subsec. 
(4) should read as follows:]
(4)  The rights of other purchasers of goods and of lien creditors are governed by the Articles on Secured 
Transactions (Article 9) and Documents of Title (Article 7).
[Publisher's Editorial Note: If a state adopts Revised Article 6-Bulk Sales (Alternative B), subsec. (4) should 
read as follows:]
(4)  The rights of other purchasers of goods and of lien creditors are governed by the Articles on Secured 
Transactions (Article 9), Bulk Sales (Article 6) and Documents of Title (Article 7).
As amended in 1988.
For material relating to the changes made in text in 1988, see section 3 of Alternative A (Repealer of Article 
6-Bulk Transfers) and Conforming Amendment to Section 2-403 following end of Alternative B (Revised 
Article 6-Bulk Sales).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 20(4), 23, 24, 25, Uniform Sales Act; Section 9, especially 9(2), Uniform 
Trust Receipts Act; Section 9, Uniform Conditional Sales Act.
Changes: Consolidated and rewritten.

§ 2-403. Power to Transfer; Good Faith Purchase of Goods; "Entrusting".
Page 2 of 3
Purposes of Changes: To gather together a series of prior uniform statutory provisions and the case-law thereunder 
and to state a unified and simplified policy on good faith purchase of goods.
1. The basic policy of our law allowing transfer of such title as the transferor has is generally continued and 
expanded under subsection (1).  In this respect the provisions of the section are applicable to a person taking by 
any form of "purchase" as defined by this Act.  Moreover the policy of this Act expressly providing for the application 
of supplementary general principles of law to sales transactions wherever appropriate joins with the present section 
to continue unimpaired all rights acquired under the law of agency or of apparent agency or ownership or other 
estoppel, whether based on statutory provisions or on case law principles.  The section also leaves unimpaired the 
powers given to selling factors under the earlier Factors Acts.  In addition subsection (1) provides specifically for the 
protection of the good faith purchaser for value in a number of specific situations which have been troublesome 
under prior law.
On the other hand, the contract of purchase is of course limited by its own terms as in a case of pledge for a limited 
amount or of sale of a fractional interest in goods.
2. The many particular situations in which a buyer in ordinary course of business from a dealer has been protected 
against reservation of property or other hidden interest are gathered by subsections (2)-(4) into a single principle 
protecting persons who buy in ordinary course out of inventory.  Consignors have no reason to complain, nor have 
lenders who hold a security interest in the inventory, since the very purpose of goods in inventory is to be turned 
into cash by sale.
The principle is extended in subsection (3) to fit with the abolition of the old law of "cash sale" by subsection (1)(c).  
It is also freed from any technicalities depending on the extended law of larceny; such extension of the concept of 
theft to include trick, particular types of fraud, and the like is for the purpose of helping conviction of the offender; it 
has no proper application to the long-standing policy of civil protection of buyers from persons guilty of such trick or 
fraud.  Finally, the policy is extended, in the interest of simplicity and sense, to any entrusting by a bailor; this is in 
consonance with the explicit provisions of Section 7-205 on the powers of a warehouseman who is also in the 
business of buying and selling fungible goods of the kind he stores.  As to entrusting by a secured party, subsection 
(2) is limited by the more specific provisions of Section 9-307(1), which deny protection to a person buying farm 
products from a person engaged in farming operations.
3. The definition of "buyer in ordinary course of business" (Section 1-201) is effective here and preserves the 
essence of the healthy limitations engrafted by the case-law on the older statutes.  The older loose concept of good 
faith and wide definition of value combined to create apparent good faith purchasers in many situations in which the 
result outraged common sense; the court's solution was to protect the original title especially by use of "cash sale" 
or of over-technical construction of the enabling clauses of the statutes.  But such rulings then turned into limitations 
on the proper protection of buyers in the ordinary market.  Section 1-201(9) cuts down the category of buyer in 
ordinary course in such fashion as to take care of the results of the cases, but with no price either in confusion or in 
injustice to proper dealings in the normal market.
4. Except as provided in subsection (1), the rights of purchasers other than buyers in ordinary course are left to the 
Articles on Secured Transactions, Documents of Title, and Bulk Sales.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 1-103 and 1-201.
Point 2: Sections 1-201, 2-402, 7-205 and 9-307(1).
Points 3 and 4: Sections 1-102, 1-201, 2-104, 2-707 and Articles 6, 7 and 9.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer in ordinary course of business".  Section 1-201.

§ 2-403. Power to Transfer; Good Faith Purchase of Goods; "Entrusting".
Page 3 of 3
"Good faith".  Sections 1-201 and 2-103.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Person".  Section 1-201.
"Purchaser".  Section 1-201.
"Signed".  Section 1-201.
"Term".  Section 1-201.
"Value".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document