U.C.C. § 2-322
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 3. 
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-322. Delivery "Ex-Ship".
(1)  Unless otherwise agreed a term for delivery of goods "ex-ship" (which means from the carrying vessel) 
or in equivalent language is not restricted to a particular ship and requires delivery from a ship which has 
reached a place at the named port of destination where goods of the kind are usually discharged.
(2)  Under such a term unless otherwise agreed
(a)  the seller must discharge all liens arising out of the carriage and furnish the buyer with a direction 
which puts the carrier under a duty to deliver the goods; and
(b)  the risk of loss does not pass to the buyer until the goods leave the ship's tackle or are otherwise 
properly unloaded.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. The delivery term, "ex-ship", as between seller and buyer, is the reverse of the f.a.s. term covered.
2. Delivery need not be made from any particular vessel under a clause calling for delivery "ex-ship", even though a 
vessel on which shipment is to be made originally is named in the contract, unless the agreement by appropriate 
language, restricts the clause to delivery from a named vessel.
3. The appropriate place and manner of unloading at the port of destination depend upon the nature of the goods 
and the facilities and usages of the port.
4. A contract fixing a price "ex-ship" with payment "cash against documents" calls only for such documents as are 
appropriate to the contract.  Tender of a delivery order and of a receipt for the freight after the arrival of the carrying 
vessel is adequate.  The seller is not required to tender a bill of lading as a document of title nor is he required to 
insure the goods for the buyer's benefit, as the goods are not at the buyer's risk during the voyage.
Cross Reference:
Point 1: Section 2-319(2).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.

§ 2-322. Delivery "Ex-Ship".
Page 2 of 2
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Term".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document