U.C.C. § 2-705
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 7. 
REMEDIES        
§ 2-705. Seller's Stoppage of Delivery in Transit or Otherwise.
(1)  The seller may stop delivery of goods in the possession of a carrier or other bailee when he discovers 
the buyer to be insolvent ( Section 2-702) and may stop delivery of carload, truckload, planeload or larger 
shipments of express or freight when the buyer repudiates or fails to make a payment due before delivery 
or if for any other reason the seller has a right to withhold or reclaim the goods.
(2)  As against such buyer the seller may stop delivery until
(a)  receipt of the goods by the buyer; or
(b)  acknowledgment to the buyer by any bailee of the goods except a carrier that the bailee holds the 
goods for the buyer; or
(c)  such acknowledgment to the buyer by a carrier by reshipment or as a warehouse; or
(d)  negotiation to the buyer of any negotiable document of title covering the goods.
(3)  
(a)  To stop delivery the seller must so notify as to enable the bailee by reasonable diligence to prevent 
delivery of the goods.
(b)  After such notification the bailee must hold and deliver the goods according to the directions of the 
seller but the seller is liable to the bailee for any ensuing charges or damages.
(c)  If a negotiable document of title has been issued for goods the bailee is not obliged to obey a 
notification to stop until surrender of possession or control of the document.
(d)  A carrier who has issued a non-negotiable bill of lading is not obliged to obey a notification to stop 
received from a person other than the consignor.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 57-59, Uniform Sales Act; see also Sections 12, 14 and 42, Uniform 
Bills of Lading Act and Sections 9, 11 and 49, Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act.
Changes: This section continues and develops the above sections of the Uniform Sales Act in the light of the other 
uniform statutory provisions noted.
Purposes: To make it clear that:
1. Subsection (1) applies the stoppage principle to other bailees as well as carriers.
It also expands the remedy to cover the situations, in addition to buyer's insolvency, specified in the subsection.  
But since stoppage is a burden in any case to carriers, and might be a very heavy burden to them if it covered all 

§ 2-705. Seller's Stoppage of Delivery in Transit or Otherwise.
Page 2 of 3
small shipments in all these situations, the right to stop for reasons other than insolvency is limited to carload, 
truckload, planeload or larger shipments.  The seller shipping to a buyer of doubtful credit can protect himself by 
shipping C.O.D.
Where stoppage occurs for insecurity it is merely a suspension of performance, and if assurances are duly 
forthcoming from the buyer the seller is not entitled to resell or divert.
Improper stoppage is a breach by the seller if it effectively interferes with the buyer's right to due tender under the 
section on manner of tender of delivery.  However, if the bailee obeys an unjustified order to stop he may also be 
liable to the buyer.  The measure of his obligation is dependent on the provisions of the Documents of Title Article 
(Section 7-303).  Subsection 3(b) therefore gives him a right of indemnity as against the seller in such a case.
2. "Receipt by the buyer" includes receipt by the buyer's designated representative, the subpurchaser, when 
shipment is made direct to him and the buyer himself never receives the goods.  It is entirely proper under this 
Article that the seller, by making such direct shipment to the sub-purchaser, be regarded as acquiescing in the 
latter's purchase and as thus barred from stoppage of the goods as against him.
As between the buyer and the seller, the latter's right to stop the goods at any time until they reach the place of final 
delivery is recognized by this section.
Under subsection (3)(c) and (d), the carrier is under no duty to recognize the stop order of a person who is a 
stranger to the carrier's contract.  But the seller's right as against the buyer to stop delivery remains, whether or not 
the carrier is obligated to recognize the stop order.  If the carrier does obey it, the buyer cannot complain merely 
because of that circumstance; and the seller becomes obligated under subsection (3)(b) to pay the carrier any 
ensuing damages or charges.
3. A diversion of a shipment is not a "reshipment" under subsection (2)(c) when it is merely an incident to the 
original contract of transportation.  Nor is the procurement of "exchange bills" of lading which change only the name 
of the consignee to that of the buyer's local agent but do not alter the destination of a reshipment.
Acknowledgment by the carrier as a "warehouse" within the meaning of this Article requires a contract of a truly 
different character from the original shipment, a contract not in extension of transit but as a warehouse.
4. Subsection (3)(c) makes the bailee's obedience of a notification to stop conditional upon the surrender of 
possession or control of any outstanding negotiable document.
5. Any charges or losses incurred by the carrier in following the seller's orders, whether or not he was obligated to 
do so, fall to the seller's charge.
6. After an effective stoppage under this section the seller's rights in the goods are the same as if he had never 
made a delivery.
Cross References:
Sections 2-702 and 2-703.
Point 1: Sections 2-503 and 2-609, and Article 7.
Point 2: Section 2-103 and Article 7.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Contract for sale".  Section 2-106.

§ 2-705. Seller's Stoppage of Delivery in Transit or Otherwise.
Page 3 of 3
"Document of title".  Section 1-201.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Insolvent".  Section 1-201.
"Notification".  Section 1-201.
"Receipt" of goods.  Section 2-103.
"Rights".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document