U.C.C. § 2-323
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 3. 
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-323. Form of Bill of Lading Required in Overseas Shipment; "Overseas".
(1)  Where the contract contemplates overseas shipment and contains a term C.I.F. or C. & F. or F.O.B. 
vessel, the seller unless otherwise agreed must obtain a negotiable bill of lading stating that the goods have 
been loaded in board or, in the case of a term C.I.F. or C. & F., received for shipment.
(2)  Where in a case within subsection (1) a tangible bill of lading has been issued in a set of parts, unless 
otherwise agreed if the documents are not to be sent from abroad the buyer may demand tender of the full 
set; otherwise only one part of the bill of lading need be tendered.  Even if the agreement expressly 
requires a full set
(a)  due tender of a single part is acceptable within the provisions of this Article on cure of improper 
delivery (subsection (1) of Section 2-508); and
(b)  even though the full set is demanded, if the documents are sent from abroad the person tendering 
an incomplete set may nevertheless require payment upon furnishing an indemnity which the buyer in 
good faith deems adequate.
(3)  A shipment by water or by air or a contract contemplating such shipment is "overseas" insofar as by 
usage of trade or agreement it is subject to the commercial, financing or shipping practices characteristic of 
international deep water commerce.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) follows the "American" rule that a regular bill of lading indicating delivery of the goods at the dock 
for shipment is sufficient, except under a term "F.O.B. vessel." See Section 2-319 and comment thereto.
2. Subsection (2) deals with the problem of bills of lading covering deep water shipments, issued not as a single bill 
of lading but in a set of parts, each part referring to the other parts and the entire set constituting in commercial 
practice and at law a single bill of lading.  Commercial practice in international commerce is to accept and pay 
against presentation of the first part of a set if the part is sent from overseas even though the contract of the buyer 
requires presentation of a full set of bills of lading provided adequate indemnity for the missing parts is forthcoming.  
In accord with the amendment to Section 7-304, bills of lading in a set are limited to tangible bills.
This subsection codifies that practice as between buyer and seller.  Article 5 (Section 5-113) authorizes banks 
presenting drafts under letters of credit to give indemnities against the missing parts, and this subsection means 
that the buyer must accept and act on such indemnities if he in good faith deems them adequate.  But neither this 
subsection nor Article 5 decides whether a bank which has issued a letter of credit is similarly bound.  The issuing 
bank's obligation under a letter of credit is independent and depends on its own terms.  See Article 5.

§ 2-323. Form of Bill of Lading Required in Overseas Shipment; "Overseas".
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Sections 2-508(2), 5-113.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading".  Section 1-201.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Delivery".  Section 1-201.
"Financing agency".  Section 2-104.
"Person".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Send".  Section 1-201.
"Term".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document