U.C.C. § 2-711
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 7. 
REMEDIES        
§ 2-711. Buyer's Remedies in General; Buyer's Security Interest in Rejected 
Goods.
(1)  Where the seller fails to make delivery or repudiates or the buyer rightfully rejects or justifiably revokes 
acceptance then with respect to any goods involved, and with respect to the whole if the breach goes to the 
whole contract ( Section 2-612), the buyer may cancel and whether or not he has done so may in addition 
to recovering so much of the price as has been paid
(a)  "cover" and have damages under the next section as to all the goods affected whether or not they 
have been identified to the contract; or
(b)  recover damages for non-delivery as provided in this Article ( Section 2-713).
(2)  Where the seller fails to deliver or repudiates the buyer may also
(a)  if the goods have been identified recover them as provided in this Article ( Section 2-502); or
(b)  in a proper case obtain specific performance or replevy the goods as provided in this Article ( 
Section 2-716).
(3)  On rightful rejection or justifiable revocation of acceptance a buyer has a security interest in goods in 
his possession or control for any payments made on their price and any expenses reasonably incurred in 
their inspection, receipt, transportation, care and custody and may hold such goods and resell them in like 
manner as an aggrieved seller ( Section 2-706).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: No comparable index section; Subsection (3)-Section 69(5), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: The prior uniform statutory provision is generally continued and expanded in Subsection (3).
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. To index in this section the buyer's remedies, subsection (1) covering those remedies permitting the recovery of 
money damages, and subsection (2) covering those which permit reaching the goods themselves.  The remedies 
listed here are those available to a buyer who has not accepted the goods or who has justifiably revoked his 
acceptance.  The remedies available to a buyer with regard to goods finally accepted appear in the section dealing 
with breach in regard to accepted goods.  The buyer's right to proceed as to all goods when the breach is as to only 
some of the goods is determined by the section on breach in installment contracts and by the section on partial 
acceptance.
Despite the seller's breach, proper retender of delivery under the section on cure of improper tender or replacement 
can effectively preclude the buyer's remedies under this section, except for any delay involved.

§ 2-711. Buyer's Remedies in General; Buyer's Security Interest in Rejected Goods.
Page 2 of 2
2. To make it clear in subsection (3) that the buyer may hold and resell rejected goods if he has paid a part of the 
price or incurred expenses of the type specified.  "Paid" as used here includes acceptance of a draft or other time 
negotiable instrument or the signing of a negotiable note.  His freedom of resale is coextensive with that of a seller 
under this Article except that the buyer may not keep any profit resulting from the resale and is limited to retaining 
only the amount of the price paid and the costs involved in the inspection and handling of the goods.  The buyer's 
security interest in the goods is intended to be limited to the items listed in subsection (3), and the buyer is not 
permitted to retain such funds as he might believe adequate for his damages.  The buyer's right to cover, or to have 
damages for non-delivery, is not impaired by his exercise of his right of resale.
3. It should also be noted that this Act requires its remedies to be liberally administered and provides that any right 
or obligation which it declares is enforceable by action unless a different effect is specifically prescribed (Section 1-
106).
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-508, 2-601(c), 2-608, 2-612 and 2-714.
Point 2: Section 2-706.
Point 3: Section 1-106.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party".  Section 1-201.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Cancellation".  Section 2-106.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Cover".  Section 2-712.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Notifies".  Section 1-201.
"Receipt" of goods.  Section 2-103.
"Remedy".  Section 1-201.
"Security interest".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document