U.C.C. § 2-716
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 7. 
REMEDIES        
§ 2-716. Buyer's Right to Specific Performance or Replevin.
(1)  Specific performance may be decreed where the goods are unique or in other proper circumstances.
(2)  The decree for specific performance may include such terms and conditions as to payment of the price, 
damages, or other relief as the court may deem just.
(3)  The buyer has a right of replevin for goods identified to the contract if after reasonable effort he is 
unable to effect cover for such goods or the circumstances reasonably indicate that such effort will be 
unavailing or if the goods have been shipped under reservation and satisfaction of the security interest in 
them has been made or tendered. In the case of goods bought for personal, family, or household purposes, 
the buyer's right of replevin vests upon acquisition of a special property, even if the seller had not then 
repudiated or failed to deliver.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 68, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rephrased.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. The present section continues in general prior policy as to specific performance and injunction against breach.  
However, without intending to impair in any way the exercise of the court's sound discretion in the matter, this 
Article seeks to further a more liberal attitude than some courts have shown in connection with the specific 
performance of contracts of sale.
2. In view of this Article's emphasis on the commercial feasibility of replacement, a new concept of what are 
"unique" goods is introduced under this section.  Specific performance is no longer limited to goods which are 
already specific or ascertained at the time of contracting.  The test of uniqueness under this section must be made 
in terms of the total situation which characterizes the contract.  Output and requirements contracts involving a 
particular or peculiarly available source or market present today the typical commercial specific performance 
situation, as contrasted with contracts for the sale of heirlooms or priceless works of art which were usually involved 
in the older cases.  However, uniqueness is not the sole basis of the remedy under this section for the relief may 
also be granted "in other proper circumstances" and inability to cover is strong evidence of "other proper 
circumstances".
3. The legal remedy of replevin is given to the buyer in cases in which cover is reasonably unavailable and goods 
have been identified to the contract. This is in addition to the buyer's right to recover identified goods under Section 
2-502. For consumer goods, the buyer's right to replevin vests upon the buyer's acquisition of a special property, 
which occurs upon identification of the goods to the contract. See Section 2-501. Inasmuch as a secured party 
normally acquires no greater rights in its collateral that its debtor had or had power to convey, see Section 2-403(1) 

§ 2-716. Buyer's Right to Specific Performance or Replevin.
Page 2 of 2
(first sentence), a buyer who acquires a right of replevin under subsection (3) will take free of a security interest 
created by the seller if it attaches to the goods after the goods have been identified to the contract. The buyer will 
take free, even if the buyer does not buy in ordinary course and even if the security interest is perfected. Of course, 
to the extent that the buyer pays the price after the security interest attaches, the payments will constitute proceeds 
of the security interest.
4. This section is intended to give the buyer rights to the goods comparable to the seller's rights to the price.
5. If a negotiable document of title is outstanding, the buyer's right of replevin relates of course to the document not 
directly to the goods.  See Article 7, especially Section 7-602.
Cross References:
Point 3: Section 2-502.
Point 4: Section 2-709.
Point 5: Article 7.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Goods".  Section 1-201.
"Rights".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document