U.C.C. § 2-310
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 3. 
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-310. Open Time for Payment or Running of Credit; Authority to Ship 
Under Reservation.
Unless otherwise agreed
(a)  payment is due at the time and place at which the buyer is to receive the goods even though the 
place of shipment is the place of delivery; and
(b)  if the seller is authorized to send the goods he may ship them under reservation, and may tender 
the documents of title, but the buyer may inspect the goods after their arrival before payment is due 
unless such inspection is inconsistent with the terms of the contract ( Section 2-513); and
(c)  if delivery is authorized and made by way of documents of title otherwise than by subsection (b) 
then payment is due regardless of where the goods are to be received (i) at the time and place at which 
the buyer is to receive delivery of the tangible documents or (ii) at the time the buyer is to receive 
delivery of the electronic documents and at the seller's place of business or if none, the seller's 
residence; and
(d)  where the seller is required or authorized to ship the goods on credit the credit period runs from the 
time of shipment but post-dating the invoice or delaying its dispatch will correspondingly delay the 
starting of the credit period.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 42 and 47(2), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten in this and other sections.
Purposes of Changes: This section is drawn to reflect modern business methods of dealing at a distance rather 
than face to face.  Thus:
1. Paragraph (a) provides that payment is due at the time and place "the buyer is to receive the goods" rather than 
at the point of delivery except in documentary shipment cases (paragraph (c) ).  This grants an opportunity for the 
exercise by the buyer of his preliminary right to inspection before paying even though under the delivery term the 
risk of loss may have previously passed to him or the running of the credit period has already started.
2. Paragraph (b) while providing for inspection by the buyer before he pays, protects the seller.  He is not required 
to give up possession of the goods until he has received payment, where no credit has been contemplated by the 
parties.  The seller may collect through a bank by a sight draft against an order bill of lading "hold until arrival; 
inspection allowed." The obligations of the bank under such a provision are set forth in Part 5 of Article 4.  Under 
subsection (c), in the absence of a credit term, the seller is permitted to ship under reservation and if he does 
payment is then due where and when the buyer is to receive delivery of the tangible documents of title.  In the case 

§ 2-310. Open Time for Payment or Running of Credit; Authority to Ship Under Reservation.
Page 2 of 2
of an electronic document of title, payment is due when the buyer is to receive delivery of the electronic document 
and at the seller's place of business, or if none, the seller's residence.  Delivery as to documents of title is stated in 
Article 1, Section 1-201.
3. Unless otherwise agreed, the place for the delivery of the documents and payment is the buyer's city but the time 
for payment is only after arrival of the goods, since under paragraph (b), and Sections 2-512 and 2-513 the buyer is 
under no duty to pay prior to inspection. Tender of a document of title requires that the seller be ready, willing and 
able to transfer possession of a tangible document of title or control of an electronic document of title to the buyer.
4. Where the mode of shipment is such that goods must be unloaded immediately upon arrival, too rapidly to permit 
adequate inspection before receipt, the seller must be guided by the provisions of this Article on inspection which 
provide that if the seller wishes to demand payment before inspection, he must put an appropriate term into the 
contract.  Even requiring payment against documents will not of itself have this desired result if the documents are 
to be held until the arrival of the goods.  But under (b) and (c) if the terms are C.I.F., C.O.D., or cash against 
documents payment may be due before inspection.
5. Paragraph (d) states the common commercial understanding that an agreed credit period runs from the time of 
shipment or from that dating of the invoice which is commonly recognized as a representation of the time of 
shipment.  The provision concerning any delay in sending forth the invoice is included because such conduct 
results in depriving the buyer of his full notice and warning as to when he must be prepared to pay.
Cross References:
Generally: Part 5.
Point 1: Section 2-509.
Point 2: Sections 2-505, 2-511, 2-512, 2-513 and Article 4.
Point 3: Sections 2-308(b), 2-512 and 2-513.
Point 4: Section 2-513(3)(b).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Delivery".  Section 1-201.
"Document of title".  Section 1-201.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Receipt of goods".  Section 2-103.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Send".  Section 1-201.
"Term".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document