U.C.C. § 2-321
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 3. 
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-321. C.I.F. or C. & F.: "Net Landed Weights"; "Payment on Arrival"; 
Warranty of Condition on Arrival.
Under a contract containing a term C.I.F. or C. & F.
(1)  Where the price is based on or is to be adjusted according to "net landed weights", "delivered 
weights", "out turn" quantity or quality or the like, unless otherwise agreed the seller must reasonably 
estimate the price.  The payment due on tender of the documents called for by the contract is the 
amount so estimated, but after final adjustment of the price a settlement must be made with commercial 
promptness.
(2)  An agreement described in subsection (1) or any warranty of quality or condition of the goods on 
arrival places upon the seller the risk of ordinary deterioration, shrinkage and the like in transportation 
but has no effect on the place or time of identification to the contract for sale or delivery or on the 
passing of the risk of loss.
(3)  Unless otherwise agreed where the contract provides for payment on or after arrival of the goods 
the seller must before payment allow such preliminary inspection as is feasible; but if the goods are lost 
delivery of the documents and payment are due when the goods should have arrived.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
This section deals with two variations of the C.I.F. contract which have evolved in mercantile practice but are 
entirely consistent with the basic C.I.F. pattern.  Subsections (1) and (2), which provide for a shift to the seller of the 
risk of quality and weight deterioration during shipment, are designed to conform the law to the best mercantile 
practice and usage without changing the legal consequences of the C.I.F. or C. & F. term as to the passing of 
marine risks to the buyer at the point of shipment.  Subsection (3) provides that where under the contract 
documents are to be presented for payment after arrival of the goods, this amounts merely to a postponement of 
the payment under the C.I.F. contract and is not to be confused with the "no arrival, no sale" contract.  If the goods 
are lost, delivery of the documents and payment against them are due when the goods should have arrived.  The 
clause for payment on or after arrival is not to be construed as such a condition precedent to payment that if the 
goods are lost in transit the buyer need never pay and the seller must bear the loss.
Cross Reference:
Section 2-324.
Definitional Cross References:

§ 2-321. C.I.F. or C. & F.: "Net Landed Weights"; "Payment on Arrival"; Warranty of Condition on Arrival.
Page 2 of 2
"Agreement".  Section 1-201.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Delivery".  Section 1-201.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Term".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document