U.C.C. § 2-605
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 6. 
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE        
§ 2-605. Waiver of Buyer's Objections by Failure to Particularize.
(1)  The buyer's failure to state in connection with rejection a particular defect which is ascertainable by 
reasonable inspection precludes him from relying on the unstated defect to justify rejection or to establish 
breach
(a)  where the seller could have cured it if stated seasonably; or
(b)  between merchants when the seller has after rejection made a request in writing for a full and final 
written statement of all defects on which the buyer proposes to rely.
(2)  Payment against documents made without reservation of rights precludes recovery of the payment for 
defects apparent in the documents.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. The present section rests upon a policy of permitting the buyer to give a quick and informal notice of defects in a 
tender without penalizing him for omissions in his statement, while at the same time protecting a seller who is 
reasonably misled by the buyer's failure to state curable defects.
2. Where the defect in a tender is one which could have been cured by the seller, a buyer who merely rejects the 
delivery without stating his objections to it is probably acting in commercial bad faith and seeking to get out of a deal 
which has become unprofitable.  Subsection (1)(a), following the general policy of this Article which looks to 
preserving the deal wherever possible, therefore insists that the seller's right to correct his tender in such 
circumstances be protected.
3. When the time for cure is past, subsection (1)(b) makes it plain that a seller is entitled upon request to a final 
statement of objections upon which he can rely.  What is needed is that he make clear to the buyer exactly what is 
being sought.  A formal demand under paragraph (b) will be sufficient in the case of a merchant-buyer.
4. Subsection (2) applies to the particular case of documents the same principle which the section on effects of 
acceptance applies to the case of goods.  The matter is dealt with in this section in terms of "waiver" of objections 
rather than of right to revoke acceptance, partly to avoid any confusion with the problems of acceptance of goods 
and partly because defects in documents which are not taken as grounds for rejection are generally minor ones.  
The only defects concerned in the present subsection are defects in the documents which are apparent. This rule 
applies to both tangible and electronic documents of title.  Where payment is required against the documents they 
must be inspected before payment, and the payment then constitutes acceptance of thedocuments.  Under the 
section dealing with this problem, such acceptance of the documents does not constitute an acceptance of the 

§ 2-605. Waiver of Buyer's Objections by Failure to Particularize.
Page 2 of 2
goods or impair any options or remedies of the buyer for their improper delivery.  Where the documents are 
delivered without requiring such contemporary action as payment from the buyer, the reason of the next section on 
what constitutes acceptance of goods, applies.  Their acceptance by non-objection is therefore postponed until after 
a reasonable time for their inspection.  In either situation, however, the buyer "waives" only the defects apparent in 
the documents.
Cross References:
Point 2: Section 2-508.
Point 4: Sections 2-512(2), 2-606(1)(b), 2-607(2).
Definitional Cross References:
"Between merchants".  Section 2-104.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Seasonably".  Section 1-204.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Writing" and "written".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document