U.C.C. § 2-608
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 6. 
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE        
§ 2-608. Revocation of Acceptance in Whole or in Part.
(1)  The buyer may revoke his acceptance of a lot or commercial unit whose non-conformity substantially 
impairs its value to him if he has accepted it
(a)  on the reasonable assumption that its non-conformity would be cured and it has not been 
seasonably cured; or
(b)  without discovery of such non-conformity if his acceptance was reasonably induced either by the 
difficulty of discovery before acceptance or by the seller's assurances.
(2)  Revocation of acceptance must occur within a reasonable time after the buyer discovers or should have 
discovered the ground for it and before any substantial change in condition of the goods which is not 
caused by their own defects.  It is not effective until the buyer notifies the seller of it.
(3)  A buyer who so revokes has the same rights and duties with regard to the goods involved as if he had 
rejected them.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 69(1)(d), (3), (4) and (5), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. Although the prior basic policy is continued, the buyer is no longer required to elect between revocation of 
acceptance and recovery of damages for breach.  Both are now available to him.  The non-alternative character of 
the two remedies is stressed by the terms used in the present section.  The section no longer speaks of 
"rescission," a term capable of ambiguous application either to transfer of title to the goods or to the contract of sale 
and susceptible also of confusion with cancellation for cause of an executed or executory portion of the contract.  
The remedy under this section is instead referred to simply as "revocation of acceptance" of goods tendered under 
a contract for sale and involves no suggestion of "election" of any sort.
2. Revocation of acceptance is possible only where the non-conformity substantially impairs the value of the goods 
to the buyer.  For this purpose the test is not what the seller had reason to know at the time of contracting; the 
question is whether the non-conformity is such as will in fact cause a substantial impairment of value to the buyer 
though the seller had no advance knowledge as to the buyer's particular circumstances.
3. "Assurances" by the seller under paragraph (b) of subsection (1) can rest as well in the circumstances or in the 
contract as in explicit language used at the time of delivery.  The reason for recognizing such assurances is that 
they induce the buyer to delay discovery.  These are the only assurances involved in paragraph (b).  Explicit 

§ 2-608. Revocation of Acceptance in Whole or in Part.
Page 2 of 3
assurances may be made either in good faith or bad faith.  In either case any remedy accorded by this Article is 
available to the buyer under the section on remedies for fraud.
4. Subsection (2) requires notification of revocation of acceptance within a reasonable time after discovery of the 
grounds for such revocation.  Since this remedy will be generally resorted to only after attempts at adjustment have 
failed, the reasonable time period should extend in most cases beyond the time in which notification of breach must 
be given, beyond the time for discovery of non-conformity after acceptance and beyond the time for rejection after 
tender.  The parties may by their agreement limit the time for notification under this section, but the same sanctions 
and considerations apply to such agreements as are discussed in the comment on manner and effect of rightful 
rejection.
5. The content of the notice under subsection (2) is to be determined in this case as in others by considerations of 
good faith, prevention of surprise, and reasonable adjustment.  More will generally be necessary than the mere 
notification of breach required under the preceding section.  On the other hand the requirements of the section on 
waiver of buyer's objections do not apply here.  The fact that quick notification of trouble is desirable affords good 
ground for being slow to bind a buyer by his first statement.  Following the general policy of this Article, the 
requirements of the content of notification are less stringent in the case of a non-merchant buyer.
6. Under subsection (2) the prior policy is continued of seeking substantial justice in regard to the condition of goods 
restored to the seller.  Thus the buyer may not revoke his acceptance if the goods have materially deteriorated 
except by reason of their own defects.  Worthless goods, however, need not be offered back and minor defects in 
the articles reoffered are to be disregarded.
7. The policy of the section allowing partial acceptance is carried over into the present section and the buyer may 
revoke his acceptance, in appropriate cases, as to the entire lot or any commercial unit thereof.
Cross References:
Point 3: Section 2-721.
Point 4: Sections 1-204, 2-602 and 2-607.
Point 5: Sections 2-605 and 2-607.
Point 7: Section 2-601.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Commercial unit".  Section 2-105.
"Conform".  Section 2-106.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Lot".  Section 2-105.
"Notifies".  Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time".  Section 1-204.
"Rights".  Section 1-201.
"Seasonably".  Section 1-204.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.

§ 2-608. Revocation of Acceptance in Whole or in Part.
Page 3 of 3
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document