U.C.C. § 2-106
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 1. 
SHORT TITLE, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND SUBJECT MATTER        
§ 2-106. Definitions: "Contract"; "Agreement"; "Contract for Sale"; "Sale"; 
"Present Sale"; "Conforming" to Contract; "Termination"; "Cancellation".
(1)  In this Article unless the context otherwise requires "contract" and "agreement" are limited to those 
relating to the present or future sale of goods.  "Contract for sale" includes both a present sale of goods and 
a contract to sell goods at a future time.  A "sale" consists in the passing of title from the seller to the buyer 
for a price ( Section 2-401).  A "present sale" means a sale which is accomplished by the making of the 
contract.
(2)  Goods or conduct including any part of a performance are "conforming" or conform to the contract 
when they are in accordance with the obligations under the contract.
(3)  "Termination" occurs when either party pursuant to a power created by agreement or law puts an end 
to the contract otherwise than for its breach.  On "termination" all obligations which are still executory on 
both sides are discharged but any right based on prior breach or performance survives.
(4)  "Cancellation" occurs when either party puts an end to the contract for breach by the other and its effect 
is the same as that of "termination" except that the cancelling party also retains any remedy for breach of 
the whole contract or any unperformed balance.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsection (1)-Section 1(1) and (2), Uniform Sales Act; Subsection (2)-none, but 
subsection generally continues policy of Sections 11, 44 and 69, Uniform Sales Act; Subsections (3) and (4)-none.
Changes: Completely rewritten.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. Subsection (1): "Contract for sale" is used as a general concept throughout this Article, but the rights of the 
parties do not vary according to whether the transaction is a present sale or a contract to sell unless the Article 
expressly so provides.
2. Subsection (2): It is in general intended to continue the policy of requiring exact performance by the seller of his 
obligations as a condition to his right to require acceptance.  However, the seller is in part safeguarded against 
surprise as a result of sudden technicality on the buyer's part by the provisions of Section 2-508 on seller's cure of 
improper tender or delivery.  Moreover usage of trade frequently permits commercial leeways in performance and 
the language of the agreement itself must be read in the light of such custom or usage and also, prior course of 
dealing, and in a long term contract, the course of performance.
3. Subsections (3) and (4): These subsections are intended to make clear the distinction carried forward throughout 
this Article between termination and cancellation.

§ 2-106. Definitions: "Contract"; "Agreement"; "Contract for Sale"; "Sale"; "Present Sale "; "Conforming" to 
Contract; "Termination"; "Cancellation".
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 1-203, 1-205, 2-208 and 2-508.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement".  Section 1-201.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Remedy".  Section 1-201.
"Rights".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document