U.C.C. § 2-306
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 3. 
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-306. Output, Requirements and Exclusive Dealings.
(1)  A term which measures the quantity by the output of the seller or the requirements of the buyer means 
such actual output or requirements as may occur in good faith, except that no quantity unreasonably 
disproportionate to any stated estimate or in the absence of a stated estimate to any normal or otherwise 
comparable prior output or requirements may be tendered or demanded.
(2)  A lawful agreement by either the seller or the buyer for exclusive dealing in the kind of goods 
concerned imposes unless otherwise agreed an obligation by the seller to use best efforts to supply the 
goods and by the buyer to use best efforts to promote their sale.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) of this section, in regard to output and requirements, applies to this specific problem the general 
approach of this Act which requires the reading of commercial background and intent into the language of any 
agreement and demands good faith in the performance of that agreement.  It applies to such contracts of 
nonproducing establishments such as dealers or distributors as well as to manufacturing concerns.
2. Under this Article, a contract for output or requirements is not too indefinite since it is held to mean the actual 
good faith output or requirements of the particular party.  Nor does such a contract lack mutuality of obligation 
since, under this section, the party who will determine quantity is required to operate his plant or conduct his 
business in good faith and according to commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade so that his output or 
requirements will approximate a reasonably foreseeable figure.  Reasonable elasticity in the requirements is 
expressly envisaged by this section and good faith variations from prior requirements are permitted even when the 
variation may be such as to result in discontinuance.  A shut-down by a requirements buyer for lack of orders might 
be permissible when a shut-down merely to curtail losses would not.  The essential test is whether the party is 
acting in good faith.  Similarly, a sudden expansion of the plant by which requirements are to be measured would 
not be included within the scope of the contract as made but normal expansion undertaken in good faith would be 
within the scope of this section.  One of the factors in an expansion situation would be whether the market price had 
risen greatly in a case in which the requirements contract contained a fixed price.  Reasonable variation of an 
extreme sort is exemplified in Southwest Natural Gas Co. v. Oklahoma Portland Cement Co., 102 F.2d 630 
(C.C.A.10, 1939).  This Article takes no position as to whether a requirements contract is a provable claim in 
bankruptcy.
3. If an estimate of output or requirements is included in the agreement, no quantity unreasonably disproportionate 
to it may be tendered or demanded.  Any minimum or maximum set by the agreement shows a clear limit on the 

§ 2-306. Output, Requirements and Exclusive Dealings.
Page 2 of 2
intended elasticity.  In similar fashion, the agreed estimate is to be regarded as a center around which the parties 
intend the variation to occur.
4. When an enterprise is sold, the question may arise whether the buyer is bound by an existing output or 
requirements contract.  That question is outside the scope of this Article, and is to be determined on other principles 
of law.  Assuming that the contract continues, the output or requirements in the hands of the new owner continue to 
be measured by the actual good faith output or requirements under the normal operation of the enterprise prior to 
sale.  The sale itself is not grounds for sudden expansion or decrease.
5. Subsection (2), on exclusive dealing, makes explicit the commercial rule embodied in this Act under which the 
parties to such contracts are held to have impliedly, even when not expressly, bound themselves to use reasonable 
diligence as well as good faith in their performance of the contract.  Under such contracts the exclusive agent is 
required, although no express commitment has been made, to use reasonable effort and due diligence in the 
expansion of the market or the promotion of the product, as the case may be.  The principal is expected under such 
a contract to refrain from supplying any other dealer or agent within the exclusive territory.  An exclusive dealing 
agreement brings into play all of the good faith aspects of the output and requirement problems of subsection (1).  It 
also raises questions of insecurity and right to adequate assurance under this Article.
Cross References:
Point 4: Section 2-210.
Point 5: Sections 1-203 and 2-609.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement".  Section 1-201.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Contract for sale".  Section 2-106.
"Good faith".  Section 1-201.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Term".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document