U.C.C. § 2A-309
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2A. LEASES          >            PART 
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT        
§ 2A-309. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Fixtures.
(1)  In this section:
(a)  goods are "fixtures" when they become so related to particular real estate that an interest in them 
arises under real estate law;
(b)  a "fixture filing" is the filing, in the office where a record of a mortgage on the real estate would be 
filed or recorded, of a financing statement covering goods that are or are to become fixtures and 
conforming to the requirements of Section 9-502(a) and (b);
(c)  a lease is a "purchase money lease" unless the lessee has possession or use of the goods or the 
right to possession or use of the goods before the lease agreement is enforceable;
(d)  a mortgage is a "construction mortgage" to the extent it secures an obligation incurred for the 
construction of an improvement on land including the acquisition cost of the land, if the recorded writing 
so indicates; and
(e)  "encumbrance" includes real estate mortgages and other liens on real estate and all other rights in 
real estate that are not ownership interests.
(2)  Under this Article a lease may be of goods that are fixtures or may continue in goods that become 
fixtures, but no lease exists under this Article of ordinary building materials incorporated into an 
improvement on land.
(3)  This Article does not prevent creation of a lease of fixtures pursuant to real estate law.
(4)  The perfected interest of a lessor of fixtures has priority over a conflicting interest of an encumbrancer 
or owner of the real estate if:
(a)  the lease is a purchase money lease, the conflicting interest of the encumbrancer or owner arises 
before the goods become fixtures, the interest of the lessor is perfected by a fixture filing before the 
goods become fixtures or within ten days thereafter, and the lessee has an interest of record in the real 
estate or is in possession of the real estate; or
(b)  the interest of the lessor is perfected by a fixture filing before the interest of the encumbrancer or 
owner is of record, the lessor's interest has priority over any conflicting interest of a predecessor in title 
of the encumbrancer or owner, and the lessee has an interest of record in the real estate or is in 
possession of the real estate.
(5)  The interest of a lessor of fixtures, whether or not perfected, has priority over the conflicting interest of 
an encumbrancer or owner of the real estate if:
(a)  the fixtures are readily removable factory or office machines, readily removable equipment that is 
not primarily used or leased for use in the operation of the real estate, or readily removable 
replacements of domestic appliances that are goods subject to a consumer lease, and before the 
goods become fixtures the lease contract is enforceable; or
(b)  the conflicting interest is a lien on the real estate obtained by legal or equitable proceedings after 
the lease contract is enforceable; or

§ 2A-309. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Fixtures.
Page 2 of 4
(c)  the encumbrancer or owner has consented in writing to the lease or has disclaimed an interest in 
the goods as fixtures; or
(d)  the lessee has a right to remove the goods as against the encumbrancer or owner.  If the lessee's 
right to remove terminates, the priority of the interest of the lessor continues for a reasonable time.
(6)  Notwithstanding subsection (4)(a) but otherwise subject to subsections (4) and (5), the interest of a 
lessor of fixtures, including the lessor's residual interest, is subordinate to the conflicting interest of an 
encumbrancer of the real estate under a construction mortgage recorded before the goods become fixtures 
if the goods become fixtures before the completion of the construction.  To the extent given to refinance a 
construction mortgage, the conflicting interest of an encumbrancer of the real estate under a mortgage has 
this priority to the same extent as the encumbrancer of the real estate under the construction mortgage.
(7)  In cases not within the preceding subsections, priority between the interest of a lessor of fixtures, 
including the lessor's residual interest, and the conflicting interest of an encumbrancer or owner of the real 
estate who is not the lessee is determined by the priority rules governing conflicting interests in real estate.
(8)  If the interest of a lessor of fixtures, including the lessor's residual interest, has priority over all 
conflicting interests of all owners and encumbrancers of the real estate, the lessor or the lessee may (i) on 
default, expiration, termination, or cancellation of the lease agreement but subject to the agreement and 
this Article, or (ii) if necessary to enforce other rights and remedies of the lessor or lessee under this Article, 
remove the goods from the real estate, free and clear of all conflicting interests of all owners and 
encumbrancers of the real estate, but the lessor or lessee must reimburse any encumbrancer or owner of 
the real estate who is not the lessee and who has not otherwise agreed for the cost of repair of any physical 
injury, but not for any diminution in value of the real estate caused by the absence of the goods removed or 
by any necessity of replacing them.  A person entitled to reimbursement may refuse permission to remove 
until the party seeking removal gives adequate security for the performance of this obligation.
(9)  Even though the lease agreement does not create a security interest, the interest of a lessor of fixtures, 
including the lessor's residual interest, is perfected by filing a financing statement as a fixture filing for 
leased goods that are or are to become fixtures in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Article on 
Secured Transactions (Article 9).
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 9-313.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing terminology and to add new material.
Purposes:
1. While Section 9-313 provided a model for this section, certain provisions were substantially revised.
2. Section 2A-309(1)(c), which is new, defines purchase money lease to exclude leases where the lessee had 
possession or use of the goods or the right thereof before the lease agreement became enforceable.  This term is 
used in subsection (4)(a) as one of the conditions that must be satisfied to obtain priority over the conflicting interest 
of an encumbrancer or owner of the real estate.

§ 2A-309. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Fixtures.
Page 3 of 4
3. Section 2A-309(4), which states one of several priority rules found in this section, deletes reference to office 
machines and the like (Section 9-313(4)(c)) as well as certain liens (Section 9-313(4)(d)).  However, these items are 
included in subsection (5), another priority rule that is more permissive than the rule found in subsection (4) as it 
applies whether or not the interest of the lessor is perfected.  In addition, subsection (5)(a) expands the scope of the 
provisions of Section 9-313(4)(c) to include readily removable equipment not primarily used or leased for use in the 
operation of real estate; the qualifier is intended to exclude from the expanded rule equipment integral to the 
operation of real estate, e.g., heating and air conditioning equipment.
4. The rule stated in subsection (7) is more liberal than the rule stated in Section 9-313(7) in that issues of priority 
not otherwise resolved in this subsection are left for resolution by the priority rules governing conflicting interests in 
real estate, as opposed to the Section 9-313(7) automatic subordination of the security interest in fixtures.  Note 
that, for the purpose of this section, where the interest of an encumbrancer or owner of the real estate is paramount 
to the interest of the lessor, the latter term includes the residual interest of the lessor.
5. The rule stated in subsection (8) is more liberal than the rule stated in Section 9-313(8) in that the right of 
removal is extended to both the lessor and the lessee and the occasion for removal includes expiration, termination 
or cancellation of the lease agreement, and enforcement of rights and remedies under this Article, as well as 
default.  The new language also provides that upon removal the goods are free and clear of conflicting interests of 
owners and encumbrancers of the real estate.
6. Finally, subsection (9) provides a mechanism for the lessor of fixtures to perfect its interest by filing a financing 
statement under the provisions of the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9), even though the lease agreement 
does not create a security interest.  Section 1-201(37).  The relevant provisions of Article 9 must be interpreted 
permissively to give effect to this mechanism as it implicitly expands the scope of Article 9 so that its filing 
provisions apply to transactions that create a lease of fixtures, even though the lease agreement does not create a 
security interest.  This mechanism is similar to that provided in Section 2-326(3)(c) for the seller of goods on 
consignment, even though the consignment is not "intended as security".  Section 1-201(37).  Given the lack of 
litigation with respect to the mechanism created for consignment sales, this new mechanism should prove effective.
Cross References:
Sections 1-201(37), 2A-309(1)(c), 2A-309(4), Article 9, especially Sections 9-313, 9-313(4)(c), 9-313(4)(d), 9-
313(7), 9-313(8) and 9-408.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed".  Section 1-201(3).
"Cancellation".  Section 2A-103(1)(b).
"Conforming".  Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Consumer lease".  Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Goods".  Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease".  Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease agreement".  Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract".  Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee".  Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor".  Section 2A-103(1)(p).

§ 2A-309. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Fixtures.
Page 4 of 4
"Lien".  Section 2A-103(1)(r).
"Mortgage".  Section 9-105(1)(j).
"Party".  Section 1-201(29).
"Person".  Section 1-201(30).
"Reasonable time".  Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Remedy".  Section 1-201(34).
"Rights".  Section 1-201(36).
"Security interest".  Section 1-201(37).
"Termination".  Section 2A-103(1)(z).
"Value".  Section 1-201(44).
"Writing".  Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document