U.C.C. § 2A-518
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2A. LEASES          >            PART 
5. DEFAULT          >             B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR        
§ 2A-518. Cover; Substitute Goods.
(1)  After a default by a lessor under the lease contract of the type described in Section 2A-508(1), or, if 
agreed, after other default by the lessor, the lessee may cover by making any purchase or lease of or 
contract to purchase or lease goods in substitution for those due from the lessor.
(2)  Except as otherwise provided with respect to damages liquidated in the lease agreement ( Section 2A-
504) or otherwise determined pursuant to agreement of the parties ( Sections 1-102(3) and 2A-503), if a 
lessee's cover is by a lease agreement substantially similar to the original lease agreement and the new 
lease agreement is made in good faith and in a commercially reasonable manner, the lessee may recover 
from the lessor as damages (i) the present value, as of the date of the commencement of the term of the 
new lease agreement, of the rent under the new lease agreement applicable to that period of the new lease 
term which is comparable to the then remaining term of the original lease agreement minus the present 
value as of the same date of the total rent for the then remaining lease term of the original lease 
agreement, and (ii) any incidental or consequential damages, less expenses saved in consequence of the 
lessor's default.
(3)  If a lessee's cover is by lease agreement that for any reason does not qualify for treatment under 
subsection (2), or is by purchase or otherwise, the lessee may recover from the lessor as if the lessee had 
elected not to cover and Section 2A-519 governs.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-712.
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) allows the lessee to take action to fix its damages after default by the lessor.  Such action may 
consist of the lease of goods.  The decision to cover is a function of commercial judgment, not a statutory mandate 
replete with sanctions for failure to comply.  Cf.  Section 9-507.
2. Subsection (2) states a rule for determining the amount of lessee's damages provided that there is no agreement 
to the contrary.  The lessee's damages will be established using the new lease agreement as a measure if the 
following three criteria are met: (i) the lessee's cover is by lease agreement, (ii) the lease agreement is substantially 
similar to the original lease agreement, and (iii) such cover was effected in good faith, and in a commercially 
reasonable manner.  Thus, the lessee will be entitled to recover from the lessor the present value, as of the date of 
commencement of the term of the new lease agreement, of the rent under the new lease agreement applicable to 

§ 2A-518. Cover; Substitute Goods.
Page 2 of 3
that period which is comparable to the then remaining term of the original lease agreement less the present value of 
the rent reserved for the remaining term under the original lease, together with incidental or consequential damages 
less expenses saved in consequence of the lessor's default.  Consequential damages may include loss suffered by 
the lessee because of deprivation of the use of the goods during the period between the default and the acquisition 
of the goods under the new lease agreement.  If the lessee's cover does not satisfy the criteria of subsection (2), 
Section 2A-519 governs.
3. Two of the three criteria to be met by the lessee are familiar, but the concept of the new lease agreement being 
substantially similar to the original lease agreement is not.  Given the many variables facing a party who intends to 
lease goods and the rapidity of change in the market place, the policy decision was made not to draft with 
specificity.  It was thought unwise to seek to establish certainty at the cost of fairness.  Thus, the decision of 
whether the new lease agreement is substantially similar to the original will be determined case by case.
4. While the section does not draw a bright line, it is possible to describe some of the factors that should be 
considered in finding that a new lease agreement is substantially similar to the original.  First, the goods subject to 
the new lease agreement should be examined.  For example, in a lease of computer equipment the new lease 
might be for more modern equipment.  However, it may be that at the time of the lessor's breach it was not possible 
to obtain the same type of goods in the market place.  Because the lessee's remedy under Section 2A-519 is 
intended to place the lessee in essentially the same position as if he had covered, if goods similar to those to have 
been delivered under the original lease are not available, then the computer equipment in this hypothetical should 
qualify as a commercially reasonable substitute.  See Section 2-712(1).
5. Second, the various elements of the new lease agreement should also be examined.  Those elements include 
the presence or absence of options to purchase or release; the lessor's representations, warranties and covenants 
to the lessee, as well as those to be provided by the lessee to the lessor; and the services, if any, to be provided by 
the lessor or by the lessee.  All of these factors allocate cost and risk between the lessor and the lessee and thus 
affect the amount of rent to be paid.  If the differences between the original lease and the new lease can be easily 
valued, it would be appropriate for a court to adjust the difference in rental to take account of the difference between 
the two leases, find that the new lease is substantially similar to the old lease, and award cover damages under this 
section.  If, for example, the new lease requires the lessor to insure the goods in the hands of the lessee, while the 
original lease required the lessee to insure, the usual cost of such insurance could be deducted from the rent due 
under the new lease before determining the difference in rental between the two leases.
6. Having examined the goods and the agreement, the test to be applied is whether, in light of these comparisons, 
the new lease agreement is substantially similar to the original lease agreement.  These findings should not be 
made with scientific precision, as they are a function of economics, nor should they be made independently with 
respect to the goods and each element of the agreement, as it is important that a sense of commercial judgment 
pervade the finding.  To establish the new lease as a proper measure of damage under subsection (2), these 
factors, taken as a whole, must result in a finding that the new lease agreement is substantially similar to the 
original.
7. A new lease can be substantially similar to the original lease even though its term extends beyond the remaining 
term of the original lease, so long as both (a) the lease terms are commercially comparable (e.g., it is highly unlikely 
that a one-month rental and a five-year lease would reflect similar commercial realities), and (b) the court can fairly 
apportion a part of the rental payments under the new lease to that part of the term of the new lease which is 
comparable to the remaining lease term under the original lease.  Also, the lease term of the new lease may be 
comparable to the term of the original lease even though the beginning and ending dates of the two leases are not 
the same.  For example, a two-month lease of agricultural equipment for the months of August and September may 
be comparable to a two-month lease running from the 15th of August to the 15th of October if in the particular 
location two-month leases beginning on August 15th are basically interchangeable with two-month leases beginning 
August 1st.  Similarly, the term of a one-year truck lease beginning on the 15th of January may be comparable to 
the term of a one-year truck lease beginning January 2d.  If the lease terms are found to be comparable, the court 
may base cover damages on the entire difference between the costs under the two leases.

§ 2A-518. Cover; Substitute Goods.
Page 3 of 3
Cross References:
Sections 2-712(1), 2A-519 and 9-507.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement".  Section 1-201(3).
"Contract".  Section 1-201(11).
"Good faith".  Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b).
"Goods".  Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease".  Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease agreement".  Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract".  Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee".  Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor".  Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Party".  Section 1-201(29).
"Present value".  Section 2A-103(1)(u).
"Purchase".  Section 2A-103(1)(v).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document