U.C.C. § 2A-106
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2A. LEASES          >            PART 
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS        
§ 2A-106. Limitation on Power of Parties to Consumer Lease to Choose 
Applicable Law and Judicial Forum.
(1)  If the law chosen by the parties to a consumer lease is that of a jurisdiction other than a jurisdiction in 
which the lessee resides at the time the lease agreement becomes enforceable or within 30 days thereafter 
or in which the goods are to be used, the choice is not enforceable.
(2)  If the judicial forum chosen by the parties to a consumer lease is a forum that would not otherwise have 
jurisdiction over the lessee, the choice is not enforceable.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Unif. Consumer Credit Code § 1.201(8), 7A U.L.A. 36 (1974).
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes: There is a real danger that a lessor may induce a consumer lessee to agree that the applicable law will 
be a jurisdiction that has little effective consumer protection, or to agree that the applicable forum will be a forum 
that is inconvenient for the lessee in the event of litigation.  As a result, this section invalidates these choice of law 
or forum clauses, except where the law chosen is that of the state of the consumer's residence or where the goods 
will be kept, or the forum chosen is one that otherwise would have jurisdiction over the lessee.
Subsection (1) limits potentially abusive choice of law clauses in consumer leases.  The 30-day rule in subsection 
(1) was suggested by Section 9-103(1)(c).  This section has no effect on choice of law clauses in leases that are not 
consumer leases.  Such clauses would be governed by other law.
Subsection (2) prevents enforcement of potentially abusive jurisdictional consent clauses in consumer leases.  By 
using the term judicial forum, this section does not limit selection of a nonjudicial forum, such as arbitration.  This 
section has no effect on choice of forum clauses in leases that are not consumer leases; such clauses are, as a 
matter of current law, "prima facie valid".  The Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Co., 407 U.S. 1, 10 (1972). Such 
clauses would be governed by other law, including the Model Choice of Forum Act (1968).
Cross Reference:
Section 9-103(1)(c).
Definitional Cross References:
"Consumer lease".  Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Lease agreement".  Section 2A-103(1)(k).

§ 2A-106. Limitation on Power of Parties to Consumer Lease to Choose Applicable Law and Judicial Forum.
Page 2 of 2
"Lessee".  Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Goods".  Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Party".  Section 1-201(29).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document