U.C.C. § 3-413
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES        
§ 3-413. OBLIGATION OF ACCEPTOR
(a)  The acceptor of a draft is obliged to pay the draft (i) according to its terms at the time it was accepted, 
even though the acceptance states that the draft is payable "as originally drawn" or equivalent terms, (ii) if 
the acceptance varies the terms of the draft, according to the terms of the draft as varied, or (iii) if the 
acceptance is of a draft that is an incomplete instrument, according to its terms when completed, to the 
extent stated in Sections 3-115 and 3-407. The obligation is owed to a person entitled to enforce the draft 
or to the drawer or an indorser who paid the draft under Section 3-414 or 3-415.
(b)  If the certification of a check or other acceptance of a draft states the amount certified or accepted, the 
obligation of the acceptor is that amount. If (i) the certification or acceptance does not state an amount, (ii) 
the amount of the instrument is subsequently raised, and (iii) the instrument is then negotiated to a holder in 
due course, the obligation of the acceptor is the amount of the instrument at the time it was taken by the 
holder in due course.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Subsection (a) is consistent with former Section 3-413(1). Subsection (b) has primary importance with respect to 
certified checks. It protects the holder in due course of a certified check that was altered after certification and 
before negotiation to the holder in due course. A bank can avoid liability for the altered amount by stating on the 
check the amount the bank agrees to pay. The subsection applies to other accepted drafts as well. The rule of this 
section is similar to the rule of Articles 41 of the Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International 
Promissory Notes. Articles 42 and 43 of the Convention include more detailed rules that in many respects do not 
have parallels in this Article. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial 
Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document