U.C.C. § 3-416
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES        
§ 3-416. TRANSFER WARRANTIES
(a)  A person who transfers an instrument for consideration warrants to the transferee and, if the transfer is 
by indorsement, to any subsequent transferee that:
(1)  the warrantor is a person entitled to enforce the instrument;
(2)  all signatures on the instrument are authentic and authorized;
(3)  the instrument has not been altered;
(4)  the instrument is not subject to a defense or claim in recoupment of any party which can be 
asserted against the warrantor;
(5)  the warrantor has no knowledge of any insolvency proceeding commenced with respect to the 
maker or acceptor or, in the case of an unaccepted draft, the drawer; and
(6)  with respect to a remotely-created consumer item, that the person on whose account the item is 
drawn authorized the issuance of the item in the amount for which the item is drawn.
(b)  A person to whom the warranties under subsection (a) are made and who took the instrument in good 
faith may recover from the warrantor as damages for breach of warranty an amount equal to the loss 
suffered as a result of the breach, but not more than the amount of the instrument plus expenses and loss 
of interest incurred as a result of the breach.
(c)  The warranties stated in subsection (a) cannot be disclaimed with respect to checks. Unless notice of a 
claim for breach of warranty is given to the warrantor within 30 days after the claimant has reason to know 
of the breach and the identity of the warrantor, the liability of the warrantor under subsection (b) is 
discharged to the extent of any loss caused by the delay in giving notice of the claim.
(d)  A [cause of action] for breach of warranty under this section accrues when the claimant has reason to 
know of the breach.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (a) is taken from subsection (2) of former Section 3-417. Subsections (3) and (4) of former Section 
3-417 are deleted. Warranties under subsection (a) in favor of the immediate transferee apply to all persons who 
transfer an instrument for consideration whether or not the transfer is accompanied by indorsement. Any 
consideration sufficient to support a simple contract will support those warranties. If there is an indorsement the 
warranty runs with the instrument and the remote holder may sue the indorser-warrantor directly and thus avoid a 
multiplicity of suits.
   2. Since the purpose of transfer (Section 3-203(a)) is to give the transferee the right to enforce the instrument, 
subsection (a)(1) is a warranty that the transferor is a person entitled to enforce the instrument (Section 3-301). 
Under Section 3-203(b) transfer gives the transferee any right of the transferor to enforce the instrument. 

§ 3-416. TRANSFER WARRANTIES
Page 2 of 2
Subsection (a)(1) is in effect a warranty that there are no unauthorized or missing indorsements that prevent the 
transferor from making the transferee a person entitled to enforce the instrument.
   3. The rationale of subsection (a)(4) is that the transferee does not undertake to buy an instrument that is not 
enforceable in whole or in part, unless there is a contrary agreement. Even if the transferee takes as a holder in due 
course who takes free of the defense or claim in recoupment, the warranty gives the transferee the option of 
proceeding against the transferor rather than litigating with the obligor on the instrument the issue of the holder-in-
due-course status of the transferee. Subsection (3) of former Section 3-417 which limits this warranty is deleted. 
The rationale is that while the purpose of a "no recourse" indorsement is to avoid a guaranty of payment, the 
indorsement does not clearly indicate an intent to disclaim warranties.
   4. Under subsection (a)(5) the transferor does not warrant against difficulties of collection, impairment of the credit 
of the obligor or even insolvency. The transferee is expected to determine such questions before taking the 
obligation. If insolvency proceedings as defined in Section 1-201(22) have been instituted against the party who is 
expected to pay and the transferor knows it, the concealment of that fact amounts to a fraud upon the transferee, 
and the warranty against knowledge of such proceedings is provided accordingly.
   5. Transfer warranties may be disclaimed with respect to any instrument except a check. Between the immediate 
parties disclaimer may be made by agreement. In the case of an indorser, disclaimer of transferor's liability, to be 
effective, must appear in the indorsement with words such as "without warranties" or some other specific reference 
to warranties. But in the case of a check, subsection (c) of Section 3-416 provides that transfer warranties cannot 
be disclaimed at all. In the check collection process the banking system relies on these warranties.
   6. Subsection (b) states the measure of damages for breach of warranty. There is no express provision for 
attorney's fees, but attorney's fees are not meant to be necessarily excluded. They could be granted because they 
fit within the phrase "expenses *** incurred as a result of the breach." The intention is to leave to other state law the 
issue as to when attorney's fees are recoverable.
   7. Since the traditional term "cause of action" may have been replaced in some states by "claim for relief" or some 
equivalent term, the words "cause of action" in subsection (d) have been bracketed to indicate that the words may 
be replaced by an appropriate substitute to conform to local practice.
   8. Subsection (a)(6) is based on a number of nonuniform amendments designed to address concerns about 
certain kinds of check fraud. The provision implements a limited rejection of Price v. Neal, 97 Eng. Rep. 871 (K.B. 
1762), so that in certain circumstances (those involving remotely-created consumer items) the payor bank can use 
a warranty claim to absolve itself of responsibility for honoring an unauthorized item. The provision rests on the 
premise that monitoring by depositary banks can control this type of fraud more effectively than any practices 
readily available to payor banks. The provision expressly includes both the case in which the consumer does not 
authorize the item at all and also the case in which the consumer authorizes the item but in an amount different 
from the amount in which the item is drawn. Similar provisions appear in Sections 3-417, 4-207, and 4-208.
   The provision supplements applicable federal law, which requires telemarketers who submit instruments for 
payment to obtain the customer's "express verifiable authorization," which may be either in writing or tape recorded 
and must be made available upon request to the customer's bank. Federal Trade Commission's Telemarketing 
Sales Rule, 16 C.F.R. § 310.3(a)(3), implementing the Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention 
Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 6101-6108. Some states also have consumer-protection laws governing authorization of 
instruments in telemarketing transactions. See, e.g., 9 Vt. Stat. Ann. § 2464.
   9. Article 45 of the Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes includes 
warranties that are similar (except for the warranty in subsection (a)(6)).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document