U.C.C. § 3-202
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 2. NEGOTIATION, TRANSFER, AND INDORSEMENT        
§ 3-202. NEGOTIATION SUBJECT TO RESCISSION
(a)  Negotiation is effective even if obtained (i) from an infant, a corporation exceeding its powers, or a 
person without capacity, (ii) by fraud, duress, or mistake, or (iii) in breach of duty or as part of an illegal 
transaction.
(b)  To the extent permitted by other law, negotiation may be rescinded or may be subject to other 
remedies, but those remedies may not be asserted against a subsequent holder in due course or a person 
paying the instrument in good faith and without knowledge of facts that are a basis for rescission or other 
remedy.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section is based on former Section 3-207. Subsection (2) of former Section 3-207 prohibited rescission of 
a negotiation against holders in due course. Subsection (b) of Section 3-202 extends this protection to payor banks.
   2. Subsection (a) applies even though the lack of capacity or the illegality, is of a character which goes to the 
essence of the transaction and makes it entirely void. It is inherent in the character of negotiable instruments that 
any person in possession of an instrument which by its terms is payable to that person or to bearer is a holder and 
may be dealt with by anyone as a holder. The principle finds its most extreme application in the well settled rule that 
a holder in due course may take the instrument even from a thief and be protected against the claim of the rightful 
owner. The policy of subsection (a) is that any person to whom an instrument is negotiated is a holder until the 
instrument has been recovered from that person's possession. The remedy of a person with a claim to an 
instrument is to recover the instrument by replevin or otherwise; to impound it or to enjoin its enforcement, collection 
or negotiation; to recover its proceeds from the holder; or to intervene in any action brought by the holder against 
the obligor. As provided in Section 3-305(c), the claim of the claimant is not a defense to the obligor unless the 
claimant defends the action.
   3. There can be no rescission or other remedy against a holder in due course or a person who pays in good faith 
and without notice, even though the prior negotiation may have been fraudulent or illegal in its essence and entirely 
void. As against any other party the claimant may have any remedy permitted by law. This section is not intended to 
specify what that remedy may be, or to prevent any court from imposing conditions or limitations such as prompt 
action or return of the consideration received. All such questions are left to the law of the particular jurisdiction. 
Section 3-202 gives no right that would not otherwise exist. The section is intended to mean that any remedies 
afforded by other law are cut off only by a holder in due course.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document