U.C.C. § 3-108
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 3-108. PAYABLE ON DEMAND OR AT DEFINITE TIME
(a)  A promise or order is "payable on demand" if it (i) states that it is payable on demand or at sight, or 
otherwise indicates that it is payable at the will of the holder, or (ii) does not state any time of payment.
(b)  A promise or order is "payable at a definite time" if it is payable on elapse of a definite period of time 
after sight or acceptance or at a fixed date or dates or at a time or times readily ascertainable at the time 
the promise or order is issued, subject to rights of (i) prepayment, (ii) acceleration, (iii) extension at the 
option of the holder, or (iv) extension to a further definite time at the option of the maker or acceptor or 
automatically upon or after a specified act or event.
(c)  If an instrument, payable at a fixed date, is also payable upon demand made before the fixed date, the 
instrument is payable on demand until the fixed date and, if demand for payment is not made before that 
date, becomes payable at a definite time on the fixed date.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   This section is a restatement of former Section 3-108 and Section 3-109. Subsection (b) broadens former Section 
3-109 somewhat by providing that a definite time includes a time readily ascertainable at the time the promise or 
order is issued. Subsection (b)(iii) and (iv) restates former Section 3-109(1)(d). It adopts the generally accepted rule 
that a clause providing for extension at the option of the holder, even without a time limit, does not affect 
negotiability since the holder is given only a right which the holder would have without the clause. If the extension is 
to be at the option of the maker or acceptor or is to be automatic, a definite time limit must be stated or the time of 
payment remains uncertain and the order or promise is not a negotiable instrument. If a definite time limit is stated, 
the effect upon certainty of time of payment is the same as if the instrument were made payable at the ultimate date 
with a term providing for acceleration.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document