U.C.C. § 3-602
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 6. DISCHARGE AND PAYMENT        
§ 3-602. PAYMENT
(a)  Subject to subsection (e), an instrument is paid to the extent payment is made by or on behalf of a party 
obliged to pay the instrument, and to a person entitled to enforce the instrument.
(b)  Subject to subsection (e), a note is paid to the extent payment is made by or on behalf of a party 
obliged to pay the note to a person that formerly was entitled to enforce the note only if at the time of the 
payment the party obliged to pay has not received adequate notification that the note has been transferred 
and that payment is to be made to the transferee. A notification is adequate only if it is signed by the 
transferor or the transferee; reasonably identifies the transferred note; and provides an address at which 
payments subsequently are to be made. Upon request, a transferee shall seasonably furnish reasonable 
proof that the note has been transferred. Unless the transferee complies with the request, a payment to the 
person that formerly was entitled to enforce the note is effective for purposes of subsection (c) even if the 
party obliged to pay the note has received a notification under this paragraph.
(c)  Subject to subsection (e), to the extent of a payment under subsections (a) and (b), the obligation of the 
party obliged to pay the instrument is discharged even though payment is made with knowledge of a claim 
to the instrument under Section 3-306 by another person.
(d)  Subject to subsection (e), a transferee, or any party that has acquired rights in the instrument directly or 
indirectly from a transferee, including any such party that has rights as a holder in due course, is deemed to 
have notice of any payment that is made under subsection (b) after the date that the note is transferred to 
the transferee but before the party obliged to pay the note receives adequate notification of the transfer.
(e)  The obligation of a party to pay the instrument is not discharged under subsections (a) through (d) if:
(1)  a claim to the instrument under Section 3-306 is enforceable against the party receiving payment 
and (i) payment is made with knowledge by the payor that payment is prohibited by injunction or similar 
process of a court of competent jurisdiction, or (ii) in the case of an instrument other than a cashier's 
check, teller's check, or certified check, the party making payment accepted, from the person having a 
claim to the instrument, indemnity against loss resulting from refusal to pay the person entitled to 
enforce the instrument; or
(2)  the person making payment knows that the instrument is a stolen instrument and pays a person it 
knows is in wrongful possession of the instrument.
(f)  As used in this section, "signed," with respect to a record that is not a writing, includes the attachment to 
or logical association with the record of an electronic symbol, sound, or process with the present intent to 
adopt or accept the record.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section replaces former Section 3-603(1). The phrase "claim to the instrument" in subsection (a) means, 
by reference to Section 3-306, a claim of ownership or possession and not a claim in recoupment. Subsection 

§ 3-602. PAYMENT
Page 2 of 2
(e)(1)(ii) is added to conform to Section 3-411. Section 3-411 is intended to discourage an obligated bank from 
refusing payment of a cashier's check, certified check or dishonored teller's check at the request of a claimant to the 
check who provided the bank with indemnity against loss. See Comment 1 to Section 3-411. An obligated bank that 
refuses payment under those circumstances not only remains liable on the check but may also be liable to the 
holder of the check for consequential damages. Section 3-602(e)(1)(ii) and Section 3-411, read together, change 
the rule of former Section 3-603(1) with respect to the obligation of the obligated bank on the check. Payment to the 
holder of a cashier's check, teller's check, or certified check discharges the obligation of the obligated bank on the 
check to both the holder and the claimant even though indemnity has been given by the person asserting the claim. 
If the obligated bank pays the check in violation of an agreement with the claimant in connection with the indemnity 
agreement, any liability that the bank may have for violation of the agreement is not governed by Article 3, but is left 
to other law. This section continues the rule that the obligor is not discharged on the instrument if payment is made 
in violation of an injunction against payment. See Section 3-411(c)(iv).
   2. Subsection (a) covers payments made in a traditional manner, to the person entitled to enforce the instrument. 
Subsection (b), which provides an alternative method of payment, deals with the situation in which a person entitled 
to enforce the instrument transfers the instrument without giving notice to parties obligated to pay the instrument. If 
that happens and one of those parties subsequently makes a payment to the transferor, the payment is effective 
even though it is not made to the person entitled to enforce the instrument. Unlike the earlier version of Section 3-
602, this rule is consistent with Section 9-406(a), Restatement of Mortgages § 5.5, and Restatement of Contracts § 
338(1).
   3. In determining the party to whom a payment is made for purposes of this section, courts should look to 
traditional rules of agency. Thus, if the original payee of a note transfers ownership of the note to a third party but 
continues to service the obligation, the law of agency might treat payments made to the original payee as payments 
made to the third party.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document