U.C.C. § 3-304
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS        
§ 3-304. OVERDUE INSTRUMENT
(a)  An instrument payable on demand becomes overdue at the earliest of the following times:
(1)  on the day after the day demand for payment is duly made;
(2)  if the instrument is a check, 90 days after its date; or
(3)  if the instrument is not a check, when the instrument has been outstanding for a period of time after 
its date which is unreasonably long under the circumstances of the particular case in light of the nature 
of the instrument and usage of the trade.
(b)  With respect to an instrument payable at a definite time the following rules apply:
(1)  If the principal is payable in installments and a due date has not been accelerated, the instrument 
becomes overdue upon default under the instrument for nonpayment of an installment, and the 
instrument remains overdue until the default is cured.
(2)  If the principal is not payable in installments and the due date has not been accelerated, the 
instrument becomes overdue on the day after the due date.
(3)  If a due date with respect to principal has been accelerated, the instrument becomes overdue on 
the day after the accelerated due date.
(c)  Unless the due date of principal has been accelerated, an instrument does not become overdue if there 
is default in payment of interest but no default in payment of principal.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. To be a holder in due course, one must take without notice that an instrument is overdue. Section 3-
302(a)(2)(iii). Section 3-304 replaces subsection (3) of former Section 3-304. For the sake of clarity it treats demand 
and time instruments separately. Subsection (a) applies to demand instruments. A check becomes stale after 90 
days.
   Under former Section 3-304(3)(c), a holder that took a demand note had notice that it was overdue if it was taken 
"more than a reasonable length of time after its issue." In substitution for this test, subsection (a)(3) requires the 
trier of fact to look at both the circumstances of the particular case and the nature of the instrument and trade 
usage. Whether a demand note is stale may vary a great deal depending on the facts of the particular case.
   2. Subsections (b) and (c) cover time instruments. They follow the distinction made under former Article 3 
between defaults in payment of principal and interest. In subsection (b) installment instruments and single payment 
instruments are treated separately. If an installment is late, the instrument is overdue until the default is cured.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 3-304. OVERDUE INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 2
End of Document