U.C.C. § 3-309
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS        
§ 3-309. ENFORCEMENT OF LOST, DESTROYED, OR STOLEN INSTRUMENT
(a)  A person not in possession of an instrument is entitled to enforce the instrument if:
(1)  the person seeking to enforce the instrument:
(A)  was entitled to enforce the instrument when loss of possession occurred; or
(B)  has directly or indirectly acquired ownership of the instrument from a person who was entitled 
to enforce the instrument when loss of possession occurred;
(2)  the loss of possession was not the result of a transfer by the person or a lawful seizure; and
(3)  the person cannot reasonably obtain possession of the instrument because the instrument was 
destroyed, its whereabouts cannot be determined, or it is in the wrongful possession of an unknown 
person or a person that cannot be found or is not amenable to service of process.
(b)  A person seeking enforcement of an instrument under subsection (a) must prove the terms of the 
instrument and the person's right to enforce the instrument. If that proof is made, Section 3-308 applies to 
the case as if the person seeking enforcement had produced the instrument. The court may not enter 
judgment in favor of the person seeking enforcement unless it finds that the person required to pay the 
instrument is adequately protected against loss that might occur by reason of a claim by another person to 
enforce the instrument. Adequate protection may be provided by any reasonable means.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Section 3-309 is a modification of former Section 3-804. The rights stated are those of "a person entitled to 
enforce the instrument" at the time of loss rather than those of an "owner" as in former Section 3-804. Under 
subsection (b), judgment to enforce the instrument cannot be given unless the court finds that the defendant will be 
adequately protected against a claim to the instrument by a holder that may appear at some later time. The court is 
given discretion in determining how adequate protection is to be assured. Former Section 3-804 allowed the court 
to "require security indemnifying the defendant against loss." Under Section 3-309 adequate protection is a flexible 
concept. For example, there is substantial risk that a holder in due course may make a demand for payment if the 
instrument was payable to bearer when it was lost or stolen. On the other hand if the instrument was payable to the 
person who lost the instrument and that person did not indorse the instrument, no other person could be a holder of 
the instrument. In some cases there is risk of loss only if there is doubt about whether the facts alleged by the 
person who lost the instrument are true. Thus, the type of adequate protection that is reasonable in the 
circumstances may depend on the degree of certainty about the facts in the case.
   2. Subsection (a) is intended to reject the result in Dennis Joslin Co. v. Robinson Broadcasting Corp., 977 F. 
Supp. 491 (D.D.C. 1997). A transferee of a lost instrument need prove only that its transferor was entitled to 
enforce, not that the transferee was in possession at the time the instrument was lost. The protections of subsection 
(a) should also be available when instruments are lost during transit, because whatever the precise status of 

§ 3-309. ENFORCEMENT OF LOST, DESTROYED, OR STOLEN INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 2
ownership at the point of loss, either the sender or the receiver ordinarily would have been entitled to enforce the 
instrument during the course of transit. The amendments to subsection (a) are not intended to alter in any way the 
rules that apply to the preservation of checks in connection with truncation or any other expedited method of check 
collection or processing.
   3. A security interest may attach to the right of a person not in possession of an instrument to enforce the 
instrument. Although the secured party may not be the owner of the instrument, the secured party may nevertheless 
be entitled to exercise its debtor's right to enforce the instrument by resorting to its collection rights under the 
circumstances described in Section 9-607. This section does not address whether the person required to pay the 
instrument owes any duty to a secured party that is not itself the owner of the instrument.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document