U.C.C. § 4-212
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS        
§ 4-212. PRESENTMENT BY NOTICE OF ITEM NOT PAYABLE BY, THROUGH, 
OR AT BANK; LIABILITY OF DRAWER OR INDORSER
(a)  Unless otherwise instructed, a collecting bank may present an item not payable by, through, or at a 
bank by sending to the party to accept or pay a record providing notice that the bank holds the item for 
acceptance or payment. The notice must be sent in time to be received on or before the day when 
presentment is due and the bank must meet any requirement of the party to accept or pay under Section 3-
501 by the close of the bank's next banking day after it knows of the requirement.
(b)  If presentment is made by notice and payment, acceptance, or request for compliance with a 
requirement under Section 3-501 is not received by the close of business on the day after maturity or, in the 
case of demand items, by the close of business on the third banking day after notice was sent, the 
presenting bank may treat the item as dishonored and charge any drawer or indorser by sending it notice of 
the facts.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section codifies a practice extensively followed in presentation of trade acceptances and documentary and 
other drafts drawn on nonbank payors. It imposes a duty on the payor to respond to the notice of the item if the item 
is not to be considered dishonored. Notice of such a dishonor charges drawers and indorsers. Presentment under 
this section is good presentment under Article 3. See Section 3-501.
   2. A drawee not receiving notice is not, of course, liable to the drawer for wrongful dishonor.
   3. A bank so presenting an instrument must be sufficiently close to the drawee to be able to exhibit the instrument 
on the day it is requested to do so or the next business day at the latest.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document