U.C.C. § 4-302
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 3. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: PAYOR BANKS        
§ 4-302. PAYOR'S BANK RESPONSIBILITY FOR LATE RETURN OF ITEM
(a)  If an item is presented to and received by a payor bank, the bank is accountable for the amount of:
(1)  a demand item, other than a documentary draft, whether properly payable or not, if the bank, in any 
case in which it is not also the depositary bank, retains the item beyond midnight of the banking day of 
receipt without settling for it or, whether or not it is also the depositary bank, does not pay or return the 
item or send notice of dishonor until after its midnight deadline; or
(2)  any other properly payable item unless, within the time allowed for acceptance or payment of that 
item, the bank either accepts or pays the item or returns it and accompanying documents.
(b)  The liability of a payor bank to pay an item pursuant to subsection (a) is subject to defenses based on 
breach of a presentment warranty ( Section 4-208) or proof that the person seeking enforcement of the 
liability presented or transferred the item for the purpose of defrauding the payor bank.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (a)(1) continues the former law distinguishing between cases in which the payor bank is not also 
the depositary bank and those in which the payor bank is also the depositary bank ("on us" items). For "on us" 
items the payor bank is accountable if it retains the item beyond its midnight deadline without settling for it. If the 
payor bank is not the depositary bank it is accountable if it retains the item beyond midnight of the banking day of 
receipt without settling for it. It may avoid accountability either by settling for the item on the day of receipt and 
returning the item before its midnight deadline under Section 4-301 or by returning the item on the day of receipt. 
This rule is consistent with the deferred posting practice authorized by Section 4-301 which allows the payor bank 
to make provisional settlement for an item on the day of receipt and to revoke that settlement by returning the item 
on the next day. With respect to checks, Regulation CC Section 229.36(d) provides that settlements between banks 
for forward collection of checks are final when made. See the Commentary on that provision for its effect on the 
UCC.
   2. If the settlement given by the payor bank does not become final, there has been no payment under Section 4-
215(b), and the payor bank giving the failed settlement is accountable under subsection (a)(1) of Section 4-302. For 
instance, the payor bank makes provisional settlement by sending a teller's check that is dishonored. In such a 
case settlement is not final under Section 4-213(c) and no payment occurs under Section 4-215(b). Payor bank is 
accountable on the item. The general principle is that unless settlement provides the presenting bank with usable 
funds, settlement has failed and the payor bank is accountable for the amount of the item. On the other hand, if the 
payor bank makes a settlement for the item that becomes final under Section 4-215, the item has been paid and 
thus the payor bank is not accountable for the item under this Section. Amendments approved by the Permanent 
Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
   3. Subsection (b) is an elaboration of the deleted introductory language of former Section 4-302: "In the absence 
of a valid defense such as breach of a presentment warranty (subsection (1) of Section 4-207), settlement effected 

§ 4-302. PAYOR'S BANK RESPONSIBILITY FOR LATE RETURN OF ITEM
Page 2 of 2
or the like...." A payor bank can defend an action against it based on accountability by showing that the item 
contained a forged indorsement or a fraudulent alteration. Subsection (b) drops the ambiguous "or the like" 
language and provides that the payor bank may also raise the defense of fraud. Decisions that hold an accountable 
bank's liability to be "absolute" are rejected. A payor bank that makes a late return of an item should not be liable to 
a defrauder operating a check kiting scheme. In Bank of Leumi Trust Co. v. Bally's Park Place Inc., 528 F.Supp. 
349 (S.D.N.Y.1981), and American National Bank v. Foodbasket, 497 P.2d 546 (Wyo.1972), banks that were 
accountable under Section 4-302 for missing their midnight deadline were successful in defending against parties 
who initiated collection knowing that the check would not be paid. The "settlement effected" language is deleted as 
unnecessary. If a payor bank is accountable for an item it is liable to pay it. If it has made final payment for an item, 
it is no longer accountable for the item.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document