U.C.C. § 4-216
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS        
§ 4-216. INSOLVENCY AND PREFERENCE
(a)  If an item is in or comes into the possession of a payor or collecting bank that suspends payment and 
the item has not been finally paid, the item must be returned by the receiver, trustee, or agent in charge of 
the closed bank to the presenting bank or the closed bank's customer.
(b)  If a payor bank finally pays an item and suspends payments without making a settlement for the item 
with its customer or the presenting bank which settlement is or becomes final, the owner of the item has a 
preferred claim against the payor bank.
(c)  If a payor bank gives or a collecting bank gives or receives a provisional settlement for an item and 
thereafter suspends payments, the suspension does not prevent or interfere with the settlement's becoming 
final if the finality occurs automatically upon the lapse of certain time or the happening of certain events.
(d)  If a collecting bank receives from subsequent parties settlement for an item, which settlement is or 
becomes final and the bank suspends payments without making a settlement for the item with its customer 
which settlement is or becomes final, the owner of the item has a preferred claim against the collecting 
bank.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. The underlying purpose of the provisions of this section is not to confer upon banks, holders of items or anyone 
else preferential positions in the event of bank failures over general depositors or any other creditors of the failed 
banks. The purpose is to fix as definitely as possible the cut-off point of time for the completion or cessation of the 
collection process in the case of items that happen to be in the process at the time a particular bank suspends 
payments. It must be remembered that in bank collections as a whole and in the handling of items by an individual 
bank, items go through a whole series of processes. It must also be remembered that at any particular point of time 
a particular bank (at least one of any size) is functioning as a depositary bank for some items, as an intermediary 
bank for others, as a presenting bank for still others and as a payor bank for still others, and that when it suspends 
payments it will have close to its normal load of items working through its various processes. For the convenience 
of receivers, owners of items, banks, and in fact substantially everyone concerned, it is recognized that at the 
particular moment of time that a bank suspends payment, a certain portion of the items being handled by it have 
progressed far enough in the bank collection process that it is preferable to permit them to continue the remaining 
distance, rather than to send them back and reverse the many entries that have been made or the steps that have 
been taken with respect to them. Therefore, having this background and these purposes in mind, the section states 
what items must be turned backward at the moment suspension intervenes and what items have progressed far 
enough that the collection process with respect to them continues, with the resulting necessary statement of rights 
of various parties flowing from this prescription of the cut-off time.
   2. The rules stated are similar to those stated in the American Bankers Association Bank Collection Code, but 
with the abandonment of any theory of trust. On the other hand, some law previous to this Act may be relevant. See 
Note, Uniform Commercial Code: Stopping Payment of an Item Deposited with an Insolvent Depositary Bank, 40 

§ 4-216. INSOLVENCY AND PREFERENCE
Page 2 of 2
Okla.L.Rev. 689 (1987). Although for practical purposes Federal Deposit Insurance affects materially the result of 
bank failures on holders of items and banks, no attempt is made to vary the rules of the section by reason of such 
insurance.
   3. It is recognized that in view of Jennings v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 294 U.S. 216, 55 S.Ct. 394, 
79 L.Ed. 869, 99 A.L.R. 1248 (1935), amendment of the National Bank Act would be necessary to have this section 
apply to national banks. But there is no reason why it should not apply to others. See Section 1-108.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document