U.C.C. § 4-210
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS        
§ 4-210. SECURITY INTEREST OF COLLECTING BANK IN ITEMS, 
ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS AND PROCEEDS
(a)  A collecting bank has a security interest in an item and any accompanying documents or the proceeds 
of either:
(1)  in case of an item deposited in an account, to the extent to which credit given for the item has been 
withdrawn or applied;
(2)  in case of an item for which it has given credit available for withdrawal as of right, to the extent of 
the credit given, whether or not the credit is drawn upon or there is a right of charge-back; or
(3)  if it makes an advance on or against the item.
(b)  If credit given for several items received at one time or pursuant to a single agreement is withdrawn or 
applied in part, the security interest remains upon all the items, any accompanying documents or the 
proceeds of either. For the purpose of this section, credits first given are first withdrawn.
(c)  Receipt by a collecting bank of a final settlement for an item is a realization on its security interest in the 
item, accompanying documents, and proceeds. So long as the bank does not receive final settlement for 
the item or give up possession of the item or possession or control of the accompanying documents for 
purposes other than collection, the security interest continues to that extent and is subject to Article 9, but:
(1)  no security agreement is necessary to make the security interest enforceable ( Section 9-
203(b)(3)(A));
(2)  no filing is required to perfect the security interest; and
(3)  the security interest has priority over conflicting perfected security interests in the item, 
accompanying documents, or proceeds.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (a) states a rational rule for the interest of a bank in an item. The customer of the depositary bank is 
normally the owner of the item and the several collecting banks are agents of the customer (Section 4-201). A 
collecting agent may properly make advances on the security of paper held for collection, and acquires at common 
law a possessory lien for these advances. Subsection (a) applies an analogous principle to a bank in the collection 
chain which extends credit on items in the course of collection. The bank has a security interest to the extent stated 
in this section. To the extent of its security interest it is a holder for value (Sections 3-303, 4-211) and a holder in 
due course if it satisfies the other requirements for that status (Section 3-302). Subsection (a) does not derogate 
from the banker's general common law lien or right of setoff against indebtedness owing in deposit accounts. See 
Section 1-103. Rather subsection (a) specifically implements and extends the principle as a part of the bank 
collection process.

§ 4-210. SECURITY INTEREST OF COLLECTING BANK IN ITEMS, ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS AND 
PROCEEDS
Page 2 of 2
   2. Subsection (b) spreads the security interest of the bank over all items in a single deposit or received under a 
single agreement and a single giving of credit. It also adopts the "first-in, first-out" rule.
   3. Collection statistics establish that the vast majority of items handled for collection are in fact collected. The first 
sentence of subsection (c) reflects the fact that in the normal case the bank's security interest is self-liquidating. The 
remainder of the subsection correlates the security interest with the provisions of Article 9, particularly for use in the 
cases of noncollection in which the security interest may be important.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document