U.C.C. § 4-105
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 4-105. DEFINITIONS OF TYPES OF BANKS
In this Article:
(1)  ["Bank" means a person engaged in the business of banking, including a savings bank, savings 
and loan association, credit union, or trust company;]
(2)  "Depositary bank" means the first bank to take an item even though it is also the payor bank, 
unless the item is presented for immediate payment over the counter;
(3)  "Payor bank" means a bank that is the drawee of a draft;
(4)  "Intermediary bank" means a bank to which an item is transferred in course of collection except the 
depositary or payor bank;
(5)  "Collecting bank" means a bank handling an item for collection except the payor bank;
(6)  "Presenting bank" means a bank presenting an item except a payor bank.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Legislative Note: A jurisdiction that enacts this statute that has not yet enacted the revised version of UCC Article 
1 should leave the definition of "Bank" in Section 4-105(1). Section 4-105(1) is reserved for that purpose. A 
jurisdiction that has adopted or simultaneously adopts the revised Article 1 should delete the definition of "Bank" 
from Section 4-105(1), but should leave those numbers "reserved." If jurisdictions follow the numbering suggested 
here, the subsections will have the same numbering in all jurisdictions that have adopted these amendments 
(whether they have or have not adopted the revised version of UCC Article 1). In either case, they should change 
the title of the section, as indicated in these revisions, so that all jurisdictions will have the same title for the section.
   1. The definitions in general exclude a bank to which an item is issued, as this bank does not take by transfer 
except in the particular case covered in which the item is issued to a payee for collection, as in the case in which a 
corporation is transferring balances from one account to another. Thus, the definition of "depositary bank" does not 
include the bank to which a check is made payable if a check is given in payment of a mortgage. This bank has the 
status of a payee under Article 3 on Negotiable Instruments and not that of a collecting bank.
   2. Paragraph (1): "Bank" is defined in Section 1-201(4) as meaning "any person engaged in the business of 
banking." The definition in paragraph (1) makes clear that "bank" includes savings banks, savings and loan 
associations, credit unions and trust companies, in addition to the commercial banks commonly denoted by use of 
the term "bank."
   3. Paragraph (2): A bank that takes an "on us" item for collection, for application to a customer's loan, or first 
handles the item for other reasons is a depositary bank even though it is also the payor bank. However, if the holder 
presents the item for immediate payment over the counter, the payor bank is not a depositary bank.

§ 4-105. DEFINITIONS OF TYPES OF BANKS
Page 2 of 2
   4. Paragraph (3): The definition of "payor bank" is clarified by use of the term "drawee." That term is defined in 
Section 4-104 as meaning "a person ordered in a draft to make payment." An "order" is defined in Section 3-103 as 
meaning "a written instruction to pay money… An authorization to pay is not an order unless the person authorized 
to pay is also instructed to pay." The definition of order is incorporated into Article 4 by Section 4-104(c). Thus a 
payor bank is one instructed to pay in the item. A bank does not become a payor bank by being merely authorized 
to pay or by being given an instruction to pay not contained in the item.
   5. Paragraph (4): The term "intermediary bank" includes the last bank in the collection process if the drawee is not 
a bank. Usually the last bank is also a presenting bank.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document