U.C.C. § 4-204
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS        
§ 4-204. METHODS OF SENDING AND PRESENTING; SENDING DIRECTLY 
TO PAYOR BANK
(a)  A collecting bank shall send items by a reasonably prompt method, taking into consideration relevant 
instructions, the nature of the item, the number of those items on hand, the cost of collection involved, and 
the method generally used by it or others to present those items.
(b)  A collecting bank may send:
(1)  an item directly to the payor bank;
(2)  an item to a nonbank payor if authorized by its transferor; and
(3)  an item other than documentary drafts to a nonbank payor, if authorized by Federal Reserve 
regulation or operating circular, clearing-house rule, or the like.
(c)  Presentment may be made by a presenting bank at a place where the payor bank or other payor has 
requested that presentment be made.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (a) prescribes the general standards applicable to proper sending or forwarding of items. Because 
of the many types of methods available and the desirability of preserving flexibility any attempt to prescribe limited 
or precise methods is avoided.
   2. Subsection (b)(1) codifies the practice of direct mail, express, messenger or like presentment to payor banks. 
The practice is now country-wide and is justified by the need for speed, the general responsibility of banks, Federal 
Deposit Insurance protection and other reasons.
   3. Full approval of the practice of direct sending is limited to cases in which a bank is a payor. Since nonbank 
drawees or payors may be of unknown responsibility, substantial risks may be attached to placing in their hands the 
instruments calling for payments from them. This is obviously so in the case of documentary drafts. However, in 
some cities practices have long existed under clearing-house procedures to forward certain types of items to certain 
nonbank payors. Examples include insurance loss drafts drawn by field agents on home offices. For the purpose of 
leaving the door open to legitimate practices of this kind, subsection (b)(3) affirmatively approves direct sending of 
any item other than documentary drafts to any nonbank payor, if authorized by Federal Reserve regulation or 
operating circular, clearing-house rule or the like.
   On the other hand subsection (b)(2) approves sending any item directly to a nonbank payor if authorized by a 
collecting bank's transferor. This permits special instructions or agreements out of the norm and is consistent with 
the "chain of command" theory of Section 4-203. However, if a transferor other than the owner of the item, e.g., a 
prior collecting bank, authorizes a direct sending to a nonbank payor, such transferor assumes responsibility for the 
propriety or impropriety of such authorization.

§ 4-204. METHODS OF SENDING AND PRESENTING; SENDING DIRECTLY TO PAYOR BANK
Page 2 of 2
   4. Section 3-501(b) provides where presentment may be made. This provision is expressly subject to Article 4. 
Section 4-204(c) specifically approves presentment by a presenting bank at any place requested by the payor bank 
or other payor. The time when a check is received by a payor bank for presentment is governed by Regulation CC 
Section 229.36(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document