U.C.C. § 4-205
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS        
§ 4-205. DEPOSITARY BANK HOLDER OF UNINDORSED ITEM
If a customer delivers an item to a depositary bank for collection:
(1)  the depositary bank becomes a holder of the item at the time it receives the item for collection if the 
customer at the time of delivery was a holder of the item, whether or not the customer indorses the 
item, and, if the bank satisfies the other requirements of Section 3-302, it is a holder in due course; and
(2)  the depositary bank warrants to collecting banks, the payor bank or other payor, and the drawer 
that the amount of the item was paid to the customer or deposited to the customer's account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Section 3-201(b) provides that negotiation of an instrument payable to order requires indorsement by the holder. 
The rule of former Section 4-205(1) was that the depositary bank may supply a missing indorsement of its customer 
unless the item contains the words "payee's indorsement required" or the like. The cases have differed on the 
status of the depositary bank as a holder if it fails to supply its customer's indorsement.  Marine Midland Bank, N.A. 
v. Price, Miller, Evans & Flowers, 446 N.Y.S.2d 797 (N.Y.App.Div. 4th Dept. 1981), rev'd, 455 N.Y.S.2d 565 
(N.Y.1982). It is common practice for depositary banks to receive unindorsed checks under so-called "lock-box" 
agreements from customers who receive a high volume of checks. No function would be served by requiring a 
depositary bank to run these items through a machine that would supply the customer's indorsement except to 
afford the drawer and the subsequent banks evidence that the proceeds of the item reached the customer's 
account. Paragraph (1) provides that the depositary bank becomes a holder when it takes the item for deposit if the 
depositor is a holder. Whether it supplies the customer's indorsement is immaterial. Paragraph (2) satisfies the 
need for a receipt of funds by the depositary bank by imposing on that bank a warranty that it paid the customer or 
deposited the item to the customer's account. This warranty runs not only to collecting banks and to the payor bank 
or nonbank drawee but also to the drawer, affording protection to these parties that the depositary bank received 
the item and applied it to the benefit of the holder.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document