U.C.C. § 4-106
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 4-106. PAYABLE THROUGH OR PAYABLE AT BANK: COLLECTING BANK
(a)  If an item states that it is "payable through" a bank identified in the item, (i) the item designates the 
bank as a collecting bank and does not by itself authorize the bank to pay the item, and (ii) the item may be 
presented for payment only by or through the bank.
ALTERNATIVE A
(b)  If an item states that it is "payable at" a bank identified in the item, the item is equivalent to a draft 
drawn on the bank.
ALTERNATIVE B
(b)  If an item states that it is "payable at" a bank identified in the item, (i) the item designates the bank as a 
collecting bank and does not by itself authorize the bank to pay the item, and (ii) the item may be presented 
for payment only by or through the bank.
(c)  If a draft names a nonbank drawee and it is unclear whether a bank named in the draft is a co-drawee 
or a collecting bank, the bank is a collecting bank.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section replaces former Sections 3-120 and 3-121. Some items are made "payable through" a particular 
bank. Subsection (a) states that such language makes the bank a collecting bank and not a payor bank. An item 
identifying a "payable through" bank can be presented for payment to the drawee only by the "payable through" 
bank. The item cannot be presented to the drawee over the counter for immediate payment or by a collecting bank 
other than the "payable through" bank.
   2. Subsection (b) retains the alternative approach of the present law. Under Alternative A a note payable at a 
bank is the equivalent of a draft drawn on the bank and the midnight deadline provisions of Sections 4-301 and 4-
302 apply. Under Alternative B a "payable at" bank is in the same position as a "payable through" bank under 
subsection (a).
   3. Subsection (c) rejects the view of some cases that a bank named below the name of a drawee is itself a 
drawee. The commercial understanding is that this bank is a collecting bank and is not accountable under Section 
4-302 for holding an item beyond its deadline. The liability of the bank is governed by Sections 4-202(a) and 4-
103(e).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document