U.C.C. § 4-213
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS        
§ 4-213. MEDIUM AND TIME OF SETTLEMENT BY BANK
(a)  With respect to settlement by a bank, the medium and time of settlement may be prescribed by Federal 
Reserve regulations or circulars, clearing-house rules, and the like, or agreement. In the absence of such 
prescription:
(1)  the medium of settlement is cash or credit to an account in a Federal Reserve bank of or specified 
by the person to receive settlement; and
(2)  the time of settlement, is:
(i)  with respect to tender of settlement by cash, a cashier's check, or teller's check, when the cash 
or check is sent or delivered;
(ii)  with respect to tender of settlement by credit in an account in a Federal Reserve Bank, when 
the credit is made;
(iii)  with respect to tender of settlement by a credit or debit to an account in a bank, when the 
credit or debit is made or, in the case of tender of settlement by authority to charge an account, 
when the authority is sent or delivered; or
(iv)  with respect to tender of settlement by a funds transfer, when payment is made pursuant to 
Section 4A-406(a) to the person receiving settlement.
(b)  If the tender of settlement is not by a medium authorized by subsection (a) or the time of settlement is 
not fixed by subsection (a), no settlement occurs until the tender of settlement is accepted by the person 
receiving settlement.
(c)  If settlement for an item is made by cashier's check or teller's check and the person receiving 
settlement, before its midnight deadline:
(1)  presents or forwards the check for collection, settlement is final when the check is finally paid; or
(2)  fails to present or forward the check for collection, settlement is final at the midnight deadline of the 
person receiving settlement.
(d)  If settlement for an item is made by giving authority to charge the account of the bank giving settlement 
in the bank receiving settlement, settlement is final when the charge is made by the bank receiving 
settlement if there are funds available in the account for the amount of the item.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (a) sets forth the medium of settlement that the person receiving settlement must accept. In nearly 
all cases the medium of settlement will be determined by agreement or by Federal Reserve regulations and 
circulars, clearing-house rules, and the like. In the absence of regulations, rules or agreement, the person receiving 
settlement may demand cash or credit in a Federal Reserve bank. If the person receiving settlement does not have 

§ 4-213. MEDIUM AND TIME OF SETTLEMENT BY BANK
Page 2 of 2
an account in a Federal Reserve bank, it may specify the account of another bank in a Federal Reserve bank. In 
the unusual case in which there is no agreement on the medium of settlement and the bank making settlement 
tenders settlement other than cash or Federal Reserve bank credit, no settlement has occurred under subsection 
(b) unless the person receiving settlement accepts the settlement tendered. For example, if a payor bank, without 
agreement, tenders a teller's check, the bank receiving the settlement may reject the check and return it to the 
payor bank or it may accept the check as settlement.
   2. In several provisions of Article 4 the time that a settlement occurs is relevant. Subsection (a) sets out a general 
rule that the time of settlement, like the means of settlement, may be prescribed by agreement. In the absence of 
agreement, the time of settlement for tender of the common agreed media of settlement is that set out in subsection 
(a)(2). The time of settlement by cash, cashier's or teller's check or authority to charge an account is the time the 
cash, check or authority is sent, unless presentment is over the counter in which case settlement occurs upon 
delivery to the presenter. If there is no agreement on the time of settlement and the tender of settlement is not 
made by one of the media set out in subsection (a), under subsection (b) the time of settlement is the time the 
settlement is accepted by the person receiving settlement.
   3. Subsections (c) and (d) are special provisions for settlement by remittance drafts and authority to charge an 
account in the bank receiving settlement. The relationship between final settlement and final payment under Section 
4-215 is addressed in subsection (b) of Section 4-215. With respect to settlement by cashier's checks or teller's 
checks, other than in response to over-the-counter presentment, the bank receiving settlement can keep the risk 
that the check will not be paid on the bank tendering the check in settlement by acting to initiate collection of the 
check within the midnight deadline of the bank receiving settlement. If the bank fails to initiate settlement before its 
midnight deadline, final settlement occurs at the midnight deadline, and the bank receiving settlement assumes the 
risk that the check will not be paid. If there is no agreement that permits the bank tendering settlement to tender a 
cashier's or teller's check, subsection (b) allows the bank receiving the check to reject it, and, if it does, no 
settlement occurs. However, if the bank accepts the check, settlement occurs and the time of final settlement is 
governed by subsection (c).
   With respect to settlement by tender of authority to charge the account of the bank making settlement in the bank 
receiving settlement, subsection (d) provides that final settlement does not take place until the account charged has 
available funds to cover the amount of the item. If there is no agreement that permits the bank tendering settlement 
to tender an authority to charge an account as settlement, subsection (b) allows the bank receiving the tender to 
reject it. However, if the bank accepts the authority, settlement occurs and the time of final settlement is governed 
by subsection (d).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document