U.C.C. § 4-403
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 4. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAYOR BANK AND ITS CUSTOMER        
§ 4-403. CUSTOMER'S RIGHT TO STOP PAYMENT; BURDEN OF PROOF OF 
LOSS
(a)  A customer or any person authorized to draw on the account if there is more than one person may stop 
payment of any item drawn on the customer's account or close the account by an order to the bank 
describing the item or account with reasonable certainty received at a time and in a manner that affords the 
bank a reasonable opportunity to act on it before any action by the bank with respect to the item described 
in Section 4-303. If the signature of more than one person is required to draw on an account, any of these 
persons may stop payment or close the account.
(b)  A stop-payment order is effective for six months, but it lapses after 14 calendar days if the original order 
was oral and was not confirmed in a record within that period. A stop-payment order may be renewed for 
additional six-month periods by a record given to the bank within a period during which the stop-payment 
order is effective.
(c)  The burden of establishing the fact and amount of loss resulting from the payment of an item contrary 
to a stop-payment order or order to close an account is on the customer. The loss from payment of an item 
contrary to a stop-payment order may include damages for dishonor of subsequent items under Section 4-
402.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. The position taken by this section is that stopping payment or closing an account is a service which depositors 
expect and are entitled to receive from banks notwithstanding its difficulty, inconvenience and expense. The 
inevitable occasional losses through failure to stop or close should be borne by the banks as a cost of the business 
of banking.
   2. Subsection (a) follows the decisions holding that a payee or indorsee has no right to stop payment. This is 
consistent with the provision governing payment or satisfaction. See Section 3-602. The sole exception to this rule 
is found in Section 4-405 on payment after notice of death, by which any person claiming an interest in the account 
can stop payment.
   3. Payment is commonly stopped only on checks; but the right to stop payment is not limited to checks, and 
extends to any item payable by any bank. If the maker of a note payable at a bank is in a position analogous to that 
of a drawer (Section 4-106) the maker may stop payment of the note. By analogy the rule extends to drawees other 
than banks.
   4. A cashier's check or teller's check purchased by a customer whose account is debited in payment for the check 
is not a check drawn on the customer's account within the meaning of subsection (a); hence, a customer 
purchasing a cashier's check or teller's check has no right to stop payment of such a check under subsection (a). If 
a bank issuing a cashier's check or teller's check refuses to pay the check as an accommodation to its customer or 
for other reasons, its liability on the check is governed by Section 3-411. There is no right to stop payment after 

§ 4-403. CUSTOMER'S RIGHT TO STOP PAYMENT; BURDEN OF PROOF OF LOSS
Page 2 of 2
certification of a check or other acceptance of a draft, and this is true no matter who procures the certification. See 
Sections 3-411 and 4-303. The acceptance is the drawee's own engagement to pay, and it is not required to impair 
its credit by refusing payment for the convenience of the drawer.
   5. Subsection (a) makes clear that if there is more than one person authorized to draw on a customer's account 
any one of them can stop payment of any check drawn on the account or can order the account closed. Moreover, if 
there is a customer, such as a corporation, that requires its checks to bear the signatures of more than one person, 
any of these persons may stop payment on a check. In describing the item, the customer, in the absence of a 
contrary agreement, must meet the standard of what information allows the bank under the technology then existing 
to identify the item with reasonable certainty.
   6. Under subsection (b), a stop-payment order is effective after the order, whether written or oral, is received by 
the bank and the bank has a reasonable opportunity to act on it. If the order is written it remains in effect for six 
months from that time. If the order is oral it lapses after 14 days unless there is written confirmation. If there is 
written confirmation within the 14-day period, the six-month period dates from the giving of the oral order. A stop-
payment order may be renewed any number of times by written notice given during a six-month period while a stop 
order is in effect. A new stop-payment order may be given after a six-month period expires, but such a notice takes 
effect from the date given. When a stop-payment order expires it is as though the order had never been given, and 
the payor bank may pay the item in good faith under Section 4-404 even though a stop-payment order had once 
been given.
   7. A payment in violation of an effective direction to stop payment is an improper payment, even though it is made 
by mistake or inadvertence. Any agreement to the contrary is invalid under Section 4-103(a) if in paying the item 
over the stop-payment order the bank has failed to exercise ordinary care. An agreement to the contrary which is 
imposed upon a customer as part of a standard form contract would have to be evaluated in the light of the general 
obligation of good faith. Sections 1-203 and 4-104(c). The drawee is, however, entitled to subrogation to prevent 
unjust enrichment (Section 4-407); retains common law defenses, e.g., that by conduct in recognizing the payment 
the customer has ratified the bank's action in paying over a stop-payment order (Section 1-103); and retains 
common law rights, e.g., to recover money paid under a mistake under Section 3-418. It has sometimes been said 
that payment cannot be stopped against a holder in due course, but the statement is inaccurate. The payment can 
be stopped but the drawer remains liable on the instrument to the holder in due course (Sections 3-305, 3-414) and 
the drawee, if it pays, becomes subrogated to the rights of the holder in due course against the drawer. Section 4-
407. The relationship between Sections 4-403 and 4-407 is discussed in the comments to Section 4-407. Any 
defenses available against a holder in due course remain available to the drawer, but other defenses are cut off to 
the same extent as if the holder were bringing the action.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document