U.C.C. § 4A-102
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS          >            
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 4A-102. Subject Matter.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 4A-108, this Article applies to funds transfers defined in Section 4A-104.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Article 4A governs a specialized method of payment referred to in the Article as a funds transfer but also commonly 
referred to in the commercial community as a wholesale wire transfer.  A funds transfer is made by means of one or 
more payment orders.  The scope of Article 4A is determined by the definitions of "payment order" and "funds 
transfer" found in Section 4A-103 and Section 4A-104.
The funds transfer governed by Article 4A is in large part a product of recent and developing technological changes.  
Before this Article was drafted there was no comprehensive body of law-statutory or judicial-that defined the 
juridical nature of a funds transfer or the rights and obligations flowing from payment orders.  Judicial authority with 
respect to funds transfers is sparse, undeveloped and not uniform.  Judges have had to resolve disputes by 
referring to general principles of common law or equity, or they have sought guidance in statutes such as Article 4 
which are applicable to other payment methods.  But attempts to define rights and obligations in funds transfers by 
general principles or by analogy to rights and obligations in negotiable instrument law or the law of check collection 
have not been satisfactory.
In the drafting of Article 4A, a deliberate decision was made to write on a clean slate and to treat a funds transfer as 
a unique method of payment to be governed by unique rules that address the particular issues raised by this 
method of payment.  A deliberate decision was also made to use precise and detailed rules to assign responsibility, 
define behavioral norms, allocate risks and establish limits on liability, rather than to rely on broadly stated, flexible 
principles.  In the drafting of these rules, a critical consideration was that the various parties to funds transfers need 
to be able to predict risk with certainty, to insure against risk, to adjust operational and security procedures, and to 
price funds transfer services appropriately.  This consideration is particularly important given the very large amounts 
of money that are involved in funds transfers.
Funds transfers involve competing interests-those of the banks that provide funds transfer services and the 
commercial and financial organizations that use the services, as well as the public interest.  These competing 
interests were represented in the drafting process and they were thoroughly considered.  The rules that emerged 
represent a careful and delicate balancing of those interests and are intended to be the exclusive means of 
determining the rights, duties and liabilities of the affected parties in any situation covered by particular provisions of 
the Article.  Consequently, resort to principles of law or equity outside of Article 4A is not appropriate to create 
rights, duties and liabilities inconsistent with those stated in this Article.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 4A-102. Subject Matter.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document