U.C.C. § 4A-105
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS          >            
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 4A-105. Other Definitions.
(a)  In this Article:
(1)  "Authorized account" means a deposit account of a customer in a bank designated by the customer 
as a source of payment of payment orders issued by the customer to the bank.  If a customer does not 
so designate an account, any account of the customer is an authorized account if payment of a 
payment order from that account is not inconsistent with a restriction on the use of that account.
(2)  "Bank" means a person engaged in the business of banking and includes a savings bank, savings 
and loan association, credit union, and trust company.  A branch or separate office of a bank is a 
separate bank for purposes of this Article.
(3)  "Customer" means a person, including a bank, having an account with a bank or from whom a bank 
has agreed to receive payment orders.
(4)  "Funds-transfer business day" of a receiving bank means the part of a day during which the 
receiving bank is open for the receipt, processing, and transmittal of payment orders and cancellations 
and amendments of payment orders.
(5)  "Funds-transfer system" means a wire transfer network, automated clearing house, or other 
communication system of a clearing house or other association of banks through which a payment 
order by a bank may be transmitted to the bank to which the order is addressed.
(6)  "Good faith" means honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair 
dealing.
(7)  "Prove" with respect to a fact means to meet the burden of establishing the fact ( Section 1-201(8)).
(b)  Other definitions applying to this Article and the sections in which they appear are: 
"Acceptance"
Section 4A-209
"Beneficiary"
Section 4A-103
"Beneficiary's bank"
Section 4A-103
"Executed"
Section 4A-301
"Execution date"
Section 4A-301
"Funds transfer"
Section 4A-104
"Funds-transfer system rule"
Section 4A-501
"Intermediary bank"
Section 4A-104
"Originator"
Section 4A-104
"Originator's bank"
Section 4A-104
"Payment by beneficiary's bank to beneficiary"
Section 4A-405
"Payment by originator to beneficiary"
Section 4A-406
"Payment by sender to receiving bank"
Section 4A-403
"Payment date"
Section 4A-401
"Payment order"
Section 4A-103
"Receiving bank"
Section 4A-103
"Security procedure"
Section 4A-201
"Sender"
Section 4A-103
(c)  The following definitions in Article 4 apply to this Article: 

§ 4A-105. Other Definitions.
Page 2 of 3
"Clearing house"
Section 4-104
"Item"
Section 4-104
"Suspends payments"
Section 4-104
(d)  In addition Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation 
applicable throughout this Article.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. The definition of "bank" in subsection (a)(2) includes some institutions that are not commercial banks.  The 
definition reflects the fact that many financial institutions now perform functions previously restricted to commercial 
banks, including acting on behalf of customers in funds transfers.  Since many funds transfers involve payment 
orders to or from foreign countries the definition also covers foreign banks.  The definition also includes Federal 
Reserve Banks.  Funds transfers carried out by Federal Reserve Banks are described in Comments 1 and 2 to 
Section 4A-107.
2. Funds transfer business is frequently transacted by banks outside of general banking hours.  Thus, the definition 
of banking day in Section 4-104(1)(c) cannot be used to describe when a bank is open for funds transfer business.  
Subsection (a)(4) defines a new term, "funds transfer business day," which is applicable to Article 4A.  The 
definition states, "is open for the receipt, processing, and transmittal of payment orders and cancellations and 
amendments of payment orders." In some cases it is possible to electronically transmit payment orders and other 
communications to a receiving bank at any time.  If the receiving bank is not open for the processing of an order 
when it is received, the communication is stored in the receiving bank's computer for retrieval when the receiving 
bank is open for processing.  The use of the conjunctive makes clear that the defined term is limited to the period 
during which all functions of the receiving bank can be performed, i.e., receipt, processing, and transmittal of 
payment orders, cancellations and amendments.
3. Subsection (a)(5) defines "funds transfer system." The term includes a system such as CHIPS which provides for 
transmission of a payment order as well as settlement of the obligation of the sender to pay the order.  It also 
includes automated clearing houses, operated by a clearing house or other association of banks, which process 
and transmit payment orders of banks to other banks.  In addition the term includes organizations that provide only 
transmission services such as SWIFT.  The definition also includes the wire transfer network and automated 
clearing houses of Federal Reserve Banks.  Systems of the Federal Reserve Banks, however, are treated 
differently from systems of other associations of banks.  Funds transfer systems other than systems of the Federal 
Reserve Banks are treated in Article 4A as a means of communication of payment orders between participating 
banks.  Section 4A-206.  The Comment to that section and the Comment to Section 4A-107 explain how Federal 
Reserve Banks function under Article 4A.  Funds transfer systems are also able to promulgate rules binding on 
participating banks that, under Section 4A-501, may supplement or in some cases may even override provisions of 
Article 4A.
4. Subsection (d) incorporates definitions stated in Article 1 as well as principles of construction and interpretation 
stated in that Article.  Included is Section 1-103.  The last paragraph of the Comment to Section 4A-102 is 
addressed to the issue of the extent to which general principles of law and equity should apply to situations covered 
by provisions of Article 4A.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 4A-105. Other Definitions.
Page 3 of 3
End of Document