U.C.C. § 4A-106
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS          >            
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 4A-106. Time Payment Order Is Received.
(a)  The time of receipt of a payment order or communication cancelling or amending a payment order is 
determined by the rules applicable to receipt of a notice stated in Section 1-201(27).  A receiving bank may 
fix a cut-off time or times on a funds-transfer business day for the receipt and processing of payment orders 
and communications cancelling or amending payment orders.  Different cut-off times may apply to payment 
orders, cancellations, or amendments, or to different categories of payment orders, cancellations, or 
amendments.  A cut-off time may apply to senders generally or different cut-off times may apply to different 
senders or categories of payment orders.  If a payment order or communication cancelling or amending a 
payment order is received after the close of a funds-transfer business day or after the appropriate cut-off 
time on a funds-transfer business day, the receiving bank may treat the payment order or communication 
as received at the opening of the next funds-transfer business day.
(b)  If this Article refers to an execution date or payment date or states a day on which a receiving bank is 
required to take action, and the date or day does not fall on a funds-transfer business day, the next day that 
is a funds-transfer business day is treated as the date or day stated, unless the contrary is stated in this 
Article.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
The time that a payment order is received by a receiving bank usually defines the payment date or the execution 
date of a payment order.  Section 4A-401 and Section 4A-301.  The time of receipt of a payment order, or 
communication cancelling or amending a payment order is defined in subsection (a) by reference to the rules stated 
in Section 1-201(27).  Thus, time of receipt is determined by the same rules that determine when a notice is 
received.  Time of receipt, however, may be altered by a cut-off time.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document