U.C.C. § 5-114
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT        
§ 5-114. ASSIGNMENT OF PROCEEDS
(a)  In this section, "proceeds of a letter of credit" means the cash, check, accepted draft, or other item of 
value paid or delivered upon honor or giving of value by the issuer or any nominated person under the letter 
of credit. The term does not include a beneficiary's drawing rights or documents presented by the 
beneficiary.
(b)  A beneficiary may assign its right to part or all of the proceeds of a letter of credit. The beneficiary may 
do so before presentation as a present assignment of its right to receive proceeds contingent upon its 
compliance with the terms and conditions of the letter of credit.
(c)  An issuer or nominated person need not recognize an assignment of proceeds of a letter of credit until 
it consents to the assignment.
(d)  An issuer or nominated person has no obligation to give or withhold its consent to an assignment of 
proceeds of a letter of credit, but consent may not be unreasonably withheld if the assignee possesses and 
exhibits the letter of credit and presentation of the letter of credit is a condition to honor.
(e)  Rights of a transferee beneficiary or nominated person are independent of the beneficiary's assignment 
of the proceeds of a letter of credit and are superior to the assignee's right to the proceeds.
(f)  Neither the rights recognized by this section between an assignee and an issuer, transferee beneficiary, 
or nominated person nor the issuer's or nominated person's payment of proceeds to an assignee or a third 
person affect the rights between the assignee and any person other than the issuer, transferee beneficiary, 
or nominated person. The mode of creating and perfecting a security interest in or granting an assignment 
of a beneficiary's rights to proceeds is governed by Article 9 or other law. Against persons other than the 
issuer, transferee beneficiary, or nominated person, the rights and obligations arising upon the creation of a 
security interest or other assignment of a beneficiary's right to proceeds and its perfection are governed by 
Article 9 or other law.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (b) expressly validates the beneficiary's present assignment of letter of credit proceeds if made 
after the credit is established but before the proceeds are realized. This section adopts the prevailing usage -- 
"assignment of proceeds" -- to an assignee. That terminology carries with it no implication, however, that an 
assignee acquires no interest until the proceeds are paid by the issuer. For example, an "assignment of the right to 
proceeds" of a letter of credit for purposes of security that meets the requirements of Section 9-203(1) would 
constitute the present creation of a security interest in that right. This security interest can be perfected by 
possession (Section 9-305) if the letter of credit is in written form. Although subsection (a) explains the meaning of 
"'proceeds' of a letter of credit," it should be emphasized that those proceeds also may be Article 9 proceeds of 
other collateral. For example, if a seller of inventory receives a letter of credit to support the account that arises 
upon the sale, payments made under the letter of credit are Article 9 proceeds of the inventory, account, and any 
document of title covering the inventory. Thus, the secured party who had a perfected security interest in that 
inventory, account, or document has a perfected security interest in the proceeds collected under the letter of credit, 

§ 5-114. ASSIGNMENT OF PROCEEDS
Page 2 of 2
so long as they are identifiable cash proceeds (Section 9-306(2), (3)). This perfection is continuous, regardless of 
whether the secured party perfected a security interest in the right to letter of credit proceeds.
   2. An assignee's rights to enforce an assignment of proceeds against an issuer and the priority of the assignee's 
rights against a nominated person or transferee beneficiary are governed by Article 5. Those rights and that priority 
are stated in subsections (c), (d), and (e). Note also that Section 4-210 gives first priority to a collecting bank that 
has given value for a documentary draft.
   3. By requiring that an issuer or nominated person consent to the assignment of proceeds of a letter of credit, 
subsections (c) and (d) follow more closely recognized national and international letter of credit practices than did 
prior law. In most circumstances, it has always been advisable for the assignee to obtain the consent of the issuer 
in order better to safeguard its right to the proceeds. When notice of an assignment has been received, issuers 
normally have required signatures on a consent form. This practice is reflected in the revision. By unconditionally 
consenting to such an assignment, the issuer or nominated person becomes bound, subject to the rights of the 
superior parties specified in subsection (e), to pay to the assignee the assigned letter of credit proceeds that the 
issuer or nominated person would otherwise pay to the beneficiary or another assignee.
   Where the letter of credit must be presented as a condition to honor and the assignee holds and exhibits the letter 
of credit to the issuer or nominated person, the risk to the issuer or nominated person of having to pay twice is 
minimized. In such a situation, subsection (d) provides that the issuer or nominated person may not unreasonably 
withhold its consent to the assignment.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document