U.C.C. § 5-103
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT        
§ 5-103. SCOPE
(a)  This article applies to letters of credit and to certain rights and obligations arising out of transactions 
involving letters of credit.
(b)  The statement of a rule in this article does not by itself require, imply, or negate application of the same 
or a different rule to a situation not provided for, or to a person not specified, in this article.
(c)  With the exception of this subsection, subsections (a) and (d), Sections 5-102(a)(9) and (10), 5-106(d), 
and 5-114(d), and except to the extent prohibited in Sections 1-102(3) and 5-117(d), the effect of this article 
may be varied by agreement or by a provision stated or incorporated by reference in an undertaking. A term 
in an agreement or undertaking generally excusing liability or generally limiting remedies for failure to 
perform obligations is not sufficient to vary obligations prescribed by this article.
(d)  Rights and obligations of an issuer to a beneficiary or a nominated person under a letter of credit are 
independent of the existence, performance, or nonperformance of a contract or arrangement out of which 
the letter of credit arises or which underlies it, including contracts or arrangements between the issuer and 
the applicant and between the applicant and the beneficiary.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Sections 5-102(a)(10) and 5-103 are the principal limits on the scope of Article 5. Many undertakings in 
commerce and contract are similar, but not identical to the letter of credit. Principal among those are "secondary," 
"accessory," or "suretyship" guarantees. Although the word "guarantee" is sometimes used to describe an 
independent obligation like that of the issuer of a letter of credit (most often in the case of European bank 
undertakings but occasionally in the case of undertakings of American banks), in the United States the word 
"guarantee" is more typically used to describe a surety ship transaction in which the "guarantor" is only secondarily 
liable and has the right to assert the underlying debtor's defenses. This article does not apply to secondary or 
accessory guarantees and it is important to recognize the distinction between letters of credit and those guarantees. 
It is often a defense to a secondary or accessory guarantor's liability that the underlying debt has been discharged 
or that the debtor has other defenses to the underlying liability. In letter of credit law, on the other hand, the 
independence principle recognized throughout Article 5 states that the issuer's liability is independent of the 
underlying obligation. That the beneficiary may have breached the underlying contract and thus have given a good 
defense on that contract to the applicant against the beneficiary is no defense for the issuer's refusal to honor. Only 
staunch recognition of this principle by the issuers and the courts will give letters of credit the continuing vitality that 
arises from the certainty and speed of payment under letters of credit. To that end, it is important that the law not 
carry into letter of credit transactions rules that properly apply only to secondary guarantees or to other forms of 
engagement.
   2. Like all of the provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code, Article 5 is supplemented by Section 1-103 and, 
through it, by many rules of statutory and common law. Because this article is quite short and has no rules on many 
issues that will affect liability with respect to a letter of credit transaction, law beyond Article 5 will often determine 
rights and liabilities in letter of credit transactions. Even within letter of credit law, the article is far from 
comprehensive; it deals only with "certain" rights of the parties. Particularly with respect to the standards of 

§ 5-103. SCOPE
Page 2 of 2
performance that are set out in Section 5-108, it is appropriate for the parties and the courts to turn to customs and 
practice such as the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits, currently published by the 
International Chamber of Commerce as I.C.C. Pub. No. 500 (hereafter UCP). Many letters of credit specifically 
adopt the UCP as applicable to the particular transaction. Where the UCP are adopted but conflict with Article 5 and 
except where variation is prohibited, the UCP terms are permissible contractual modifications under Sections 1-
102(3) and 5-103(c). See Section 5-116(c). Normally Article 5 should not be considered to conflict with practice 
except when a rule explicitly stated in the UCP or other practice is different from a rule explicitly stated in Article 5.
   Except by choosing the law of a jurisdiction that has not adopted the Uniform Commercial Code, it is not possible 
entirely to escape the Uniform Commercial Code. Since incorporation of the UCP avoids only "conflicting" Article 5 
rules, parties who do not wish to be governed by the nonconflicting provisions of Article 5 must normally either 
adopt the law of a jurisdiction other than a State of the United States or state explicitly the rule that is to govern. 
When rules of custom and practice are incorporated by reference, they are considered to be explicit terms of the 
agreement or undertaking.
   Neither the obligation of an issuer under Section 5-108 nor that of an adviser under Section 5-107 is an obligation 
of the kind that is invariable under Section 1-102(3). Section 5-103(c) and Comment 1 to Section 5-108 make it 
clear that the applicant and the issuer may agree to almost any provision establishing the obligations of the issuer 
to the applicant. The last sentence of subsection (c) limits the power of the issuer to achieve that result by a 
nonnegotiated disclaimer or limitation of remedy.
   What the issuer could achieve by an explicit agreement with its applicant or by a term that explicitly defines its 
duty, it cannot accomplish by a general disclaimer. The restriction on disclaimers in the last sentence of subsection 
(c) is based more on procedural than on substantive unfairness. Where, for example, the reimbursement agreement 
provides explicitly that the issuer need not examine any documents, the applicant understands the risk it has 
undertaken. A term in a reimbursement agreement which states generally that an issuer will not be liable unless it 
has acted in "bad faith" or committed "gross negligence" is ineffective under Section 5-103(c). On the other hand, 
less general terms such as terms that permit issuer reliance on an oral or electronic message believed in good faith 
to have been received from the applicant or terms that entitle an issuer to reimbursement when it honors a 
"substantially" though not "strictly" complying presentation, are effective. In each case the question is whether the 
disclaimer or limitation is sufficiently clear and explicit in reallocating a liability or risk that is allocated differently 
under a variable Article 5 provision.
   Of course, no term in a letter of credit, whether incorporated by reference to practice rules or stated specifically, 
can free an issuer from a conflicting contractual obligation to its applicant. If, for example, an issuer promised its 
applicant that it would pay only against an inspection certificate of a particular company but failed to require such a 
certificate in its letter of credit or made the requirement only a nondocumentary condition that had to be 
disregarded, the issuer might be obliged to pay the beneficiary even though its payment might violate its contract 
with its applicant.
   3. Parties should generally avoid modifying the definitions in Section 5-102. The effect of such an agreement is 
almost inevitably unclear. To say that something is a "guarantee" in the typical domestic transaction is to say that 
the parties intend that particular legal rules apply to it. By acknowledging that something is a guarantee, but 
asserting that it is to be treated as a "letter of credit," the parties leave a court uncertain about where the rules on 
guarantees stop and those concerning letters of credit begin.
   4. Section 5-102(2) and (3) of Article 5 are omitted as unneeded; the omission does not change the law.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document