U.C.C. § 5-104
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT        
§ 5-104. FORMAL REQUIREMENTS
 A letter of credit, confirmation, advice, transfer, amendment, or cancellation may be issued in any form that is a 
record and is authenticated (i) by a signature or (ii) in accordance with the agreement of the parties or the standard 
practice referred to in Section 5-108(e).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Neither Section 5-104 nor the definition of letter of credit in Section 5-102(a)(10) requires inclusion of all the 
terms that are normally contained in a letter of credit in order for an undertaking to be recognized as a letter of 
credit under Article 5. For example, a letter of credit will typically specify the amount available, the expiration date, 
the place where presentation should be made, and the documents that must be presented to entitle a person to 
honor. Undertakings that have the formalities required by Section 5-104 and meet the conditions specified in 
Section 5-102(a)(10) will be recognized as letters of credit even though they omit one or more of the items usually 
contained in a letter of credit.
   2. The authentication specified in this section is authentication only of the identity of the issuer, confirmer, or 
adviser.
   An authentication agreement may be by system rule, by standard practice, or by direct agreement between the 
parties. The reference to practice is intended to incorporate future developments in the UCP and other practice 
rules as well as those that may arise spontaneously in commercial practice.
   3. Many banking transactions, including the issuance of many letters of credit, are now conducted mostly by 
electronic means. For example, S.W.I.F.T. is currently used to transmit letters of credit from issuing to advising 
banks. The letter of credit text so transmitted may be printed at the advising bank, stamped "original" and provided 
to the beneficiary in that form. The printed document may then be used as a way of controlling and recording 
payments and of recording and authorizing assignments of proceeds or transfers of rights under the letter of credit. 
Nothing in this section should be construed to conflict with that practice.
   To be a record sufficient to serve as a letter of credit or other undertaking under this section, data must have a 
durability consistent with that function. Because consideration is not required for a binding letter of credit or similar 
undertaking (Section 5 - 105) yet those undertakings are to be strictly construed (Section 5 - 108), parties to a letter 
of credit transaction are especially dependent on the continued availability of the terms and conditions of the letter 
of credit or other undertaking. By declining to specify any particular medium in which the letter of credit must be 
established or communicated, Section 5 - 104 leaves room for future developments.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document