U.C.C. § 6-109
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES          >            
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]        
§ 6-109. WHAT CONSTITUTES FILING; DUTIES OF FILING OFFICER; 
INFORMATION FROM FILING OFFICER.
(1)  Presentation of a notice or list of claimants for filing and tender of the filing fee or acceptance of the 
notice or list by the filing officer constitutes filing under this Article.
(2)  The filing officer shall:
(a)  mark each notice or list with a file number and with the date and hour of filing;
(b)  hold the notice or list or a copy for public inspection;
(c)  index the notice or list according to each name given for the seller and for the buyer; and
(d)  note in the index the file number and the addresses of the seller and buyer given in the notice or 
list.
(3)  If the person filing a notice or list furnishes the filing officer with a copy, the filing officer upon request 
shall note upon the copy the file number and date and hour of the filing of the original and send or deliver 
the copy to the person.
(4) The fee for filing and indexing and for stamping a copy furnished by the person filing to show the date 
and place of filing is $ ....… for the first page and $ .....… for each additional page.  The fee for indexing 
each name more than two is $ .....…
(5) Upon request of any person, the filing officer shall issue a certificate showing whether any notice or list 
with respect to a particular seller or buyer is on file on the date and hour stated in the certificate.  If a notice 
or list is on file, the certificate must give the date and hour of filing of each notice or list and the name and 
address of each seller, buyer, auctioneer, or liquidator.  The fee for the certificate is $ ....… if the request for 
the certificate is in the standard form prescribed by the [Secretary of State] and otherwise is $ ......…  Upon 
request of any person, the filing officer shall furnish a copy of any filed notice or list for a fee of $ .....…
(6)  The filing officer shall keep each notice or list for two years after it is filed.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None
Purposes of New Matter:
This Article contemplates public filing of bulk sale notices and lists of claimants in a single filing office in each state.  
This section, which derives substantially from Sections 9-403 and 9-407, governs filing.  The filing system is 
designed to enable one seeking information about a sale to discover any filed notices or lists by searching under 
either the seller's or the buyer's (but not the auctioneer's or liquidator's) individual, partnership, or corporate name.
Cross-References:

§ 6-109. WHAT CONSTITUTES FILING; DUTIES OF FILING OFFICER; INFORMATION FROM FILING 
OFFICER.
Page 2 of 2
Sections 6-103, 6-105, 9-403, and 9-407.
Definitional Cross-References:
"Auctioneer".  Section 6-102.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Liquidator".  Section 6-102.
"Person".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Send".  Section 1-201.
CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO SECTION 2-403(4)
States adopting Alternative B should amend Section 2-403(4) of the Uniform Commercial Code to read as follows:
(4) The rights of other purchasers of goods and of lien creditors are governed by the Articles on Secured 
Transactions (Article 9), Bulk Transfers Sales (Article 6) and Documents of Title (Article 7).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document