U.C.C. § 7-103
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 1. GENERAL        
§ 7-103. RELATION OF ARTICLE TO TREATY OR STATUTE
(a)  This article is subject to any treaty or statute of the United States or regulatory statute of this state to 
the extent the treaty, statute, or regulatory statute is applicable.
(b)  This article does not modify or repeal any law prescribing the form or content of a document of title or 
the services or facilities to be afforded by a bailee, or otherwise regulating a bailee's business in respects 
not specifically treated in this article. However, violation of such a law does not affect the status of a 
document of title that otherwise is within the definition of a document of title.
(c)  This [act] modifies, limits, and supersedes the federal Electronic Signatures in Global and National 
Commerce Act ( 15 U.S.C. Section 7001, et. seq.) but does not modify, limit, or supersede Section 101(c) 
of that act ( 15 U.S.C. Section 7001(c)) or authorize electronic delivery of any of the notices described in 
Section 103(b) of that act ( 15 U.S.C. Section 7003(b)).
(d)  To the extent there is a conflict between [the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act] and this article, this 
article governs.
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: In states that have not enacted the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act in some form, states 
should consider their own state laws to determine whether there is a conflict between the provisions of this article 
and those laws particularly as those other laws may affect electronic documents of title.
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Sections 7-103 and 10-104.
   Changes: Deletion of references to tariffs and classifications; incorporation of former Section 10-104 into 
subsection (b), provide for intersection with federal and state law governing electronic transactions.
Purposes:
   1. To make clear what would of course be true without the Section, that applicable Federal law is paramount.
   2. To make clear also that regulatory state statutes (such as those fixing or authorizing a commission to fix rates 
and prescribe services, authorizing different charges for goods of different values, and limiting liability for loss to the 
declared value on which the charge was based) are not affected by the Article and are controlling on the matters 
which they cover unless preempted by federal law. The reference in former Section 7-103 to tariffs, classifications, 
and regulations filed or issued pursuant to regulatory state statutes has been deleted as inappropriate in the 
modern era of diminished regulation of carriers and warehouses. If a regulatory scheme requires a carrier or 
warehouse to issue a tariff or classification, that tariff or classification would be given effect via the state regulatory 
scheme that this Article recognizes as controlling. Permissive tariffs or classifications would not displace the 
provisions of this act, pursuant to this section, but may be given effect through the ability of parties to incorporate 
those terms by reference into their agreement.

§ 7-103. RELATION OF ARTICLE TO TREATY OR STATUTE
Page 2 of 2
   3. The document of title provisions of this act supplement the federal law and regulatory state law governing 
bailees. This Article focuses on the commercial importance and usage of documents of title.  State ex. rel Public 
Service Commission v. Gunkelman & Sons, Inc., 219 N.W.2d 853 (N.D. 1974).
   4. Subsection (c) is included to make clear the interrelationship between the federal Electronic Signatures in 
Global and National Commerce Act and this article and the conforming amendments to other articles of the Uniform 
Commercial Code promulgated as part of the revision of this article. Section 102 of the federal act allows a State 
statute to modify, limit, or supersede the provisions of Section 101 of the federal act. See the comments to Revised 
Article 1, Section 1-108.
   5. Subsection (d) makes clear that once this article is in effect, its provisions regarding electronic commerce and 
regarding electronic documents of title control in the event there is a conflict with the provisions of the Uniform 
Electronic Transactions Act or other applicable state law governing electronic transactions.
Cross References:
Sections 1-108, 7-201, 7-202, 7-204, 7-206, 7-309, 7-401, 7-403.
Definitional Cross Reference:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document