U.C.C. § 7-505
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER        
§ 7-505. INDORSER NOT GUARANTOR FOR OTHER PARTIES
 The indorsement of a tangible document of title issued by a bailee does not make the indorser liable for any default 
by the bailee or previous indorsers.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-505.
   Changes: Limited to tangible documents of title.
Purposes:
   This section is limited to tangible documents of title as the concept of indorsement is irrelevant to electronic 
documents of title. Electronic documents of title will be transferred by delivery of control. Section 7-106. The 
indorsement of a tangible document of title is generally understood to be directed towards perfecting the 
transferee's rights rather than towards assuming additional obligations. The language of the present section, 
however, does not preclude the one case in which an indorsement given for value guarantees future action, 
namely, that in which the bailee has not yet become liable upon the document at the time of the indorsement. Under 
such circumstances the indorser, of course, engages that appropriate honor of the document by the bailee will 
occur. See Section 7-502(a)(4) as to negotiable delivery orders. However, even in such a case, once the bailee 
attorns to the transferee, the indorser's obligation has been fulfilled and the policy of this section excludes any 
continuing obligation on the part of the indorser for the bailee's ultimate actual performance.
   Cross Reference: Sections 7-106 and 7-502.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document