U.C.C. § 7-305
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS        
§ 7-305. DESTINATION BILLS
(a)  Instead of issuing a bill of lading to the consignor at the place of shipment, a carrier, at the request of 
the consignor, may procure the bill to be issued at destination or at any other place designated in the 
request.
(b)  Upon request of any person entitled as against a carrier to control the goods while in transit and on 
surrender of possession or control of any outstanding bill of lading or other receipt covering the goods, the 
issuer, subject to Section 7-105, may procure a substitute bill to be issued at any place designated in the 
request.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-305.
   Changes: To accommodate electronic bills of lading and for style.
Purposes:
   1. Subsection (a) continues the rules of former Section 7-305(1) without substantive change. This proposal is 
designed to facilitate the use of order bills in connection with fast shipments. Use of order bills on high speed 
shipments is impeded by the fact that the goods may arrive at destination before the documents, so that no one is 
ready to take delivery from the carrier. This is especially inconvenient for carriers by truck and air, who do not have 
terminal facilities where shipments can be held to await the consignee's appearance. Order bills would be useful to 
take advantage of bank collection. This may be preferable to C.O.D. shipment in which the carrier, e.g. a truck 
driver, is the collecting and remitting agent. Financing of shipments under this plan would be handled as follows: 
seller at San Francisco delivers the goods to an airline with instructions to issue a bill in New York to a named bank. 
Seller receives a receipt embodying this undertaking to issue a destination bill. Airline wires its New York freight 
agent to issue the bill as instructed by the seller. Seller wires the New York bank a draft on buyer. New York bank 
indorses the bill to buyer when the buyer honors the draft. Normally seller would act through its own bank in San 
Francisco, which would extend credit in reliance on the airline's contract to deliver a bill to the order of its New York 
correspondent. This section is entirely permissive; it imposes no duty to issue such bills. Whether a performing 
carrier will act as issuing agent is left to agreement between carriers.
   2. Subsection (b) continues the rule from former Section 7-305(2) with accommodation for electronic bills of 
lading. If the substitute bill changes from an electronic to a tangible medium or vice versa, the issuance of the 
substitute bill must comply with Section 7-105 to give the substitute bill validity and effect.
   Cross Reference: Section 7-105.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.

§ 7-305. DESTINATION BILLS
Page 2 of 2
"Consignor". Section 7-102.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Receipt of goods". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document