U.C.C. § 7-101
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 1. GENERAL        
§ 7-101. SHORT TITLE
 This article may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code-Documents of Title.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-101.
   Changes: Revised for style only.
   This Article is a revision of the 1962 Official Text with Comments as amended since 1962. The 1962 Official Text 
was a consolidation and revision of the Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act and the Uniform Bills of Lading Act, and 
embraced the provisions of the Uniform Sales Act relating to negotiation of documents of title.
   This Article does not contain the substantive criminal provisions found in the Uniform Warehouse Receipts and 
Bills of Lading Acts. These criminal provisions are inappropriate to a Commercial Code, and for the most part 
duplicate portions of the ordinary criminal law relating to frauds. This revision deletes the former Section 7-105 that 
provided that courts could apply a rule from Parts 2 and 3 by analogy to a situation not explicitly covered in the 
provisions on warehouse receipts or bills of lading when it was appropriate. This is, of course, an unexceptional 
proposition and need not be stated explicitly in the statute. Thus former Section 7-105 has been deleted. Whether 
applying a rule by analogy to a situation is appropriate depends upon the facts of each case.
   The Article does not attempt to define the tort liability of bailees, except to hold certain classes of bailees to a 
minimum standard of reasonable care. For important classes of bailees, liabilities in case of loss, damages or 
destruction, as well as other legal questions associated with particular documents of title, are governed by federal 
statutes, international treaties, and in some cases regulatory state laws, which supersede the provisions of this 
Article in case of inconsistency. See Section 7-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document