U.C.C. § 7-104
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 1. GENERAL        
§ 7-104. NEGOTIABLE AND NONNEGOTIABLE DOCUMENT OF TITLE
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), a document of title is negotiable if by its terms the 
goods are to be delivered to bearer or to the order of a named person.
(b)  A document of title other than one described in subsection (a) is nonnegotiable. A bill of lading that 
states that the goods are consigned to a named person is not made negotiable by a provision that the 
goods are to be delivered only against an order in a record signed by the same or another named person.
(c)  A document of title is nonnegotiable if, at the time it is issued, the document has a conspicuous legend, 
however expressed, that it is nonnegotiable.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-104.
   Changes: Subsection (a) is revised to reflect modern style and trade practice. Subsection (b) is revised for style 
and medium neutrality. Subsection (c) is new.
Purposes:
   1. This Article deals with a class of commercial paper representing commodities in storage or transportation. This 
"commodity paper" is to be distinguished from what might be called "money paper" dealt with in the Article of this 
Act on Commercial Paper (Article 3) and "investment paper" dealt with in the Article of this Act on Investment 
Securities (Article 8). The class of "commodity paper" is designated "document of title" following the terminology of 
the Uniform Sales Act Section 76. Section 1-201. The distinctions between negotiable and nonnegotiable 
documents in this section makes the most important subclassification employed in the Article, in that the holder of 
negotiable documents may acquire more rights than its transferor had (See Section 7-502). The former Section 7-
104, which provided that a document of title was negotiable if it runs to a named person or assigns if such 
designation was recognized in overseas trade, has been deleted as not necessary in light of current commercial 
practice.
   A document of title is negotiable only if it satisfies this section. "Deliverable on proper indorsement and surrender 
of this receipt" will not render a document negotiable. Bailees often include such provisions as a means of insuring 
return of nonnegotiable receipts for record purposes. Such language may be regarded as insistence by the bailee 
upon a particular kind of receipt in connection with delivery of the goods. Subsection (a) makes it clear that a 
document is not negotiable which provides for delivery to order or bearer only if written instructions to that effect are 
given by a named person. Either tangible or electronic documents of title may be negotiable if the document meets 
the requirement of this section.
   2. Subsection (c) is derived from Section 3-104(d). Prior to issuance of the document of title, an issuer may stamp 
or otherwise provide by a notation on the document that it is nonnegotiable even if the document would otherwise 
comply with the requirement of subsection (a). Once issued as a negotiable document of title, the document cannot 

§ 7-104. NEGOTIABLE AND NONNEGOTIABLE DOCUMENT OF TITLE
Page 2 of 2
be changed from a negotiable document to a nonnegotiable document. A document of title that is nonnegotiable 
cannot be made negotiable by stamping or providing a notation that the document is negotiable. The only way to 
make a document of title negotiable is to comply with subsection (a). A negotiable document of title may fail to be 
duly negotiated if the negotiation does not comply with the requirements for "due negotiation" stated in Section 7-
501.
   Cross Reference: Sections 7-501 and 7-502.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bearer". Section 1-201.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Sign". Section 7-102
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document