U.C.C. § 7-502
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER        
§ 7-502. RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY DUE NEGOTIATION
(a)  Subject to Sections 7-205 and 7-503, a holder to which a negotiable document of title has been duly 
negotiated acquires thereby:
(1)  title to the document;
(2)  title to the goods;
(3)  all rights accruing under the law of agency or estoppel, including rights to goods delivered to the 
bailee after the document was issued; and
(4)  the direct obligation of the issuer to hold or deliver the goods according to the terms of the 
document free of any defense or claim by the issuer except those arising under the terms of the 
document or under this article, but in the case of a delivery order, the bailee's obligation accrues only 
upon the bailee's acceptance of the delivery order and the obligation acquired by the holder is that the 
issuer and any indorser will procure the acceptance of the bailee.
(b)  Subject to Section 7-503, title and rights acquired by due negotiation are not defeated by any stoppage 
of the goods represented by the document of title or by surrender of the goods by the bailee and are not 
impaired even if:
(1)  the due negotiation or any prior due negotiation constituted a breach of duty;
(2)  any person has been deprived of possession of a negotiable tangible document or control of a 
negotiable electronic document by misrepresentation, fraud, accident, mistake, duress, loss, theft, or 
conversion; or
(3)  a previous sale or other transfer of the goods or document has been made to a third person.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-502.
   Changes: To accommodate electronic documents of title and for style.
Purpose:
   1. This section applies to both tangible and electronic documents of title. The elements of duly negotiated, which 
constitutes a due negotiation, are set forth in Section 7-501. The several necessary qualifications of the broad 
principle that the holder of a document acquired in a due negotiation is the owner of the document and the goods 
have been brought together in the next section (Section 7-503).

§ 7-502. RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY DUE NEGOTIATION
Page 2 of 2
   2. Subsection (a)(3) covers the case of "feeding" of a duly negotiated document by subsequent delivery to the 
bailee of such goods as the document falsely purported to cover; the bailee in such case is estopped as against the 
holder of the document.
   3. The explicit statement in subsection (a)(4) of the bailee's direct obligation to the holder precludes the defense 
that the document in question was "spent" after the carrier had delivered the goods to a previous holder. But the 
holder is subject to such defenses as non-negligent destruction even though not apparent on the document. The 
sentence on delivery orders applies only to delivery orders in negotiable form which have been duly negotiated. On 
delivery orders, see also Section 7-503(b) and Comment.
   4. Subsection (b) continues the law which gave full effect to the issuance or due negotiation of a negotiable 
document. The subsection adds nothing to the effect of the rules stated in subsection (a), but it has been included 
since such explicit reference was provided under former Section 7-502 to preserve the right of a purchaser by due 
negotiation. The listing is not exhaustive. The language"any stoppage" is included lest an inference be drawn that a 
stoppage of the goods before or after transit might cut off or otherwise impair the purchaser's rights.
   Cross References: Sections 7-103, 7-205, 7-403, 7-501, and 7-503.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Control". Section 7-106.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Delivery order". Section 7-102.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Fungible". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Holder". Section 1-201.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document