U.C.C. § 7-302
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS        
§ 7-302. THROUGH BILLS OF LADING AND SIMILAR DOCUMENTS OF TITLE
(a)  The issuer of a through bill of lading, or other document of title embodying an undertaking to be 
performed in part by a person acting as its agent or by a performing carrier, is liable to any person entitled 
to recover on the bill or other document for any breach by the other person or the performing carrier of its 
obligation under the bill or other document. However, to the extent that the bill or other document covers an 
undertaking to be performed overseas or in territory not contiguous to the continental United States or an 
undertaking including matters other than transportation, this liability for breach by the other person or the 
performing carrier may be varied by agreement of the parties.
(b)  If goods covered by a through bill of lading or other document of title embodying an undertaking to be 
performed in part by a person other than the issuer are received by that person, the person is subject, with 
respect to its own performance while the goods are in its possession, to the obligation of the issuer. The 
person's obligation is discharged by delivery of the goods to another person pursuant to the bill or other 
document and does not include liability for breach by any other person or by the issuer.
(c)  The issuer of a through bill of lading or other document of title described in subsection (a) is entitled to 
recover from the performing carrier, or other person in possession of the goods when the breach of the 
obligation under the bill or other document occurred:
(1)  the amount it may be required to pay to any person entitled to recover on the bill or other document 
for the breach, as may be evidenced by any receipt, judgment, or transcript of judgment; and
(2)  the amount of any expense reasonably incurred by the issuer in defending any action commenced 
by any person entitled to recover on the bill or other document for the breach.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-302.
   Changes: To conform to current terminology and for style.
Purposes:
   1. This section continues the rules from former Section 7-302 without substantive change. The term "performing 
carrier" is substituted for the term "connecting carrier" to conform the terminology of this section with terminology 
used in recent UNCITRAL and OAS proposals concerning transportation and through bills of lading. This change in 
terminology is not substantive. This section is compatible with liability on carriers under federal law. See 49 U.S.C. 
§§ 11706, 14706 and 15906.
   The purpose of this section is to subject the initial carrier under a through bill to suit for breach of the contract of 
carriage by any performing carrier and to make it clear that any such performing carrier holds the goods on terms 
which are defined by the document of title even though such performing carrier did not issue the document. Since 

§ 7-302. THROUGH BILLS OF LADING AND SIMILAR DOCUMENTS OF TITLE
Page 2 of 2
the performing carrier does hold the goods on the terms of the document, it must honor a proper demand for 
delivery or a diversion order just as the original bailee would have to. Similarly it has the benefits of the excuses for 
non-delivery and limitations of liability provided for the original bailee who issued the bill. Unlike the original bailee-
issuer, the performing carrier's responsibility is limited to the period while the goods are in its possession. The 
section does not impose any obligation to issue through bills.
   2. The reference to documents other than through bills looks to the possibility that multi-purpose documents may 
come into use, e.g., combination warehouse receipts and bills of lading. As electronic documents of title come into 
common usage, storage documents (e.g. warehouse receipts) and transportation documents (e.g. bills of lading) 
may merge seamlessly into one electronic document that can serve both the storage and transportation segments 
of the movement of goods.
   3. Under subsection (a) the issuer of a through bill of lading may become liable for the fault of another person. 
Subsection (c) gives the issuer appropriate rights of recourse.
   4. Despite the broad language of subsection (a), Section 7-302 is subject to preemption by federal laws and 
treaties. Section 7-103. The precise scope of federal preemption in the transportation sector is a question 
determined under federal law.
   Cross reference: Section 7-103
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document