U.C.C. § 7-208
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS        
§ 7-208. ALTERED WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS
 If a blank in a negotiable tangible warehouse receipt has been filled in without authority, a good-faith purchaser for 
value and without notice of the lack of authority may treat the insertion as authorized. Any other unauthorized 
alteration leaves any tangible or electronic warehouse receipt enforceable against the issuer according to its 
original tenor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-208.
   Changes: To accommodate electronic documents of title.
Purpose:
   1. The execution of tangible warehouse receipts in blank is a dangerous practice. As between the issuer and an 
innocent purchaser the risks should clearly fall on the former. The purchaser must have purchased the tangible 
negotiable warehouse receipt in good faith and for value to be protected under the rule of the first sentence which is 
a limited exception to the general rule in the second sentence. Electronic document of title systems should have 
protection against unauthorized access and unauthorized changes. See 7-106. Thus the protection for good faith 
purchasers found in the first sentence is not necessary in the context of electronic documents.
   2. Under the second sentence of this section, an unauthorized alteration whether made with or without fraudulent 
intent does not relieve the issuer of its liability on the warehouse receipt as originally executed. The unauthorized 
alteration itself is of course ineffective against the warehouse. The rule stated in the second sentence applies to 
both tangible and electronic warehouse receipts.
Definitional Cross References:
"Good faith". Section 1-201 [7-102].
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Notice". Section 1-202.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-204.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 7-208. ALTERED WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS
Page 2 of 2
End of Document