U.C.C. § 7-504
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE          >            
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER        
§ 7-504. RIGHTS ACQUIRED IN ABSENCE OF DUE NEGOTIATION; EFFECT 
OF DIVERSION; STOPPAGE OF DELIVERY
(a)  A transferee of a document of title, whether negotiable or nonnegotiable, to which the document has 
been delivered but not duly negotiated, acquires the title and rights that its transferor had or had actual 
authority to convey.
(b)  In the case of a transfer of a nonnegotiable document of title, until but not after the bailee receives 
notice of the transfer, the rights of the transferee may be defeated:
(1)  by those creditors of the transferor which could treat the transfer as void under Section 2-402 or 
2A-308;
(2)  by a buyer from the transferor in ordinary course of business if the bailee has delivered the goods 
to the buyer or received notification of the buyer's rights;
(3)  by a lessee from the transferor in ordinary course of business if the bailee has delivered the goods 
to the lessee or received notification of the lessee's rights; or
(4)  as against the bailee, by good-faith dealings of the bailee with the transferor.
(c)  A diversion or other change of shipping instructions by the consignor in a nonnegotiable bill of lading 
which causes the bailee not to deliver the goods to the consignee defeats the consignee's title to the goods 
if the goods have been delivered to a buyer in ordinary course of business or a lessee in ordinary course of 
business and, in any event, defeats the consignee's rights against the bailee.
(d)  Delivery of the goods pursuant to a nonnegotiable document of title may be stopped by a seller under 
Section 2-705 or a lessor under Section 2A-526, subject to the requirements of due notification in those 
sections. A bailee that honors the seller's or lessor's instructions is entitled to be indemnified by the seller or 
lessor against any resulting loss or expense.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-504.
   Changes: To include cross-references to Article 2A and for style.
Purposes:
   1. Under the general principles controlling negotiable documents, it is clear that in the absence of due negotiation 
a transferor cannot convey greater rights than the transferor has, even when the negotiation is formally perfect. This 
section recognizes the transferor's power to transfer rights which the transferor has or has "actual authority to 
convey." Thus, where a negotiable document of title is being transferred the operation of the principle of estoppel is 

§ 7-504. RIGHTS ACQUIRED IN ABSENCE OF DUE NEGOTIATION; EFFECT OF DIVERSION; STOPPAGE 
OF DELIVERY
Page 2 of 3
not recognized, as contrasted with situations involving the transfer of the goods themselves. (Compare Section 2-
403 on good faith purchase of goods.) This section applies to both tangible and electronic documents of title.
   A necessary part of the price for the protection of regular dealings with negotiable documents of title is an 
insistence that no dealing which is in any way irregular shall be recognized as a good faith purchase of the 
document or of any rights pertaining to it. So, where the transfer of a negotiable document fails as a negotiation 
because a requisite indorsement is forged or otherwise missing, the purchaser in good faith and for value may be in 
the anomalous position of having less rights, in part, than if the purchaser had purchased the goods themselves. 
True, the purchaser's rights are not subject to defeat by attachment of the goods or surrender of them to the 
purchaser's transferor (contrast subsection (b)); but on the other hand, the purchaser cannot acquire enforceable 
rights to control or receive the goods over the bailee's objection merely by giving notice to the bailee. Similarly, a 
consignee who makes payment to its consignor against a straight bill of lading can thereby acquire the position of a 
good faith purchaser of goods under provisions of the Article of this Act on Sales (Section 2-403), whereas the 
same payment made in good faith against an unendorsed order bill would not have such effect. The appropriate 
remedy of a purchaser in such a situation is to regularize its status by compelling indorsement of the document (see 
Section 7-506).
   2. As in the case of transfer--as opposed to "due negotiation"--of negotiable documents, subsection (a) empowers 
the transferor of a nonnegotiable document to transfer only such rights as the transferor has or has "actual 
authority" to convey. In contrast to situations involving the goods themselves the operation of estoppel or agency 
principles is not here recognized to enable the transferor to convey greater rights than the transferor actually has. 
Subsection (b) makes it clear, however, that the transferee of a nonnegotiable document may acquire rights greater 
in some respects than those of his transferor by giving notice of the transfer to the bailee. New subsection (b)(3) 
provides for the rights of a lessee in the ordinary course.
   Subsection (b)(2)&(3) require delivery of the goods. Delivery of the goods means the voluntary transfer of physical 
possession of the goods. See amended 2-103.
   3. Subsection (c) is in part a reiteration of the carrier's immunity from liability if it honors instructions of the 
consignor to divert, but there is added a provision protecting the title of the substituted consignee if the latter is a 
buyer in ordinary course of business. A typical situation would be where a manufacturer, having shipped a lot of 
standardized goods to A on nonnegotiable bill of lading, diverts the goods to customer B who pays for them. Under 
pre-Code passage-of-title-by-appropriation doctrine A might reclaim the goods from B. However, no consideration 
of commercial policy supports this involvement of an innocent third party in the default of the manufacturer on his 
contract to A; and the common commercial practice of diverting goods in transit suggests a trade understanding in 
accordance with this subsection. The same result should obtain if the substituted consignee is a lessee in ordinary 
course. The extent of the lessee's interest in the goods is less than a buyer's interest in the goods. However, as 
against the first consignee and the lessee in ordinary course as the substituted consignee, the lessee's rights in the 
goods as granted under the lease are superior to the first consignee's rights.
   4. Subsection (d) gives the carrier an express right to indemnity where the carrier honors a seller's request to stop 
delivery.
   5. Section 1-202 gives the bailee protection, if due diligence is exercised where the bailee's organization has not 
had time to act on a notification.
Cross References:
   Point 1: Sections 2-403 and 7-506.
Point 2: Sections 2-403 and 2A-304.
Point 3: Sections 7-303, 7-403(a)(5) and 7-404.
Point 4: Sections 2-705 and 7-403(a)(4).
Point 5: Section 1-202.

§ 7-504. RIGHTS ACQUIRED IN ABSENCE OF DUE NEGOTIATION; EFFECT OF DIVERSION; STOPPAGE 
OF DELIVERY
Page 3 of 3
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Buyer in ordinary course of business". Section 1-201.
"Consignee". Section 7-102.
"Consignor". Section 7-102.
"Creditor". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of Title". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Good faith". Section 1-201. [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Honor". Section 1-201.
"Lessee in ordinary course". Section 2A-103.
"Notification" Section 1-202.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document