U.C.C. § 8-307
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 3. TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATED AND UNCERTIFICATED SECURITIES        
§ 8-307. PURCHASER'S RIGHT TO REQUISITES FOR REGISTRATION OF 
TRANSFER
 Unless otherwise agreed, the transferor of a security on due demand shall supply the purchaser with proof of 
authority to transfer or with any other requisite necessary to obtain registration of the transfer of the security, but if 
the transfer is not for value, a transferor need not comply unless the purchaser pays the necessary expenses. If the 
transferor fails within a reasonable time to comply with the demand, the purchaser may reject or rescind the 
transfer.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Because registration of the transfer of a security is a matter of vital importance, a purchaser is here provided 
with the means of obtaining such formal requirements for registration as signature guaranties, proof of authority, 
transfer tax stamps and the like. The transferor is the one in a position to supply most conveniently whatever 
documentation may be requisite for registration of transfer, and the duty to do so upon demand within a reasonable 
time is here stated affirmatively. If an essential item is peculiarly within the province of the transferor so that the 
transferor is the only one who can obtain it, the purchaser may specifically enforce the right to obtain it. Compare 
Section 8-304(d). If a transfer is not for value the transferor need not pay expenses.
   2. If the transferor's duty is not performed the transferee may reject or rescind the contract to transfer. The 
transferee is not bound to do so. An action for damages for breach of contract may be preferred.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Purchaser"
   Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
   "Security"
   Section 8-102(a)(15)
   "Value"
   Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document