U.C.C. § 8-104
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS        
§ 8-104. ACQUISITION OF SECURITY OR FINANCIAL ASSET OR INTEREST 
THEREIN
(a)  A person acquires a security or an interest therein, under this Article, if:
(1)  the person is a purchaser to whom a security is delivered pursuant to Section 8-301; or
(2)  the person acquires a security entitlement to the security pursuant to Section 8-501.
(b)  A person acquires a financial asset, other than a security, or an interest therein, under this Article, if the 
person acquires a security entitlement to the financial asset.
(c)  A person who acquires a security entitlement to a security or other financial asset has the rights 
specified in Part 5, but is a purchaser of any security, security entitlement, or other financial asset held by 
the securities intermediary only to the extent provided in Section 8-503.
(d)  Unless the context shows that a different meaning is intended, a person who is required by other law, 
regulation, rule, or agreement to transfer, deliver, present, surrender, exchange, or otherwise put in the 
possession of another person a security or financial asset satisfies that requirement by causing the other 
person to acquire an interest in the security or financial asset pursuant to subsection (a) or (b).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section lists the ways in which interests in securities and other financial assets are acquired under Article 
8. In that sense, it describes the scope of Article 8. Subsection (a) describes the two ways that a person may 
acquire a security or interest therein under this Article: (1) by delivery (Section 8-301), and (2) by acquiring a 
security entitlement. Each of these methods is described in detail in the relevant substantive provisions of this 
Article. Part 3, beginning with the definition of "delivery" in Section 8-301, describes how interests in securities are 
acquired in the direct holding system. Part 5, beginning with the rules of Section 8-501 on how security entitlements 
are acquired, describes how interests in securities are acquired in the indirect holding system.
   Subsection (b) specifies how a person may acquire an interest under Article 8 in a financial asset other than a 
security. This Article deals with financial assets other than securities only insofar as they are held in the indirect 
holding system. For example, a bankers' acceptance falls within the definition of "financial asset," so if it is held 
through a securities account the entitlement holder's right to it is a security entitlement governed by Part 5. The 
bankers' acceptance itself, however, is a negotiable instrument governed by Article 3, not by Article 8. Thus, the 
provisions of Parts 2, 3, and 4 of this Article that deal with the rights of direct holders of securities are not 
applicable. Article 3, not Article 8, specifies how one acquires a direct interest in a bankers' acceptance. If a 
bankers' acceptance is delivered to a clearing corporation to be held for the account of the clearing corporation's 
participants, the clearing corporation becomes the holder of the bankers' acceptance under the Article 3 rules 
specifying how negotiable instruments are transferred. The rights of the clearing corporation's participants, 
however, are governed by Part 5 of this Article.

§ 8-104. ACQUISITION OF SECURITY OR FINANCIAL ASSET OR INTEREST THEREIN
Page 2 of 3
   2. The distinction in usage in Article 8 between the term "security" (and its correlatives "security certificate" and 
"uncertificated security") on the one hand, and "security entitlement" on the other, corresponds to the distinction 
between the direct and indirect holding systems. For example, with respect to certificated securities that can be held 
either directly or through intermediaries, obtaining possession of a security certificate and acquiring a security 
entitlement are both means of holding the underlying security. For many other purposes, there is no need to draw a 
distinction between the means of holding. For purposes of commercial law analysis, however, the form of holding 
may make a difference. Where an item of property can be held in different ways, the rules on how one deals with it, 
including how one transfers it or how one grants a security interest in it, differ depending on the form of holding.
   Although a security entitlement is means of holding the underlying security or other financial asset, a person who 
has a security entitlement does not have any direct claim to a specific asset in the possession of the securities 
intermediary. Subsection (c) provides explicitly that a person who acquires a security entitlement is a "purchaser" of 
any security, security entitlement, or other financial asset held by the securities intermediary only in the sense that 
under Section 8-503 a security entitlement is treated as a sui generis form of property interest.
   3. Subsection (d) is designed to ensure that parties will retain their expected legal rights and duties under Revised 
Article 8. One of the major changes made by the revision is that the rules for the indirect holding system are stated 
in terms of the "security entitlements" held by investors, rather than speaking of them as holding direct interests in 
securities. Subsection (d) is designed as a translation rule to eliminate problems of co-ordination of terminology, 
and facilitate the continued use of systems for the efficient handling of securities and financial assets through 
securities intermediaries and clearing corporations. The efficiencies of a securities intermediary or clearing 
corporation are, in part, dependent on the ability to transfer securities credited to securities accounts in the 
intermediary or clearing corporation to the account of an issuer, its agent, or other person by book entry in a 
manner that permits exchanges, redemptions, conversions, and other transactions (which may be governed by pre-
existing or new agreements, constitutional documents, or other instruments) to occur and to avoid the need to 
withdraw from immobilization in an intermediary or clearing corporation physical securities in order to deliver them 
for such purposes. Existing corporate charters, indentures and like documents may require the "presentation," 
"surrender," "delivery," or "transfer" of securities or security certificates for purposes of exchange, redemption, 
conversion or other reason. Likewise, documents may use a wide variety of terminology to describe, in the context 
for example of a tender or exchange offer, the means of putting the offeror or the issuer or its agent in possession 
of the security. Subsection (d) takes the place of provisions of prior law which could be used to reach the legal 
conclusion that book-entry transfers are equivalent to physical delivery to the person to whose account the book 
entry is credited.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Delivery"
   Section 8-301
   "Financial asset"
   Section 8-102(a)(9)
   "Person"   Section 1-201(30)
   "Purchaser"
   Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
   "Security"
   Section 8-102(a)(15)
   "Security entitlement"
   Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 8-104. ACQUISITION OF SECURITY OR FINANCIAL ASSET OR INTEREST THEREIN
Page 3 of 3
End of Document