U.C.C. § 8-405
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 4. REGISTRATION        
§ 8-405. REPLACEMENT OF LOST, DESTROYED, OR WRONGFULLY TAKEN 
SECURITY CERTIFICATE
(a)  If an owner of a certificated security, whether in registered or bearer form, claims that the certificate has 
been lost, destroyed, or wrongfully taken, the issuer shall issue a new certificate if the owner:
(1)  so requests before the issuer has notice that the certificate has been acquired by a protected 
purchaser;
(2)  files with the issuer a sufficient indemnity bond; and
(3)  satisfies other reasonable requirements imposed by the issuer.
(b)  If, after the issue of a new security certificate, a protected purchaser of the original certificate presents it 
for registration of transfer, the issuer shall register the transfer unless an overissue would result. In that 
case, the issuer's liability is governed by Section 8-210. In addition to any rights on the indemnity bond, an 
issuer may recover the new certificate from a person to whom it was issued or any person taking under that 
person, except a protected purchaser.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. This section enables the owner to obtain a replacement of a lost, destroyed or stolen certificate, provided that 
reasonable requirements are satisfied and a sufficient indemnity bond supplied.
   2. Where an "original" security certificate has reached the hands of a protected purchaser, the registered owner -- 
who was in the best position to prevent the loss, destruction or theft of the security certificate -- is now deprived of 
the new security certificate issued as a replacement. This changes the pre-UCC law under which the original 
certificate was ineffective after the issue of a replacement except insofar as it might represent an action for 
damages in the hands of a purchaser for value without notice.  Keller v. Eureka Brick Mach. Mfg. Co., 43 Mo.App. 
84, 11 L.R.A. 472 (1890). Where both the original and the new certificate have reached protected purchasers the 
issuer is required to honor both certificates unless an overissue would result and the security is not reasonably 
available for purchase. See Section 8-210. In the latter case alone, the protected purchaser of the original certificate 
is relegated to an action for damages. In either case, the issuer itself may recover on the indemnity bond.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Bearer form"
   Section 8-102(a)(2)
   "Certificated security"
   Section 8-102(a)(4)
   "Issuer"
   Section 8-201

§ 8-405. REPLACEMENT OF LOST, DESTROYED, OR WRONGFULLY TAKEN SECURITY CERTIFICATE
Page 2 of 2
   "Notice"   Section 1-201(25)
   "Overissue"
   Section 8-210
   "Protected purchaser"
   Section 8-303
   "Registered form"
   Section 8-102(a)(13)
   "Security certificate"
   Section 8-102(a)(16)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document