U.C.C. § 8-109
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS        
§ 8-109. WARRANTIES IN INDIRECT HOLDING
(a)  A person who originates an entitlement order to a securities intermediary warrants to the securities 
intermediary that:
(1)  the entitlement order is made by an appropriate person, or if the entitlement order is by an agent, 
the agent has actual authority to act on behalf of the appropriate person; and
(2)  there is no adverse claim to the security entitlement.
(b)  A person who delivers a security certificate to a securities intermediary for credit to a securities account 
or originates an instruction with respect to an uncertificated security directing that the uncertificated security 
be credited to a securities account makes to the securities intermediary the warranties specified in Section 
8-108(a) or (b).
(c)  If a securities intermediary delivers a security certificate to its entitlement holder or causes its 
entitlement holder to be registered as the owner of an uncertificated security, the securities intermediary 
makes to the entitlement holder the warranties specified in Section 8-108(a) or (b).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (a) provides that a person who originates an entitlement order warrants to the securities 
intermediary that the order is authorized, and warrants the absence of adverse claims. Subsection (b) specifies the 
warranties that are given when a person who holds securities directly has the holding converted into indirect form. A 
person who delivers a certificate to a securities intermediary or originates an instruction for an uncertificated 
security gives to the securities intermediary the transfer warranties under Section 8-108. If the securities 
intermediary in turn delivers the certificate to a higher level securities intermediary, it gives the same warranties.
   2. Subsection (c) states the warranties that a securities intermediary gives when a customer who has been 
holding securities in an account with the securities intermediary requests that certificates be delivered or that 
uncertificated securities be registered in the customer's name. The warranties are the same as those that brokers 
make with respect to securities that the brokers sell to or buy on behalf of the customers. See Section 8-108(i).
   3. As with the Section 8-108 warranties, the warranties specified in this section may be modified by agreement 
under Section 1-102(3).
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Adverse claim"
   Section 8-102(a)(1)
   "Appropriate person"
   Section 8-107
   "Entitlement holder"
   Section 8-102(a)(7)

§ 8-109. WARRANTIES IN INDIRECT HOLDING
Page 2 of 2
   "Entitlement order"
   Section 8-102(a)(8)
   "Instruction"
   Section 8-102(a)(12)
   "Person"   Section 1-201(30)
   "Securities account"
   Section 8-501
   "Securities intermediary"
   Section 8-102(a)(14)
   "Security certificate"
   Section 8-102(a)(16)
   "Uncertificated security"
   Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document