U.C.C. § 9-627
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 6. DEFAULT          >            SUBPART 2. NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE        
§ 9-627. DETERMINATION OF WHETHER CONDUCT WAS COMMERCIALLY 
REASONABLE
(a) [Greater amount obtainable under other circumstances; no preclusion of commercial 
reasonableness.]  The fact that a greater amount could have been obtained by a collection, enforcement, 
disposition, or acceptance at a different time or in a different method from that selected by the secured 
party is not of itself sufficient to preclude the secured party from establishing that the collection, 
enforcement, disposition, or acceptance was made in a commercially reasonable manner.
(b) [Dispositions that are commercially reasonable.]  A disposition of collateral is made in a 
commercially reasonable manner if the disposition is made:
(1)  in the usual manner on any recognized market;
(2)  at the price current in any recognized market at the time of the disposition; or
(3)  otherwise in conformity with reasonable commercial practices among dealers in the type of property 
that was the subject of the disposition.
(c) [Approval by court or on behalf of creditors.]  A collection, enforcement, disposition, or acceptance 
is commercially reasonable if it has been approved:
(1)  in a judicial proceeding;
(2)  by a bona fide creditors' committee;
(3)  by a representative of creditors; or
(4)  by an assignee for the benefit of creditors.
(d) [Approval under subsection (c) not necessary; absence of approval has no effect.]  Approval 
under subsection (c) need not be obtained, and lack of approval does not mean that the collection, 
enforcement, disposition, or acceptance is not commercially reasonable.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-507(2).
   2. Relationship of Price to Commercial Reasonableness. Some observers have found the notion contained in 
subsection (a) (derived from former Section 9-507(2)) (the fact that a better price could have been obtained does 
not establish lack of commercial reasonableness) to be inconsistent with that found in Section 9-610(b) (derived 
from former Section 9-504(3) (every aspect of the disposition, including its terms, must be commercially 
reasonable). There is no such inconsistency. While not itself sufficient to establish a violation of this Part, a low 
price suggests that a court should scrutinize carefully all aspects of a disposition to ensure that each aspect was 
commercially reasonable.

§ 9-627. DETERMINATION OF WHETHER CONDUCT WAS COMMERCIALLY REASONABLE
Page 2 of 2
   The law long has grappled with the problem of dispositions of personal and real property which comply with 
applicable procedural requirements (e.g., advertising, notification to interested persons, etc.) but which yield a price 
that seems low. This Article addresses that issue in Section 9-615(f). That section applies only when the transferee 
is the secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor. It contains a special rule for 
calculating a deficiency or surplus in a complying disposition that yields a price that is "significantly below the range 
of proceeds that a complying disposition to a person other than the secured party, a person related to the secured 
party, or a secondary obligor would have brought."
   3. Determination of Commercial Reasonableness; Advance Approval. It is important to make clear the 
conduct and procedures that are commercially reasonable and to provide a secured party with the means of 
obtaining, by court order or negotiation with a creditors' committee or a representative of creditors, advance 
approval of a proposed method of enforcement as commercially reasonable. This section contains rules that assist 
in that determination and provides for advance approval in appropriate situations. However, none of the specific 
methods of disposition specified in subsection (b) is required or exclusive.
   4. "Recognized Market." As in Sections 9-610(c) and 9-611(d), the concept of a "recognized market" in 
subsections (b)(1) and (2) is quite limited; it applies only to markets in which there are standardized price quotations 
for property that is essentially fungible, such as stock exchanges.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document