U.C.C. § 9-403
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES        
§ 9-403. AGREEMENT NOT TO ASSERT DEFENSES AGAINST ASSIGNEE
(a) ["Value."]  In this section, "value" has the meaning provided in Section 3-303(a).
(b) [Agreement not to assert claim or defense.]  Except as otherwise provided in this section, an 
agreement between an account debtor and an assignor not to assert against an assignee any claim or 
defense that the account debtor may have against the assignor is enforceable by an assignee that takes an 
assignment:
(1)  for value;
(2)  in good faith;
(3)  without notice of a claim of a property or possessory right to the property assigned; and
(4)  without notice of a defense or claim in recoupment of the type that may be asserted against a 
person entitled to enforce a negotiable instrument under Section 3-305(a).
(c) [When subsection (b) not applicable.]  Subsection (b) does not apply to defenses of a type that may 
be asserted against a holder in due course of a negotiable instrument under Section 3-305(b).
(d) [Omission of required statement in consumer transaction.]  In a consumer transaction, if a record 
evidences the account debtor's obligation, law other than this article requires that the record include a 
statement to the effect that the rights of an assignee are subject to claims or defenses that the account 
debtor could assert against the original obligee, and the record does not include such a statement:
(1)  the record has the same effect as if the record included such a statement; and
(2)  the account debtor may assert against an assignee those claims and defenses that would have 
been available if the record included such a statement.
(e) [Rule for individual under other law.]  This section is subject to law other than this article which 
establishes a different rule for an account debtor who is an individual and who incurred the obligation 
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.
(f) [Other law not displaced.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), this section does not 
displace law other than this article which gives effect to an agreement by an account debtor not to assert a 
claim or defense against an assignee.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-206.
   2. Scope and Purpose. Subsection (b), like former Section 9-206, generally validates an agreement between an 
account debtor and an assignor that the account debtor will not assert against an assignee claims and defenses 
that it may have against the assignor. These agreements are typical in installment sale agreements and leases. 

§ 9-403. AGREEMENT NOT TO ASSERT DEFENSES AGAINST ASSIGNEE
Page 2 of 3
However, this section expands former Section 9-206 to apply to all account debtors; it is not limited to account 
debtors that have bought or leased goods. This section applies only to the obligations of an "account debtor," as 
defined in Section 9-102. Thus, it does not determine the circumstances under which and the extent to which a 
person who is obligated on a negotiable instrument is disabled from asserting claims and defenses. Rather, Article 
3 must be consulted. See, e.g., Sections 3-305, 3-306. Article 3 governs even when the negotiable instrument 
constitutes part of chattel paper. See Section 9-102 (an obligor on a negotiable instrument constituting part of 
chattel paper is not an "account debtor").
   3. Conditions of Validation; Relationship to Article 3. Subsection (b) validates an account debtor's agreement 
only if the assignee takes an assignment for value, in good faith, and without notice of conflicting claims to the 
property assigned or of certain claims or defenses of the account debtor. Like former Section 9-206, this section is 
designed to put the assignee in a position that is no better and no worse than that of a holder in due course of a 
negotiable instrument under Article 3. However, former Section 9-206 left open certain issues, e.g., whether the 
section incorporated the special Article 3 definition of "value" in Section 3-303 or the generally applicable definition 
in Section 1-201(44). Subsection (a) addresses this question; it provides that "value" has the meaning specified in 
Section 3-303(a). Similarly, subsection (c) provides that subsection (b) does not validate an agreement with respect 
to defenses that could be asserted against a holder in due course under Section 3-305(b) (the so-called "real" 
defenses). In 1990, the definition of "holder in due course" (Section 3-302) and the articulation of the rights of a 
holder in due course (Sections 3-305 and 3-306) were revised substantially. This section tracks more closely the 
rules of Sections 3-302, 3-305, and 3-306.
   4. Relationship to Terms of Assigned Property. Former Section 9-206(2), concerning warranties 
accompanying the sale of goods, has been deleted as unnecessary. This Article does not regulate the terms of the 
account, chattel paper, or general intangible that is assigned, except insofar as the account, chattel paper, or 
general intangible itself creates a security interest (as often is the case with chattel paper). Thus, Article 2, and not 
this Article, determines whether a seller of goods makes or effectively disclaims warranties, even if the sale is 
secured. Similarly, other law, and not this Article, determines the effectiveness of an account debtor's undertaking 
to pay notwithstanding, and not to assert, any defenses or claims against an assignor--e.g., a "hell-or-high-water" 
provision in the underlying agreement that is assigned. If other law gives effect to this undertaking, then, under 
principles of nemo dat, the undertaking would be enforceable by the assignee (secured party). If other law prevents 
the assignor from enforcing the undertaking, this section nevertheless might permit the assignee to do so. The right 
of the assignee to enforce would depend upon whether, under the particular facts, the account debtor's undertaking 
fairly could be construed as an agreement that falls within the scope of this section and whether the assignee meets 
the requirements of this section.
   5. Relationship to Federal Trade Commission Rule. Subsection (d) is new. It applies to rights evidenced by a 
record that is required to contain, but does not contain, the notice set forth in Federal Trade Commission Rule 433, 
16 C.F.R. Part 433 (the "Holder-in-Due-Course Regulations"). Under this subsection, an assignee of such a record 
takes subject to the consumer account debtor's claims and defenses to the same extent as it would have if the 
writing had contained the required notice. Thus, subsection (d) effectively renders waiver-of-defense clauses 
ineffective in the transactions with consumers to which it applies.
   6. Relationship to Other Law. Like former Section 9-206(1), this section takes no position on the enforceability 
of waivers of claims and defenses by consumer account debtors, leaving that question to other law. However, the 
reference to "law other than this article" in subsection (e) encompasses administrative rules and regulations; the 
reference in former Section 9-206(1) that it replaces ("statute or decision") arguably did not.
   This section does not displace other law that gives effect to a non-consumer account debtor's agreement not to 
assert defenses against an assignee, even if the agreement would not qualify under subsection (b). See subsection 
(f). It validates, but does not invalidate, agreements made by a non-consumer account debtor. This section also 
does not displace other law to the extent that the other law permits an assignee, who takes an assignment with 
notice of a claim of a property or possessory right, a defense, or a claim in recoupment, to enforce an account 
debtor's agreement not to assert claims and defenses against the assignor (e.g., a "hell-or-high-water" agreement). 
See Comment 4. It also does not displace an assignee's right to assert that an account debtor is estopped from 

§ 9-403. AGREEMENT NOT TO ASSERT DEFENSES AGAINST ASSIGNEE
Page 3 of 3
asserting a claim or defense. Nor does this section displace other law with respect to waivers of potential future 
claims and defenses that are the subject of an agreement between the account debtor and the assignee. Finally, it 
does not displace Section 1-107, concerning waiver of a breach that allegedly already has occurred.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document