U.C.C. § 9-326
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY          >            SUBPART 3. PRIORITY        
§ 9-326. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS CREATED BY NEW DEBTOR
(a) [Subordination of security interest created by new debtor.]  Subject to subsection (b), a security 
interest that is created by a new debtor in collateral in which the new debtor has or acquires rights and is 
perfected sorely by a filed financing statement that is would be ineffective to perfect the security interest but 
for the application of Section 9-316(i)(1) or 9-508 is subordinate to a security interest in the same collateral 
which is perfected other than by such a filed financing statement.
(b) [Priority under other provisions; multiple original debtors.]  The other provisions of this part 
determine the priority among conflicting security interests in the same collateral perfected by filed financing 
statements described in subsection (a). However, if the security agreements to which a new debtor became 
bound as debtor were not entered into by the same original debtor, the conflicting security interests rank 
according to priority in time of the new debtor's having become bound.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New.
   2. Subordination of Security Interests Created by New Debtor. This section addresses the priority contests 
that may arise when a new debtor becomes bound by the security agreement of an original debtor and each debtor 
has a secured creditor.
   Subsection (a) subordinates the original debtor's secured party's security interest perfected against the new 
debtor by a filed financing statement that would be ineffective to perfect the security interest but for Section 9-508 
or, if the original debtor and new debtor are located in different jurisdictions, Section 9-316(i)(1). The security 
interest is subordinated to security interests in the same collateral perfected by another method, e.g., by filing 
against the new debtor. This section does not subordinate a security interest perfected by a new initial financing 
statement providing the name of the new debtor, even if the initial financing statement is filed to maintain the 
effectiveness of a financing statement under the circumstances described in Section 9-508(b). Nor does it 
subordinate a security interest perfected by a financing statement filed against the original debtor which remains 
effective against collateral transferred by the original debtor to the new debtor. See Section 9-508(c). Concerning 
priority contests involving transferred collateral, see Sections 9-325 and 9-507.
   Example 1: SP-X holds a perfected-by-filing security interest in X Corp's existing and after-acquired inventory, 
and SP-Z holds a perfected-by-possession security interest in an item of Z Corp's inventory. Both X Corp and Z 
Corp are located in the same jurisdiction under Section 9-307. Z Corp becomes bound as debtor by X Corp's 
security agreement (e.g., Z Corp buys X Corp's assets and assumes its security agreement). See Section 9-203(d). 
But for Section 9-508, SP-X's financing statement would be ineffective to perfect a security interest in the item of 
inventory in which Z Corp has rights. However, subsection (a) provides that SP-X's perfected security interest is 
subordinate to SP-Z's, regardless of whether SP-X's financing statement was filed before SP-Z perfected its 
security interest.

§ 9-326. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS CREATED BY NEW DEBTOR
Page 2 of 3
   Example 2: SP-X holds a perfected-by-filing security interest in X Corp's existing and after-acquired inventory, 
and SP-Z holds a perfected-by-filing security interest in Z Corp's existing and after-acquired inventory. Both X Corp 
and Z Corp are located in the same jurisdiction under Section 9-307. Z Corp becomes bound as debtor by X Corp's 
security agreement. Immediately thereafter, and before the effectiveness of SP-X's financing statement lapses, Z 
Corp acquires a new item of inventory. But for Section 9-508, SP-X's financing statement would be ineffective to 
perfect a security interest in the new item of inventory in which Z Corp has rights. However, because SP-Z's 
security interest was perfected by a filing whose effectiveness does not depend on Section 9-316(i)(1) or 9-508, 
subsection (a) subordinates SP-X's perfected security interest to SP-Z's. This would be the case even if SP-Z filed 
after Z Corp became bound by X Corp's security agreement, and regardless of which financing statement was filed 
first.
   The same result would obtain if X Corp and Z Corp were located in different jurisdictions. SP-X's security interest 
would be perfected by a financing statement that would be ineffective but for Section 9-316(i)(1), whereas the 
effectiveness of SP-Z's filing does not depend on Section 9-316(i)(1) or 9-508.
   3. Other Priority Rules. Subsection (b) addresses the priority among security interests created by the original 
debtor (X Corp). By invoking the other priority rules of this subpart, as applicable, subsection (b) preserves the 
relative priority of security interests created by the original debtor.
   Example 3: Under the facts of Example 2, SP-Y also holds a perfected-by-filing security interest in X Corp's 
existing and after-acquired inventory. SP-Y filed after SP-X. Inasmuch as both SP-X's and SP-Y's security interests 
in inventory acquired by Z Corp after it became bound would be unperfected but for the application of Section 9-
508, the normal priority rules determine their relative priorities. Under the "first-to-file-or-perfect" rule of Section 9-
322(a)(1), SP-X has priority over SP-Y.
   Example 4: Under the facts of Example 3, after Z Corp became bound by X Corp's security agreement, SP-Y 
promptly filed a new initial financing statement against Z Corp. SP-X's security interest remains perfected only by 
virtue of its original filing against X Corp which "would be ineffective to perfect the security interest but for the 
application of Section 9-508." Because SP-Y's security interest is perfected by the filing of a financing statement 
whose effectiveness does not depend on Section 9-508 or 9-316(i)(1), subsection (a) subordinates SP-X's security 
interest to SP-Y's. If both SP-X and SP-Y file a new initial financing statement against Z Corp, then the "first-to-file-
or-perfect" rule of Section 9-322(a)(1) governs their priority inter se as well as their priority against SP-Z.
   The second sentence of subsection (b) effectively limits the applicability of the first sentence to situations in which 
a new debtor has become bound by more than one security agreement entered into by the same original debtor. 
When the new debtor has become bound by security agreements entered into by different original debtors, the 
second sentence provides that priority is based on priority in time of the new debtor's becoming bound.
   Example 5: Under the facts of Example 2, SP-W holds a perfected-by-filing security interest in W Corp's existing 
and after-acquired inventory. After Z Corp became bound by X Corp's security agreement in favor of SP-X, Z Corp 
became bound by W Corp's security agreement. Under subsection (b), SP-W's security interest in inventory 
acquired by Z Corp is subordinate to that of SP-X, because Z Corp became bound under SP-X's security 
agreement before it became bound under SP-W's security agreement. This is the result regardless of which 
financing statement (SP-X's or SP-W's) was filed first.
   The second sentence of subsection (b) reflects the generally accepted view that priority based on the first-to-file 
rule is inappropriate for resolving priority disputes when the filings were made against different debtors. Like 
subsection (a) and the first sentence of subsection (b), however, the second sentence of subsection (b) relates only 
to priority conflicts among security interests that would be unperfected but for the application of Section 9-316(i)(1) 
or 9-508.
   Example 6: Under the facts of Example 5, after Z Corp became bound by W Corp's security agreement, SP-W 
promptly filed a new initial financing statement against Z Corp. At that time, SP-X's security interest was perfected 
only pursuant to its original filing against X Corp which "would be ineffective to perfect the security interest but for 
the application of Section 9-508." Because SP-W's security interest is perfected by the filing of a financing 

§ 9-326. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS CREATED BY NEW DEBTOR
Page 3 of 3
statement whose effectiveness does not depend on Section 9-316(i)(1) or 9-508, subsection (a) subordinates SP-
X's security interest to SP-W's. If both SP-X and SP-W file a new initial financing statement against Z Corp, then the 
"first-to-file-or-perfect" rule of Section 9-322(a)(1) governs their priority inter se as well as their priority against SP-Z.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document