U.C.C. § 9-405
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES        
§ 9-405. MODIFICATION OF ASSIGNED CONTRACT
(a) [Effect of modification on assignee.]  A modification of or substitution for an assigned contract is 
effective against an assignee if made in good faith. The assignee acquires corresponding rights under the 
modified or substituted contract. The assignment may provide that the modification or substitution is a 
breach of contract by the assignor. This subsection is subject to subsections (b) through (d).
(b) [Applicability of subsection (a).]  Subsection (a) applies to the extent that:
(1)  the right to payment or a part thereof under an assigned contract has not been fully earned by 
performance; or
(2)  the right to payment or a part thereof has been fully earned by performance and the account debtor 
has not received notification of the assignment under Section 9-406(a).
(c) [Rule for individual under other law.]  This section is subject to law other than this article which 
establishes a different rule for an account debtor who is an individual and who incurred the obligation 
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.
(d) [Inapplicability to health-care-insurance receivable.]  This section does not apply to an assignment 
of a health-care-insurance receivable.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-318(2).
   2. Modification of Assigned Contract. The ability of account debtors and assignors to modify assigned 
contracts can be important, especially in the case of government contracts and complex contractual arrangements 
(e.g., construction contracts) with respect to which modifications are customary. Subsections (a) and (b) provide 
that good-faith modifications of assigned contracts are binding against an assignee to the extent that (i) the right to 
payment has not been fully earned or (ii) the right to payment has been earned and notification of the assignment 
has not been given to the account debtor. Former Section 9-318(2) did not validate modifications of fully-performed 
contracts under any circumstances, whether or not notification of the assignment had been given to the account 
debtor. Subsection (a) protects the interests of assignees by (i) limiting the effectiveness of modifications to those 
made in good faith, (ii) affording the assignee with corresponding rights under the contract as modified, and (iii) 
recognizing that the modification may be a breach of the assignor's agreement with the assignee.
   3. Consumer Account Debtors. Subsection (c) is new. It makes clear that the rules of this section are subject to 
other law establishing special rules for consumer account debtors.
   4. Account Debtors on Health-Care-Insurance Receivables. Subsection (d) also is new. It provides that this 
section does not apply to an assignment of a health-care-insurance receivable. The obligation of an insurer with 
respect to a health-care-insurance receivable is governed by other law.

§ 9-405. MODIFICATION OF ASSIGNED CONTRACT
Page 2 of 2
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document