U.C.C. § 9-612
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 6. DEFAULT          >            SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF 
SECURITY INTEREST        
§ 9-612. TIMELINESS OF NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF 
COLLATERAL
(a) [Reasonable time is question of fact.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), whether a 
notification is sent within a reasonable time is a question of fact.
(b) [10-day period sufficient in non-consumer transaction.]  In a transaction other than a consumer 
transaction, a notification of disposition sent after default and 10 days or more before the earliest time of 
disposition set forth in the notification is sent within a reasonable time before the disposition.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New.
   2. Reasonable Notification. Section 9-611(b) requires the secured party to send a "reasonable authenticated 
notification." Under that section, as under former Section 9-504(3), one aspect of a reasonable notification is its 
timeliness. This generally means that the notification must be sent at a reasonable time in advance of the date of a 
public disposition or the date after which a private disposition is to be made. A notification that is sent so near to the 
disposition date that a notified person could not be expected to act on or take account of the notification would be 
unreasonable.
   3. Timeliness of Notification: Safe Harbor. The 10-day notice period in subsection (b) is intended to be a "safe 
harbor" and not a minimum requirement. To qualify for the "safe harbor" the notification must be sent after default. 
A notification also must be sent in a commercially reasonable manner. See Section 9-611(b) ("reasonable 
authenticated notification"). These requirements prevent a secured party from taking advantage of the "safe harbor" 
by, for example, giving the debtor a notification at the time of the original extension of credit or sending the notice by 
surface mail to a debtor overseas.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document