U.C.C. § 9-201
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY 
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT          >            SUBPART 1. 
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT        
§ 9-201. GENERAL EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT
(a) [General effectiveness.]  Except as otherwise provided in [the Uniform Commercial Code], a security 
agreement is effective according to its terms between the parties, against purchasers of the collateral, and 
against creditors.
(b) [Applicable consumer laws and other law.]  A transaction subject to this article is subject to any 
applicable rule of law which establishes a different rule for consumers and [insert reference to (i) any other 
statute or regulation that regulates the rates, charges, agreements, and practices for loans, credit sales, or 
other extensions of credit and (ii) any consumer-protection statute or regulation].
(c) [Other applicable law controls.]  In case of conflict between this article and a rule of law, statute, or 
regulation described in subsection (b), the rule of law, statute, or regulation controls. Failure to comply with 
a statute or regulation described in subsection (b) has only the effect the statute or regulation specifies.
(d) [Further deference to other applicable law.]  This article does not:
(1)  validate any rate, charge, agreement, or practice that violates a rule of law, statute, or regulation 
described in subsection (b); or
(2)  extend the application of the rule of law, statute, or regulation to a transaction not otherwise subject 
to it.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Sections 9-201, 9-203(4).
   2. Effectiveness of Security Agreement. Subsection (a) provides that a security agreement is generally 
effective. With certain exceptions, a security agreement is effective between the debtor and secured party and is 
likewise effective against third parties. Note that "security agreement" is used here (and elsewhere in this Article) as 
it is defined in Section 9-102: "an agreement that creates or provides for a security interest." It follows that 
subsection (a) does not provide that every term or provision contained in a record that contains a security 
agreement or that is so labeled is effective. Property read, former Section 9-201 was to the same effect. Exceptions 
to the general rule of subsection (a) arise where there is an overriding provision in this Article or any other Article of 
the UCC. For example, Section 9-317 subordinates unperfected security interests to lien creditors and certain 
buyers, and several provisions in Part 3 subordinate some security interests to other security interests and interests 
of purchasers.
   3. Law, Statutes, and Regulations Applicable to Certain Transactions. Subsection (b) makes clear that 
certain transactions, although subject to this Article, also are subject to other applicable laws relating to consumers 
or specified in that subsection. Subsection (c) provides that the other law is controlling in the event of a conflict, and 

§ 9-201. GENERAL EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT
Page 2 of 2
that a violation of other law does not ipso facto constitute a violation of this Article. Subsection (d) provides that this 
Article does not validate violations under or extend the application of the other applicable laws.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document