U.C.C. § 9-508
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND 
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT        
§ 9-508. EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT IF NEW DEBTOR 
BECOMES BOUND BY SECURITY AGREEMENT
(a) [Financing statement naming original debtor.]  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a filed 
financing statement naming an original debtor is effective to perfect a security interest in collateral in which 
a new debtor has or acquires rights to the extent that the financing statement would have been effective 
had the original debtor acquired rights in the collateral.
(b) [Financing statement becoming seriously misleading.]  If the difference between the name of the 
original debtor and that of the new debtor causes a filed financing statement that is effective under 
subsection (a) to be seriously misleading under Section 9-506:
(1)  the financing statement is effective to perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the new 
debtor before, and within four months after, the new debtor becomes bound under Section 9-203(d); 
and
(2)  the financing statement is not effective to perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the 
new debtor more than four months after the new debtor becomes bound under Section 9-203(d) unless 
an initial financing statement providing the name of the new debtor is filed before the expiration of that 
time.
(c) [When section not applicable.]  This section does not apply to collateral as to which a filed financing 
statement remains effective against the new debtor under Section 9-507(a).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New.
   2. The Problem. Section 9-203(d) and (e) and this section deal with situations where one party (the "new debtor") 
becomes bound as debtor by a security agreement entered into by another person (the "original debtor"). These 
situations often arise as a consequence of changes in business structure. For example, the original debtor may be 
an individual debtor who operates a business as a sole proprietorship and then incorporates it. Or, the original 
debtor may be a corporation that is merged into another corporation. Under both former Article 9 and this Article, 
collateral that is transferred in the course of the incorporation or merger normally would remain subject to a 
perfected security interest. See Sections 9-315(a), 9-507(a). Former Article 9 was less clear with respect to whether 
an after-acquired property clause in a security agreement signed by the original debtor would be effective to create 
a security interest in property acquired by the new corporation or the merger survivor and, if so, whether a financing 
statement filed against the original debtor would be effective to perfect the security interest. This section and 
Sections 9-203(d) and (e) are a clarification.

§ 9-508. EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT IF NEW DEBTOR BECOMES BOUND BY 
SECURITY AGREEMENT
Page 2 of 3
   3. How New Debtor Becomes Bound. Normally, a security interest is unenforceable unless the debtor has 
authenticated a security agreement describing the collateral. See Section 9-203(b). New Section 9-203(e) creates 
an exception, under which a security agreement entered into by one person is effective with respect to the property 
of another. This exception comes into play if a "new debtor" becomes bound as debtor by a security agreement 
entered into by another person (the "original debtor"). (The quoted terms are defined in Section 9-102.) If a new 
debtor does become bound, then the security agreement entered into by the original debtor satisfies the security-
agreement requirement of Section 9-203(b)(3) as to existing or after-acquired property of the new debtor to the 
extent the property is described in the security agreement. In that case, no other agreement is necessary to make a 
security interest enforceable in that property. See Section 9-203(e).
   Section 9-203(d) explains when a new debtor becomes bound by an original debtor's security agreement. Under 
Section 9-203(d)(1), a new debtor becomes bound as debtor if, by contract or operation of other law, the security 
agreement becomes effective to create a security interest in the new debtor's property. For example, if the 
applicable corporate law of mergers provides that when A Corp merges into B Corp, B Corp becomes a debtor 
under A Corp's security agreement, then B Corp would become bound as debtor following such a merger. Similarly, 
B Corp would become bound as debtor if B Corp contractually assumes A's obligations under the security 
agreement.
   Under certain circumstances, a new debtor becomes bound for purposes of this Article even though it would not 
be bound under other law. Under Section 9-203(d)(2), a new debtor becomes bound when, by contract or operation 
of other law, it (i) becomes obligated not only for the secured obligation but also generally for the obligations of the 
original debtor and (ii) acquires or succeeds to substantially all the assets of the original debtor. For example, some 
corporate laws provide that, when two corporations merge, the surviving corporation succeeds to the assets of its 
merger partner and "has all liabilities" of both corporations. In the case where, for example, A Corp merges into B 
Corp (and A Corp ceases to exist), some people have questioned whether A Corp's grant of a security interest in its 
existing and after-acquired property becomes a "liability" of B Corp, such that B Corp's existing and after-acquired 
property becomes subject to a security interest in favor of A Corp's lender. Even if corporate law were to give a 
negative answer, under Section 9-203(d)(2), B Corp would become bound for purposes of Section 9-203(e) and this 
section. The "substantially all of the assets" requirement of Section 9-203(d)(2) excludes sureties and other 
secondary obligors as well as persons who become obligated through veil piercing and other non-successorship 
doctrines. In most cases, it will exclude successors to the assets and liabilities of a division of a debtor.
   4. When Financing Statement Effective Against New Debtor. Subsection (a) provides that a filing against the 
original debtor generally is effective to perfect a security interest in collateral that a new debtor has at the time it 
becomes bound by the original debtor's security agreement and collateral that it acquires after the new debtor 
becomes bound. Under subsection (b), however, if the filing against the original debtor is seriously misleading as to 
the new debtor's name, the filing is effective as to collateral acquired by the new debtor more than four months after 
the new debtor becomes bound only if a person files during the four-month period an initial financing statement 
providing the name of the new debtor. Compare Section 9-507(c) (four-month period of effectiveness with respect 
to collateral acquired by a debtor after the name provided for the debtor becomes insufficient as the name of the 
debtor). As to the meaning of "initial financing statement" in this context, see Section 9-512, Comment 5.
   5. Transferred Collateral. This section does not apply to collateral transferred by the original debtor to a new 
debtor. See subsection (c). Under those circumstances, the filing against the original debtor continues to be 
effective until it lapses or perfection is lost for another reason. See Sections 9-316, 9-507(a).
   6. Priority. Section 9-326 governs the priority contest between a secured creditor of the original debtor and a 
secured creditor of the new debtor.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 9-508. EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT IF NEW DEBTOR BECOMES BOUND BY 
SECURITY AGREEMENT
Page 3 of 3
End of Document