U.C.C. § 9-106
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS          >            SUBPART 1. SHORT TITLE, DEFINITIONS, 
AND GENERAL CONCEPTS        
§ 9-106. CONTROL OF INVESTMENT PROPERTY
(a) [Control under   Section 8-106.] A person has control of a certificated security, uncertificated security, 
or security entitlement as provided in Section 8-106.
(b) [Control of commodity contract.]  A secured party has control of a commodity contract if:
(1)  the secured party is the commodity intermediary with which the commodity contract is carried; or
(2)  the commodity customer, secured party, and commodity intermediary have agreed that the 
commodity intermediary will apply any value distributed on account of the commodity contract as 
directed by the secured party without further consent by the commodity customer.
(c) [Effect of control of securities account or commodity account.]  A secured party having control of 
all security entitlements or commodity contracts carried in a securities account or commodity account has 
control over the securities account or commodity account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-115(e).
   2. "Control" Under Article 8. For an explanation of "control" of securities and certain other investment property, 
see Section 8-106, Comments 4 and 7.
   3. "Control" of Commodity Contracts. This section, as did former Section 9-115(1)(e), contains provisions 
relating to control of commodity contracts which are analogous to those in Section 8-106 for other types of 
investment property.
   4. Securities Accounts and Commodity Accounts. For drafting convenience, control with respect to a 
securities account or commodity account is defined in terms of obtaining control over the security entitlements or 
commodity contracts. Of course, an agreement that provides that (without further consent of the debtor) the 
securities intermediary or commodity intermediary will honor instructions from the secured party concerning a 
securities account or commodity account described as such is sufficient. Such an agreement necessarily implies 
that the intermediary will honor instructions concerning all security entitlements or commodity contracts carried in 
the account and thus affords the secured party control of all the security entitlements or commodity contracts.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document