U.C.C. § 9-621
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 6. DEFAULT          >            SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF 
SECURITY INTEREST        
§ 9-621. NOTIFICATION OF PROPOSAL TO ACCEPT COLLATERAL
(a) [Persons to which proposal to be sent.]  A secured party that desires to accept collateral in full or 
partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures shall send its proposal to:
(1)  any person from which the secured party has received, before the debtor consented to the 
acceptance, an authenticated notification of a claim of an interest in the collateral;
(2)  any other secured party or lienholder that, 10 days before the debtor consented to the acceptance, 
held a security interest in or other lien on the collateral perfected by the filing of a financing statement 
that:
(A)  identified the collateral;
(B)  was indexed under the debtor's name as of that date; and
(C)  was filed in the office or offices in which to file a financing statement against the debtor 
covering the collateral as of that date; and
(3)  any other secured party that, 10 days before the debtor consented to the acceptance, held a 
security interest in the collateral perfected by compliance with a statute, regulation, or treaty described 
in Section 9-311(a).
(b) [Proposal to be sent to secondary obligor in partial satisfaction.]  A secured party that desires to 
accept collateral in partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures shall send its proposal to any secondary 
obligor in addition to the persons described in subsection (a).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-505.
   2. Notification Requirement. Subsection (a) specifies three classes of competing claimants to whom the 
secured party must send notification of its proposal: (i) those who notify the secured party that they claim an interest 
in the collateral, (ii) holders of certain security interests and liens who have filed against the debtor, and (iii) holders 
of certain security interests who have perfected by compliance with a statute (including a certificate-of-title statute), 
regulation, or treaty described in Section 9-311(a). With regard to (ii), see Section 9-611, Comment 4. Subsection 
(b) also requires notification to any secondary obligor if the proposal is for acceptance in partial satisfaction.
   Unlike Section 9-611, this section contains no "safe harbor," which excuses an enforcing secured party from 
notifying certain secured parties and other lienholders. This is because, unlike Section 9-610, which requires that a 
disposition of collateral be commercially reasonable, Section 9-620 permits the debtor and secured party to set the 
amount of credit the debtor will receive for the collateral subject only to the requirement of good faith. An effective 
acceptance discharges subordinate security interests and other subordinate liens. See Section 9-622. If collateral is 

§ 9-621. NOTIFICATION OF PROPOSAL TO ACCEPT COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
subject to several liens securing debts much larger than the value of the collateral, the debtor may be disinclined to 
refrain from consenting to an acceptance by the holder of the senior security interest, even though, had the debtor 
objected and the senior disposed of the collateral under Section 9-610, the collateral may have yielded more than 
enough to satisfy the senior security interest (but not enough to satisfy all the liens). Accordingly, this section 
imposes upon the enforcing secured party the risk of the filing office's errors and delay. The holder of a security 
interest who is entitled to notification under this section but to whom the enforcing secured party does not send 
notification has the right to recover under Section 9-625(b) any loss resulting from the secured party's 
noncompliance with this section.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document