U.C.C. § 9-622
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 6. DEFAULT          >            SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF 
SECURITY INTEREST        
§ 9-622. EFFECT OF ACCEPTANCE OF COLLATERAL
(a) [Effect of acceptance.]  A secured party's acceptance of collateral in full or partial satisfaction of the 
obligation it secures:
(1)  discharges the obligation to the extent consented to by the debtor;
(2)  transfers to the secured party all of a debtor's rights in the collateral;
(3)  discharges the security interest or agricultural lien that is the subject of the debtor's consent and 
any subordinate security interest or other subordinate lien; and
(4)  terminates any other subordinate interest.
(b) [Discharge of subordinate interest notwithstanding noncompliance.]  A subordinate interest is 
discharged or terminated under subsection (a), even if the secured party fails to comply with this article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New.
   2. Effect of Acceptance. Subsection (a) specifies the effect of an acceptance of collateral in full or partial 
satisfaction of the secured obligation. The acceptance to which it refers is an effective acceptance. If a purported 
acceptance is ineffective under Section 9-620, e.g., because the secured party receives a timely objection from a 
person entitled to notification, then neither this subsection nor subsection (b) applies. Paragraph (1) expresses the 
fundamental consequence of accepting collateral in full or partial satisfaction of the secured obligation--the 
obligation is discharged to the extent consented to by the debtor. Unless otherwise agreed, the obligor remains 
liable for any deficiency. Paragraphs (2) through (4) indicate the effects of an acceptance on various property rights 
and interests. Paragraph (2) follows Section 9-617(a) in providing that the secured party acquires "all of a debtor's 
rights in the collateral." Under paragraph (3), the effect of strict foreclosure on holders of junior security interests 
and other liens is the same regardless of whether the collateral is accepted in full or partial satisfaction of the 
secured obligation: all junior encumbrances are discharged. Paragraph (4) provides for the termination of other 
subordinate interests.
   Subsection (b) makes clear that subordinate interests are discharged under subsection (a) regardless of whether 
the secured party complies with this Article. Thus, subordinate interests are discharged regardless of whether a 
proposal was required to be sent or, if required, was sent. However, a secured party's failure to send a proposal or 
otherwise to comply with this Article may subject the secured party to liability under Section 9-625.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 9-622. EFFECT OF ACCEPTANCE OF COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
End of Document