U.C.C. § 9-314
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY          >            SUBPART 2. PERFECTION        
§ 9-314. PERFECTION BY CONTROL
(a) [Perfection by control.]  A security interest in investment property, deposit accounts, letter-of-credit 
rights, electronic chattel paper, or electronic documents may be perfected by control of the collateral under 
Section 7-106, 9-104, 9-105, 9-106, or 9-107.
(b) [Specified collateral: time of perfection by control; continuation of perfection.]  A security interest 
in deposit accounts, electronic chattel paper, letter-of-credit rights, or electronic documents is perfected by 
control under Section 7-106, 9-104, 9-105, or 9-107 when the secured party obtains control and remains 
perfected by control only while the secured party retains control.
(c) [Investment property: time of perfection by control; continuation of perfection.]  A security 
interest in investment property is perfected by control under Section 9-106 from the time the secured party 
obtains control and remains perfected by control until:
(1)  the secured party does not have control; and
(2)  one of the following occurs:
(A)  if the collateral is a certificated security, the debtor has or acquires possession of the security 
certificate;
(B)  if the collateral is an uncertificated security, the issuer has registered or registers the debtor as 
the registered owner; or
(C)  if the collateral is a security entitlement, the debtor is or becomes the entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Substantially new; derived in part from former Section 9-115(4).
   2. Control. This section provides for perfection by control with respect to investment property, deposit accounts, 
letter-of-credit rights, and electronic chattel paper, and electronic documents. For explanations of how a secured 
party takes control of these types of collateral, see Sections 9-104 through 9-107 and Section 7-106. Subsection (b) 
explains when a security interest is perfected by control and how long a security interest remains perfected by 
control. Like Section 9-313(d) and for the same reasons, subsection (b) makes no reference to the doctrine of 
"relation back." See Section 9-313, Comment 5.  As to an electronic document that is reissued in a tangible 
medium, Section 7-105, a secured party that is perfected by control in the electronic document should file as to the 
document before relinquishing control in order to maintain continuous perfection in the document. See Section 9-
308.
   3.Investment Property. Subsection (c) provides a special rule for investment property. Once a secured party has 
control, its security interest remains perfected by control until the secured party ceases to have control and the 
debtor receives possession of collateral that is a certificated security, becomes the registered owner of collateral 

§ 9-314. PERFECTION BY CONTROL
Page 2 of 2
that is an uncertificated security, or becomes the entitlement holder of collateral that is a security entitlement. The 
result is particularly important in the "repledge" context. See Section 9-207, Comment 5.
   In a transaction in which a secured party who has control grants a security interest in investment property or sells 
outright the investment property, by virtue of the debtor's consent or applicable legal rules, a purchaser from the 
secured party typically will cut off the debtor's rights in the investment property or be immune from the debtor's 
claims. See Section 9-207, Comments 5 and 6. If the investment property is a security, the debtor normally would 
retain no interest in the security following the purchase from the secured party, and a claim of the debtor against the 
secured party for redemption (Section 9-623) or otherwise with respect to the security would be a purely personal 
claim. If the investment property transferred by the secured party is a financial asset in which the debtor had a 
security entitlement credited to a securities account maintained with the secured party as a securities intermediary, 
the debtor's claim against the secured party could arise as a part of its securities account notwithstanding its 
personal nature. (This claim would be analogous to a "credit balance" in the securities account, which is a 
component of the securities account even though it is a personal claim against the intermediary.) In the case in 
which the debtor may retain an interest in investment property notwithstanding a repledge or sale by the secured 
party, subsection (c) makes clear that the security interest will remain perfected by control.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document