U.C.C. § 9-611
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 6. DEFAULT          >            SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF 
SECURITY INTEREST        
§ 9-611. NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
(a) ["Notification date."]  In this section, "notification date" means the earlier of the date on which:
(1)  a secured party sends to the debtor and any secondary obligor an authenticated notification of 
disposition; or
(2)  the debtor and any secondary obligor waive the right to notification.
(b) [Notification of disposition required.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), a secured 
party that disposes of collateral under Section 9-610 shall send to the persons specified in subsection (c) a 
reasonable authenticated notification of disposition.
(c) [Persons to be notified.]  To comply with subsection (b), the secured party shall send an authenticated 
notification of disposition to:
(1)  the debtor;
(2)  any secondary obligor; and
(3)  if the collateral is other than consumer goods:
(A)  any other person from which the secured party has received, before the notification date, an 
authenticated notification of a claim of an interest in the collateral;
(B)  any other secured party or lienholder that, 10 days before the notification date, held a security 
interest in or other lien on the collateral perfected by the filing of a financing statement that:
(i)  identified the collateral;
(ii)  was indexed under the debtor's name as of that date; and
(iii)  was filed in the office in which to file a financing statement against the debtor covering the 
collateral as of that date; and
(C)  any other secured party that, 10 days before the notification date, held a security interest in the 
collateral perfected by compliance with a statute, regulation, or treaty described in Section 9-
311(a).
(d) [Subsection (b) inapplicable: perishable collateral; recognized market.]  Subsection (b) does not 
apply if the collateral is perishable or threatens to decline speedily in value or is of a type customarily sold 
on a recognized market.
(e) [Compliance with subsection (c)(3)(B).]  A secured party complies with the requirement for 
notification prescribed by subsection (c)(3)(B) if:
(1)  not later than 20 days or earlier than 30 days before the notification date, the secured party 
requests, in a commercially reasonable manner, information concerning financing statements indexed 
under the debtor's name in the office indicated in subsection (c)(3)(B); and
(2)  before the notification date, the secured party:
(A)  did not receive a response to the request for information; or

§ 9-611. NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 4
(B)  received a response to the request for information and sent an authenticated notification of 
disposition to each secured party or other lienholder named in that response whose financing 
statement covered the collateral.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-504(3).
   2. Reasonable Notification. This section requires a secured party who wishes to dispose of collateral under 
Section 9-610 to send "a reasonable authenticated notification of disposition" to specified interested persons, 
subject to certain exceptions. The notification must be reasonable as to the manner in which it is sent, its timeliness 
(i.e., a reasonable time before the disposition is to take place), and its content. See Sections 9-612 (timeliness of 
notification), 9-613 (contents of notification generally), 9-614 (contents of notification in consumer-goods 
transactions).
   3. Notification to Debtors and Secondary Obligors. This section imposes a duty to send notification of a 
disposition not only to the debtor but also to any secondary obligor. Subsections (b) and (c) resolve an uncertainty 
under former Article 9 by providing that secondary obligors (sureties) are entitled to receive notification of an 
intended disposition of collateral, regardless of who created the security interest in the collateral. If the surety 
created the security interest, it would be the debtor. If it did not, it would be a secondary obligor. (This Article also 
resolves the question of the secondary obligor's ability to waive, pre-default, the right to notification-waiver generally 
is not permitted. See Section 9-602.) Section 9-605 relieves a secured party from any duty to send notification to a 
debtor or secondary obligor unknown to the secured party.
   Under subsection (b), the principal obligor (borrower) is not always entitled to notification of disposition.
   Example: Behnfeldt borrows on an unsecured basis, and Bruno grants a security interest in her car to secure the 
debt. Behnfeldt is a primary obligor, not a secondary obligor. As such, she is not entitled to notification of disposition 
under this section.
   4. Notification to Other Secured Parties. Prior to the 1972 amendments to Article 9, former Section 9-504(3) 
required the enforcing secured party to send reasonable notification of the disposition:
   except in the case of consumer goods to any other person who has a security interest in the collateral and who 
has duly filed a financing statement indexed in the name of the debtor in this State or who is known by the secured 
party to have a security interest in the collateral.
   The 1972 amendments eliminated the duty to give notice to secured parties other than those from whom the 
foreclosing secured party had received written notice of a claim of an interest in the collateral.
   Many of the problems arising from dispositions of collateral encumbered by multiple security interests can be 
ameliorated or solved by informing all secured parties of an intended disposition and affording them the opportunity 
to work with one another. To this end, subsection (c)(3)(B) expands the duties of the foreclosing secured party to 
include the duty to notify (and the corresponding burden of searching the files to discover) certain competing 
secured parties. The subsection imposes a search burden that in some cases may be greater than the pre-1972 
burden on foreclosing secured parties but certainly is more modest than that faced by a new secured lender.
   To determine who is entitled to notification, the foreclosing secured party must determine the proper office for 
filing a financing statement as of a particular date, measured by reference to the "notification date," as defined in 
subsection (a). This determination requires reference to the choice-of-law provisions of Part 3. The secured party 
must ascertain whether any financing statements covering the collateral and indexed under the debtor's name, as 

§ 9-611. NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
Page 3 of 4
the name existed as of that date, in fact were filed in that office. The foreclosing secured party generally need not 
notify secured parties whose effective financing statements have become more difficult to locate because of 
changes in the location of the debtor, proceeds rules, or changes in the name that is sufficient as the name of the 
debtor under Section 9-503(a).
   Under subsection (c)(3)(C), the secured party also must notify a secured party who has perfected a security 
interest by complying with a statute or treaty described in Section 9-311(a), such as a certificate-of-title statute.
   Subsection (e) provides a "safe harbor" that takes into account the delays that may be attendant to receiving 
information from the public filing offices. It provides, generally, that the secured party will be deemed to have 
satisfied its notification duty under subsection (c)(3)(B) if it requests a search from the proper office at least 20 but 
not more than 30 days before sending notification to the debtor and if it also sends a notification to all secured 
parties (and other lienholders) reflected on the search report. The secured party's duty under subsection (c)(3)(B) 
also will be satisfied if the secured party requests but does not receive a search report before the notification is sent 
to the debtor. Thus, if subsection (e) applies, a secured party who is entitled to notification under subsection 
(c)(3)(B) has no remedy against a foreclosing secured party who does not send the notification. The foreclosing 
secured party has complied with the notification requirement. Subsection (e) has no effect on the requirements of 
the other paragraphs of subsection (c). For example, if the foreclosing secured party received a notification from the 
holder of a conflicting security interest in accordance with subsection (c)(3)(A) but failed to send to the holder a 
notification of the disposition, the holder of the conflicting security interest would have the right to recover any loss 
under Section 9-625(b).
   5. Authentication Requirement. Subsections (b) and (c) explicitly provide that a notification of disposition must 
be "authenticated." Some cases read former Section 9-504(3) as validating oral notification.
   6. Second Try. This Article leaves to judicial resolution, based upon the facts of each case, the question whether 
the requirement of "reasonable not ification" requires a "second try," i.e., whether a secured party who sends 
notification and learns that the debtor did not receive it must attempt to locate the debtor and send another 
notification.
   7. Recognized Market; Perishable Collateral. New subsection (d) makes it clear that there is no obligation to 
give notification of a disposition in the case of perishable collateral or collateral customarily sold on a recognized 
market (e.g., marketable securities). Former Section 9-504(3) might be read (incorrectly) to relieve the secured 
party from its duty to notify a debtor but not from its duty to notify other secured parties in connection with 
dispositions of such collateral.
   8. Failure to Conduct Notified Disposition. Nothing in this Article prevents a secured party from electing not to 
conduct a disposition after sending a notification. Nor does this Article prevent a secured party from electing to send 
a revised notification if its plans for disposition change. This assumes, however, that the secured party acts in good 
faith, the revised notification is reasonable, and the revised plan for disposition and any attendant delay are 
commercially reasonable.
   9. Waiver. A debtor or secondary obligor may waive the right to notification under this section only by a post-
default authenticated agreement. See Section 9-624(a).
   10. Other Law. Other State or federal law may contain requirements concerning notification of a disposition of 
property by a secured party. For example, federal law imposes notification requirements with respect to the 
enforcement of mortgages on federally documented vessels. Principles of statutory interpretation and, in the context 
of federal law, supremacy and preemption determine whether and to what extent law other than this Article 
supplements, displaces, or is displaced by this Article. See Sections 1-103, 1-104, 9-109(c)(1).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 9-611. NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
Page 4 of 4
End of Document