U.C.C. § 9-311
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY          >            SUBPART 2. PERFECTION        
§ 9-311. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN PROPERTY SUBJECT 
TO CERTAIN STATUTES, REGULATIONS, AND TREATIES
(a) [Security interest subject to other law.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), the filing of a 
financing statement is not necessary or effective to perfect a security interest in property subject to:
(1)  a statute, regulation, or treaty of the United States whose requirements for a security interest's 
obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor with respect to the property preempt Section 9-310(a);
(2)  [list any statute covering automobiles, trailers, mobile homes, boats, farm tractors, or the like, which 
provides for a security interest to be indicated on a certificate of title as a condition or result of 
perfection, and any non-Uniform Commercial Code central filing statute]; or
(3)  a statute of another jurisdiction which provides for a security interest to be indicated on a certificate 
of title as a condition or result of the security interest's obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor 
with respect to the property.
(b) [Compliance with other law.]  Compliance with the requirements of a statute, regulation, or treaty 
described in subsection (a) for obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor is equivalent to the filing of 
a financing statement under this article. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) and Sections 9-313 
and 9-316(d) and (e) for goods covered by a certificate of title, a security interest in property subject to a 
statute, regulation, or treaty described in subsection (a) may be perfected only by compliance with those 
requirements, and a security interest so perfected remains perfected notwithstanding a change in the use 
or transfer of possession of the collateral.
(c) [Duration and renewal of perfection.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) and Section 9-
316(d) and (e), duration and renewal of perfection of a security interest perfected by compliance with the 
requirements prescribed by a statute, regulation, or treaty described in subsection (a) are governed by the 
statute, regulation, or treaty. In other respects, the security interest is subject to this article.
(d) [Inapplicability to certain inventory.]  During any period in which collateral subject to a statute 
specified in subsection (a)(2) is inventory held for sale or lease by a person or leased by that person as 
lessor and that person is in the business of selling goods of that kind, this section does not apply to a 
security interest in that collateral created by that person.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Legislative Note: This Article contemplates that perfection of a security interest in goods covered by a certificate 
of title occurs upon receipt by appropriate State officials of a properly tendered application for a certificate of title on 
which the security interest is to be indicated, without a relation back to an earlier time. States whose certificate-of-
title statutes provide for perfection at a different time or contain a relation-back provision should amend the statutes 
accordingly.

§ 9-311. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN PROPERTY SUBJECT TO CERTAIN STATUTES, 
REGULATIONS, AND TREATIES
Page 2 of 4
   1. Source. Former Section 9-302(3), (4).
   2. Federal Statutes, Regulations, and Treaties. Subsection (a)(1) exempts from the filing provisions of this 
Article transactions as to which a system of filing--state or federal--has been established under federal law. 
Subsection (b) makes clear that when such a system exists, perfection of a relevant security interest can be 
achieved only through compliance with that system (i.e., filing under this Article is not a permissible alternative).
   An example of the type of federal statute referred to in subsection (a)(1) is 49 U.S.C. §§ 44107-11, for civil aircraft 
of the United States. The Assignment of Claims Act of 1940, as amended, provides for notice to contracting and 
disbursing officers and to sureties on bonds but does not establish a national filing system and therefore is not 
within the scope of subsection (a)(1). An assignee of a claim against the United States may benefit from compliance 
with the Assignment of Claims Act. But regardless of whether the assignee complies with that Act, the assignee 
must file under this Article in order to perfect its security interest against creditors and transferees of its assignor.
   Subsection (a)(1) provides explicitly that the filing requirement of this Article defers only to federal statutes, 
regulations, or treaties whose requirements for a security interest's obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor 
preempt Section 9-310(a). The provision eschews reference to the term "perfection," inasmuch as Section 9-308 
specifies the meaning of that term and a preemptive rule may use other terminology.
   3. State Statutes. Subsections (a)(2) and (3) exempt from the filing requirements of this Article transactions 
covered by State certificate-of-title statutes covering motor vehicles and the like. The description of certificate-of-title 
statutes in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) tracks the language of the definition of "certificate of title" in Section 9-102. 
For a discussion of the operation of state certificate-of-title statutes in interstate contexts, see the Comments to 
Section 9-303.
   Some states have enacted central filing statutes with respect to secured transactions in kinds of property that are 
of special importance in the local economy. Subsection (a)(2) defers to these statutes with respect to filing for that 
property.
   4. Inventory Covered by Certificate of Title. Under subsection (d), perfection of a security interest in the 
inventory of a person in the business of selling goods of that kind is governed by the normal perfection rules, even if 
the inventory is subject to a certificate-of-title statute. Compliance with a certificate-of-title statute is both 
unnecessary and ineffective to perfect a security interest in inventory to which this subsection applies. Thus, a 
secured party who finances an automobile dealer that is in the business of selling and leasing its inventory of 
automobiles can perfect a security interest in all the automobiles by filing a financing statement but not by 
compliance with a certificate-of-title statute.
   Subsection (d), and thus the filing and other perfection provisions of this Article, does not apply to inventory that is 
subject to a certificate-of-title statute and is of a kind that the debtor is not in the business of selling. For example, if 
goods are subject to a certificate-of-title statute and the debtor is in the business of leasing but not of selling, goods 
of that kind, the other subsections of this section govern perfection of a security interest in the goods. The fact that 
the debtor eventually sells the goods does not, of itself, mean that the debtor "is in the business of selling goods of 
that kind."
   The filing and other perfection provisions of this Article apply to goods subject to a certificate-of-title statute only 
"during any period in which collateral is inventory held for sale or lease or leased." If the debtor takes goods of this 
kind out of inventory and uses them, say, as equipment, a filed financing statement would not remain effective to 
perfect a security interest.
   5. Compliance with Perfection Requirements of Other Statute. Subsection (b) makes clear that compliance 
with the perfection requirements (i.e., the requirements for obtaining priority over a lien creditor), but not other 
requirements, of a statute, regulation, or treaty described in subsection (a) is sufficient for perfection under this 
Article. Perfection of a security interest under such a statute, regulation, or treaty has all the consequences of 
perfection under this Article.

§ 9-311. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN PROPERTY SUBJECT TO CERTAIN STATUTES, 
REGULATIONS, AND TREATIES
Page 3 of 4
   The interplay of this section with certain certificate-of-title statutes may create confusion and uncertainty. For 
example, statutes under which perfection does not occur until a certificate of title is issued will create a gap between 
the time that the goods are covered by the certificate under Section 9-303 and the time of perfection. If the gap is 
long enough, it may result in turning some unobjectionable transactions into avoidable preferences under 
Bankruptcy Code Section 547. (The preference risk arises if more than 30 days passes between the time a security 
interest attaches (or the debtor receives possession of the collateral, in the case of a purchase-money security 
interest) and the time it is perfected.) Accordingly, the Legislative Note to this section instructs the legislature to 
amend the applicable certificate-of-title statute to provide that perfection occurs upon receipt by the appropriate 
State official of a properly tendered application for a certificate of title on which the security interest is to be 
indicated.
   Under some certificate-of-title statutes, including the Uniform Motor Vehicle Certificate of Title and Anti-Theft Act, 
perfection generally occurs upon delivery of specified documents to a state official but may, under certain 
circumstances, relate back to the time of attachment. This relation-back feature can create great difficulties for the 
application of the rules in Sections 9-303 and 9-311(b). Accordingly, the Legislative Note also recommends to 
legislatures that they remove any relation-back provisions from certificate-of-title statutes affecting security 
interests.
   6. Compliance with Perfection Requirements of Other Statute as Equivalent to Filing. Under Subsection (b), 
compliance with the perfection requirements (i.e., the requirements for obtaining priority over a lien creditor) of a 
statute, regulation, or treaty described in subsection (a) "is equivalent to the filing of a financing statement."
   The quoted phrase appeared in former Section 9-302(3). Its meaning was unclear, and many questions arose 
concerning the extent to which and manner in which Article 9 rules referring to "filing" were applicable to perfection 
by compliance with a certificate-of-title statute. This Article takes a variety of approaches for applying Article 9's 
filing rules to compliance with other statutes and treaties. First, as discussed above in Comment 5, it leaves the 
determination of some rules, such as the rule establishing time of perfection (Section 9-516(a)), to the other statutes 
themselves. Second, this Article explicitly applies some Article 9 filing rules to perfection under other statutes or 
treaties. See, e.g., Section 9-505. Third, this Article makes other Article 9 rules applicable to security interests 
perfected by compliance with another statute through the "equivalent to . . . filing" provision in the first sentence of 
Section 9-311(b). The third approach is reflected for the most part in occasional Comments explaining how 
particular rules apply when perfection is accomplished under Section 9-311(b). See, e.g., Section 9-310, Comment 
4; Section 9-315, Comment 6; Section 9-317, Comment 8. The absence of a Comment indicating that a particular 
filing provision applies to perfection pursuant to Section 9-311(b) does not mean the provision is inapplicable.
   7. Perfection by Possession of Goods Covered by Certificate-of-Title Statute. A secured party who holds a 
security interest perfected under the law of State A in goods that subsequently are covered by a State B certificate 
of title may face a predicament. Ordinarily, the secured party will have four months under State B's Section 9-316(c) 
and (d) in which to reperfect as against a purchaser of the goods by having its security interest noted on a State B 
certificate. This procedure is likely to require the cooperation of the debtor and any competing secured party whose 
security interest has been noted on the certificate. Comment 4(e) to former Section 9-103 observed that "that 
cooperation is not likely to be forthcoming from an owner who wrongfully procured the issuance of a new certificate 
not showing the out-of-state security interest, or from a local secured party finding himself in a priority contest with 
the out-of-state secured party." According to that Comment, "the only solution for the out-of-state secured party 
under present certificate of title statutes seems to be to reperfect by possession, i.e., by repossessing the goods." 
But the "solution" may not have worked: Former Section 9-302(4) provided that a security interest in property 
subject to a certificate-of-title statute "can be perfected only by compliance therewith."
   Sections 9-316(d) and (e), 9-311(c), and 9-313(b) of this Article resolve the conflict by providing that a security 
interest that remains perfected solely by virtue of Section 9-316(e) can be reperfected by the secured party's taking 
possession of the collateral. These sections contemplate only that taking possession of goods covered by a 
certificate of title will work as a method of perfection. None of these sections creates a right to take possession. 
Section 9-609 and the agreement of the parties define the secured party's right to take possession.

§ 9-311. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN PROPERTY SUBJECT TO CERTAIN STATUTES, 
REGULATIONS, AND TREATIES
Page 4 of 4
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document