U.C.C. § 9-604
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 6. DEFAULT          >            SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF 
SECURITY INTEREST        
§ 9-604. PROCEDURE IF SECURITY AGREEMENT COVERS REAL 
PROPERTY OR FIXTURES
(a) [Enforcement: personal and real property.]  If a security agreement covers both personal and real 
property, a secured party may proceed:
(1)  under this part as to the personal property without prejudicing any rights with respect to the real 
property; or
(2)  as to both the personal property and the real property in accordance with the rights with respect to 
the real property, in which case the other provisions of this part do not apply.
(b) [Enforcement: fixtures.]  Subject to subsection (c), if a security agreement covers goods that are or 
become fixtures, a secured party may proceed:
(1)  under this part; or
(2)  in accordance with the rights with respect to real property, in which case the other provisions of this 
part do not apply.
(c) [Removal of fixtures.]  Subject to the other provisions of this part, if a secured party holding a security 
interest in fixtures has priority over all owners and encumbrancers of the real property, the secured party, 
after default, may remove the collateral from the real property.
(d) [Injury caused by removal.]  A secured party that removes collateral shall promptly reimburse any 
encumbrancer or owner of the real property, other than the debtor, for the cost of repair of any physical 
injury caused by the removal. The secured party need not reimburse the encumbrancer or owner for any 
diminution in value of the real property caused by the absence of the goods removed or by any necessity of 
replacing them. A person entitled to reimbursement may refuse permission to remove until the secured 
party gives adequate assurance for the performance of the obligation to reimburse.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Sections 9-501(4), 9-313(8).
   2. Real-Property-Related Collateral. The collateral in many transactions consists of both real and personal 
property. In the interest of simplicity, speed, and economy, subsection (a), like former Section 9-501(4), permits (but 
does not require) the secured party to proceed as to both real and personal property in accordance with its rights 
and remedies with respect to the real property. Subsection (a) also makes clear that a secured party who exercises 
rights under Part 6 with respect to personal property does not prejudice any rights under real-property law.
   This Article does not address certain other real-property-related problems. In a number of States, the exercise of 
remedies by a creditor who is secured by both real property and non-real property collateral is governed by special 

§ 9-604. PROCEDURE IF SECURITY AGREEMENT COVERS REAL PROPERTY OR FIXTURES
Page 2 of 2
legal rules. For example, under some anti-deficiency laws, creditors risk loss of rights against personal property 
collateral if they err in enforcing their rights against the real property. Under a "one-form-of-action" rule (or rule 
against splitting a cause of action), a creditor who judicially enforces a real property mortgage and does not 
proceed in the same action to enforce a security interest in personalty may (among other consequences) lose the 
right to proceed against the personalty. Although statutes of this kind create impediments to enforcement of security 
interests, this Article does not override these limitations under other law.
   3. Fixtures. Subsection (b) is new. It makes clear that a security interest in fixtures may be enforced either under 
real-property law or under any of the applicable provisions of Part 6, including sale or other disposition either before 
or after removal of the fixtures (see subsection (c)). Subsection (b) also serves to overrule cases holding that a 
secured party's only remedy after default is the removal of the fixtures from the real property. See, e.g., Maplewood 
Bank & Trust v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 625 A.2d 537 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1993).
   Subsection (c) generally follows former Section 9-313(8). It gives the secured party the right to remove fixtures 
under certain circumstances. A secured party whose security interest in fixtures has priority over owners and 
encumbrancers of the real property may remove the collateral from the real property. However, subsection (d) 
requires the secured party to reimburse any owner (other than the debtor) or encumbrancer for the cost of repairing 
any physical injury caused by the removal. This right to reimbursement is implemented by the last sentence of 
subsection (d), which gives the owner or encumbrancer a right to security or indemnity as a condition for giving 
permission to remove.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document