U.C.C. § 9-701
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 7. TRANSITION        
§ 9-701. EFFECTIVE DATE
 This [Act] takes effect on July 1, 2001.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   A uniform law as complex as Article 9 necessarily gives rise to difficult problems and uncertainties during the 
transition to the new law. As is customary for uniform laws, this Article is based on the general assumption that all 
States will have enacted substantially identical versions. While always important, uniformity is essential to the 
success of this Article. If former Article 9 is in effect in some jurisdictions, and this Article is in effect in others, 
horrendous complications may arise. For example, the proper place in which to file to perfect a security interest 
(and thus the status of a particular security interest as perfected or unperfected) would depend on whether the 
matter was litigated in a State in which former Article 9 was in effect or a State in which this Article was in effect. 
Accordingly, this section contemplates that States will adopt a uniform effective date for this Article. Any one State's 
failure to adopt the uniform effective date will greatly increase the cost and uncertainty surrounding the transition.
   Other problems arise from transactions and relationships that were entered into under former Article 9 or under 
non-UCC law and which remain outstanding on the effective date of this Article. The difficulties arise primarily 
because this Article expands the scope of former Article 9 to cover additional types of collateral and transactions 
and because it provides new methods of perfection for some types of collateral, different priority rules, and different 
choice-of-law rules governing perfection and priority. This Section and the other sections in this Part address 
primarily this second set of problems.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document