U.C.C. § 9-506
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND 
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT        
§ 9-506. EFFECT OF ERRORS OR OMISSIONS
(a) [Minor errors and omissions.]  A financing statement substantially satisfying the requirements of this 
part is effective, even if it has minor errors or omissions, unless the errors or omissions make the financing 
statement seriously misleading.
(b) [Financing statement seriously misleading.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), a 
financing statement that fails sufficiently to provide the name of the debtor in accordance with Section 9-
503(a) is seriously misleading.
(c) [Financing statement not seriously misleading.]  If a search of the records of the filing office under 
the debtor's correct name, using the filing office's standard search logic, if any, would disclose a financing 
statement that fails sufficiently to provide the name of the debtor in accordance with Section 9-503(a), the 
name provided does not make the financing statement seriously misleading.
(d) ["Debtor's correct name."]  For purposes of Section 9-508(b), the "debtor's correct name" in 
subsection (c) means the correct name of the new debtor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-402(8).
   2. Errors and Omissions. Like former Section 9-402(8), subsection (a) is in line with the policy of this Article to 
simplify formal requisites and filing requirements. It is designed to discourage the fanatical and impossibly refined 
reading of statutory requirements in which courts occasionally have indulged themselves. Subsection (a) provides 
the standard applicable to indications of collateral. Subsections (b) and (c), which are new, concern the 
effectiveness of financing statements in which the debtor's name is incorrect. Subsection (b) contains the general 
rule: a financing statement that fails sufficiently to provide the debtor's name in accordance with Section 9-503(a) is 
seriously misleading as a matter of law. Subsection (c) provides an exception: If the financing statement 
nevertheless would be discovered in a search under the debtor's correct name, using the filing office's standard 
search logic, if any, then as a matter of law the incorrect name does not make the financing statement seriously 
misleading. A financing statement that is seriously misleading under this section is ineffective even if it is disclosed 
by (i) using a search logic other than that of the filing office to search the official records, or (ii) using the filing 
office's standard search logic to search a data base other than that of the filing office. For purposes of subsection 
(c), any name that satisfies Section 9-503(a) at the time of the search is a "correct name."
   This section and Section 9 503 balance the interests of filers and searchers. Searchers are not expected to 
ascertain nicknames, trade names, and the like by which the debtor may be known and then search under each of 
them. Rather, it is the secured party's responsibility to provide the name of the debtor sufficiently in a filed financing 
statement. Subsection (c) sets forth the only situation in which a financing statement that fails sufficiently to provide 
the name of the debtor is not seriously misleading. As stated in subsection (b), if the name of the debtor provided 

§ 9-506. EFFECT OF ERRORS OR OMISSIONS
Page 2 of 2
on a financing statement is insufficient and subsection (c) is not satisfied, the financing statement is seriously 
misleading. Such a financing statement is ineffective even if the debtor is known in some contexts by the name 
provided on the financing statement and even if searchers know or have reason to know that the name provided on 
the financing statement refers to the debtor. Any suggestion to the contrary in a judicial opinion is incorrect.
   In addition to requiring the debtor's name and an indication of the collateral, Section 9-502(a) requires a financing 
statement to provide the name of the secured party or a representative of the secured party. Inasmuch as searches 
are not conducted under the secured party's name, and no filing is needed to continue the perfected status of 
security interest after it is assigned, an error in the name of the secured party or its representative will not be 
seriously misleading. However, in an appropriate case, an error of this kind may give rise to an estoppel in favor of 
a particular holder of a conflicting claim to the collateral. See Section 1-103.
   3. New Debtors. Subsection (d) provides that, in determining the extent to which a financing statement naming 
an original debtor is effective against a new debtor, the sufficiency of the financing statement should be tested 
against the name of the new debtor.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document