U.C.C. § 9-307
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY          >            SUBPART 1. LAW GOVERNING 
PERFECTION AND PRIORITY        
§ 9-307. LOCATION OF DEBTOR
(a) ["Place of business."]  In this section, "place of business" means a place where a debtor conducts its 
affairs.
(b) [Debtor's location: general rules.]  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following rules 
determine a debtor's location:
(1)  A debtor who is an individual is located at the individual's principal residence.
(2)  A debtor that is an organization and has only one place of business is located at its place of 
business.
(3)  A debtor that is an organization and has more than one place of business is located at its chief 
executive office.
(c) [Limitation of applicability of subsection (b).]  Subsection (b) applies only if a debtor's residence, 
place of business, or chief executive office, as applicable, is located in a jurisdiction whose law generally 
requires information concerning the existence of a nonpossessory security interest to be made generally 
available in a filing, recording, or registration system as a condition or result of the security interest's 
obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor with respect to the collateral. If subsection (b) does not 
apply, the debtor is located in the District of Columbia.
(d) [Continuation of location: cessation of existence, etc.]  A person that ceases to exist, have a 
residence, or have a place of business continues to be located in the jurisdiction specified by subsections 
(b) and (c).
(e) [Location of registered organization organized under State law.]  A registered organization that is 
organized under the law of a State is located in that State.
(f) [Location of registered organization organized under federal law; bank branches and agencies.]  
Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i), a registered organization that is organized under the law of 
the United States and a branch or agency of a bank that is not organized under the law of the United States 
or a State are located:
(1)  in the State that the law of the United States designates, if the law designates a State of location;
(2)  in the State that the registered organization, branch, or agency designates, if the law of the United 
States authorizes the registered organization, branch, or agency to designate its State of location, 
including by designating its main office, home office, or other comparable office; or
(3)  in the District of Columbia, if neither paragraph (1) nor paragraph (2) applies.
(g) [Continuation of location: change in status of registered organization.]  A registered organization 
continues to be located in the jurisdiction specified by subsection (e) or (f) notwithstanding:
(1)  the suspension, revocation, forfeiture, or lapse of the registered organization's status as such in its 
jurisdiction of organization; or
(2)  the dissolution, winding up, or cancellation of the existence of the registered organization.
(h) [Location of United States.]  The United States is located in the District of Columbia.

§ 9-307. LOCATION OF DEBTOR
Page 2 of 4
(i) [Location of foreign bank branch or agency if licensed in only one state.]  A branch or agency of a 
bank that is not organized under the law of the United States or a State is located in the State in which the 
branch or agency is licensed, if all branches and agencies of the bank are licensed in only one State.
(j) [Location of foreign air carrier.]  A foreign air carrier under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, as 
amended, is located at the designated office of the agent upon which service of process may be made on 
behalf of the carrier.
(k) [Section applies only to this part.]  This section applies only for purposes of this part.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-103(3)(d), substantially revised.
   2. General Rules. As a general matter, the location of the debtor determines the jurisdiction whose law governs 
perfection of a security interest. See Sections 9-301(1), 9-305(c). It also governs priority of a security interest in 
certain types of intangible collateral, such as accounts, electronic chattel paper, and general intangibles. This 
section determines the location of the debtor for choice-of-law purposes, but not for other purposes. See subsection 
(k).
   Subsection (b) states the general rules: An individual debtor is deemed to be located at the individual's principal 
residence with respect to both personal and business assets. Any other debtor is deemed to be located at its place 
of business if it has only one, or at its chief executive office if it has more than one place of business.
   As used in this section, a "place of business" means a place where the debtor conducts its affairs. See subsection 
(a). Thus, every organization, even eleemosynary institutions and other organizations that do not conduct "for profit" 
business activities, has a "place of business." Under subsection (d), a person who ceases to exist, have a 
residence, or have a place of business continues to be located in the jurisdiction determined by subsection (b).
   The term "chief executive office" is not defined in this Section or elsewhere in the Uniform Commercial Code. 
"Chief executive office" means the place from which the debtor manages the main part of its business operations or 
other affairs. This is the place where persons dealing with the debtor would normally look for credit information, and 
is the appropriate place for filing. With respect to most multi-state debtors, it will be simple to determine which of the 
debtor's offices is the "chief executive office." Even when a doubt arises, it would be rare that there could be more 
than two possibilities. A secured party in such a case may protect itself by perfecting under the law of each possible 
jurisdiction.
   Similarly, the term "principal residence" is not defined. If the security interest in question is a purchase-money 
security interest in consumer goods which is perfected upon attachment, see Section 9-309(1), the choice of law 
may make no difference. In other cases, when a doubt arises, prudence may dictate perfecting under the law of 
each jurisdiction that might be the debtor's "principal residence."
   Questions sometimes arise about the location of the debtor with respect to collateral held in a common-law trust. 
A typical common-law trust is not itself a juridical entity capable of owning property and so would not be a "debtor" 
as defined in Section 9-102. Rather, the debtor with respect to property held in a common-law trust typically is the 
trustee of the trust acting in the capacity of trustee. (The beneficiary would be a "debtor" with respect to its 
beneficial interest in the trust, but not with respect to the property held in the trust.) If a common-law trust has 
multiple trustees located in different jurisdictions, a secured party who perfects by filing would be well advised to file 
a financing statement in each jurisdiction in which a trustee is located, as determined under Section 9-307. Filing in 
all relevant jurisdictions would insure perfection and minimize any priority complications that otherwise might arise.
   The general rules are subject to several exceptions, each of which is discussed below.

§ 9-307. LOCATION OF DEBTOR
Page 3 of 4
   3. Non-U.S. Debtors. Under the general rules of this section, a non-U.S. debtor normally would be located in a 
foreign jurisdiction and, as a consequence, foreign law would govern perfection. When foreign law affords no public 
notice of security interests, the general rule yields unacceptable results.
   Accordingly, subsection (c) provides that the normal rules for determining the location of a debtor (i.e., the rules in 
subsection (b)) apply only if they yield a location that is "a jurisdiction whose law generally requires information 
concerning the existence of a nonpossessory security interest to be made generally available in a filing, recording, 
or registration system as a condition or result of the security interest's obtaining priority over the rights of a lien 
creditor with respect to the collateral." The phrase "generally requires" is meant to include legal regimes that 
generally require notice in a filing or recording system as a condition of perfecting nonpossessory security interests, 
but which permit perfection by another method (e.g., control, automatic perfection, temporary perfection) in limited 
circumstances. A jurisdiction that has adopted this Article or an earlier version of this Article is such a jurisdiction. If 
the rules in subsection (b) yield a jurisdiction whose law does not generally require notice in a filing or registration 
system and none of the special rules in subsections (e), (f), (i), and (j) applies, the debtor is located in the District of 
Columbia.
   Example 1: Debtor is an English corporation with 7 offices in the United States and its chief executive office in 
London, England. Debtor creates a security interest in its accounts. Under subsection (b)(3), Debtor would be 
located in England. However, subsection (c) provides that subsection (b) applies only if English law generally 
conditions perfection on giving public notice in a filing, recording, or registration system. Otherwise, Debtor is 
located in the District of Columbia. Under Section 9-301(1), perfection, the effect of perfection, and priority are 
governed by the law of the jurisdiction of the debtor's location-here, England or the District of Columbia (depending 
on the content of English law).
   Example 2: Debtor is an English corporation with 7 offices in the United States and its chief executive office in 
London, England. Debtor creates a security interest in equipment located in London. Under subsection (b)(3) 
Debtor would be located in England. However, subsection (c) provides that subsection (b) applies only if English 
law generally conditions perfection on giving public notice in a filing, recording, or registration system. Otherwise, 
Debtor is located in the District of Columbia. Under Section 9-301(1), perfection is governed by the law of the 
jurisdiction of the debtor's location, whereas, under Section 9-301(3), the law of the jurisdiction in which the 
collateral is located-here, England-governs priority.
   The foregoing discussion assumes that each transaction bears an appropriate relation to the forum State. In the 
absence of an appropriate relation, the forum State's entire UCC, including the choice-of-law provisions in Article 9 
(Sections 9-301 through 9-307), will not apply. See Section 9-109, Comment 9.
   4. Registered Organizations Organized Under Law of a State. Under subsection (e), a "registered 
organization" (defined in Section 9-102 so as to ordinarily include corporations, limited partnerships, limited liability 
companies, and statutory trusts) organized under the law of a "State" (defined in Section 9-102) is located in its 
State of organization. The term "registered organization" includes a business trust described in the second 
sentence of the term's definition. See Section 9-102. The trust's public organic record, typically the trust agreement, 
usually will indicate the jurisdiction under whose law the trust is organized.
   Subsection (g) makes clear that events affecting the status of a registered organization, such as the dissolution of 
a corporation or revocation of its charter, do not affect its location for purposes of subsection (e). However, certain 
of these events may result in, or be accompanied by, a transfer of collateral from the registered organization to 
another debtor. This section does not determine whether a transfer occurs, nor does it determine the legal 
consequences of any transfer.
   Determining the registered organization-debtor's location by reference to the jurisdiction of organization could 
provide some important side benefits for the filing systems. A jurisdiction could structure its filing system so that it 
would be impossible to make a mistake in a registered organization-debtor's name on a financing statement. For 
example, a filer would be informed if a filed record designated an incorrect corporate name for the debtor. Linking 
filing to the jurisdiction of organization also could reduce pressure on the system imposed by transactions in which 
registered organizations cease to exist-as a consequence of merger or consolidation, for example. The jurisdiction 

§ 9-307. LOCATION OF DEBTOR
Page 4 of 4
of organization might prohibit such transactions unless steps were taken to ensure that existing filings were refiled 
against a successor or terminated by the secured party.
   5. Registered Organizations Organized Under Law of United States; Branches and Agencies of Banks Not 
Organized Under Law of United States. Subsection (f) specifies the location of a debtor that is a registered 
organization organized under the law of the United States. It defers to law of the United States, to the extent that 
that law determines, or authorizes the debtor to determine, the debtor's location. Thus, if the law of the United 
States designates a particular State as the debtor's location, that State is the debtor's location for purposes of this 
Article's choice-of-law rules. Similarly, if the law of the United States authorizes the registered organization to 
designate its State of location, the State that the registered organization designates is the State in which it is 
located for purposes of this Article's choice-of-law rules. In other cases, the debtor is located in the District of 
Columbia.
   In some cases, the law of the United States authorizes the registered organization to designate a main office, 
home office, or other comparable office. See, e.g., 12 U.S.C. Sections 22 and 1464(a); 12 C.F.R. Section 552.3. 
Designation of such an office constitutes the designation of the State of location for purposes of Section 9-307 
(f)(2).
   Subsection (f) also specifies the location of a branch or agency in the United States of a foreign bank that has one 
or more branches or agencies in the United States. The law of the United States authorizes a foreign bank (or, on 
behalf of the bank, a federal agency) to designate a single home state for all of the foreign bank's branches and 
agencies in the United States. See 12 U.S.C. Section 3103(c) and 12 C.F.R. Section 211.22. As authorized, the 
designation constitutes the State of location for the branch or agency for purposes of Section 9-307(f), unless all of 
a foreign bank's branches or agencies that are in the United States are licensed in only one State, in which case the 
branches and agencies are located in that State. See subsection (i).
   In cases not governed by subsection (f) or (i), the location of a foreign bank is determined by subsections (b) and 
(c).
   6. United States. To the extent that Article 9 governs (see Sections 1-301, 9-109(c)), the United States is located 
in the District of Columbia for purposes of this Article's choice-of-law rules. See subsection (h).
   7. Foreign Air Carriers. Subsection (j) follows former Section 9-103(3)(d). To the extent that it is applicable, the 
Convention on the International Recognition of Rights in Aircraft (Geneva Convention) supersedes state legislation 
on this subject, as set forth in Section 9-311(b), but some nations are not parties to that Convention.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document