U.C.C. § 9-208
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY 
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT          >            SUBPART 2. RIGHTS 
AND DUTIES        
§ 9-208. ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF SECURED PARTY HAVING CONTROL OF 
COLLATERAL
(a) [Applicability of section.]  This section applies to cases in which there is no outstanding secured 
obligation and the secured party is not committed to make advances, incur obligations, or otherwise give 
value.
(b) [Duties of secured party after receiving demand from debtor.]  Within 10 days after receiving an 
authenticated demand by the debtor:
(1)  a secured party having control of a deposit account under Section 9-104(a)(2) shall send to the 
bank with which the deposit account is maintained an authenticated statement that releases the bank 
from any further obligation to comply with instructions originated by the secured party;
(2)  a secured party having control of a deposit account under Section 9-104(a)(3) shall:
(A)  pay the debtor the balance on deposit in the deposit account; or
(B)  transfer the balance on deposit into a deposit account in the debtor's name;
(3)  a secured party, other than a buyer, having control of electronic chattel paper under Section 9-105 
shall:
(A)  communicate the authoritative copy of the electronic chattel paper to the debtor or its 
designated custodian;
(B)  if the debtor designates a custodian that is the designated custodian with which the 
authoritative copy of the electronic chattel paper is maintained for the secured party, communicate 
to the custodian an authenticated record releasing the designated custodian from any further 
obligation to comply with instructions originated by the secured party and instructing the custodian 
to comply with instructions originated by the debtor; and
(C)  take appropriate action to enable the debtor or its designated custodian to make copies of or 
revisions to the authoritative copy which add or change an identified assignee of the authoritative 
copy without the consent of the secured party;
(4)  a secured party having control of investment property under Section 8-106(d)(2) or 9-106(b) shall 
send to the securities intermediary or commodity intermediary with which the security entitlement or 
commodity contract is maintained an authenticated record that releases the securities intermediary or 
commodity intermediary from any further obligation to comply with entitlement orders or directions 
originated by the secured party;
(5)  a secured party having control of a letter-of-credit right under Section 9-107 shall send to each 
person having an unfulfilled obligation to pay or deliver proceeds of the letter of credit to the secured 
party an authenticated release from any further obligation to pay or deliver proceeds of the letter of 
credit to the secured party; and
(6)  a secured party having control of an electronic document shall:

§ 9-208. ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF SECURED PARTY HAVING CONTROL OF COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
(A)  give control of the electronic document to the debtor or its designated custodian;
(B)  if the debtor designates a custodian that is the designated custodian with which the 
authoritative copy of the electronic document is maintained for the secured party, communicate to 
the custodian an authenticated record releasing the designated custodian from any further 
obligation to comply with instructions originated by the secured party and instructing the custodian 
to comply with instructions originated by the debtor; and
(C)  take appropriate action to enable the debtor or its designated custodian to make copies of or 
revisions to the authoritative copy which add or change an identified assignee of the authoritative 
copy without the consent of the secured party.
As amended in 2003.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New.
   2. Scope and Purpose. This section imposes duties on a secured party who has control of a deposit account, 
electronic chattel paper, investment property, a letter-of-credit right, or electronic documents of title. The duty to 
terminate the secured party's control is analogous to the duty to file a termination statement, imposed by Section 9-
513. Under subsection (a), it applies only when there is no outstanding secured obligation and the secured party is 
not committed to give value. The requirements of this section can be varied by agreement under Section 1-102(3). 
For example, a debtor could by contract agree that the secured party may comply with subsection (b) by releasing 
control more than 10 days after demand. Also, duties under this section should not be read to conflict with the terms 
of the collateral itself. For example, if the collateral is a time deposit account, subsection (b)(2) should not require a 
secured party with control to make an early withdrawal of the funds (assuming that were possible) in order to pay 
them over to the debtor or put them in an account in the debtor's name.
   3. Remedy for Failure to Relinquish Control. If a secured party fails to comply with the requirements of 
subsection (b), the debtor has the remedy set forth in Section 9-625(e). This remedy is identical to that applicable to 
failure to provide or file a termination statement under Section 9-513.
   4. Duty to Relinquish Possession. Although Section 9-207 addresses directly the duties of a secured party in 
possession of collateral, that section does not require the secured party to relinquish possession when the secured 
party ceases to hold a security interest. Under common law, absent agreement to the contrary, the failure to 
relinquish possession of collateral upon satisfaction of the secured obligation would constitute a conversion. 
Inasmuch as problems apparently have not surfaced in the absence of statutory duties under former Article 9 and 
the common-law duty appears to have been sufficient, this Article does not impose a statutory duty to relinquish 
possession.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document