U.C.C. § 9-526
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE        
§ 9-526. FILING-OFFICE RULES
(a) [Adoption of filing-office rules.]  The [insert appropriate governmental official or agency] shall adopt 
and publish rules to implement this article. The filing-office rules must be[:
(1)]  consistent with this article[; and
(2)  adopted and published in accordance with the [insert any applicable state administrative 
procedure act]].
(b) [Harmonization of rules.]  To keep the filing-office rules and practices of the filing office in harmony 
with the rules and practices of filing offices in other jurisdictions that enact substantially this part, and to 
keep the technology used by the filing office compatible with the technology used by filing offices in other 
jurisdictions that enact substantially this part, the [insert appropriate governmental official or agency], so far 
as is consistent with the purposes, policies, and provisions of this article, in adopting, amending, and 
repealing filing-office rules, shall:
(1)  consult with filing offices in other jurisdictions that enact substantially this part; and
(2)  consult the most recent version of the Model Rules promulgated by the International Association of 
Corporate Administrators or any successor organization; and
(3)  take into consideration the rules and practices of, and the technology used by, filing offices in other 
jurisdictions that enact substantially this part.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New; subsection (b) derives in part from the Uniform Consumer Credit Code (1974).
   2. Rules Required. Operating a filing office is a complicated business, requiring many more rules and procedures 
than this Article can usefully provide. Subsection (a) requires the adoption of rules to carry out the provisions of 
Article 9. The filing-office rules must be consistent with the provisions of the statute and adopted in accordance with 
local procedures. The publication requirement informs secured parties about filing-office practices, aids secured 
parties in evaluating filing-related risks and costs, and promotes regularity of application within the filing office.
   3. Importance of Uniformity. In today's national economy, uniformity of the policies and practices of the filing 
offices will reduce the costs of secured transactions substantially. The International Association of Corporate 
Administrators (IACA), referred to in subsection (b), is an organization whose membership includes filing officers 
from every State. These individuals are responsible for the proper functioning of the Article 9 filing system and have 
worked diligently to develop model filing-office rules, with a view toward efficiency and uniformity.
   Although uniformity is an important desideratum, subsection (a) affords considerable flexibility in the adoption of 
filing-office rules. Each State may adopt a version of subsection (a) that reflects the desired relationship between 
the statewide filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(2) and the local filing offices described in Section 9-

§ 9-526. FILING-OFFICE RULES
Page 2 of 2
501(a)(1) and that takes into account the practices of its filing offices. Subsection (a) need not designate a single 
official or agency to adopt rules applicable to all filing offices, and the rules applicable to the statewide filing office 
need not be identical to those applicable to the local filing office. For example, subsection (a) might provide for the 
statewide filing office to adopt filing-office rules, and, if not prohibited by other law, the filing office might adopt one 
set of rules for itself and another for local offices. Or, subsection (a) might designate one official or agency to adopt 
rules for the statewide filing office and another to adopt rules for local filing offices.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document