U.C.C. § 9-321
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY          >            SUBPART 3. PRIORITY        
§ 9-321. LICENSEE OF GENERAL INTANGIBLE AND LESSEE OF GOODS IN 
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS
(a) ["Licensee in ordinary course of business."]  In this section, "licensee in ordinary course of 
business" means a person that becomes a licensee of a general intangible in good faith, without knowledge 
that the license violates the rights of another person in the general intangible, and in the ordinary course 
from a person in the business of licensing general intangibles of that kind. A person becomes a licensee in 
the ordinary course if the license to the person comports with the usual or customary practices in the kind of 
business in which the licensor is engaged or with the licensor's own usual or customary practices.
(b) [Rights of licensee in ordinary course of business.]  A licensee in ordinary course of business takes 
its rights under a nonexclusive license free of a security interest in the general intangible created by the 
licensor, even if the security interest is perfected and the licensee knows of its existence.
(c) [Rights of lessee in ordinary course of business.]  A lessee in ordinary course of business takes its 
leasehold interest free of a security interest in the goods created by the lessor, even if the security interest 
is perfected and the lessee knows of its existence.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Derived from Sections 2A-103(1)(o), 2A-307(3).
   2. Licensee in Ordinary Course. Like the analogous rules in Section 9-320(a) with respect to buyers in ordinary 
course and subsection (c) with respect to lessees in ordinary course, the new rule in subsection (b) reflects the 
expectations of the parties and the marketplace: a licensee under a nonexclusive license takes subject to a security 
interest unless the secured party authorizes the license free of the security interest or other, controlling law such as 
that of this section (protecting ordinary-course licensees) dictates a contrary result. See Sections 9-201, 9-315. The 
definition of "licensee in ordinary course of business" in subsection (a) is modeled upon that of "buyer in ordinary 
course of business."
   3. Lessee in Ordinary Course. Subsection (c) contains the rule formerly found in Section 2A-307(3). The rule 
works in the same way as that of Section 9-320(a).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document