U.C.C. § 9-318
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY          >            SUBPART 3. PRIORITY        
§ 9-318. NO INTEREST RETAINED IN RIGHT TO PAYMENT THAT IS SOLD; 
RIGHTS AND TITLE OF SELLER OF ACCOUNT OR CHATTEL PAPER WITH 
RESPECT TO CREDITORS AND PURCHASERS
(a) [Seller retains no interest.]  A debtor that has sold an account, chattel paper, payment intangible, or 
promissory note does not retain a legal or equitable interest in the collateral sold.
(b) [Deemed rights of debtor if buyer's security interest unperfected.]  For purposes of determining the 
rights of creditors of, and purchasers for value of an account or chattel paper from, a debtor that has sold 
an account or chattel paper, while the buyer's security interest is unperfected, the debtor is deemed to have 
rights and title to the account or chattel paper identical to those the debtor sold.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New.
   2. Sellers of Accounts, Chattel Paper, Payment Intangibles, and Promissory Notes. Section 1-201(b)(35) 
defines "security interest" to include the interest of a buyer of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or 
promissory notes. See also Section 9-109(a) and Comment 5. Subsection (a) makes explicit what was implicit, but 
perfectly obvious, under former Article 9: The fact that a sale of an account or chattel paper gives rise to a "security 
interest" does not imply that the seller retains an interest in the property that has been sold. To the contrary, a seller 
of an account or chattel paper retains no interest whatsoever in the property to the extent that it has been sold. 
Subsection (a) also applies to sales of payment intangibles and promissory notes, transactions that were not 
covered by former Article 9. Neither this Article nor the definition of "security interest" in Section 1-201 provides 
rules for distinguishing sales transactions from those that create a security interest securing an obligation.
   3. Buyers of Accounts and Chattel Paper. Another aspect of sales of accounts and chattel paper also was 
implicit, and equally obvious, under former Article 9: If the buyer's security interest is unperfected, then for purposes 
of determining the rights of certain third parties, the seller (debtor) is deemed to have all rights and title that the 
seller sold. The seller is deemed to have these rights even though, as between the parties, it has sold all its rights to 
the buyer. Subsection (b) makes this explicit. As a consequence of subsection (b), if the buyer's security interest is 
unperfected, the seller can transfer, and the creditors of the seller can reach, the account or chattel paper as if it 
had not been sold.
   Example: Debtor sells accounts or chattel paper to Buyer-1 and retains no interest in them. Buyer-1 does not file 
a financing statement. Debtor then sells the same receivables to Buyer-2. Buyer-2 files a proper financing 
statement. Having sold the receivables to Buyer-1, Debtor would not have any rights in the collateral so as to permit 
Buyer-2's security (ownership) interest to attach. Nevertheless, under this section, for purposes of determining the 
rights of purchasers for value from Debtor, Debtor is deemed to have the rights that Debtor sold. Accordingly, 

§ 9-318. NO INTEREST RETAINED IN RIGHT TO PAYMENT THAT IS SOLD; RIGHTS AND TITLE OF 
SELLER OF ACCOUNT OR CHATTEL PAPER WITH RESPECT TO CREDITORS AND PURCHASERS
Page 2 of 2
Buyer-2's security interest attaches, is perfected by the filing, and, under Section 9-322, is senior to Buyer-1's 
interest.
   4. Effect of Perfection. If the security interest of a buyer of accounts or chattel paper is perfected the usual result 
would take effect: transferees from and creditors of the seller could not acquire an interest in the sold accounts or 
chattel paper. The same result would occur if payment intangibles or promissory notes were sold, inasmuch as the 
buyer's security interest is automatically perfected under Section 9-309.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document