U.C.C. § 9-704
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 7. TRANSITION        
§ 9-704. SECURITY INTEREST UNPERFECTED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE
A security interest that is enforceable immediately before this [Act] takes effect but which would be 
subordinate to the rights of a person that becomes a lien creditor at that time:
(1)  remains an enforceable security interest for one year after this [Act] takes effect;
(2)  remains enforceable thereafter if the security interest becomes enforceable under Section 9-203 
when this [Act] takes effect or within one year thereafter; and
(3)  becomes perfected:
(A)  without further action, when this [Act] takes effect if the applicable requirements for perfection 
under this [Act] are satisfied before or at that time; or
(B)  when the applicable requirements for perfection are satisfied if the requirements are satisfied 
after that time.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   This section deals with security interests that are enforceable but unperfected (i.e., subordinate to the rights of a 
person who becomes a lien creditor) under former Article 9 or other applicable law immediately before this Article 
takes effect. These security interests remain enforceable for one year after the effective date, and thereafter if the 
appropriate steps for attachment under this Article are taken before the one-year period expires. (This section's 
treatment of enforceability is the same as that of Section 9-703.) The security interest becomes a perfected security 
interest on the effective date if, at that time, the security interest satisfies the requirements for perfection under this 
Article. If the security interest does not satisfy the requirements for perfection until sometime thereafter, it becomes 
a perfected security interest at that later time.
   Example: A security interest has attached under former Article 9 but is unperfected because the filed financing 
statement covers "all of debtor's personal property" and controlling case law in the applicable jurisdiction has 
determined that this identification of collateral in a financing statement is insufficient. Upon the effective date of this 
Article, the financing statement becomes sufficient under Section 9-504(2). On that date the security interest 
becomes perfected. (This assumes, of course, that the financing statement is filed in the proper filing office under 
this Article.)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document