U.C.C. § 9-501
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND 
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT        
§ 9-501. FILING OFFICE
(a) [Filing offices.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), if the local law of this State governs 
perfection of a security interest or agricultural lien, the office in which to file a financing statement to perfect 
the security interest or agricultural lien is:
(1)  the office designated for the filing or recording of a record of a mortgage on the related real 
property, if:
(A)  the collateral is as-extracted collateral or timber to be cut; or
(B)  the financing statement is filed as a fixture filing and the collateral is goods that are or are to 
become fixtures; or
(2)  the office of [] [or any office duly authorized by []], in all other cases, including a case in which the 
collateral is goods that are or are to become fixtures and the financing statement is not filed as a fixture 
filing.
(b) [Filing office for transmitting utilities.]  The office in which to file a financing statement to perfect a 
security interest in collateral, including fixtures, of a transmitting utility is the office of []. The financing 
statement also constitutes a fixture filing as to the collateral indicated in the financing statement which is or 
is to become fixtures.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Legislative Note: The State should designate the filing office where the brackets appear. The filing office may be 
that of a governmental official (e.g., the Secretary of State) or a private party that maintains the State's filing 
system.
   1. Source. Derived from former Section 9-401.
   2. Where to File. Subsection (a) indicates where in a given State a financing statement is to be filed. Former 
Article 9 afforded each State three alternative approaches, depending on the extent to which the State desires 
central filing (usually with the Secretary of State), local filing (usually with a county office), or both. As Comment 1 to 
former Section 9-401 observed, "The principal advantage of state-wide filing is ease of access to the credit 
information which the files exist to provide. Consider for example the national distributor who wishes to have current 
information about the credit standing of the thousands of persons he sells to on credit. The more completely the 
files are centralized on a state-wide basis, the easier and cheaper it becomes to procure credit information; the 
more the files are scattered in local filing units, the more burdensome and costly." Local filing increases the net 
costs of secured transactions also by increasing uncertainty and the number of required filings. Any benefit that 
local filing may have had in the 1950's is now insubstantial. Accordingly, this Article dictates central filing for most 

§ 9-501. FILING OFFICE
Page 2 of 2
situations, while retaining local filing for real-estate-related collateral and special filing provisions for transmitting 
utilities.
   3. Minerals and Timber. Under subsection (a)(1), a filing in the office where a record of a mortgage on the 
related real property would be filed will perfect a security interest in as-extracted collateral. Inasmuch as the security 
interest does not attach until extraction, the filing continues to be effective after extraction. A different result occurs 
with respect to timber to be cut, however. Unlike as-extracted collateral, standing timber may be goods before it is 
cut. See Section 9-102 (defining "goods"). Once cut, however, it is no longer timber to be cut, and the filing in the 
real-property-mortgage office ceases to be effective. The timber then becomes ordinary goods, and filing in the 
office specified in subsection (a)(2) is necessary for perfection. Note also that after the timber is cut the law of the 
debtor's location, not the location of the timber, governs perfection under Section 9-301.
   4. Fixtures. There are two ways in which a secured party may file a financing statement to perfect a security 
interest in goods that are or are to become fixtures. It may file in the Article 9 records, as with most other goods. 
See subsection (a)(2). Or it may file the financing statement as a "fixture filing," defined in Section 9-102, in the 
office in which a record of a mortgage on the related real property would be filed. See subsection(a)(1)(B).
   5. Transmitting Utilities. The usual filing rules do not apply well for a transmitting utility (defined in Section 9-
102). Many pre-UCC statutes provided special filing rules for railroads and in some cases for other public utilities, to 
avoid the requirements for filing with legal descriptions in every county in which such debtors had property. Former 
Section 9-401(5) recreated and broadened these provisions, and subsection (b) follows this approach. The nature 
of the debtor will inform persons searching the record as to where to make a search.
   A given State's subsection (b) applies only if the local law of that State governs perfection. As to most collateral, 
perfection by filing is governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the debtor is located. See Section 9-301(1). 
However, the law of the jurisdiction in which goods that are or become fixtures are located governs perfection by 
filing a fixture filing. See Section 9-301(3)(A). As a consequence, filing in the filing office of more than one State 
may be necessary to perfect a security interest in fixtures collateral of a transmitting utility by filing a fixture filing. 
See Section 9-301, Comment 5.b.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document