U.C.C. § 9-523
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE        
§ 9-523. INFORMATION FROM FILING OFFICE; SALE OR LICENSE OF 
RECORDS
(a) [Acknowledgment of filing written record.]  If a person that files a written record requests an 
acknowledgment of the filing, the filing office shall send to the person an image of the record showing the 
number assigned to the record pursuant to Section 9-519(a)(1) and the date and time of the filing of the 
record. However, if the person furnishes a copy of the record to the filing office, the filing office may instead:
(1)  note upon the copy the number assigned to the record pursuant to Section 9-519(a)(1) and the 
date and time of the filing of the record; and
(2)  send the copy to the person.
(b) [Acknowledgment of filing other record.]  If a person files a record other than a written record, the 
filing office shall communicate to the person an acknowledgment that provides:
(1)  the information in the record;
(2)  the number assigned to the record pursuant to Section 9-519(a)(1); and
(3)  the date and time of the filing of the record.
(c) [Communication of requested information.]  The filing office shall communicate or otherwise make 
available in a record the following information to any person that requests it:
(1)  whether there is on file on a date and time specified by the filing office, but not a date earlier than 
three business days before the filing office receives the request, any financing statement that:
(A)  designates a particular debtor [or, if the request so states, designates a particular debtor at the 
address specified in the request];
(B)  has not lapsed under Section 9-515 with respect to all secured parties of record; and
(C)  if the request so states, has lapsed under Section 9-515 and a record of which is maintained 
by the filing office under Section 9-522(a);
(2)  the date and time of filing of each financing statement; and
(3)  the information provided in each financing statement.
(d) [Medium for communicating information.]  In complying with its duty under subsection (c), the filing 
office may communicate information in any medium. However, if requested, the filing office shall 
communicate information by issuing [its written certificate] [a record that can be admitted into evidence in 
the courts of this State without extrinsic evidence of its authenticity].
(e) [Timeliness of filing office performance.]  The filing office shall perform the acts required by 
subsections (a) through (d) at the time and in the manner prescribed by filing-office rule, but not later than 
two business days after the filing office receives the request.
(f) [Public availability of records.]  At least weekly, the [insert appropriate official or governmental 
agency] [filing office] shall offer to sell or license to the public on a nonexclusive basis, in bulk, copies of all 
records filed in it under this part, in every medium from time to time available to the filing office.

§ 9-523. INFORMATION FROM FILING OFFICE; SALE OR LICENSE OF RECORDS
Page 2 of 3
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Legislative Notes:
   1. States whose filing office does not offer the additional service of responding to search requests limited to a 
particular address should omit the bracketed language in subsection (c)(1)(A).
   2. A State that elects not to require real-estate filing offices to comply with either or both of subsections (e) and (f) 
should specify in the appropriate subsection(s) only the filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(2).
   1. Source. Former Section 9-407; subsections (d) and (e) are new.
   2. Filing Office's Duty to Provide Information. Former Section 9-407, dealing with obtaining information from 
the filing office, was bracketed to suggest to legislatures that its enactment was optional. Experience has shown 
that the method by which interested persons can obtain information concerning the public records should be 
uniform. Accordingly, the analogous provisions of this Article are not in brackets.
   Most of the other changes from former Section 9-407 are for clarification, to embrace medium-neutral drafting, or 
to impose standards of performance on the filing office.
   3. Acknowledgments of Filing. Subsections (a) and (b) require the filing office to acknowledge the filing of a 
record. Under subsection (a), the filing office is required to acknowledge the filing of a written record only upon 
request of the filer. Subsection (b) requires the filing office to acknowledge the filing of a non-written record even in 
the absence of a request from the filer.
   4. Response to Search Request. Subsection (c)(3) requires the filing office to provide "the information contained 
in each financing statement" to a person who requests it. This requirement can be satisfied by providing copies, 
images, or reports. The requirement does not in any manner inhibit the filing office from also offering to provide less 
than all of the information (presumably for a lower fee) to a person who asks for less. Thus, subsection (c) 
accommodates the practice of providing only the type of record (e.g., initial financing statement, continuation 
statement), number assigned to the record, date and time of filing, and names and addresses of the debtor and 
secured party when a requesting person asks for no more (i.e., when the person does not ask for copies of 
financing statements). In contrast, the filing office's obligation under subsection (b) to provide an acknowledgment 
containing "the information contained in the record" is not defined by a customer's request. Thus unless the filer 
stipulates otherwise, to comply with subsection (b) the filing office's acknowledgment must contain all of the 
information in a record.
   Subsection (c) assures that a minimum amount of information about filed records will be available to the public. It 
does not preclude a filing office from offering additional services.
   5. Lapsed and Terminated Financing Statements. This section reflects the policy that terminated financing 
statements will remain part of the filing office's data base. The filing office may remove from the data base only 
lapsed financing statements, and then only when at least a year has passed after lapse. See Section 9-519(g). 
Subsection (c)(1)(C) requires a filing office to conduct a search and report as to lapsed financing statements that 
have not been removed from the data base, when requested.
   6. Search by Debtor's Address. Subsection (c)(1)(A) contemplates that, by making a single request, a searcher 
will receive the results of a search of the entire public record maintained by any given filing office. Addition of the 
bracketed language in subsection (c)(1)(A) would permit a search report limited to financing statements showing a 

§ 9-523. INFORMATION FROM FILING OFFICE; SALE OR LICENSE OF RECORDS
Page 3 of 3
particular address for the debtor, but only if the search request is so limited. With or without the bracketed 
language, this subsection does not permit the filing office to compel a searcher to limit a request by address.
   7. Medium of Communication; Certificates. Former Article 9 provided that the filing office respond to a request 
for information by providing a certificate. The principle of medium-neutrality would suggest that the statute not 
require a written certificate. Subsection (d) follows this principle by permitting the filing office to respond by 
communicating "in any medium." By permitting communication "in any medium," subsection (d) is not inconsistent 
with a system in which persons other than filing office staff conduct searches of the filing office's (computer) 
records.
   Some searchers find it necessary to introduce the results of their search into evidence. Because official written 
certificates might be introduced into evidence more easily than official communications in another medium, 
subsection (d) affords States the option of requiring the filing office to issue written certificates upon request. The 
alternative bracketed language in subsection (d) recognizes that some States may prefer to permit the filing office to 
respond in another medium, as long as the response can be admitted into evidence in the courts of that State 
without extrinsic evidence of its authenticity.
   8. Performance Standard. The utility of the filing system depends on the ability of searchers to get current 
information quickly. Accordingly, subsection (e) requires that the filing office respond to a request for information no 
later than two business days after it receives the request. The information contained in the response must be 
current as of a date no earlier than three business days before the filing office receives the request. See subsection 
(c)(1). The failure of the filing office to comply with performance standards, such as subsection (e), has no effect on 
the private rights of persons affected by the filing of records.
   9. Sales of Records in Bulk. Subsection (f), which is new, mandates that the appropriate official or the filing 
office sell or license the filing records to the public in bulk, on a nonexclusive basis, in every medium available to 
the filing office. The details of implementation are left to filing-office rules.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document