U.C.C. § 9-404
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES        
§ 9-404. RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY ASSIGNEE; CLAIMS AND DEFENSES 
AGAINST ASSIGNEE
(a) [Assignee's rights subject to terms, claims, and defenses; exceptions.]  Unless an account debtor 
has made an enforceable agreement not to assert defenses or claims, and subject to subsections (b) 
through (e), the rights of an assignee are subject to:
(1)  all terms of the agreement between the account debtor and assignor and any defense or claim in 
recoupment arising from the transaction that gave rise to the contract; and
(2)  any other defense or claim of the account debtor against the assignor which accrues before the 
account debtor receives a notification of the assignment authenticated by the assignor or the assignee.
(b) [Account debtor's claim reduces amount owed to assignee.]  Subject to subsection (c) and except 
as otherwise provided in subsection (d), the claim of an account debtor against an assignor may be 
asserted against an assignee under subsection (a) only to reduce the amount the account debtor owes.
(c) [Rule for individual under other law.]  This section is subject to law other than this article which 
establishes a different rule for an account debtor who is an individual and who incurred the obligation 
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.
(d) [Omission of required statement in consumer transaction.]  In a consumer transaction, if a record 
evidences the account debtor's obligation, law other than this article requires that the record include a 
statement to the effect that the account debtor's recovery against an assignee with respect to claims and 
defenses against the assignor may not exceed amounts paid by the account debtor under the record, and 
the record does not include such a statement, the extent to which a claim of an account debtor against the 
assignor may be asserted against an assignee is determined as if the record included such a statement.
(e) [Inapplicability to health-care-insurance receivable.]  This section does not apply to an assignment 
of a health-care-insurance receivable.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-318(1).
   2. Purpose; Rights of Assignee in General. Subsection (a), like former Section 9-318(1), provides that an 
assignee generally takes an assignment subject to defenses and claims of an account debtor. Under subsection 
(a)(1), if the account debtor's defenses on an assigned claim arise from the transaction that gave rise to the 
contract with the assignor, it makes no difference whether the defense or claim accrues before or after the account 
debtor is notified of the assignment. Under subsection (a)(2), the assignee takes subject to other defenses or claims 
only if they accrue before the account debtor has been notified of the assignment. Of course, an account debtor 
may waive its right to assert defenses or claims against an assignee under Section 9-403 or other applicable law. 
Subsection (a) tracks Section 3-305(a)(3) more closely than its predecessor.

§ 9-404. RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY ASSIGNEE; CLAIMS AND DEFENSES AGAINST ASSIGNEE
Page 2 of 2
   3. Limitation on Affirmative Claims. Subsection (b) is new. It limits the claim that the account debtor may assert 
against an assignee. Borrowing from Section 3-305(a)(3) and cases construing former Section 9-318, subsection 
(b) generally does not afford the account debtor the right to an affirmative recovery from an assignee.
   4. Consumer Account Debtors; Relationship to Federal Trade Commission Rule. Subsections (c) and (d) 
also are new. Subsection (c) makes clear that the rules of this section are subject to other law establishing special 
rules for consumer account debtors. An "account debtor who is an individual" as used in subsection (c) includes 
individuals who are jointly or jointly and severally obligated. Subsection (d) applies to rights evidenced by a record 
that is required to contain, but does not contain, the notice set forth in Federal Trade Commission Rule 433, 16 
C.F.R. Part 433 (the "Holder-in-Due-Course Regulations"). Under subsection (d), a consumer account debtor has 
the same right to an affirmative recovery from an assignee of such a record as the consumer would have had 
against the assignee had the record contained the required notice.
   5. Scope; Application to "Account Debtor." This section deals only with the rights and duties of "account 
debtors"--and for the most part only with account debtors on accounts, chattel paper, and payment intangibles. 
Subsection (e) provides that the obligation of an insurer with respect to a health-care-insurance receivable is 
governed by other law. References in this section to an "account debtor" include account debtors on collateral that 
is proceeds. Neither this section nor any other provision of this Article, including Sections 9-408 and 9-409, provides 
analogous regulation of the rights and duties of other obligors on collateral, such as the maker of a negotiable 
instrument (governed by Article 3), the issuer of or nominated person under a letter of credit (governed by Article 5), 
or the issuer of a security (governed by Article 8). Article 9 leaves those rights and duties untouched; however, 
Section 9-409 deals with the special case of letters of credit. When chattel paper is composed in part of a 
negotiable instrument, the obligor on the instrument is not an "account debtor," and Article 3 governs the rights of 
the assignee of the chattel paper with respect to the issues that this section addresses. See, e.g., Section 3-601 
(dealing with discharge of an obligation to pay a negotiable instrument).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document