U.C.C. § 9-325
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY          >            SUBPART 3. PRIORITY        
§ 9-325. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN TRANSFERRED 
COLLATERAL
(a) [Subordination of security interest in transferred collateral.]  Except as otherwise provided in 
subsection (b), a security interest created by a debtor is subordinate to a security interest in the same 
collateral created by another person if:
(1)  the debtor acquired the collateral subject to the security interest created by the other person;
(2)  the security interest created by the other person was perfected when the debtor acquired the 
collateral; and
(3)  there is no period thereafter when the security interest is unperfected.
(b) [Limitation of subsection (a) subordination.]  Subsection (a) subordinates a security interest only if 
the security interest:
(1)  otherwise would have priority solely under Section 9-322(a) or 9-324; or
(2)  arose solely under Section 2-711(3) or 2A-508(5).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. New.
   2. "Double Debtor Problem." This section addresses the "double debtor" problem, which arises when a debtor 
acquires property that is subject to a security interest created by another debtor.
   3. Taking Subject to Perfected Security Interest. Consider the following scenario:
   Example 1: A owns an item of equipment subject to a perfected security interest in favor of SP-A. A sells the 
equipment to B, not in the ordinary course of business. B acquires its interest subject to SP-A's security interest. 
See Sections 9-201, 9-315(a)(1). Under this section, if B creates a security interest in the equipment in favor of SP-
B, SP-B's security interest is subordinate to SP-A's security interest, even if SP-B filed against B before SP-A filed 
against A, and even if SP-B took a purchase-money security interest. Normally, SP-B could have investigated the 
source of the equipment and discovered SP-A's filing before making an advance against the equipment, whereas 
SP-A had no reason to search the filings against someone other than its debtor, A.
   4. Taking Subject to Unperfected Security Interest. This section applies only if the security interest in the 
transferred collateral was perfected when the transferee acquired the collateral. See subsection (a)(2). If this 
condition is not met, then the normal priority rules apply.
   Example 2: A owns an item of equipment subject to an unperfected security interest in favor of SP-A. A sells the 
equipment to B, who gives value and takes delivery of the equipment without knowledge of the security interest. B 

§ 9-325. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN TRANSFERRED COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
takes free of the security interest. See Section 9-317(b). If B then creates a security interest in favor of SP-B, no 
priority issue arises; SP-B has the only security interest in the equipment.
   Example 3: The facts are as in Example 2, except that B knows of SP-A's security interest and therefore takes 
the equipment subject to it. If B creates a security interest in the equipment in favor of SP-B, this section does not 
determine the relative priority of the security interests. Rather, the normal priority rules govern. If SP-B perfects its 
security interest, then, under Section 9-322(a)(2), SP-A's unperfected security interest will be junior to SP-B's 
perfected security interest. The award of priority to SP-B is premised on the belief that SP-A's failure to file could 
have misled SP-B.
   5. Taking Subject to Perfected Security Interest that Becomes Unperfected. This section applies only if the 
security interest in the transferred collateral did not become unperfected at any time after the transferee acquired 
the collateral. See subsection (a)(3). If this condition is not met, then the normal priority rules apply.
   Example 4: As in Example 1, A owns an item of equipment subject to a perfected security interest in favor of SP-
A. A sells the equipment to B, not in the ordinary course of business. B acquires its interest subject to SP-A's 
security interest. See Sections 9-201, 9-315(a)(1). B creates a security interest in favor of SP-B, and SP-B perfects 
its security interest. This section provides that SP-A's security interest is senior to SP-B's. However, if SP-A's 
financing statement lapses while SP-B's security interest is perfected, then the normal priority rules would apply, 
and SP-B's security interest would become senior to SP-A's security interest. See Sections 9-322(a)(2), 9-515(c).
   6. Unusual Situations. The appropriateness of the rule of subsection (a) is most apparent when it works to 
subordinate security interests having priority under the basic priority rules of Section 9-322(a) or the purchase-
money priority rules of Section 9-324. The rule also works properly when applied to the security interest of a buyer 
under Section 2-711(3) or a lessee under Section 2A-508(5). However, subsection (a) may provide an inappropriate 
resolution of the "double debtor" problem in some of the wide variety of other contexts in which the problem may 
arise. Although subsection (b) limits the application of subsection (a) to those cases in which subordination is 
known to be appropriate, courts should apply the rule in other settings, if necessary to promote the underlying 
purposes and policies of the Uniform Commercial Code. See Section 1-102(1).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document