U.C.C. § 9-505
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND 
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT        
§ 9-505. FILING AND COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER STATUTES AND TREATIES 
FOR CONSIGNMENTS, LEASES, OTHER BAILMENTS, AND OTHER 
TRANSACTIONS
(a) [Use of terms other than "debtor" and "secured party."]  A consignor, lessor, or other bailor of 
goods, a licensor, or a buyer of a payment intangible or promissory note may file a financing statement, or 
may comply with a statute or treaty described in Section 9-311(a), using the terms "consignor", 
"consignee", "lessor", "lessee", "bailor", "bailee", "licensor", "licensee", "owner", "registered owner", "buyer", 
"seller", or words of similar import, instead of the terms "secured party" and "debtor".
(b) [Effect of financing statement under subsection (a).]  This part applies to the filing of a financing 
statement under subsection (a) and, as appropriate, to compliance that is equivalent to filing a financing 
statement under Section 9-311(b), but the filing or compliance is not of itself a factor in determining whether 
the collateral secures an obligation. If it is determined for another reason that the collateral secures an 
obligation, a security interest held by the consignor, lessor, bailor, licensor, owner, or buyer which attaches 
to the collateral is perfected by the filing or compliance.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-408.
   2. Precautionary Filing. Occasionally, doubts arise concerning whether a transaction creates a relationship to 
which this Article or its filing provisions apply. For example, questions may arise over whether a "lease" of 
equipment in fact creates a security interest or whether the "sale" of payment intangibles in fact secures an 
obligation, thereby requiring action to perfect the security interest. This section, which derives from former Section 
9-408, affords the option of filing of a financing statement with appropriate changes of terminology but without 
affecting the substantive question of classification of the transaction.
   3. Changes from Former Section 9-408. This section expands the rule of Section 9-408 to embrace more 
generally other bailments and transactions, as well as sales transactions, primarily sales of payment intangibles and 
promissory notes. It provides the same benefits for compliance with a statute or treaty described in Section 9-311(a) 
that former Section 9-408 provided for filing, in connection with the use of terms such as "lessor," consignor," etc. 
The references to "owner" and "registered owner" are intended to address, for example, the situation where a 
putative lessor is the registered owner of an automobile covered by a certificate of title and the transaction is 
determined to create a security interest. Although this section provides that the security interest is perfected, the 
relevant certificate-of-title statute may expressly provide to the contrary or may be ambiguous. If so, it may be 
necessary or advisable to amend the certificate-of-title statute to ensure that perfection of the security interest will 
be achieved.

§ 9-505. FILING AND COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER STATUTES AND TREATIES FOR CONSIGNMENTS, 
LEASES, OTHER BAILMENTS, AND OTHER TRANSACTIONS
Page 2 of 2
   As did former Section 1-201, former Article 9 referred to transactions, including leases and consignments, 
"intended as security." This misleading phrase created the erroneous impression that the parties to a transaction 
can dictate how the law will classify it (e.g., as a bailment or as a security interest) and thus affect the rights of third 
parties. This Article deletes the phrase wherever it appears. Subsection (b) expresses the principle more precisely 
by referring to a security interest that "secures an obligation."
   4. Consignments. Although a "true" consignment is a bailment, the filing and priority provisions of former Article 
9 applied to "true" consignments. See former Sections 2-326(3), 9-114. A consignment "intended as security" 
created a security interest that was in all respects subject to former Article 9. This Article subsumes most true 
consignments under the rubric of "security interest." See Sections 9-102 (definition of "consignment"), 9-109(a)(4), 
1-201(b)(35) (definition of "security interest"). Nevertheless, it maintains the distinction between a (true) 
"consignment," as to which only certain aspects of Article 9 apply, and a so-called consignment that actually 
"secures an obligation," to which Article 9 applies in full. The revisions to this section reflect the change in 
terminology.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document