U.C.C. § 1-301
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS          >            
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES        
§ 1-301. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY; PARTIES' POWER TO CHOOSE 
APPLICABLE LAW
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, when a transaction bears a reasonable relation to this 
state and also to another state or nation the parties may agree that the law either of this state or of such 
other state or nation shall govern their rights and duties.
(b)  In the absence of an agreement effective under subsection (a), and except as provided in subsection 
(c), [the Uniform Commercial Code] applies to transactions bearing an appropriate relation to this state.
(c)  If one of the following provisions of [the Uniform Commercial Code] specifies the applicable law, that 
provision governs and a contrary agreement is effective only to the extent permitted by the law so specified:
(1)  Section 2-402;
(2)  Sections 2A-105 and 2A-106;
(3)  Section 4-102;
(4)  Section 4A-507;
(5)  Section 5-116;
  [(6) Section 6-103;]
(7)  Section 8-110;
(8)  Sections 9-301 through 9-307.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Source: Former Section 1-105.
   Changes from former law: This section is substantively identical to former Section 1-105. Changes in language 
are stylistic only.
   1. Subsection (a) states affirmatively the right of the parties to a multi-state transaction or a transaction involving 
foreign trade to choose their own law. That right is subject to the firm rules stated in the sections listed in subsection 
(c), and is limited to jurisdictions to which the transaction bears a "reasonable relation." In general, the test of 
"reasonable relation" is similar to that laid down by the Supreme Court in Seeman v. Philadelphia Warehouse Co., 
274 U.S. 403, 47 S.Ct. 626, 71 L.Ed. 1123 (1927). Ordinarily the law chosen must be that of a jurisdiction where a 
significant enough portion of the making or performance of the contract is to occur or occurs. But an agreement as 
to choice of law may sometimes take effect as a shorthand expression of the intent of the parties as to matters 
governed by their agreement, even though the transaction has no significant contact with the jurisdiction chosen.

§ 1-301. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY; PARTIES' POWER TO CHOOSE APPLICABLE LAW
Page 2 of 2
   2. Where there is no agreement as to the governing law, the Act is applicable to any transaction having an 
"appropriate" relation to any state which enacts it. Of course, the Act applies to any transaction which takes place in 
its entirety in a state which has enacted the Act. But the mere fact that suit is brought in a state does not make it 
appropriate to apply the substantive law of that state. Cases where a relation to the enacting state is not 
"appropriate" include, for example, those where the parties have clearly contracted on the basis of some other law, 
as where the law of the place of contracting and the law of the place of contemplated performance are the same 
and are contrary to the law under the Code.
   3. Where a transaction has significant contacts with a state which has enacted the Act and also with other 
jurisdictions, the question what relation is "appropriate" is left to judicial decision. In deciding that question, the court 
is not strictly bound by precedents established in other contexts. Thus a conflict-of-laws decision refusing to apply a 
purely local statute or rule of law to a particular multi-state transaction may not be valid precedent for refusal to 
apply the Code in an analogous situation. Application of the Code in such circumstances may be justified by its 
comprehensiveness, by the policy of uniformity, and by the fact that it is in large part a reformulation and 
restatement of the law merchant and of the understanding of a business community which transcends state and 
even national boundaries. Compare Global Commerce Corp. v. Clark-Babbitt Industries, Inc., 239 F.2d 716, 719 (2d 
Cir. 1956). In particular, where a transaction is governed in large part by the Code, application of another law to 
some detail of performance because of an accident of geography may violate the commercial understanding of the 
parties.
   4. Subsection (c) spells out essential limitations on the parties' right to choose the applicable law. Especially in 
Article 9 parties taking a security interest or asked to extend credit which may be subject to a security interest must 
have sure ways to find out whether and where to file and where to look for possible existing filings.
   5. Sections 9-301 through 9-307 should be consulted as to the rules for perfection of security interests and 
agricultural liens and the effect of perfection and nonperfection and priority.
   6. This section is subject to Section 1-102, which states the scope of Article 1. As that section indicates, the rules 
of Article 1, including this section, apply to a transaction to the extent that transaction is governed by one of the 
other Articles of the Uniform Commercial Code.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document