U.C.C. § 2-104
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 1. 
SHORT TITLE, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND SUBJECT MATTER        
§ 2-104. Definitions: "Merchant"; "Between Merchants"; "Financing Agency".
(1)  "Merchant" means a person who deals in goods of the kind or otherwise by his occupation holds 
himself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the practices or goods involved in the transaction or to 
whom such knowledge or skill may be attributed by his employment of an agent or broker or other 
intermediary who by his occupation holds himself out as having such knowledge or skill.
(2)  "Financing agency" means a bank, finance company or other person who in the ordinary course of 
business makes advances against goods or documents of title or who by arrangement with either the seller 
or the buyer intervenes in ordinary course to make or collect payment due or claimed under the contract for 
sale, as by purchasing or paying the seller's draft or making advances against it or by merely taking it for 
collection whether or not documents of title accompany or are associated with the draft.  "Financing 
agency" includes also a bank or other person who similarly intervenes between persons who are in the 
position of seller and buyer in respect to the goods ( Section 2-707).
(3)  "Between merchants" means in any transaction with respect to which both parties are chargeable with 
the knowledge or skill of merchants.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.  But see Sections 15(2), (5), 16(c), 45(2) and 71, Uniform Sales Act, and 
Sections 35 and 37, Uniform Bills of Lading Act for examples of the policy expressly provided for in this Article.
Purposes:
1. This Article assumes that transactions between professionals in a given field require special and clear rules 
which may not apply to a casual or inexperienced seller or buyer.  It thus adopts a policy of expressly stating rules 
applicable "between merchants" and "as against a merchant", wherever they are needed instead of making them 
depend upon the circumstances of each case as in the statutes cited above.  This section lays the foundation of this 
policy by defining those who are to be regarded as professionals or "merchants" and by stating when a transaction 
is deemed to be "between merchants".
2. The term "merchant" as defined here roots in the "law merchant" concept of a professional in business.  The 
professional status under the definition may be based upon specialized knowledge as to the goods, specialized 
knowledge as to business practices, or specialized knowledge as to both and which kind of specialized knowledge 
may be sufficient to establish the merchant status is indicated by the nature of the provisions.
The special provisions as to merchants appear only in this Article and they are of three kinds.  Sections 2-201(2), 2-
205, 2-207 and 2-209 dealing with the statute of frauds, firm offers, confirmatory memoranda and modification rest 
on normal business practices which are or ought to be typical of and familiar to any person in business.  For 
purposes of these sections almost every person in business would, therefore, be deemed to be a "merchant" under 
the language "who … by his occupation holds himself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the practices … 

§ 2-104. Definitions: "Merchant"; "Between Merchants"; "Financing Agency".
Page 2 of 2
involved in the transaction ..." since the practices involved in the transaction are non-specialized business practices 
such as answering mail.  In this type of provision, banks or even universities, for example, well may be "merchants." 
But even these sections only apply to a merchant in his mercantile capacity; a lawyer or bank president buying 
fishing tackle for his own use is not a merchant.
On the other hand, in Section 2-314 on the warranty of merchantability, such warranty is implied only "if the seller is 
a merchant with respect to goods of that kind." Obviously this qualification restricts the implied warranty to a much 
smaller group than everyone who is engaged in business and requires a professional status as to particular kinds of 
goods.  The exception in Section 2-402(2) for retention of possession by a merchant-seller falls in the same class; 
as does Section 2-403(2) on entrusting of possession to a merchant "who deals in goods of that kind".
A third group of sections includes 2-103(1)(b), which provides that in the case of a merchant "good faith" includes 
observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade; 2-327(1)(c), 2-603 and 2-605, dealing 
with responsibilities of merchant buyers to follow seller's instructions, etc.; 2-509 on risk of loss, and 2-609 on 
adequate assurance of performance.  This group of sections applies to persons who are merchants under either the 
"practices" or the "goods" aspect of the definition of merchant.
3. The "or to whom such knowledge or skill may be attributed by his employment of an agent or broker ..." clause of 
the definition of merchant means that even persons such as universities, for example, can come within the definition 
of merchant if they have regular purchasing departments or business personnel who are familiar with business 
practices and who are equipped to take any action required.
Cross References:
Point 1: See Sections 1-102 and 1-203.
Point 2: See Sections 2-314, 2-315 and 2-320 to 2-325, of this Article, and Article 9.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bank".  Section 1-201.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Contract for sale".  Section 2-106.
"Document of title".  Section 1-201.
"Draft".  Section 3-104.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Person".  Section 1-201.
"Purchase".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document