U.C.C. § 2-325
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 3. 
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-325. "Letter of Credit" Term; "Confirmed Credit".
(1)  Failure of the buyer seasonably to furnish an agreed letter of credit is a breach of the contract for sale.
(2)  The delivery to seller of a proper letter of credit suspends the buyer's obligation to pay.  If the letter of 
credit is dishonored, the seller may on seasonable notification to the buyer require payment directly from 
him.
(3)  Unless otherwise agreed the term "letter of credit" or "banker's credit" in a contract for sale means an 
irrevocable credit issued by a financing agency of good repute and, where the shipment is overseas, of 
good international repute.  The term "confirmed credit" means that the credit must also carry the direct 
obligation of such an agency which does business in the seller's financial market.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To express the established commercial and banking understanding as to the meaning and effects of 
terms calling for "letters of credit" or "confirmed credit":
1. Subsection (2) follows the general policy of this Article and Article 3 (Section 3-802) on conditional payment, 
under which payment by check or other short-term instrument is not ordinarily final as between the parties if the 
recipient duly presents the instrument and honor is refused.  Thus the furnishing of a letter of credit does not 
substitute the financing agency's obligation for the buyer's, but the seller must first give the buyer reasonable notice 
of his intention to demand direct payment from him.
2. Subsection (2) requires that the credit be irrevocable and be a prime credit as determined by the standing of the 
issuer.  It is not necessary, unless otherwise agreed, that the credit be a negotiation credit; the seller can finance 
himself by an assignment of the proceeds under Section 5-116(2).
3. The definition of "confirmed credit" is drawn on the supposition that the credit is issued by a bank which is not 
doing direct business in the seller's financial market; there is no intention to require the obligation of two banks both 
local to the seller.
Cross References:
Sections 2-403, 2-511(3) and 3-802 and Article 5.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Contract for sale".  Section 2-106.

§ 2-325. "Letter of Credit" Term; "Confirmed Credit".
Page 2 of 2
"Draft".  Section 3-104.
"Financing agency".  Section 2-104.
"Notifies".  Section 1-201.
"Overseas".  Section 2-323.
"Purchaser".  Section 1-201.
"Seasonably".  Section 1-204.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
"Term".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document