U.C.C. § 2-305
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 3. 
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-305. Open Price Term.
(1)  The parties if they so intend can conclude a contract for sale even though the price is not settled.  In 
such a case the price is a reasonable price at the time for delivery if
(a)  nothing is said as to price; or
(b)  the price is left to be agreed by the parties and they fail to agree; or
(c)  the price is to be fixed in terms of some agreed market or other standard as set or recorded by a 
third person or agency and it is not so set or recorded.
(2)  A price to be fixed by the seller or by the buyer means a price for him to fix in good faith.
(3)  When a price left to be fixed otherwise than by agreement of the parties fails to be fixed through fault of 
one party the other may at his option treat the contract as cancelled or himself fix a reasonable price.
(4)  Where, however, the parties intend not to be bound unless the price be fixed or agreed and it is not 
fixed or agreed there is no contract.  In such a case the buyer must return any goods already received or if 
unable so to do must pay their reasonable value at the time of delivery and the seller must return any 
portion of the price paid on account.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 9 and 10, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section applies when the price term is left open on the making of an agreement which is nevertheless 
intended by the parties to be a binding agreement.  This Article rejects in these instances the formula that "an 
agreement to agree is unenforceable" if the case falls within subsection (1) of this section, and rejects also 
defeating such agreements on the ground of "indefiniteness".  Instead this Article recognizes the dominant intention 
of the parties to have the deal continue to be binding upon both.  As to future performance, since this Article 
recognizes remedies such as cover (Section 2-712), resale (Section 2-706) and specific performance (Section 2-
716) which go beyond any mere arithmetic as between contract price and market price, there is usually a 
"reasonably certain basis for granting an appropriate remedy for breach" so that the contract need not fail for 
indefiniteness.
2. Under some circumstances the postponement of agreement on price will mean that no deal has really been 
concluded, and this is made express in the preamble of subsection (1) ("The parties if they so intend") and in 
subsection (4).  Whether or not this is so is, in most cases, a question to be determined by the trier of fact.

§ 2-305. Open Price Term.
Page 2 of 3
3. Subsection (2), dealing with the situation where the price is to be fixed by one party rejects the uncommercial 
idea that an agreement that the seller may fix the price means that he may fix any price he may wish by the express 
qualification that the price so fixed must be fixed in good faith.  Good faith includes observance of reasonable 
commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade if the party is a merchant.  (Section 2-103).  But in the normal case 
a "posted price" or a future seller's or buyer's "given price," "price in effect," "market price," or the like satisfies the 
good faith requirement.
4. The section recognizes that there may be cases in which a particular person's judgment is not chosen merely as 
a barometer or index of a fair price but is an essential condition to the parties' intent to make any contract at all.  For 
example, the case where a known and trusted expert is to "value" a particular painting for which there is no market 
standard differs sharply from the situation where a named expert is to determine the grade of cotton, and the 
difference would support a finding that in the one the parties did not intend to make a binding agreement if that 
expert were unavailable whereas in the other they did so intend.  Other circumstances would of course affect the 
validity of such a finding.
5. Under subsection (3), wrongful interference by one party with any agreed machinery for price fixing in the 
contract may be treated by the other party as a repudiation justifying cancellation, or merely as a failure to take 
cooperative action thus shifting to the aggrieved party the reasonable leeway in fixing the price.
6. Throughout the entire section, the purpose is to give effect to the agreement which has been made.  That effect, 
however, is always conditioned by the requirement of good faith action which is made an inherent part of all 
contracts within this Act.  (Section 1-203).
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-204(3), 2-706, 2-712 and 2-716.
Point 3: Section 2-103.
Point 5: Sections 2-311 and 2-610.
Point 6: Section 1-203.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement".  Section 1-201.
"Burden of establishing".  Section 1-201.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Cancellation".  Section 2-106.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale".  Section 2-106.
"Fault".  Section 1-201.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Receipt of goods".  Section 2-103.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.

§ 2-305. Open Price Term.
Page 3 of 3
"Term".  Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document