U.C.C. § 2-308
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 3. 
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT        
§ 2-308. Absence of Specified Place for Delivery.
Unless otherwise agreed
(a)  the place for delivery of goods is the seller's place of business or if he has none his residence; but
(b)  in a contract for sale of identified goods which to the knowledge of the parties at the time of 
contracting are in some other place, that place is the place for their delivery; and
(c)  documents of title may be delivered through customary banking channels.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Paragraphs (a) and (b)-Section 43(1), Uniform Sales Act; Paragraph (c)-none.
Changes: Slight modification in language.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. Paragraphs (a) and (b) provide for those noncommercial sales and for those occasional commercial sales where 
no place or means of delivery has been agreed upon by the parties.  Where delivery by carrier is "required or 
authorized by the agreement", the seller's duties as to delivery of the goods are governed not by this section but by 
Section 2-504.
2. Under paragraph (b) when the identified goods contracted for are known to both parties to be in some location 
other than the seller's place of business or residence, the parties are presumed to have intended that place to be 
the place of delivery.  This paragraph also applies (unless, as would be normal, the circumstances show that 
delivery by way of documents is intended) to a bulk of goods in the possession of a bailee.  In such a case, 
however, the seller has the additional obligation to procure the acknowledgment by the bailee of the buyer's right to 
possession.
3. Where "customary banking channels" call only for due notification by the banker that the documents are 
available, leaving the buyer himself to see to the physical receipt of the goods, tender at the buyer's address is not 
required under paragraph (c).  But that paragraph merely eliminates the possibility of a default by the seller if 
"customary banking channels" have been properly used in giving notice to the buyer.  Where the bank has 
purchased a draft accompanied by or associated with documents or has undertaken its collection on behalf of the 
seller, Part 5 of Article 4 spells out its duties and relations to its customer.  Where the documents move forward 
under a letter of credit the Article on Letters of Credit spells out the duties and relations between the bank, the seller 
and the buyer.  Delivery in relationship to either tangible or electronic documents of title is defined in Article 1, 
Section 1-201.

§ 2-308. Absence of Specified Place for Delivery.
Page 2 of 2
4. The rules of this section apply only "unless otherwise agreed." The surrounding circumstances, usage of trade, 
course of dealing and course of performance, as well as the express language of the parties, may constitute an 
"otherwise agreement".
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-504 and 2-505.
Point 2: Section 2-503.
Point 3: Section 2-512, Articles 4, Part 5, and 5.
Definitional Cross References:
"Contract for sale".  Section 2-106.
"Delivery".  Section 1-201.
"Document of title".  Section 1-201.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Party".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document