U.C.C. § 2-719
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 7. 
REMEDIES        
§ 2-719. Contractual Modification or Limitation of Remedy.
(1)  Subject to the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section and of the preceding section on 
liquidation and limitation of damages,
(a)  the agreement may provide for remedies in addition to or in substitution for those provided in this 
Article and may limit or alter the measure of damages recoverable under this Article, as by limiting the 
buyer's remedies to return of the goods and repayment of the price or to repair and replacement of non-
conforming goods or parts; and
(b)  resort to a remedy as provided is optional unless the remedy is expressly agreed to be exclusive, in 
which case it is the sole remedy.
(2)  Where circumstances cause an exclusive or limited remedy to fail of its essential purpose, remedy may 
be had as provided in this Act.
(3)  Consequential damages may be limited or excluded unless the limitation or exclusion is 
unconscionable.  Limitation of consequential damages for injury to the person in the case of consumer 
goods is prima facie unconscionable but limitation of damages where the loss is commercial is not.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Under this section parties are left free to shape their remedies to their particular requirements and reasonable 
agreements limiting or modifying remedies are to be given effect.
However, it is of the very essence of a sales contract that at least minimum adequate remedies be available.  If the 
parties intend to conclude a contract for sale within this Article they must accept the legal consequence that there 
be at least a fair quantum of remedy for breach of the obligations or duties outlined in the contract.  Thus any clause 
purporting to modify or limit the remedial provisions of this Article in an unconscionable manner is subject to 
deletion and in that event the remedies made available by this Article are applicable as if the stricken clause had 
never existed.  Similarly, under subsection (2), where an apparently fair and reasonable clause because of 
circumstances fails in its purpose or operates to deprive either party of the substantial value of the bargain, it must 
give way to the general remedy provisions of this Article.
2. Subsection (1)(b) creates a presumption that clauses prescribing remedies are cumulative rather than exclusive.  
If the parties intend the term to describe the sole remedy under the contract, this must be clearly expressed.
3. Subsection (3) recognizes the validity of clauses limiting or excluding consequential damages but makes it clear 
that they may not operate in an unconscionable manner.  Actually such terms are merely an allocation of unknown 

§ 2-719. Contractual Modification or Limitation of Remedy.
Page 2 of 2
or undeterminable risks.  The seller in all cases is free to disclaim warranties in the manner provided in Section 2-
316.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-302.
Point 3: Section 2-316.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement".  Section 1-201.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Conforming".  Section 2-106.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Remedy".  Section 1-201.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document