U.C.C. § 2-709
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2. SALES          >            PART 7. 
REMEDIES        
§ 2-709. Action for the Price.
(1)  When the buyer fails to pay the price as it becomes due the seller may recover, together with any 
incidental damages under the next section, the price
(a)  of goods accepted or of conforming goods lost or damaged within a commercially reasonable time 
after risk of their loss has passed to the buyer; and
(b)  of goods identified to the contract if the seller is unable after reasonable effort to resell them at a 
reasonable price or the circumstances reasonably indicate that such effort will be unavailing.
(2)  Where the seller sues for the price he must hold for the buyer any goods which have been identified to 
the contract and are still in his control except that if resale becomes possible he may resell them at any 
time prior to the collection of the judgment.  The net proceeds of any such resale must be credited to the 
buyer and payment of the judgment entitles him to any goods not resold.
(3)  After the buyer has wrongfully rejected or revoked acceptance of the goods or has failed to make a 
payment due or has repudiated ( Section 2-610), a seller who is held not entitled to the price under this 
section shall nevertheless be awarded damages for non-acceptance under the preceding section.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 63, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten, important commercially needed changes being incorporated.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. Neither the passing of title to the goods nor the appointment of a day certain for payment is now material to a 
price action.
2. The action for the price is now generally limited to those cases where resale of the goods is impracticable except 
where the buyer has accepted the goods or where they have been destroyed after risk of loss has passed to the 
buyer.
3. This section substitutes an objective test by action for the former "not readily resalable" standard.  An action for 
the price under subsection (1)(b) can be sustained only after a "reasonable effort to resell" the goods "at reasonable 
price" has actually been made or where the circumstances "reasonably indicate" that such an effort will be 
unavailing.
4. If a buyer is in default not with respect to the price, but on an obligation to make an advance, the seller should 
recover not under this section for the price as such, but for the default in the collateral (though coincident) obligation 
to finance the seller.  If the agreement between the parties contemplates that the buyer will acquire, on making the 

§ 2-709. Action for the Price.
Page 2 of 2
advance, a security interest in the goods, the buyer on making the advance has such an interest as soon as the 
seller has rights in the agreed collateral.  See Section 9-204.
5. "Goods accepted" by the buyer under subsection (1)(a) include only goods as to which there has been no 
justified revocation of acceptance, for such a revocation means that there has been a default by the seller which 
bars his rights under this section.  "Goods lost or damaged" are covered by the section on risk of loss.  "Goods 
identified to the contract" under subsection (1)(b) are covered by the section on identification and the section on 
identification notwithstanding breach.
6. This section is intended to be exhaustive in its enumeration of cases where an action for the price lies.
7. If the action for the price fails, the seller may nonetheless have proved a case entitling him to damages for non-
acceptance.  In such a situation, subsection (3) permits recovery of those damages in the same action.
Cross References:
Point 4: Section 1-106.
Point 5: Sections 2-501, 2-509, 2-510 and 2-704.
Point 7: Section 2-708.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action".  Section 1-201.
"Buyer".  Section 2-103.
"Conforming".  Section 2-106.
"Contract".  Section 1-201.
"Goods".  Section 2-105.
"Seller".  Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document