U.C.C. § 2A-506
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2A. LEASES          >            PART 
5. DEFAULT          >             A. IN GENERAL        
§ 2A-506. Statute of Limitations.
(1)  An action for default under a lease contract, including breach of warranty or indemnity, must be 
commenced within 4 years after the cause of action accrued.  By the original lease contract the parties may 
reduce the period of limitation to not less than one year.
(2)  A cause of action for default accrues when the act or omission on which the default or breach of 
warranty is based is or should have been discovered by the aggrieved party, or when the default occurs, 
whichever is later.  A cause of action for indemnity accrues when the act or omission on which the claim for 
indemnity is based is or should have been discovered by the indemnified party, whichever is later.
(3)  If an action commenced within the time limited by subsection (1) is so terminated as to leave available 
a remedy by another action for the same default or breach of warranty or indemnity, the other action may 
be commenced after the expiration of the time limited and within 6 months after the termination of the first 
action unless the termination resulted from voluntary discontinuance or from dismissal for failure or neglect 
to prosecute.
(4)  This section does not alter the law on tolling of the statute of limitations nor does it apply to causes of 
action that have accrued before this Article becomes effective.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-725.
Changes: Substantially rewritten.
Purposes: Subsection (1) does not incorporate the limitation found in Section 2-725(1) prohibiting the parties from 
extending the period of limitation.  Breach of warranty and indemnity claims often arise in a lease transaction; with 
the passage of time such claims often diminish or are eliminated.  To encourage the parties to commence litigation 
under these circumstances makes little sense.
Subsection (2) states two rules for determining when a cause of action accrues.  With respect to default, the rule of 
Section 2-725(2) is not incorporated in favor of a more liberal rule of the later of the date when the default occurs or 
when the act or omission on which it is based is or should have been discovered.  With respect to indemnity, a 
similarly liberal rule is adopted.
Cross References:
Sections 2-725(1) and 2-725(2).
Definitional Cross References:
"Action".  Section 1-201(1).

§ 2A-506. Statute of Limitations.
Page 2 of 2
"Aggrieved party".  Section 1-201(2).
"Lease contract".  Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Party".  Section 1-201(29).
"Remedy".  Section 1-201(34).
"Termination".  Section 2A-103(1)(z).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document