U.C.C. § 3-303
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS        
§ 3-303. VALUE AND CONSIDERATION
(a)  An instrument is issued or transferred for value if:
(1)  the instrument is issued or transferred for a promise of performance, to the extent the promise has 
been performed;
(2)  the transferee acquires a security interest or other lien in the instrument other than a lien obtained 
by judicial proceeding;
(3)  the instrument is issued or transferred as payment of, or as security for, an antecedent claim 
against any person, whether or not the claim is due;
(4)  the instrument is issued or transferred in exchange for a negotiable instrument; or
(5)  the instrument is issued or transferred in exchange for the incurring of an irrevocable obligation to a 
third party by the person taking the instrument.
(b)  "Consideration" means any consideration sufficient to support a simple contract. The drawer or maker 
of an instrument has a defense if the instrument is issued without consideration. If an instrument is issued 
for a promise of performance, the issuer has a defense to the extent performance of the promise is due and 
the promise has not been performed. If an instrument is issued for value as stated in subsection (a), the 
instrument is also issued for consideration.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsection (a) is a restatement of former Section 3-303 and subsection (b) replaces former Section 3-408. The 
distinction between value and consideration in Article 3 is a very fine one. Whether an instrument is taken for value 
is relevant to the issue of whether a holder is a holder in due course. If an instrument is not issued for consideration 
the issuer has a defense to the obligation to pay the instrument. Consideration is defined in subsection (b) as "any 
consideration sufficient to support a simple contract." The definition of value in Section 1-201(44), which doesn't 
apply to Article 3, includes "any consideration sufficient to support a simple contract." Thus, outside Article 3, 
anything that is consideration is also value. A different rule applies in Article 3. Subsection (b) of Section 3-303 
states that if an instrument is issued for value it is also issued for consideration.
   Case # 1. X owes Y $ 1,000. The debt is not represented by a note. Later X issues a note to Y for the debt. Under 
subsection (a)(3) X's note is issued for value. Under subsection (b) the note is also issued for consideration whether 
or not, under contract law, Y is deemed to have given consideration for the note.
   Case # 2. X issues a check to Y in consideration of Y's promise to perform services in the future. Although the 
executory promise is consideration for issuance of the check it is value only to the extent the promise is performed. 
Subsection (a)(1).

§ 3-303. VALUE AND CONSIDERATION
Page 2 of 2
   Case # 3. X issues a note to Y in consideration of Y's promise to perform services. If at the due date of the note 
Y's performance is not yet due, Y may enforce the note because it was issued for consideration. But if at the due 
date of the note, Y's performance is due and has not been performed, X has a defense. Subsection (b).
   2. Subsection (a), which defines value, has primary importance in cases in which the issue is whether the holder 
of an instrument is a holder in due course and particularly to cases in which the issuer of the instrument has a 
defense to the instrument. Suppose Buyer and Seller signed a contract on April 1 for the sale of goods to be 
delivered on May 1. Payment of 50% of the price of the goods was due upon signing of the contract. On April 1 
Buyer delivered to Seller a check in the amount due under the contract. The check was drawn by X to Buyer as 
payee and was indorsed to Seller. When the check was presented for payment to the drawee on April 2, it was 
dishonored because X had stopped payment. At that time Seller had not taken any action to perform the contract 
with Buyer. If X has a defense on the check, the defense can be asserted against Seller who is not a holder in due 
course because Seller did not give value for the check. Subsection (a)(1). The policy basis for subsection (a)(1) is 
that the holder who gives an executory promise of performance will not suffer an out-of-pocket loss to the extent the 
executory promise is unperformed at the time the holder learns of dishonor of the instrument. When Seller took 
delivery of the check on April 1, Buyer's obligation to pay 50% of the price on that date was suspended, but when 
the check was dishonored on April 2 the obligation revived. Section 3-310(b). If payment for goods is due at or 
before delivery and the buyer fails to make the payment, the seller is excused from performing the promise to 
deliver the goods. Section 2-703. Thus, Seller is protected from an out-of-pocket loss even if the check is not 
enforceable. Holder-in-due-course status is not necessary to protect Seller.
   3. Subsection (a)(2) equates value with the obtaining of a security interest or a nonjudicial lien in the instrument. 
The term "security interest" covers Article 9 cases in which an instrument is taken as collateral as well as bank 
collection cases in which a bank acquires a security interest under Section 4-210. The acquisition of a common-law 
or statutory banker's lien is also value under subsection (a)(2). An attaching creditor or other person who acquires a 
lien by judicial proceedings does not give value for the purposes of subsection (a)(2).
   4. Subsection (a)(3) follows former Section 3-303(b) in providing that the holder takes for value if the instrument is 
taken in payment of or as security for an antecedent claim, even though there is no extension of time or other 
concession, and whether or not the claim is due. Subsection (a)(3) applies to any claim against any person; there is 
no requirement that the claim arise out of contract. In particular the provision is intended to apply to an instrument 
given in payment of or as security for the debt of a third person, even though no concession is made in return.
   5. Subsection (a)(4) and (5) restate former Section 3-303(c). They state generally recognized exceptions to the 
rule that an executory promise is not value. A negotiable instrument is value because it carries the possibility of 
negotiation to a holder in due course, after which the party who gives it is obliged to pay. The same reasoning 
applies to any irrevocable commitment to a third person, such as a letter of credit issued when an instrument is 
taken.
   6. The term "promise" in paragraph (a)(1) is used in the phrase "promise of performance" and for that reason 
does not have the specialized meaning given that term in Section 3-103(a)(12). See Section 1-201 ("Changes from 
Former Law"). No inference should be drawn from the decision to use the phrase "promise of performance," 
although the phrase does include the word "promise," which has the specialized definition set forth in Section 3-
103. Indeed, that is true even though "undertaking" is used instead of "promise" in Section 3-104(a)(3). See Section 
3-104 comment 1 (explaining the use of the term "undertaking" in Section 3-104 to avoid use of the defined term 
"promise"). Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 
2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document