U.C.C. § 3-415
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES        
§ 3-415. OBLIGATION OF INDORSER
(a)  Subject to subsections (b), (c), (d), (e) and to Section 3-419(d), if an instrument is dishonored, an 
indorser is obliged to pay the amount due on the instrument (i) according to the terms of the instrument at 
the time it was indorsed, or (ii) if the indorser indorsed an incomplete instrument, according to its terms 
when completed, to the extent stated in Sections 3-115 and 3-407. The obligation of the indorser is owed to 
a person entitled to enforce the instrument or to a subsequent indorser who paid the instrument under this 
section.
(b)  If an indorsement states that it is made "without recourse" or otherwise disclaims liability of the 
indorser, the indorser is not liable under subsection (a) to pay the instrument.
(c)  If notice of dishonor of an instrument is required by Section 3-503 and notice of dishonor complying 
with that section is not given to an indorser, the liability of the indorser under subsection (a) is discharged.
(d)  If a draft is accepted by a bank after an indorsement is made, the liability of the indorser under 
subsection (a) is discharged.
(e)  If an indorser of a check is liable under subsection (a) and the check is not presented for payment, or 
given to a depositary bank for collection, within 30 days after the day the indorsement was made, the 
liability of the indorser under subsection (a) is discharged.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Subsections (a) and (b) restate the substance of former Section 3-414(1). Subsection (2) of former Section 3-
414 has been dropped because it is superfluous. Although notice of dishonor is not mentioned in subsection (a), it 
must be given in some cases to charge an indorser. It is covered in subsection (c). Regulation CC § 229.35(b) 
provides that a bank handling a check for collection or return is liable to a bank that subsequently handles the check 
to the extent the latter bank does not receive payment for the check. This liability applies whether or not the bank 
incurring the liability indorsed the check.
   2. Section 3-503 states when notice of dishonor is required and how it must be given. If required notice of 
dishonor is not given in compliance with Section 3-503, subsection (c) of Section 3-415 states that the effect is to 
discharge the indorser's obligation.
   3. Subsection (d) is similar in effect to Section 3-414(c) if the draft is accepted by a bank after the indorsement is 
made. See Comment 3 to Section 3-414. If a draft is accepted by a bank before the indorsement is made, the 
indorser incurs the obligation stated in subsection (a).
   4. Subsection (e) modifies former Sections 3-503(2)(b) and 3-502(1)(a) by stating a 30-day rather than a seven-
day period, and stating it as an absolute rather than a presumptive period.
   5. As stated in subsection (a), the obligation of an indorser to pay the amount due on the instrument is generally 
owed not only to a person entitled to enforce the instrument but also to a subsequent indorser who paid the 

§ 3-415. OBLIGATION OF INDORSER
Page 2 of 2
instrument. But if the prior indorser and the subsequent indorser are both anomalous indorsers, this rule does not 
apply. In that case, Section 3-116 applies. Under Section 3-116(a), the anomalous indorsers are jointly and 
severally liable and if either pays the instrument the indorser who pays has a right of contribution against the other. 
Section 3-116(b). The right to contribution in Section 3-116(b) is subject to "agreement of the affected parties." 
Suppose the subsequent indorser can prove an agreement with the prior indorser under which the prior indorser 
agreed to treat the subsequent indorser as a guarantor of the obligation of the prior indorser. Rights of the two 
indorsers between themselves would be governed by the agreement. Under suretyship law, the subsequent 
indorser under such an agreement is referred to as a sub-surety. Under the agreement, if the subsequent indorser 
pays the instrument there is a right to reimbursement from the prior indorser; if the prior indorser pays the 
instrument, there is no right of recourse against the subsequent indorser. See PEB Commentary No. 11, dated 
February 10, 1994 [Appendix V, infra].
   6. The rule of this section is similar to the rule of Article 44 of the Convention on International Bills of Exchange 
and International Promissory Notes. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform 
Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document