U.C.C. § 3-501
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 5. DISHONOR        
§ 3-501. PRESENTMENT
(a)  "Presentment" means a demand made by or on behalf of a person entitled to enforce an instrument (i) 
to pay the instrument made to the drawee or a party obliged to pay the instrument or, in the case of a note 
or accepted draft payable at a bank, to the bank, or (ii) to accept a draft made to the drawee.
(b)  The following rules are subject to Article 4, agreement of the parties, and clearing-house rules and the 
like:
(1)  Presentment may be made at the place of payment of the instrument and must be made at the 
place of payment if the instrument is payable at a bank in the United States; may be made by any 
commercially reasonable means, including an oral, written, or electronic communication; is effective 
when the demand for payment or acceptance is received by the person to whom presentment is made; 
and is effective if made to any one of two or more makers, acceptors, drawees, or other payors.
(2)  Upon demand of the person to whom presentment is made, the person making presentment must 
(i) exhibit the instrument, (ii) give reasonable identification and, if presentment is made on behalf of 
another person, reasonable evidence of authority to do so, and (iii) sign a receipt on the instrument for 
any payment made or surrender the instrument if full payment is made.
(3)  Without dishonoring the instrument, the party to whom presentment is made may (i) return the 
instrument for lack of a necessary indorsement, or (ii) refuse payment or acceptance for failure of the 
presentment to comply with the terms of the instrument, an agreement of the parties, or other 
applicable law or rule.
(4)  The party to whom presentment is made may treat presentment as occurring on the next business 
day after the day of presentment if the party to whom presentment is made has established a cut-off 
hour not earlier than 2 p.m. for the receipt and processing of instruments presented for payment or 
acceptance and presentment is made after the cut-off hour.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Subsection (a) defines presentment. Subsection (b)(1) states the place and manner of presentment. Electronic 
presentment is authorized. The communication of the demand for payment or acceptance is effective when 
received. Subsection (b)(2) restates former Section 3-505. Subsection (b)(2)(i) allows the person to whom 
presentment is made to require exhibition of the instrument, unless the parties have agreed otherwise as in an 
electronic presentment agreement. Former Section 3-507(3) is the antecedent of subsection (b)(3)(i). Since a payor 
must decide whether to pay or accept on the day of presentment, subsection (b)(4) allows the payor to set a cut-off 
hour for receipt of instruments presented.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 3-501. PRESENTMENT
Page 2 of 2
End of Document