U.C.C. § 3-502
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS          
>            PART 5. DISHONOR        
§ 3-502. DISHONOR
(a)  Dishonor of a note is governed by the following rules:
(1)  If the note is payable on demand, the note is dishonored if presentment is duly made to the maker 
and the note is not paid on the day of presentment.
(2)  If the note is not payable on demand and is payable at or through a bank or the terms of the note 
require presentment, the note is dishonored if presentment is duly made and the note is not paid on the 
day it becomes payable or the day of presentment, whichever is later.
(3)  If the note is not payable on demand and paragraph (2) does not apply, the note is dishonored if it 
is not paid on the day it becomes payable.
(b)  Dishonor of an unaccepted draft other than a documentary draft is governed by the following rules:
(1)  If a check is duly presented for payment to the payor bank otherwise than for immediate payment 
over the counter, the check is dishonored if the payor bank makes timely return of the check or sends 
timely notice of dishonor or nonpayment under Section 4-301 or 4-302, or becomes accountable for the 
amount of the check under Section 4-302.
(2)  If a draft is payable on demand and paragraph (1) does not apply, the draft is dishonored if 
presentment for payment is duly made to the drawee and the draft is not paid on the day of 
presentment.
(3)  If a draft is payable on a date stated in the draft, the draft is dishonored if (i) presentment for 
payment is duly made to the drawee and payment is not made on the day the draft becomes payable or 
the day of presentment, whichever is later, or (ii) presentment for acceptance is duly made before the 
day the draft becomes payable and the draft is not accepted on the day of presentment.
(4)  If a draft is payable on elapse of a period of time after sight or acceptance, the draft is dishonored if 
presentment for acceptance is duly made and the draft is not accepted on the day of presentment.
(c)  Dishonor of an unaccepted documentary draft occurs according to the rules stated in subsection (b)(2), 
(3), and (4), except that payment or acceptance may be delayed without dishonor until no later than the 
close of the third business day of the drawee following the day on which payment or acceptance is required 
by those paragraphs.
(d)  Dishonor of an accepted draft is governed by the following rules:
(1)  If the draft is payable on demand, the draft is dishonored if presentment for payment is duly made 
to the acceptor and the draft is not paid on the day of presentment.
(2)  If the draft is not payable on demand, the draft is dishonored if presentment for payment is duly 
made to the acceptor and payment is not made on the day it becomes payable or the day of 
presentment, whichever is later.
(e)  In any case in which presentment is otherwise required for dishonor under this section and presentment 
is excused under Section 3-504, dishonor occurs without presentment if the instrument is not duly accepted 
or paid.

§ 3-502. DISHONOR
Page 2 of 4
(f)  If a draft is dishonored because timely acceptance of the draft was not made and the person entitled to 
demand acceptance consents to a late acceptance, from the time of acceptance the draft is treated as 
never having been dishonored.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Section 3-415 provides that an indorser is obliged to pay an instrument if the instrument is dishonored and is 
discharged if the indorser is entitled to notice of dishonor and notice is not given. Under Section 3-414, the drawer 
is obliged to pay an unaccepted draft if it is dishonored. The drawer, however, is not entitled to notice of dishonor 
except to the extent required in a case governed by Section 3-414(d). Part 5 tells when an instrument is dishonored 
(Section 3-502) and what it means to give notice of dishonor (Section 3-503). Often dishonor does not occur until 
presentment (Section 3-501), and frequently presentment and notice of dishonor are excused (Section 3-504).
   2. In the great majority of cases presentment and notice of dishonor are waived with respect to notes. In most 
cases a formal demand for payment to the maker of the note is not contemplated. Rather, the maker is expected to 
send payment to the holder of the note on the date or dates on which payment is due. If payment is not made when 
due, the holder usually makes a demand for payment, but in the normal case in which presentment is waived, 
demand is irrelevant and the holder can proceed against indorsers when payment is not received. Under former 
Article 3, in the small minority of cases in which presentment and dishonor were not waived with respect to notes, 
the indorser was discharged from liability (former Section 3-502(1)(a)) unless the holder made presentment to the 
maker on the exact day the note was due (former Section 3-503(1)(c)) and gave notice of dishonor to the indorser 
before midnight of the third business day after dishonor (former Section 3-508(2)). These provisions are omitted 
from Revised Article 3 as inconsistent with practice which seldom involves face-to-face dealings.
   3. Subsection (a) applies to notes. Subsection (a)(1) applies to notes payable on demand. Dishonor requires 
presentment, and dishonor occurs if payment is not made on the day of presentment. There is no change from 
previous Article 3. Subsection (a)(2) applies to notes payable at a definite time if the note is payable at or through a 
bank or, by its terms, presentment is required. Dishonor requires presentment, and dishonor occurs if payment is 
not made on the due date or the day of presentment if presentment is made after the due date. Subsection (a)(3) 
applies to all other notes. If the note is not paid on its due date it is dishonored. This allows holders to collect notes 
in ways that make sense commercially without having to be concerned about a formal presentment on a given day.
   4. Subsection (b) applies to unaccepted drafts other than documentary drafts. Subsection (b)(1) applies to 
checks. Except for checks presented for immediate payment over the counter, which are covered by subsection 
(b)(2), dishonor occurs according to rules stated in Article 4. Those rules contemplate four separate situations that 
warrant discussion. The first two situations arise in the normal course of affairs, in which the drawee bank makes 
settlement for the amount of the check to the presenting bank. In the first situation, the drawee bank under Section 
4-301 recovers this settlement if it returns the check by its midnight deadline (Section 4-104). In that case the check 
is not paid and dishonor occurs under Section 3-502(b)(1). The second situation arises if the drawee bank has 
made such a settlement and does not return the check or give notice of dishonor or nonpayment within the midnight 
deadline. In that case, the settlement becomes final payment of the check under Section 4-215. Because the 
drawee bank already has paid such an item, it cannot be "accountable" for the item under the terms of Section 4-
302(a)(1). Thus, no dishonor occurs regardless of whether the drawee bank retains the check indefinitely or for 
some reason returns the check after its midnight deadline.
   The third and fourth situations arise less commonly, in cases in which the drawee bank does not settle for the 
check when it is received. Under Section 4-302 if the drawee bank is not also the depositary bank and retains the 
check without settling for it beyond midnight of the day it is presented for payment, the bank at that point becomes 
"accountable" for the amount of the check, i.e., it is obliged to pay the amount of the check. If the drawee bank is 

§ 3-502. DISHONOR
Page 3 of 4
also the depositary bank, the bank becomes accountable for the amount of the check if the bank does not pay the 
check or return it or send notice of dishonor by its midnight deadline. Hence, if the drawee bank is also the 
depositary bank and does not either settle for the check when it is received (a settlement that would ripen into final 
payment if the drawee bank failed to take action to recover the settlement by its midnight deadline) or return the 
check or an appropriate notice by its midnight deadline, the drawee bank will become accountable for the amount of 
the check under Section 4-302. Thus, in all cases in which the drawee bank becomes accountable under Section 4-
302, the check has not been paid (either by a settlement that became unrecoverable or otherwise) and thus, under 
Section 3-502(b)(1), the check is dishonored.
   The fact that a bank that is accountable for the amount of the check under Section 4-302 is obliged to pay the 
check does not mean that the check has been paid. Indeed, because each of the paragraphs of Section 4-302(b) is 
limited by its terms to situations in which a bank has not paid the item, a drawee bank will be accountable under 
Section 4-302 only in situations in which it has not previously paid the check. Section 3-502(b)(1) reflects the view 
that a person presenting a check is entitled to payment, not just the ability to hold the drawee accountable under 
Section 4-302. If that payment is not made in a timely manner, the check is dishonored.
   Regulation CC Section 229.36(d) provides that settlement between banks for the forward collection of checks is 
final. The relationship of that section to Articles 3 and 4 is discussed in the Commentary to that section. 
Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
   Subsection (b)(2) applies to demand drafts other than those governed by subsection (b)(1). It covers checks 
presented for immediate payment over the counter and demand drafts other than checks. Dishonor occurs if 
presentment for payment is made and payment is not made on the day of presentment.
   Subsection (b)(3) and (4) applies to time drafts. An unaccepted time draft differs from a time note. The maker of a 
note knows that the note has been issued, but the drawee of a draft may not know that a draft has been drawn on it. 
Thus, with respect to drafts, presentment for payment or acceptance is required. Subsection (b)(3) applies to drafts 
payable on a date stated in the draft. Dishonor occurs if presentment for payment is made and payment is not made 
on the day the draft becomes payable or the day of presentment if presentment is made after the due date. The 
holder of an unaccepted draft payable on a stated date has the option of presenting the draft for acceptance before 
the day the draft becomes payable to establish whether the drawee is willing to assume liability by accepting. Under 
subsection (b)(3)(ii) dishonor occurs when the draft is presented and not accepted. Subsection (b)(4) applies to 
unaccepted drafts payable on elapse of a period of time after sight or acceptance. If the draft is payable 30 days 
after sight, the draft must be presented for acceptance to start the running of the 30-day period. Dishonor occurs if it 
is not accepted. The rules in subsection (b)(3) and (4) follow former Section 3-501(1)(a).
   5. Subsection (c) gives drawees an extended period to pay documentary drafts because of the time that may be 
needed to examine the documents. The period prescribed is that given by Section 5-112 in cases in which a letter 
of credit is involved.
   6. Subsection (d) governs accepted drafts. If the acceptor's obligation is to pay on demand the rule, stated in 
subsection (d)(1), is the same as for that of a demand note stated in subsection (a)(1). If the acceptor's obligation is 
to pay at a definite time the rule, stated in subsection (d)(2), is the same as that of a time note payable at a bank 
stated in subsection (b)(2).
   7. Subsection (e) is a limitation on subsection (a)(1) and (2), subsection (b), subsection (c), and subsection (d). 
Each of those provisions states dishonor as occurring after presentment. If presentment is excused under Section 
3-504, dishonor occurs under those provisions without presentment if the instrument is not duly accepted or paid.
   8. Under subsection (b)(3)(ii) and (4) if a draft is presented for acceptance and the draft is not accepted on the 
day of presentment, there is dishonor. But after dishonor, the holder may consent to late acceptance. In that case, 
under subsection (f), the late acceptance cures the dishonor. The draft is treated as never having been dishonored. 
If the draft is subsequently presented for payment and payment is refused dishonor occurs at that time.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws

§ 3-502. DISHONOR
Page 4 of 4
End of Document