U.C.C. § 4-110
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS        
§ 4-110. ELECTRONIC PRESENTMENT
(a)  "Agreement for electronic presentment" means an agreement, clearing-house rule, or Federal Reserve 
regulation or operating circular, providing that presentment of an item may be made by transmission of an 
image of an item or information describing the item ("presentment notice") rather than delivery of the item 
itself. The agreement may provide for procedures governing retention, presentment, payment, dishonor, 
and other matters concerning items subject to the agreement.
(b)  Presentment of an item pursuant to an agreement for presentment is made when the presentment 
notice is received.
(c)  If presentment is made by presentment notice, a reference to "item" or "check" in this Article means the 
presentment notice unless the context otherwise indicates.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. "An agreement for electronic presentment" refers to an agreement under which presentment may be made to a 
payor bank by a presentment notice rather than by presentment of the item. Under imaging technology now under 
development, the presentment notice might be an image of the item. The electronic presentment agreement may 
provide that the item may be retained by a depositary bank, other collecting bank, or even a customer of the 
depositary bank, or it may provide that the item will follow the presentment notice. The identifying characteristic of 
an electronic presentment agreement is that presentment occurs when the presentment notice is received. "An 
agreement for electronic presentment" does not refer to the common case of retention of items by payor banks 
because the item itself is presented to the payor bank in these cases. Payor bank check retention is a matter of 
agreement between payor banks and their customers. Provisions on payor bank check retention are found in 
Section 4-406(b).
   2. The assumptions under which the electronic presentment amendments are based are as follows: No bank will 
participate in an electronic presentment program without an agreement. These agreements may be either bilateral 
(Section 4-103(a)), under which two banks that frequently do business with each other may agree to depositary 
bank check retention, or multilateral (Section 4-103(b)), in which large segments of the banking industry may 
participate in such a program. In the latter case, federal or other uniform regulatory standards would likely supply 
the substance of the electronic presentment agreement, the application of which could be triggered by the use of 
some form of identifier on the item. Regulation CC, Section 229.36(c) authorizes truncation agreements but forbids 
them from extending return times or otherwise varying requirements of the part of Regulation CC governing check 
collection without the agreement of all parties interested in the check. For instance, an extension of return time 
could damage a depositary bank which must make funds available to its customers under mandatory availability 
schedules. The Expedited Funds Availability Act, 12 U.S.C. Section 4008(b)(2), directs the Federal Reserve Board 
to consider requiring that banks provide for check truncation.
   3. The parties affected by an agreement for electronic presentment, with the exception of the customer, can be 
expected to protect themselves. For example, the payor bank can probably be expected to limit its risk of loss from 

§ 4-110. ELECTRONIC PRESENTMENT
Page 2 of 2
drawer forgery by limiting the dollar amount of eligible items (Federal Reserve program), by reconcilement 
agreements (ABA Safekeeping program), by insurance (credit union share draft program), or by other means. 
Because agreements will exist, only minimal amendments are needed to make clear that the UCC does not prohibit 
electronic presentment.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document