U.C.C. § 4-303
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 3. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: PAYOR BANKS        
§ 4-303. WHEN ITEMS SUBJECT TO NOTICE, STOP-PAYMENT ORDER, 
LEGAL PROCESS, OR SETOFF; ORDER IN WHICH ITEMS MAY BE 
CHANGED OR CERTIFIED
(a)  Any knowledge, notice, or stop-payment order received by, legal process served upon, or setoff 
exercised by a payor bank comes too late to terminate, suspend, or modify the bank's right or duty to pay 
an item or to charge its customer's account for the item if the knowledge, notice, stop-payment order, or 
legal process is received or served and a reasonable time for the bank to act thereon expires or the setoff is 
exercised after the earliest of the following:
(1)  the bank accepts or certifies the item;
(2)  the bank pays the item in cash;
(3)  the bank settles for the item without having a right to revoke the settlement under statute, clearing-
house rule, or agreement;
(4)  the bank becomes accountable for the amount of the item under Section 4-302 dealing with the 
payor bank's responsibility for late return of items; or
(5)  with respect to checks, a cutoff hour no earlier than one hour after the opening of the next banking 
day after the banking day on which the bank received the check and no later than the close of that next 
banking day or, if no cutoff hour is fixed, the close of the next banking day after the banking day on 
which the bank received the check.
(b)  Subject to subsection (a), items may be accepted, paid, certified, or charged to the indicated account of 
its customer in any order.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. While a payor bank is processing an item presented for payment, it may receive knowledge or a legal notice 
affecting the item, such as knowledge or a notice that the drawer has filed a petition in bankruptcy or made an 
assignment for the benefit of creditors; may receive an order of the drawer stopping payment on the item; may have 
served on it an attachment of the account of the drawer; or the bank itself may exercise a right of setoff against the 
drawer's account. Each of these events affects the account of the drawer and may eliminate or freeze all or part of 
whatever balance is available to pay the item. Subsection (a) states the rule for determining the relative priorities 
between these various legal events and the item.
   2. The rule is that if any one of several things has been done to the item or if it has reached any one of several 
stages in its processing at the time the knowledge, notice, stop-payment order or legal process is received or 
served and a reasonable time for the bank to act thereon expires or the setoff is exercised, the knowledge, notice, 
stop-payment order, legal process or setoff comes too late, the item has priority and a charge to the customer's 
account may be made and is effective. With respect to the effect of the customer's bankruptcy, the bank's rights are 

§ 4-303. WHEN ITEMS SUBJECT TO NOTICE, STOP-PAYMENT ORDER, LEGAL PROCESS, OR SETOFF; 
ORDER IN WHICH ITEMS MAY BE CHANGED OR CERTIFIED
Page 2 of 2
governed by Bankruptcy Code Section 542(c) which codifies the result of Bank of Marin v. England, 385 U.S. 99 
(1966). Section 4-405 applies to the death or incompetence of the customer.
   3. Once a payor bank has accepted or certified an item or has paid the item in cash, the event has occurred that 
determines priorities between the item and the various legal events usually described as the "four legals." 
Paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) so provide. If a payor bank settles for an item presented over the counter 
for immediate payment by a cashier's check or teller's check which the presenting person agrees to accept, 
paragraph (3) of subsection (a) would control and the event determining priority has occurred. Because 
presentment was over the counter, Section 4-301(a) does not apply to give the payor bank the statutory right to 
revoke the settlement. Thus the requirements of paragraph (3) have been met unless a clearing-house rule or 
agreement of the parties provides otherwise.
   4. In the usual case settlement for checks is by entries in bank accounts. Since the process-of-posting test has 
been abandoned as inappropriate for automated check collection, the determining event for priorities is a given hour 
on the day after the item is received. (Paragraph (5) of subsection (a).) The hour may be fixed by the bank no 
earlier than one hour after the opening on the next banking day after the bank received the check and no later than 
the close of that banking day. If an item is received after the payor bank's regular Section 4-108 cutoff hour, it is 
treated as received the next banking day. If a bank receives an item after its regular cutoff hour on Monday and an 
attachment is levied at noon on Tuesday, the attachment is prior to the item if the bank had not before that hour 
taken the action described in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a). The Commentary to Regulation CC 
Section 229.36(d) explains that even though settlement by a paying bank for a check is final for Regulation CC 
purposes, the paying bank's right to return the check before its midnight deadline under the UCC is not affected.
   5. Another event conferring priority for an item and a charge to the customer's account based upon the item is 
stated by the language "become accountable for the amount of the item under Section 4-302 dealing with the payor 
bank's responsibility for late return of items." Expiration of the deadline under Section 4-302 with resulting 
accountability by the payor bank for the amount of the item, establishes priority of the item over notices, stop-
payment orders, legal process or setoff.
   6. In the case of knowledge, notice, stop-payment orders and legal process the effective time for determining 
whether they were received too late to affect the payment of an item and a charge to the customer's account by 
reason of such payment, is receipt plus a reasonable time for the bank to act on any of these communications. 
Usually a relatively short time is required to communicate to the accounting department advice of one of these 
events but certainly some time is necessary. Compare Sections 1-201(27) and 4-403. In the case of setoff the 
effective time is when the setoff is actually made.
   7. As between one item and another no priority rule is stated. This is justified because of the impossibility of 
stating a rule that would be fair in all cases, having in mind the almost infinite number of combinations of large and 
small checks in relation to the available balance on hand in the drawer's account; the possible methods of receipt; 
and other variables. Further, the drawer has drawn all the checks, the drawer should have funds available to meet 
all of them and has no basis for urging one should be paid before another; and the holders have no direct right 
against the payor bank in any event, unless of course, the bank has accepted, certified or finally paid a particular 
item, or has become liable for it under Section 4-302. Under subsection (b) the bank has the right to pay items for 
which it is itself liable ahead of those for which it is not.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document