U.C.C. § 4-407
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT          >            
PART 4. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAYOR BANK AND ITS CUSTOMER        
§ 4-407. PAYOR BANK'S RIGHT TO SUBROGATION ON IMPROPER 
PAYMENT
If a payor bank has paid an item over the order of the drawer or maker to stop payment, or after an account 
has been closed, or otherwise under circumstances giving a basis for objection by the drawer or maker, to 
prevent unjust enrichment and only to the extent necessary to prevent loss to the bank by reason of its 
payment of the item, the payor bank is subrogated to the rights
(1)  of any holder in due course on the item against the drawer or maker;
(2)  of the payee or any other holder of the item against the drawer or maker either on the item or under 
the transaction out of which the item arose; and
(3)  of the drawer or maker against the payee or any other holder of the item with respect to the 
transaction out of which the item arose.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Section 4-403 states that a stop-payment order or an order to close an account is binding on a bank. If a bank 
pays an item over such an order it is prima facie liable, but under subsection (c) of Section 4-403 the burden of 
establishing the fact and amount of loss from such payment is on the customer. A defense frequently interposed by 
a bank in an action against it for wrongful payment over a stop-payment order is that the drawer or maker suffered 
no loss because it would have been liable to a holder in due course in any event. On this argument some cases 
have held that payment cannot be stopped against a holder in due course. Payment can be stopped, but if it is, the 
drawer or maker is liable and the sound rule is that the bank is subrogated to the rights of the holder in due course. 
The preamble and paragraph (1) of this section state this rule.
   2. Paragraph (2) also subrogates the bank to the rights of the payee or other holder against the drawer or maker 
either on the item or under the transaction out of which it arose. It may well be that the payee is not a holder in due 
course but still has good rights against the drawer. These may be on the check but also may not be as, for 
example, where the drawer buys goods from the payee and the goods are partially defective so that the payee is 
not entitled to the full price, but the goods are still worth a portion of the contract price. If the drawer retains the 
goods it is obligated to pay a part of the agreed price. If the bank has paid the check it should be subrogated to this 
claim of the payee against the drawer.
   3. Paragraph (3) subrogates the bank to the rights of the drawer or maker against the payee or other holder with 
respect to the transaction out of which the item arose. If, for example, the payee was a fraudulent salesman 
inducing the drawer to issue a check for defective securities, and the bank pays the check over a stop-payment 
order but reimburses the drawer for such payment, the bank should have a basis for getting the money back from 
the fraudulent salesman.
   4. The limitations of the preamble prevent the bank itself from getting any double recovery or benefits out of its 
subrogation rights conferred by the section.

§ 4-407. PAYOR BANK'S RIGHT TO SUBROGATION ON IMPROPER PAYMENT
Page 2 of 2
   5. The spelling out of the affirmative rights of the bank in this section does not destroy other existing rights 
(Section 1-103). Among others these may include the defense of a payor bank that by conduct in recognizing the 
payment a customer has ratified the bank's action in paying in disregard of a stop-payment order or right to recover 
money paid under a mistake.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document