U.C.C. § 8-201
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES          
>            PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER        
§ 8-201. ISSUER
(a)  With respect to an obligation on or a defense to a security, an "issuer" includes a person that:
(1)  places or authorizes the placing of its name on a security certificate, other than as authenticating 
trustee, registrar, transfer agent, or the like, to evidence a share, participation, or other interest in its 
property or in an enterprise, or to evidence its duty to perform an obligation represented by the 
certificate;
(2)  creates a share, participation, or other interest in its property or in an enterprise, or undertakes an 
obligation, that is an uncertificated security;
(3)  directly or indirectly creates a fractional interest in its rights or property, if the fractional interest is 
represented by a security certificate; or
(4)  becomes responsible for, or in place of, another person described as an issuer in this section.
(b)  With respect to an obligation on or defense to a security, a guarantor is an issuer to the extent of its 
guaranty, whether or not its obligation is noted on a security certificate.
(c)  With respect to a registration of a transfer, issuer means a person on whose behalf transfer books are 
maintained.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. The definition of "issuer" in this section functions primarily to describe the persons whose defenses may be cut 
off under the rules in Part 2. In large measure it simply tracks the language of the definition of security in Section 8-
102(a)(15).
   2. Subsection (b) distinguishes the obligations of a guarantor as issuer from those of the principal obligor. 
However, it does not exempt the guarantor from the impact of subsection (d) of Section 8-202. Whether or not the 
obligation of the guarantor is noted on the security is immaterial. Typically, guarantors are parent corporations, or 
stand in some similar relationship to the principal obligor. If that relationship existed at the time the security was 
originally issued the guaranty would probably have been noted on the security. However, if the relationship arose 
afterward, e.g., through a purchase of stock or properties, or through merger or consolidation, probably the notation 
would not have been made. Nonetheless, the holder of the security is entitled to the benefit of the obligation of the 
guarantor.
   3. Subsection (c) narrows the definition of "issuer" for purposes of Part 4 of this Article (registration of transfer). It 
is supplemented by Section 8-407.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
   "Person"   Section 1-201(30)
   "Security"

§ 8-201. ISSUER
Page 2 of 2
   Section 8-102(a)(15)
   "Security certificate"
   Section 8-102(a)(16)
   "Uncertificated security"
   Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document