U.C.C. § 9-204
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY 
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT          >            SUBPART 1. 
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT        
§ 9-204. AFTER-ACQUIRED PROPERTY; FUTURE ADVANCES
(a) [After-acquired collateral.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), a security agreement may 
create or provide for a security interest in after-acquired collateral.
(b) [When after-acquired property clause not effective.]  A security interest does not attach under a 
term constituting an after-acquired property clause to:
(1)  consumer goods, other than an accession when given as additional security, unless the debtor 
acquires rights in them within 10 days after the secured party gives value; or
(2)  a commercial tort claim.
(c) [Future advances and other value.]  A security agreement may provide that collateral secures, or that 
accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes are sold in connection with, future 
advances or other value, whether or not the advances or value are given pursuant to commitment.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-204.
   2. After-Acquired Property; Continuing General Lien. Subsection (a) makes clear that a security interest 
arising by virtue of an after-acquired property clause is no less valid than a security interest in collateral in which the 
debtor has rights at the time value is given. A security interest in after-acquired property is not merely an "equitable" 
interest; no further action by the secured party--such as a supplemental agreement covering the new collateral--is 
required. This section adopts the principle of a "continuing general lien" or "floating lien." It validates a security 
interest in the debtor's existing and (upon acquisition) future assets, even though the debtor has liberty to use or 
dispose of collateral without being required to account for proceeds or substitute new collateral. See Section 9-205. 
Subsection (a), together with subsection (c), also validates "cross-collateral" clauses under which collateral 
acquired at any time secures advances whenever made.
   3. After-Acquired Consumer Goods. Subsection (b)(1) makes ineffective an after-acquired property clause 
covering consumer goods (defined in Section 9-109), except as accessions (see Section 9-335), acquired more 
than 10 days after the secured party gives value. Subsection (b)(1) is unchanged in substance from the 
corresponding provision in former Section 9-204(2).
   4. Commercial Tort Claims. Subsection (b)(2) provides that an after-acquired property clause in a security 
agreement does not reach future commercial tort claims. In order for a security interest in a tort claim to attach, the 
claim must be in existence when the security agreement is authenticated. In addition, the security agreement must 
describe the tort claim with greater specificity than simply "all tort claims." See Section 9-108(e).

§ 9-204. AFTER-ACQUIRED PROPERTY; FUTURE ADVANCES
Page 2 of 2
   5. Future Advances; Obligations Secured. Under subsection (c) collateral may secure future as well as past or 
present advances if the security agreement so provides. This is in line with the policy of this Article toward security 
interests in after-acquired property under subsection (a). Indeed, the parties are free to agree that a security interest 
secures any obligation whatsoever. Determining the obligations secured by collateral is solely a matter of 
construing the parties' agreement under applicable law. This Article rejects the holdings of cases decided under 
former Article 9 that applied other tests, such as whether a future advance or other subsequently incurred obligation 
was of the same or a similar type or class as earlier advances and obligations secured by the collateral.
   6. Sales of Receivables. Subsections (a) and (c) expressly validate after-acquired property and future advance 
clauses not only when the transaction is for security purposes but also when the transaction is the sale of accounts, 
chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes.. This result was implicit under former Article 9.
   7. Financing Statements. The effect of after-acquired property and future advance clauses as components of a 
security agreement should not be confused with the requirements applicable to financing statements under this 
Article's system of perfection by notice filing. The references to after-acquired property clauses and future advance 
clauses in this section are limited to security agreements. There is no need to refer to after-acquired property or 
future advances or other obligations secured in a financing statement. See Section 9-502, Comment 2.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document