U.C.C. § 9-202
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY 
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT          >            SUBPART 1. 
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT        
§ 9-202. TITLE TO COLLATERAL IMMATERIAL
 Except as otherwise provided with respect to consignments or sales of accounts, chattel paper, payment 
intangibles, or promissory notes, the provisions of this article with regard to rights and obligations apply whether title 
to collateral is in the secured party or the debtor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-202.
   2. Title Immaterial. The rights and duties of parties to a secured transaction and affected third parties are 
provided in this Article without reference to the location of "title" to the collateral. For example, the characteristics of 
a security interest that secures the purchase price of goods are the same whether the secured party appears to 
have retained title or the debtor appears to have obtained title and then conveyed title or a lien to the secured party.
   3. When Title Matters.
   a. Under This Article. This section explicitly acknowledges two circumstances in which the effect of certain 
Article 9 provisions turns on ownership (title). First, in some respects sales of accounts, chattel paper, payment 
intangibles, and promissory notes receive special treatment. See, e.g., Sections 9-207(a), 9-210(b), 9-615(e). 
Buyers of receivables under former Article 9 were treated specially, as well. See, e.g., former Section 9-502(2). 
Second, the remedies of a consignor under a true consignment and, for the most part, the remedies of a buyer of 
accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes are determined by other law and not by Part 6. 
See Section 9-601(g).
   b. Under Other Law. This Article does not determine which line of interpretation (e.g., title theory or lien theory, 
retained title or conveyed title) should be followed in cases in which the applicability of another rule of law depends 
upon who has title. If, for example, a revenue law imposes a tax on the "legal" owner of goods or if a corporation 
law makes a vote of the stockholders prerequisite to a corporation "giving" a security interest but not if it acquires 
property "subject" to a security interest, this Article does not attempt to define whether the secured party is a "legal" 
owner or whether the transaction "gives" a security interest for the purpose of such laws. Other rules of law or the 
agreement of the parties determines the location and source of title for those purposes.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document