U.C.C. § 9-206
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY 
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT          >            SUBPART 1. 
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT        
§ 9-206. SECURITY INTEREST ARISING IN PURCHASE OR DELIVERY OF 
FINANCIAL ASSET
(a) [Security interest when person buys through securities intermediary.]  A security interest in favor 
of a securities intermediary attaches to a person's security entitlement if:
(1)  the person buys a financial asset through the securities intermediary in a transaction in which the 
person is obligated to pay the purchase price to the securities intermediary at the time of the purchase; 
and
(2)  the securities intermediary credits the financial asset to the buyer's securities account before the 
buyer pays the securities intermediary.
(b) [Security interest secures obligation to pay for financial asset.]  The security interest described in 
subsection (a) secures the person's obligation to pay for the financial asset.
(c) [Security interest in payment against delivery transaction.]  A security interest in favor of a person 
that delivers a certificated security or other financial asset represented by a writing attaches to the security 
or other financial asset if:
(1)  the security or other financial asset:
(A)  in the ordinary course of business is transferred by delivery with any necessary indorsement or 
assignment; and
(B)  is delivered under an agreement between persons in the business of dealing with such 
securities or financial assets; and
(2)  the agreement calls for delivery against payment.
(d) [Security interest secures obligation to pay for delivery.]  The security interest described in 
subsection (c) secures the obligation to make payment for the delivery.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former 9-116.
   2. Codification of "Broker's Lien." Depending upon a securities intermediary's arrangements with its entitlement 
holders, the securities intermediary may treat the entitlement holder as entitled to financial assets before the 
entitlement holder has actually made payment for them. For example, many brokers permit retail customers to pay 
for financial assets by check. The broker may not receive final payment of the check until several days after the 
broker has credited the customer's securities account for the financial assets. Thus, the customer will have acquired 

§ 9-206. SECURITY INTEREST ARISING IN PURCHASE OR DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL ASSET
Page 2 of 2
a security entitlement prior to payment. Subsection (a) provides that, in such circumstances, the securities 
intermediary has a security interest in the entitlement holder's security entitlement. Under subsection (b) the 
security interest secures the customer's obligation to pay for the financial asset in question. Subsections (a) and (b) 
codify and adapt to the indirect holding system the so-called "broker's lien," which has long been recognized. See 
Restatement, Security § 12.
   3. Financial Assets Delivered Against Payment. Subsection (c) creates a security interest in favor of persons 
who deliver certificated securities or other financial assets in physical form, such as money market instruments, if 
the agreed payment is not received. In some arrangements for settlement of transactions in physical financial 
assets, the seller's securities custodian will deliver physical certificates to the buyer's securities custodian and 
receive a time-stamped delivery receipt. The buyer's securities custodian will examine the certificate to ensure that 
it is in good order, and that the delivery matches a trade in which the buyer has instructed the seller to deliver to 
that custodian. If all is in order, the receiving custodian will settle with the delivering custodian through whatever 
funds settlement system has been agreed upon or is used by custom and usage in that market. The understanding 
of the trade, however, is that the delivery is conditioned upon payment, so that if payment is not made for any 
reason, the security will be returned to the deliverer. Subsection (c) clarifies the rights of persons making deliveries 
in such circumstances. It provides the person making delivery with a security interest in the securities or other 
financial assets; under subsection (d), the security interest secures the seller's right to receive payment for the 
delivery. Section 8-301 specifies when delivery of a certificated security occurs; that section should be applied as 
well to other financial assets as well for purposes of this section.
   4. Automatic Attachment and Perfection. Subsections (a) and (c) refer to attachment of a security interest. 
Attachment under this section has the same incidents (enforceability, right to proceeds, etc.) as attachment under 
Section 9-203. This section overrides the general attachment rules in Section 9-203. See Section 9-203(c). A 
securities intermediary's security interest under subsection (a) is perfected by control without further action. See 
Section 8-106 (control); 9-314 (perfection). Security interests arising under subsection (c) are automatically 
perfected. See Section 9-309(9).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document