U.C.C. § 9-520
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE        
§ 9-520. ACCEPTANCE AND REFUSAL TO ACCEPT RECORD
(a) [Mandatory refusal to accept record.]  A filing office shall refuse to accept a record for filing for a 
reason set forth in Section 9-516(b) and may refuse to accept a record for filing only for a reason set forth in 
Section 9-516(b).
(b) [Communication concerning refusal.]  If a filing office refuses to accept a record for filing, it shall 
communicate to the person that presented the record the fact of and reason for the refusal and the date 
and time the record would have been filed had the filing office accepted it. The communication must be 
made at the time and in the manner prescribed by filing-office rule but [, in the case of a filing office 
described in Section 9-501(a)(2),] in no event more than two business days after the filing office receives 
the record.
(c) [When filed financing statement effective.]  A filed financing statement satisfying Section 9-502(a) 
and (b) is effective, even if the filing office is required to refuse to accept it for filing under subsection (a). 
However, Section 9-338 applies to a filed financing statement providing information described in Section 9-
516(b)(5) which is incorrect at the time the financing statement is filed.
(d) [Separate application to multiple debtors.]  If a record communicated to a filing office provides 
information that relates to more than one debtor, this part applies as to each debtor separately.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   Legislative Note: A State that elects not to require real-property filing offices to comply with subsection (b) should 
include the bracketed language.
   1. Source. New.
   2. Refusal to Accept Record for Filing. In some States, filing offices considered themselves obligated by former 
Article 9 to review the form and content of a financing statement and to refuse to accept those that they determine 
are legally insufficient. Some filing offices imposed requirements for or conditions to filing that do not appear in the 
statute. Under this section, the filing office is not expected to make legal judgments and is not permitted to impose 
additional conditions or requirements.
   Subsection (a) both prescribes and limits the bases upon which the filing office must and may reject records by 
reference to the reasons set forth in Section 9-516(b). For the most part, the bases for rejection are limited to those 
that prevent the filing office from dealing with a record that it receives--because some of the requisite information 
(e.g., the debtor's name) is missing or cannot be deciphered, because the record is not communicated by a method 
(e.g., it is MIME- rather than UU-encoded) or medium (e.g., it is written rather than electronic) that the filing office 
accepts, or because the filer fails to tender an amount equal to or greater than the filing fee.

§ 9-520. ACCEPTANCE AND REFUSAL TO ACCEPT RECORD
Page 2 of 2
   3. Consequences of Accepting Rejectable Record. Section 9-516(b) includes among the reasons for rejecting 
an initial financing statement the failure to give certain information that is not required as a condition of 
effectiveness. In conjunction with Section 9-516(b)(5), this section requires the filing office to refuse to accept a 
financing statement that is legally sufficient to perfect a security interest under Section 9-502 but does not contain a 
mailing address for the debtor or disclose whether the debtor is an individual or an organization. The information 
required by Section 9-516(b)(5) assists searchers in weeding out "false positives," i.e., records that a search 
reveals but which do not pertain to the debtor in question. It assists filers by helping to ensure that the debtor's 
name is correct and that the financing statement is filed in the proper jurisdiction.
   If the filing office accepts a financing statement that does not give this information at all, the filing is fully effective. 
Section 9-520(c). The financing statement also generally is effective if the information is given but is incorrect; 
however, Section 9-338 affords protection to buyers and holders of perfected security interests who give value in 
reasonable reliance upon the incorrect information.
   4. Filing Office's Duties with Respect to Rejected Record. Subsection (b) requires the filing office to 
communicate the fact of rejection and the reason therefor within a fixed period of time. Inasmuch as a rightfully 
rejected record is ineffective and a wrongfully rejected record is not fully effective, prompt communication 
concerning any rejection is important.
   5. Partial Effectiveness of Record. Under subsection (d), the provisions of this Part apply to each debtor 
separately. Thus, a filing office may reject an initial financing statement or other record as to one named debtor but 
accept it as to the other.
   Example: An initial financing statement is communicated to the filing office. The financing statement names two 
debtors, John Smith and Jane Smith. It contains all of the information described in Section 9-516(b)(5) with respect 
to John but lacks some of the information with respect to Jane. The filing office must accept the financing statement 
with respect to John, reject it with respect to Jane, and notify the filer of the rejection.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document