U.C.C. § 9-507
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 5. FILING          >            SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND 
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT        
§ 9-507. EFFECT OF CERTAIN EVENTS ON EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING 
STATEMENT
(a) [Disposition.]  A filed financing statement remains effective with respect to collateral that is sold, 
exchanged, leased, licensed, or otherwise disposed of and in which a security interest or agricultural lien 
continues, even if the secured party knows of or consents to the disposition.
(b) [Information becoming seriously misleading.]  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) and 
Section 9-508, a financing statement is not rendered ineffective if, after the financing statement is filed, the 
information provided in the financing statement becomes seriously misleading under Section 9-506.
(c) [Change in debtor's name.]  If the name that a filed financing statement provides for a debtor becomes 
insufficient as the name of the debtor under Section 9-503(a) so that the financing statement becomes 
seriously misleading under Section 9-506:
(1)  the financing statement is effective to perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the debtor 
before, or within four months after, the filed financing statement becomes seriously misleading; and
(2)  the financing statement is not effective to perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the 
debtor more than four months after the filed financing statement becomes seriously misleading, unless 
an amendment to the financing statement which renders the financing statement not seriously 
misleading is filed within four months after the the financing statement became seriously misleading.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-402(7).
   2. Scope of Section. This section deals with situations in which the information in a proper financing statement 
becomes inaccurate after the financing statement is filed. Compare Section 9-338, which deals with situations in 
which a financing statement contains a particular kind of information concerning the debtor (i.e., the information 
described in Section 9-516(b)(5)) that is incorrect at the time it is filed.
   3. Post-Filing Disposition of Collateral. Under subsection (a), a financing statement remains effective even if 
the collateral is sold or otherwise disposed of. This subsection clarifies the third sentence of former Section 9-
402(7) by providing that a financing statement remains effective following the disposition of collateral only when the 
security interest or agricultural lien continues in that collateral. This result is consistent with the conclusion of PEB 
Commentary No. 3. Normally, a security interest does continue after disposition of the collateral. See Section 9-
315(a). Law other than this Article determines whether an agricultural lien survives disposition of the collateral.
   As a consequence of the disposition, the collateral may be owned by a person other than the debtor against 
whom the financing statement was filed. Under subsection (a), the secured party remains perfected even if it does 

§ 9-507. EFFECT OF CERTAIN EVENTS ON EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 2 of 3
not correct the public record. For this reason, any person seeking to determine whether a debtor owns collateral 
free of security interests must inquire as to the debtor's source of title and, if circumstances seem to require it, 
search in the name of a former owner. Subsection (a) addresses only the sufficiency of the information contained in 
the financing statement. A disposition of collateral may result in loss of perfection for other reasons. See Section 9-
316.
   Example: Dee Corp. is an Illinois corporation. It creates a security interest in its equipment in favor of Secured 
Party. Secured Party files a proper financing statement in Illinois. Dee Corp. sells an item of equipment to Bee 
Corp., a Pennsylvania corporation, subject to the security interest. The security interest continues, see Section 9-
315(a), and remains perfected, see Section 9-507(a), notwithstanding that the financing statement is filed under "D" 
(for Dee Corp.) and not under "B." However, because Bee Corp. is located in Pennsylvania and not Illinois, see 
Section 9-307, unless Secured Party perfects under Pennsylvania law within one year after the transfer, its security 
interest will become unperfected and will be deemed to have been unperfected against purchasers of the collateral. 
See Section 9-316.
   4. Other Post-Filing Changes. Subsection (b) provides that, as a general matter, post-filing changes that render 
a financing statement seriously misleading have no effect on a financing statement. The financing statement 
remains effective. It is subject to two exceptions: Section 9-508 and Section 9-507(c). Section 9-508 addresses the 
effectiveness of a financing statement filed against an original debtor when a new debtor becomes bound by the 
original debtor's security agreement. It is discussed in the Comments to that section. Section 9-507(c) addresses 
cases in which a filed financing statement provides a name that, at the time of filing, satisfies the requirements of 
Section 9-503(a) with respect to the named debtor but, at a later time, no longer does so.
   Example 1: Debtor, an individual whose principal residence is in California, grants a security interest to SP in 
certain business equipment. SP files a financing statement with the California filing office. Alternative A is in effect in 
California. The financing statement provides the name appearing on Debtor's California driver's license, "James 
McGinty." Debtor obtains a court order changing his name to "Roger McGuinn" but does not change his driver's 
license. Even after the court order issues, the name provided for the debtor in the financing statement is sufficient 
under Section 9-503(a). Accordingly, Section 9-507(c) does not apply.
   The same result would follow if Alternative B is in effect in California.
   Under Section 9-503(a)(4) (Alternative A), if the debtor holds a current (i.e., unexpired) driver's license issued by 
the State where the financing statement is filed, the name required for the financing statement is the name indicated 
on the license that was issued most recently by that State. If the debtor does not have a current driver's license 
issued by that State, then the debtor's name is determined under subsection (a)(5). It follows that a debtor's name 
may change, and a financing statement providing the name on the debtor's then current driver's license may 
become seriously misleading, if the license expires and the debtor's name under subsection (a)(5) is different. The 
same consequences may follow if a debtor's driver's license is renewed and the names on the licenses differ.
   Example 2: The facts are as in Example 1. Debtor's driver's license expires one year after the entry of the court 
order changing Debtor's name. Debtor does not renew the license. Upon expiration of the license, the name 
required for sufficiency by Section 9-503(a) is the individual name of the debtor or the debtor's surname and first 
personal name. The name "James McGinty" has become insufficient.
   Example 3: The facts are as in Example 1. Before the license expires, Debtor renews the license. The name 
indicated on the new license is "Roger McGuinn." Upon issuance of the new license, "James McGinty" becomes 
insufficient as the debtor's name under Section 9-503(a).
   The same results would follow if Alternative B is in effect in California (assuming that, following the issuance of 
the court order, "James McGinty" is neither the individual name of the debtor nor the debtor's surname and first 
personal name).
   Even if the name provided as the name of the debtor becomes insufficient under Section 9-503(a), the filed 
financing statement does not become seriously misleading, and Section 9-507(c) does not apply, if the financing 

§ 9-507. EFFECT OF CERTAIN EVENTS ON EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 3 of 3
statement can be found by searching under the debtor's "correct" name, using the filing office's standard search 
logic. See Section 9-506. Any name that satisfies Section 9-503(a) at the time of the search is a "correct name" for 
these purposes. Thus, assuming that a search of the records of the California filing office under "Roger McGuinn," 
using the filing office's standard search logic, would not disclose a financing statement naming "James McGinty," 
the financing statement in Examples 2 and 3 has become seriously misleading and Section 9-507(c) applies.
   If a financing statement becomes seriously misleading because the name it provides for a debtor becomes 
insufficient, the financing statement, unless amended to provide a sufficient name for the debtor, is effective only to 
perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the debtor before, or within four months after, the change. If an 
amendment that provides a sufficient name is filed within four months after the change, the financing statement as 
amended would be effective also with respect to collateral acquired more than four months after the change. If an 
amendment that provides a sufficient name is filed more than four months after the change, the financing statement 
as amended would be effective also with respect to collateral acquired more than four months after the change, but 
only from the time of the filing of the amendment.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document