U.C.C. § 9-623
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 6. DEFAULT          >            SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF 
SECURITY INTEREST        
§ 9-623. RIGHT TO REDEEM COLLATERAL
(a) [Persons that may redeem.]  A debtor, any secondary obligor, or any other secured party or lienholder 
may redeem collateral.
(b) [Requirements for redemption.]  To redeem collateral, a person shall tender:
(1)  fulfillment of all obligations secured by the collateral; and
(2)  the reasonable expenses and attorney's fees described in Section 9-615(a)(1).
(c) [When redemption may occur.]  A redemption may occur at any time before a secured party:
(1)  has collected collateral under Section 9-607;
(2)  has disposed of collateral or entered into a contract for its disposition under Section 9-610; or
(3)  has accepted collateral in full or partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures under Section 9-622.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Source. Former Section 9-506.
   2. Redemption Right. Under this section, as under former Section 9-506, the debtor or another secured party 
may redeem collateral as long as the secured party has not collected (Section 9-607), disposed of or contracted for 
the disposition of (Section 9-610), or accepted (Section 9-620) the collateral. Although this section generally follows 
former Section 9-506, it extends the right of redemption to holders of nonconsensual liens. To redeem the collateral 
a person must tender fulfillment of all obligations secured, plus certain expenses. If the entire balance of a secured 
obligation has been accelerated, it would be necessary to tender the entire balance. A tender of fulfillment obviously 
means more than a new promise to perform an existing promise. It requires payment in full of all monetary 
obligations then due and performance in full of all other obligations then matured. If unmatured secured obligations 
remain, the security interest continues to secure them (i.e., as if there had been no default).
   3. Redemption of Remaining Collateral Following Partial Enforcement. Under Section 9-610 a secured party 
may make successive dispositions of portions of its collateral. These dispositions would not affect the debtor's, 
another secured party's, or a lienholder's right to redeem the remaining collateral.
   4. Effect of "Repledging." Section 9-207 generally permits a secured party having possession or control of 
collateral to create a security interest in the collateral. As explained in the Comments to that section, the debtor's 
right (as opposed to its practical ability) to redeem collateral is not affected by, and does not affect, the priority of a 
security interest created by the debtor's secured party.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE

§ 9-623. RIGHT TO REDEEM COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document