U.C.C. § 9-703
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS          
>            PART 7. TRANSITION        
§ 9-703. SECURITY INTEREST PERFECTED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE
(a) [Continuing priority over lien creditor: perfection requirements satisfied.]  A security interest that 
is enforceable immediately before this [Act] takes effect and would have priority over the rights of a person 
that becomes a lien creditor at that time is a perfected security interest under this [Act] if, when this [Act] 
takes effect, the applicable requirements for enforceability and perfection under this [Act] are satisfied 
without further action.
(b) [Continuing priority over lien creditor: perfection requirements not satisfied.]  Except as 
otherwise provided in Section 9-705, if, immediately before this [Act] takes effect, a security interest is 
enforceable and would have priority over the rights of a person that becomes a lien creditor at that time, but 
the applicable requirements for enforceability or perfection under this [Act] are not satisfied when this [Act] 
takes effect, the security interest:
(1)  is a perfected security interest for one year after this [Act] takes effect;
(2)  remains enforceable thereafter only if the security interest becomes enforceable under Section 9-
203 before the year expires; and
(3)  remains perfected thereafter only if the applicable requirements for perfection under this [Act] are 
satisfied before the year expires.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
   1. Perfected Security Interests Under Former Article 9 and This Article. This section deals with security 
interests that are perfected (i.e., that are enforceable and have priority over the rights of a lien creditor) under 
former Article 9 or other applicable law immediately before this Article takes effect. Subsection (a) provides, not 
surprisingly, that if the security interest would be a perfected security interest under this Article (i.e., if the 
transaction satisfies this Article's requirements for enforceability (attachment) and perfection), no further action 
need be taken for the security interest to be a perfected security interest.
   2. Security Interests Enforceable and Perfected Under Former Article 9 but Unenforceable or Unperfected 
Under This Article. Subsection (b) deals with security interests that are enforceable and perfected under former 
Article 9 or other applicable law immediately before this Article takes effect but do not satisfy the requirements for 
enforceability (attachment) or perfection under this Article. Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-705, these 
security interests are perfected security interests for one year after the effective date. If the security interest satisfies 
the requirements for attachment and perfection within that period, the security interest remains perfected thereafter. 
If the security interest satisfies only the requirements for attachment within that period, the security interest 
becomes unperfected at the end of the one-year period.
   Example 1: A pre-effective-date security agreement in a consumer transaction covers "all securities accounts." 
The security interest is properly perfected. The collateral description was adequate under former Article 9 (see 

§ 9-703. SECURITY INTEREST PERFECTED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE
Page 2 of 2
former Section 9-115(3)) but is insufficient under this Article (see Section 9-108(e)(2)). Unless the debtor 
authenticates a new security agreement describing the collateral other than by "type" (or Section 9-203(b)(3) 
otherwise is satisfied) within the one-year period following the effective date, the security interest becomes 
unenforceable at the end of that period.
   Other examples under former Article 9 or other applicable law that may be effective as attachment or 
enforceability steps but may be ineffective under this Article include an oral agreement to sell a payment intangible 
or possession by virtue of a notification to a bailee under former Section 9-305. Neither the oral agreement nor the 
notification would satisfy the revised Section 9-203 requirements for attachment.
   Example 2: A pre-effective-date possessory security interest in instruments is perfected by a bailee's receipt of 
notification under former 9-305. The bailee has not, however, acknowledged that it holds for the secured party's 
benefit under revised Section 9-313. Unless the bailee authenticates a record acknowledging that it holds for the 
secured party (or another appropriate perfection step is taken) within the one-year period following the effective 
date, the security interest becomes unperfected at the end of that period.
   3. Interpretation of Pre-Effective-Date Security Agreements. Section 9-102 defines "security agreement" as 
"an agreement that creates or provides for a security interest." Under Section 1-201(3), an "agreement" is a 
"bargain of the parties in fact." If parties to a pre-effective-date security agreement describe the collateral by using a 
term defined in former Article 9 in one way and defined in this Article in another way, in most cases it should be 
presumed that the bargain of the parties contemplated the meaning of the term under former Article 9.
   Example 3: A pre-effective-date security agreement covers "all accounts" of a debtor. As defined under former 
Article 9, an "account" did not include a right to payment for lottery winnings. These rights to payment are 
"accounts" under this Article, however. The agreement of the parties presumptively created a security interest in 
"accounts" as defined in former Article 9. A different result might be appropriate, for example, if the security 
agreement explicitly contemplated future changes in the Article 9 definitions of types of collateral--e.g., "'Accounts' 
means 'accounts' as defined in the UCC Article 9 of [State X], as that definition may be amended from time to time." 
Whether a different approach is appropriate in any given case depends on the bargain of the parties, as determined 
by applying ordinary principles of contract construction.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document