U.C.C. Art. 2A, Foreword
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 2A. LEASES        
Art. 2A, Foreword
Article 2A of the Uniform Commercial Code, along with Conforming Amendments to Articles 1 and 9, is presented, 
upon the recommendation of the Permanent Editorial Board for the Uniform Commercial Code, by the National 
Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and the American Law Institute.  It represents a major 
development in commercial law, addressing a type of business transaction, the leasing of personal property, that 
has long existed.  Under present law, transactions of this type are governed partly by common law principles 
relating to personal property, partly by principles relating to real estate leases, and partly by reference to Articles 2 
and 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code, dealing with Sales and Secured Transactions respectively.  The legal rules 
and concepts derived from these sources imperfectly fit a transaction that involves personal property rather than 
realty, and a lease rather than either a sale or a security interest as such.  A statute directly addressing the personal 
property lease is therefore appropriate.
Such a statute has become especially appropriate with the exponential expansion of the number and scale of 
personal property lease transactions.  Article 2A will apply to transactions involving billions of dollars annually.  It 
will apply to consumer's rental of automobiles or do-it-yourself equipment, on the one hand, and to leases of such 
items as commercial aircraft (to the extent not preempted by federal law) and industrial machinery, on the other.  
The text recognizes the differences between consumer and business leasing, while resting upon concepts that 
apply generally to any personal property lease transactions.
The final product represents an important undertaking of the Conference and the Institute.  It has proceeded, 
following recommendations by the Conference's Study Committee in 1981, through preparation and review by the 
Conference's Drafting Committee first of a proposed free-standing Uniform Personal Property Leasing Act, which 
was approved by the Conference, and later of Article 2A, which proceeded through the Permanent Editorial Board, 
the Executive Committee of the Conference, the Conference, and the Council of the Institute and the Annual 
Meeting of the members of the Institute.  Carrying the text through these several stages has required coordination 
of somewhat different procedures, and continued patience and mutual forbearance.  At the same time, the text has 
been subjected to analysis and criticism from many points of view and thereby steadily improved.
The resulting product borrows from both Articles 2 and 9.  These existing Articles of the Uniform Commercial Code 
have certain imperfections revealed by the long experience since their adoption.  Article 2A cannot overcome those 
imperfections but seeks to minimize their significance as applied to leases.  More fundamentally, there is important 
conceptual dissonance between Article 2 and Article 9.  The formulation of Article 2A takes Articles 2 and 9 as they 
are for the time being and hence has required careful adjustment to this dissonance.
The drafting task has been complicated both as a matter of substance and as a matter of process.  The Reporter, 
Ronald DeKoven, has been a master of substance and a steady and receptive principal in the process.  We join 
with the Conference and the Institute in expressing our admiration and appreciation for his contribution to this 
important field of law.
Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr., Chairman
Permanent Editorial
Board for the Uniform
Commercial Code

 Art. 2A, Foreword
Page 2 of 2
October 1, 1987
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document