U.C.C. Art. 8, Note
          Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)          >            ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES        
PREFATORY NOTE
The present version of Article 8 is the product of a major revision made necessary by the fact that the prior 
version of Article 8 did not adequately deal with the system of securities holding through securities 
intermediaries that has developed in the past few decades. Although the prior version of Article 8 did 
contain some provisions dealing with securities holding through securities intermediaries, these were 
engrafted onto a structure designed for securities practices of earlier times. The resulting legal uncertainties 
adversely affected all participants. The revision is intended to eliminate these uncertainties by providing a 
modern legal structure for current securities holding practices.
I.  EVOLUTION OF SECURITIES HOLDING SYSTEMS  
A.  The Traditional Securities Holding System  The original version of Article 8, drafted in the 
1940s and 1950s, was based on the assumption that possession and delivery of physical 
certificates are the key elements in the securities holding system. Ownership of securities was 
traditionally evidenced by possession of the certificates, and changes were accomplished by 
delivery of the certificates.
Transfer of securities in the traditional certificate-based system was a complicated, labor-intensive 
process. Each time securities were traded, the physical certificates had to be delivered from the 
seller to the buyer, and in the case of registered securities the certificates had to be surrendered to 
the issuer or its transfer agent for registration of transfer. As is well known, the mechanical 
problems of processing the paperwork for securities transfers reached crisis proportions in the late 
1960s, leading to calls for the elimination of the physical certificate and development of modern 
electronic systems for recording ownership of securities and transfers of ownership. That was the 
focus of the revision effort that led to the promulgation of the 1978 amendments to Article 8 
concerning uncertificated securities.
B.  The Uncertificated Securities System Envisioned by the 1978 Amendments  In 1978, 
amendments to Article 8 were approved to establish the commercial law rules that were thought 
necessary to permit the evolution of a system in which issuers would no longer issue certificates. 
The Drafting Committee that produced the 1978 amendments was given a fairly limited charge. It 
was to draft the revisions that would be needed for uncertificated securities, but otherwise leave the 
Article 8 rules unchanged. Accordingly, the 1978 amendments primarily took the form of adding 
parallel provisions dealing with uncertificated securities to the existing rules of Article 8 on 
certificated securities.
The system of securities holding contemplated by the 1978 amendments differed from the 
traditional system only in that ownership of securities would not be evidenced by physical 
certificates. It was contemplated that changes in ownership would continue to be reflected by 
changes in the records of the issuer. The main difference would be that instead of surrendering an 
indorsed certificate for registration of transfer, an instruction would be sent to the issuer directing it 
to register the transfer. Although a system of the sort contemplated by the 1978 amendments may 
well develop in the coming decades, this has not yet happened for most categories of securities. 
Mutual funds shares have long been issued in uncertificated form, but virtually all other forms of 
publicly traded corporate securities are still issued in certificated form. Individual investors who wish 
to be recorded as registered owners on the issuers' books still obtain and hold physical certificates. 
The certificates representing the largest portion of the shares of publicly traded companies, 
however, are not held by the beneficial owners, but by clearing corporations. Settlement of 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 2 of 30
securities trading occurs not by delivery of certificates or by registration of transfer on the records of 
the issuers or their transfer agents, but by computer entries in the records of clearing corporations 
and securities intermediaries. That is quite different from the system envisioned by the 1978 
amendments.
C.  Evolution of the Indirect Holding System  At the time of the "paperwork crunch" in the late 
1960s, the trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange that so seriously strained the 
capacities of the clearance and settlement system was in the range of 10 million shares per day. 
Today, the system can easily handle trading volume on routine days of hundreds of millions of 
shares. This processing capacity could have been achieved only by the application of modern 
electronic information processing systems. Yet the legal rules under which the system operates are 
not the uncertificated securities provisions of Article 8. To understand why this is so, one must 
delve at least a bit deeper into the operations of the current system.
If one examines the shareholder records of large corporations whose shares are publicly traded on 
the exchanges or in the over the counter market, one would find that one entity -- Cede & Co. -- is 
listed as the shareholder of record of somewhere in the range of sixty to eighty percent of the 
outstanding shares of all publicly traded companies. Cede & Co. is the nominee name used by The 
Depository Trust Company ("DTC"), a limited purpose trust company organized under New York 
law for the purpose of acting as a depository to hold securities for the benefit of its participants, 
some 600 or so broker-dealers and banks. Essentially all of the trading in publicly held companies 
is executed through the broker-dealers who are participants in DTC, and the great bulk of public 
securities -- the sixty to eighty percent figure noted above -- are held by these broker-dealers and 
banks on behalf of their customers. If all of these broker-dealers and banks held physical 
certificates, then as trades were executed each day it would be necessary to deliver the certificates 
back and forth among these broker-dealers and banks. By handing all of their securities over to a 
common depository all of these deliveries can be eliminated. Transfers can be accomplished by 
adjustments to the participants' DTC accounts.
Although the use of a common depository eliminates the needs for physical deliveries, an 
enormous number of entries would still have to be made on DTC's books if each transaction 
between its participants were recorded one by one on DTC's books. Any two major broker-dealers 
may have executed numerous trades with each other in a given security on a single day. Significant 
processing efficiency has been achieved by netting all of the transactions among the participants 
that occur each day, so that entries need be made on the depository's books only for the net 
changes in the positions of each participant at the end of each day. This clearance and netting 
function might well be performed by the securities exchanges or by the same institution that acts as 
the depository, as is the case in many other securities markets around the world. In the United 
States, however, this clearance and netting function is carried out by a separate corporation, 
National Securities Clearing Corporation ("NSCC"). All that needs to be done to settle each day's 
trading is for NSCC to compute the net receive and deliver obligations and to instruct DTC to make 
the corresponding adjustments in the participants' accounts.
The broker-dealers and banks who are participants in the DTC-NSCC system in turn provide 
analogous clearance and settlement functions to their own customers. If Customer A buys 100 
shares of XYZ Co. through Broker, and Customer B sells 100 shares of XYZ Co. through the same 
Broker, the trade can be settled by entries on Broker's books. Neither DTC's books showing 
Broker's total position in XYZ Co., nor XYZ Co.'s books showing DTC's total position in XYZ Co., 
need be changed to reflect the settlement of this trade. One can readily appreciate the significance 
of the settlement function performed at this level if one considers that a single major bank may be 
acting as securities custodian for hundreds or thousands of mutual funds, pension funds, and other 
institutional investors. On any given day, the customers of that bank may have entered into an 
enormous number of trades, yet it is possible that relatively little of this trading activity will result in 
any net change in the custodian bank's positions on the books of DTC.

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 3 of 30
Settlement of market trading in most of the major U.S. securities markets is now effected primarily 
through some form of netted clearance and depository system. Virtually all publicly traded 
corporate equity securities, corporate debt securities, and municipal debt securities are now eligible 
for deposit in the DTC system. Recently, DTC has implemented a similar depository settlement 
system for the commercial paper market, and could, but for limitations in present Article 8, handle 
other forms of short-term money market securities such as bankers' acceptances. For trading in 
mortgage-backed securities, such as Ginnie Mae's, a similar depository settlement system has 
been developed by Participants Trust Company. For trading in U.S. Treasury securities, a 
somewhat analogous book-entry system is operated under Treasury rules by the Federal Reserve 
System.
D.  Need for Different Legal Rules for the Direct and Indirect Holding Systems  Both the 
traditional paper-based system, and the uncertificated system contemplated by the 1978 
amendments, can be described as "direct" securities holding systems; that is, the beneficial owners 
of securities have a direct relationship with the issuer of the securities. For securities in bearer 
form, whoever has possession of the certificate thereby has a direct claim against the issuer. For 
registered securities, the registered owner, whether of certificated or uncertificated securities, has a 
direct relationship with the issuer by virtue of being recorded as the owner on the records 
maintained by the issuer or its transfer agent.
By contrast, the DTC depository system for corporate equity and debt securities can be described 
as an "indirect holding" system, that is, the issuer's records do not show the identity of all of the 
beneficial owners. Instead, a large portion of the outstanding securities of any given issue are 
recorded on the issuer's records as belonging to a depository. The depository's records in turn 
show the identity of the banks or brokers who are its members, and the records of those securities 
intermediaries show the identity of their customers.
Even after the 1978 amendments, the rules of Article 8 did not deal effectively with the indirect 
holding system. The rules of the 1978 version of Article 8 were based on the assumption that 
changes in ownership of securities would still be effected either by delivery of physical certificates 
or by registration of transfer on the books of the issuer. Yet in the indirect holding system, 
settlement of the vast majority of securities trades does not involve either of these events. For 
most, if not all, of the securities held through DTC, physical certificates representing DTC's total 
position do exist. These "jumbo certificates," however, are never delivered from person to person. 
Just as nothing ever happens to these certificates, virtually nothing happens to the official registry 
of stockholders maintained by the issuers or their transfer agents to reflect the great bulk of the 
changes in ownership of shares that occur each day.
The principal mechanism through which securities trades are settled today is not delivery of 
certificates or registration of transfers on the issuer's books, but netted settlement arrangements 
and accounting entries on the books of a multi-tiered pyramid of securities intermediaries. Herein is 
the basic problem. Virtually all of the rules of the prior version of Article 8 specifying how changes 
in ownership of securities are effected, and what happens if something goes awry in the process, 
were keyed to the concepts of a transfer of physical certificates or registration of transfers on the 
books of the issuers, yet that is not how changes in ownership are actually reflected in the modern 
securities holding system.
II.  BRIEF OVERVIEW OF REVISED ARTICLE 8  
A.  Drafting Approach -- Neutrality Principle  One of the objectives of the revision of Article 8 is 
to devise a structure of commercial law rules for investment securities that will be sufficiently 
flexible to respond to changes in practice over the next few decades. If it were possible to predict 
with confidence how the securities holding and trading system would develop, one could produce a 
statute designed specifically for the system envisioned. Recent experience, however, shows the 
danger of that approach. The 1978 amendments to Article 8 were based on the assumption that the 
solution to the problems that plagued the paper-based securities trading system of the 1960s would 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 4 of 30
be the development of uncertificated securities. Instead, the solution thus far has been the 
development of the indirect holding system.
If one thought that the indirect holding system would come to dominate securities holding, one 
might draft Article 8 rules designed primarily for the indirect holding system, giving limited attention 
to the traditional direct holding system of security certificates or any uncertificated version of a 
direct holding system that might develop in the future. It is, however, by no means clear whether 
the long-term evolution will be toward decreased or increased use of direct holdings. At present, 
investors in most equity securities can either hold their securities through brokers or request that 
certificates be issued in their own name. For the immediate future it seems likely that that situation 
will continue. One can imagine many plausible scenarios for future evolution. Direct holding might 
become less and less common as investors become more familiar and comfortable with book-entry 
systems and/or as market or regulatory pressures develop that discourage direct holding. One 
might note, for example, that major brokerage firms are beginning to impose fees for having 
certificates issued and that some observers have suggested that acceleration of the cycle for 
settlement of securities trades might be facilitated by discouraging customers from obtaining 
certificates. On the other hand, other observers feel that it is important for investors to retain the 
option of holding securities in certificated form, or at least in some form that gives them a direct 
relationship with the issuer and does not require them to hold through brokers or other securities 
intermediaries. Some groups within the securities industry are beginning to work on development of 
uncertificated systems that would preserve this option.
Revised Article 8 takes a neutral position on the evolution of securities holding practices. The 
revision was based on the assumption that the path of development will be determined by market 
and regulatory forces and that the Article 8 rules should not seek to influence that development in 
any specific direction. Although various drafting approaches were considered, it became apparent 
early in the revision process that the differences between the direct holding system and the indirect 
holding system are sufficiently significant that it is best to treat them as separate systems requiring 
different legal concepts. Accordingly, while the rules of the prior version of Article 8 have, in large 
measure, been retained for the direct holding system, a new Part 5 has been added, setting out the 
commercial law rules for the indirect securities holding system. The principle of neutrality does 
carry some implications for the design of specific Article 8 rules. At the very least, the Article 8 rules 
for all securities holding systems should be sufficiently clear and predictable that uncertainty about 
the governing law does not itself operate as a constraint on market developments. In addition, an 
effort has been made to identify and eliminate any Article 8 rules that might act as impediments to 
any of the foreseeable paths of development.
B.  Direct Holding System  
With respect to securities held directly, Revised Article 8 retains the basic conceptual structure and rules of 
present law. Part 2, which is largely unchanged from former law, deals with certain aspects of the 
obligations of issuers. The primary purpose of the rules of Part 2 is to apply to investment securities the 
principles of negotiable instruments law that preclude the issuers of negotiable instruments from asserting 
defenses against subsequent purchasers. Part 3 deals with transfer for securities held directly. One of its 
principal purposes is to apply to investment securities the principles of negotiable instruments law that 
protect purchasers of negotiable instruments against adverse claims. Part 4 deals with the process of 
registration of transfer by the issuer or transfer agent.
Although the basic concepts of the direct holding system rules have been retained, there are significant 
changes in terminology, organization, and statement of the rules. Some of the major changes are as 
follows:
Simplification of Part 3. The addition of the new Part 5 on the indirect holding system makes 
unnecessary the rather elaborate provisions of former law, such as those in Section 8-313, that sought 
to fit the indirect holding system into the conceptual structure of the direct holding system. Thus, Part 3 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 5 of 30
of Revised Article 8 is, in many respects, more similar to the original version of Article 8 than to the 
1978 version.
  Protected purchaser. The prior version of Article 8 used the term "bona fide purchaser" to refer to 
those purchasers who took free from adverse claims, and it used the phrase "good faith" in stating the 
requirements for such status. In order to promote clarity, Revised Article 8 states the rules that protect 
purchasers against adverse claims without using the phrase "good faith" and uses the new term 
"protected purchaser" to refer to purchasers in the direct holding system who are protected against 
adverse claims. See Sections 8-105 and 8-303.
  Certificated versus uncertificated securities. The rules of the 1978 version of Article 8 concerning 
uncertificated securities have been simplified considerably. The 1978 version added provisions on 
uncertificated securities parallel to the provisions of the original version of Article 8 dealing with 
securities represented by certificates. Thus, virtually every section had one set of rules on "certificated 
securities" and another on "uncertificated securities." The constant juxtaposition of "certificated 
securities" and "uncertificated securities" has probably led readers to overemphasize the differences. 
Revised Article 8 has a unitary definition of "security" in Section 8-102(a)(15) which refers to the 
underlying intangible interest or obligation. In Revised Article 8, the difference between certificated and 
uncertificated is treated not as an inherent attribute of the security but as a difference in the means by 
which ownership is evidenced. The terms "certificated" and "uncertificated" security are used in those 
sections where it is important to distinguish between these two means of evidencing ownership. 
Revised Article 8 also deletes the provisions of the 1978 version concerning "transaction statements" 
and "registered pledges." These changes are explained in the Revision Notes 3, 4, and 5, below.
  Scope of Parts 2, 3, and 4. The rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 deal only with the rights of persons who 
hold securities directly. In typical securities holding arrangements in the modern depository system, 
only the clearing corporation would be a direct holder of the securities. Thus, while the rules of Parts 2, 
3, and 4 would apply to the relationship between the issuer and the clearing corporation, they have no 
application to relationships below the clearing corporation level. Under Revised Article 8, a person who 
holds a security through a broker or securities custodian has a security entitlement governed by the 
Part 5 rules but is not the direct holder of the security. Thus, the rules of Revised Section 8-303 on the 
rights of "protected purchasers," which are the analog of the bona fide purchaser rules of former Article 
8, do not apply to persons who hold securities through brokers or securities custodians. Instead, Part 5 
contains its own rules to protect investors in the indirect holding system against adverse claims. See 
Revised Section 8-502.
C.  Indirect Holding System  Although the Revised Article 8 provisions for the indirect holding 
system are somewhat complex, the basic approach taken can be summarized rather briefly. 
Revised Article 8 abandons the attempt to describe all of the complex relationships in the indirect 
holding system using the simple concepts of the traditional direct holding system. Instead, new 
rules specifically designed for the indirect holding system are added as Part 5 of Article 8. In a 
nutshell, the approach is to describe the core of the package of rights of a person who holds a 
security through a securities intermediary and then give that package of rights a name.
The starting point of Revised Article 8's treatment of the indirect holding system is the concept of 
"security entitlement." The term is defined in Section 8-102(a)(17) as "the rights and property 
interest of an entitlement holder with respect to a financial asset specified in Part 5." Like many 
legal concepts, however, the meaning of "security entitlement" is to be found less in any specific 
definition than in the matrix of rules that use the term. In a sense, then, the entirety of Part 5 is the 
definition of "security entitlement" because the Part 5 rules specify the rights and property interest 
that comprise a security entitlement.
Part 5 begins by specifying, in Section 8-501, when an entitlement holder acquires a security 
entitlement. The basic rule is very simple. A person acquires a security entitlement when the 
securities intermediary credits the financial asset to the person's account. The remaining sections 
of Part 5 specify the content of the security entitlement concept.  Section 8-504 provides that a 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 6 of 30
securities intermediary must maintain a sufficient quantity of financial assets to satisfy the claims of 
all of its entitlement holders.  Section 8-503 provides that these financial assets are held by the 
intermediary for the entitlement holders, are not the property of the securities intermediary, and are 
not subject to claims of the intermediary's general creditors. Thus, a security entitlement is itself a 
form of property interest not merely an in personam claim against the intermediary. The concept of 
a security entitlement does, however, include a package of in personam rights against the 
intermediary. Other Part 5 rules identify the core of this package of rights, subject to specification 
by agreement and regulatory law. See Sections 8-505 through 8-509.
To illustrate the basic features of the new rules, consider a simple example of two investors, John 
and Mary, each of whom owns 1000 shares of Acme, Inc., a publicly traded company. John has a 
certificate representing his 1000 shares and is registered on the books maintained by Acme's 
transfer agent as the holder of record of those 1000 shares. Accordingly, he has a direct claim 
against the issuer, he receives dividends and distributions directly from the issuer, and he receives 
proxies directly from the issuer for purposes of voting his shares. Mary has chosen to hold her 
securities through her broker. She does not have a certificate and is not registered on Acme's stock 
books as a holder of record. She enjoys the economic and corporate benefits of ownership but 
does so through her broker and any other intermediaries in the chain back to the issuer. John's 
interest in Acme common stock would be described under Revised Article 8 as a direct interest in a 
"security." Thus, if John grants a security interest in his investment position, the collateral would be 
described as a "security." Mary's interest in Acme common stock would be described under 
Revised Article 8 as a "security entitlement." Thus, if Mary grants a security interest in her 
investment position, the collateral would be described as a "security entitlement."
For many purposes, there is no need to differentiate among the various ways that an investor might 
hold securities. For example, for purposes of financial accounting, John and Mary would each be 
described as the owner of 1000 shares of Acme common stock. For those purposes it is irrelevant 
that John is the registered owner and has physical possession of a certificate, while Mary holds her 
position through an intermediary. Revised Article 8 recognizes this point in Section 8-104 which 
provides that acquiring a security entitlement and acquiring a security certificate are different ways 
of acquiring an interest in the underlying security.
D.  Security Interests  Along with the revision of Article 8, significant changes have been made in 
the rules concerning security interests in securities. The revision returns to the pre-1978 structure 
in which the rules on security interests in investment securities are set out in Article 9, rather than in 
Article 8. The changes in Article 9 are, in part, conforming changes to adapt Article 9 to the new 
concept of a security entitlement. The Article 9 changes, however, go beyond that to establish a 
simplified structure for the creation and perfection of security interests in investment securities, 
whether held directly or indirectly. In order to avoid disruption of the current numbering sequence of 
Article 9, the new rules on security interests in investment securities are primarily set out in a new 
Section 9-115.
The Revised Article 9 rules continue the long-established principle that a security interest in a 
security represented by a certificate can be perfected by a possessory pledge. The revised rules, 
however, do not require that all security interests in investment securities be implemented by 
procedures based on the conceptual structure of the common law pledge. Under the revised Article 
9 rules, a security interest in securities can be created pursuant to Section 9-203 in the same 
fashion as a security interest in any other form of property, that is, by agreement between the 
debtor and secured party. There is no requirement of a "transfer," "delivery," or any similar action, 
physical or metaphysical, for the creation of an effective security interest. A security interest in 
securities is, of course, a form of property interest, but the only requirements for creation of this 
form of property interest are those set out in Section 9-203.
The perfection methods for security interests in investment securities are set out in Revised Section 
9-115(4). The basic rule is that a security interest may be perfected by "control." The concept of 
control, defined in Section 8-106, plays an important role in both Article 8 and Article 9. In general, 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 7 of 30
obtaining control means taking the steps necessary to place the lender in a position where it can 
have the collateral sold off without the further cooperation of the debtor. Thus, for certificated 
securities, a lender obtains control by taking possession of the certificate with any necessary 
indorsement. For securities held through a securities intermediary, the lender can obtain control in 
two ways. First, the lender obtains control if it becomes the entitlement holder; that is, has the 
securities positions transferred to an account in its own name. Second, the lender obtains control if 
the securities intermediary agrees to act on instructions from the secured party to dispose of the 
positions, even though the debtor remains the entitlement holder. Such an arrangement suffices to 
give the lender control even though the debtor retains the right to trade and exercise other ordinary 
rights of an entitlement holder.
Except where the debtor is itself a securities firm, filing of an ordinary Article 9 financing statement 
is also a permissible alternative method of perfection. However, filing with respect to investment 
property does not assure the lender the same protections as for other forms of collateral, since the 
priority rules provide that a secured party who obtains control has priority over a secured party who 
does not obtain control.
The details of the new rules on security interests, as applied both to the retail level and to 
arrangements for secured financing of securities dealers, are explained in the Official Comments to 
Section 9-115.
III.  SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 8  
A.  Terminology  
To understand the scope and application of the rules of Revised Article 8, and the related security interest 
rules of Article 9, it is necessary to understand some of the key defined terms:
Security, defined in Section 8-102(a)(15), has essentially the same meaning as under the prior version 
of Article 8. The difference in Revised Article 8 is that the definition of security does not determine the 
coverage of all of Article 8. Although the direct holding system rules in Parts 2, 3, and 4 apply only to 
securities, the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 apply to the broader category of "financial assets."
  Financial asset, defined in Section 8-103(a)(9), is the term used to describe the forms of property to 
which the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 apply. The term includes not only "securities," but also 
other interests, obligations, or property that are held through securities accounts. The best illustration of 
the broader scope of the term financial asset is the treatment of money market instruments, discussed 
below.
  Security entitlement, defined in Section 8-103(a)(17), is the term used to describe the property 
interest of a person who holds a security or other financial asset through a securities intermediary.
  Securities intermediary, defined in Section 8-103(a)(14), is the term used for those who hold 
securities for others in the indirect holding system. It covers clearing corporations, banks acting as 
securities custodians, and brokers holding securities for their customers.
  Entitlement holder, defined in Section 8-103(a)(7), is the term used for those who hold securities 
through intermediaries.
  Securities account, defined in Section 8-501(a), describes the form of arrangement between a 
securities intermediary and an entitlement holder that gives rise to a security entitlement. As explained 
below, the definition of securities account plays a key role in setting the scope of the indirect holding 
system rules of Part 5.
  Investment property, defined in Section 9-115(1)(f), determines the application of the new Article 9 
rules for secured transactions. In addition to securities and security entitlements, the Article 9 term 
"investment property" is defined to include "securities account" in order to simplify the drafting of the 
Article 9 rules that permit debtors to grant security interests either in specific security entitlements or in 
an entire securities account. The other difference between the coverage of the Article 8 and Article 9 
terms is that commodity futures contracts are excluded from Article 8, but are included within the Article 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 8 of 30
9 definition of "investment property." Thus, the new Article 9 rules apply to security interests in 
commodity futures positions as well as security interests in securities positions.
B.  Notes on Scope of Article 8  Article 8 is in no sense a comprehensive codification of the law 
governing securities or transactions in securities. Although Article 8 deals with some aspects of the 
rights of securities holders against issuers, most of that relationship is governed not by Article 8, 
but by corporation, securities, and contract law. Although Article 8 deals with some aspects of the 
rights and duties of parties who transfer securities, it is not a codification of the law of contracts for 
the purchase or sale of securities. (The prior version of Article 8 did include a few miscellaneous 
rules on contracts for the sale of securities, but these have not been included in Revised Article 8). 
Although the new indirect holding system rules of Part 5 deal with some aspects of the relationship 
between brokers or other securities professionals and their customers, Article 8 is still not in any 
sense a comprehensive code of the law governing the relationship between broker-dealers or other 
securities intermediaries and their customers. Most of the law governing that relationship is the 
common law of contract and agency, supplemented or supplanted by regulatory law.
The distinction between the aspects of the broker-customer relationship that are and are not dealt 
with in this Article may be illuminated by considering the differing roles of the broker in a typical 
securities transaction, in which the broker acts as agent for the customer. When a customer directs 
a broker to buy or sell securities for the customer, and the broker executes that trade on a 
securities exchange or in the over the counter market, the broker is entering into a contract for the 
purchase or sale of the securities as agent of the customer. The rules of the exchange, practices of 
the market, or regulatory law will specify when and how that contract is to be performed. For 
example, today the terms of the standard contract for trades in most corporate securities require 
the seller to deliver the securities, and the buyer to pay for them, five business days after the date 
that the contract was made, although the SEC has recently promulgated a rule that will accelerate 
the cycle to require settlement in three business days. In the common speech of the industry, the 
transaction in which the broker enters into a contract for the purchase or sale of the securities is 
referred to as executing the trade, and the transaction in which the securities are delivered and 
paid for is referred to as settlement. Thus, the current settlement cycle is known as T+5, that is, 
settlement is required on the fifth business day after the date of the trade, and the new SEC rule 
will change it to T+3. One must be careful in moving from the jargon of the securities industry to the 
jargon of the legal profession. For most practical economic purposes, the trade date is the date that 
counts, because that is the time at which the price is set, the risk of price changes shifts, and the 
parties become bound to perform. For purposes of precise legal analysis, however, the securities 
phrase "trade" or "execute a trade" means enter into a contract for the purchase or sale of the 
securities. The transfer of property interests occurs not at the time the contract is made but at the 
time it is performed, that is, at settlement.
The distinction between trade and settlement is important in understanding the scope of Article 8. 
Article 8 deals with the settlement phase of securities transactions. It deals with the mechanisms by 
which interests in securities are transferred, and the rights and duties of those who are involved in 
the transfer process. It does not deal with the process of entering into contracts for the transfer of 
securities or regulate the rights and duties of those involved in the contracting process. To use 
securities parlance, Article 8 deals not with the trade, but with settlement of the trade. Indeed, 
Article 8 does not even deal with all aspects of settlement. In a netted clearance and settlement 
system such as the NSCC-DTC system, individual trades are not settled one-by-one by 
corresponding entries on the books of any depository. Rather, settlement of the individual trades 
occurs through the clearing arrangements, in accordance with the rules and agreements that 
govern those arrangements.
In the rules dealing with the indirect holding system, one must be particularly careful to bear in mind 
the distinction between trade and settlement. Under Revised Article 8, the property interest of a 
person who holds securities through an intermediary is described as a "security entitlement," which 
is defined in Revised Section 8-102(a)(17) as the package of rights and property interest of an 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 9 of 30
entitlement holder specified in Part 5. Saying that the security entitlement is a package of rights 
against the broker does not mean that all of the customer's rights against the broker are part of the 
security entitlement and hence part of the subject matter of Article 8. The distinction between trade 
and settlement remains fundamental. The rules of this Article on the indirect holding system deal 
with brokers and other intermediaries as media through which investors hold their financial assets. 
Brokers are also media through which investors buy and sell their financial assets, but that aspect 
of their role is not the subject of this Article.
The principal goal of the Article 8 revision project is to provide a satisfactory framework for analysis 
of the indirect holding system. The technique used in Revised Article 8 is to acknowledge explicitly 
that the relationship between a securities intermediary and its entitlement holders is sui generis, 
and to state the applicable commercial law rules directly, rather than by inference from a 
categorization of the relationship based on legal concepts of a different era. One of the 
consequences of this drafting technique is that in order to provide content to the concept of security 
entitlement it becomes necessary to identify the core of the package of rights that make up a 
security entitlement.  Sections 8-504 through 8-508 cover such basic matters as the duty of the 
securities intermediary to maintain a sufficient quantity of securities to satisfy all of its entitlement 
holders, the duty of the securities intermediary to pass through to entitlement holder the economic 
and corporate law rights of ownership of the security, and the duty of the securities intermediary to 
comply with authorized entitlement orders originated by the entitlement holder. These sections are 
best thought of as definitional; that is, a relationship which does not include these rights is not the 
kind of relationship that Revised Article 8 deals with. Because these sections take the form of 
statements of the duties of an intermediary toward its entitlement holders, one must be careful to 
avoid a distorted perspective on what Revised Article 8 is and is not designed to do. Revised Article 
8 is not, and should not be, a comprehensive body of private law governing the relationship 
between brokers and their customers, nor a body of regulatory law to police against improper 
conduct by brokers or other intermediaries. Many, if not most, aspects of the relationship between 
brokers and customers are governed by the common law of contract and agency, supplemented or 
supplanted by federal and state regulatory law. Revised Article 8 does not take the place of this 
body of private and regulatory law. If there are gaps in the regulatory law, they should be dealt with 
as such; Article 8 is not the place to address them. Article 8 deals with how interests in securities 
are evidenced and how they are transferred. By way of a rough analogy, one might think of Article 
8 as playing the role for the securities markets that real estate recording acts play for the real 
estate markets. Real estate recording acts do not regulate the conduct of parties to real estate 
transactions; Article 8 does not regulate the conduct of parties to securities transactions.
C.  Application of Revised Articles 8 and 9 to Common Investments and Investment 
Arrangements  It may aid understanding to sketch briefly the treatment under Revised Articles 8 
and 9 of a variety of relatively common products and arrangements.
1.  Publicly traded stocks and bonds.
"Security" is defined in Revised Section 8-102(a)(15) in substantially the same terms as in the 
prior version of Article 8. It covers the ordinary publicly traded investment securities, such as 
corporate stocks and bonds. Parts 2, 3, and 4 govern the interests of persons who hold 
securities directly, and Part 5 governs the interest of those who hold securities indirectly.
Ordinary publicly traded securities provide a good illustration of the relationship between the 
direct and indirect holding system rules. The distinction between the direct and indirect holding 
systems is not an attribute of the securities themselves but of the way in which a particular 
person holds the securities. Thus, whether one looks to the direct holding system rules of Parts 
2, 3, and 4 or the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 will depend on the level in the 
securities holding system being analyzed.
Consider, for example, corporate stock which is held through a depository, such as DTC. The 
clearing corporation, or its nominee, is the registered owner of all of the securities it holds on 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 10 of 30
behalf of all of its participants. Thus the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 of Revised Article 8 apply to 
the relationship between the issuer and the clearing corporation. If, as is typically the case 
today, the securities are still represented by certificates, the clearing corporation will be the 
holder of the security certificate or certificates representing its total holdings. So far as Article 8 
is concerned, the relationship between the issuer and the clearing corporation is no different 
from the relationship between the issuer and any other registered owner.
The relationship between the clearing corporation and its participants is governed by the 
indirect holding system rules of Part 5. At that level, the clearing corporation is the securities 
intermediary and the participant is the entitlement holder. If the participant is itself a securities 
intermediary, such as a broker holding for its customers or a bank acting as a securities 
custodian, the Part 5 rules apply to its relationship to its own customers. At that level the broker 
or bank custodian is the securities intermediary and the customer is the entitlement holder. 
Note that the broker or bank custodian is both an entitlement holder and a securities 
intermediary -- but is so with respect to different security entitlements. For purposes of Article 8 
analysis, the customer's security entitlement against the broker or bank custodian is a different 
item of property from the security entitlement of the broker or bank custodian against the 
clearing corporation.
For investors who hold their securities directly, it makes no difference that some other investors 
hold their interests indirectly. Many investors today choose to hold their securities directly, 
becoming the registered owners on the books of the issuer and obtaining certificates registered 
in their names. For such investors, the addition of the new indirect holding system rules to 
Article 8 is entirely irrelevant. They will continue to deal directly with the issuers, or their 
transfer agents, under essentially the same rules as in the prior version of Article 8.
The securities holding options available to investors in a particular form of security may depend 
on the terms of the security. For example, direct holding is frequently not available for new 
issues of state and local government bonds. At one time, state and local government bonds 
were commonly issued in bearer form. Today, however, new issues of state and local 
government bonds must be in registered form and most are issued in what is known as "book-
entry only" form; that is, the issuer specifies that the only person it will directly register as the 
registered owner is a clearing corporation. Thus, one of the inherent terms of the security is 
that investors can hold only in the indirect holding system.
2.  Treasury securities.
U.S. government securities fall within the definition of security in Article 8 and therefore are 
governed by Article 8 in the same fashion as any other publicly held debt security, except 
insofar as Article 8 is preempted by applicable federal law or regulation.
New Treasury securities are no longer issued in certificated form; they can be held only through 
the book-entry systems established by the Treasury and Federal Reserve Banks. The Treasury 
offers a book-entry system, known as "Treasury Direct" which enables individual investors to 
have their positions recorded directly on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank, in a fashion 
somewhat similar to the uncertificated direct holding system contemplated by the 1978 version 
of Article 8. The governing law for the Treasury Direct system, however, is set out in the 
applicable Treasury regulations. The Treasury Direct system is not designed for active trading.
The great bulk of Treasury securities are held not through the Treasury Direct system but 
through a multi-tiered indirect holding system. The Federal Reserve Banks, acting as fiscal 
agent for the Treasury, maintain records of the holdings of member banks of the Federal 
Reserve System, and those banks in turn maintain records showing the extent to which they 
are holding for themselves or their own customers, including government securities dealers, 
institutional investors, or smaller banks who in turn may act as custodians for investors. The 
indirect holding system for Treasury securities was established under federal regulations 
promulgated in the 1970s. In the 1980s, Treasury released the proposed TRADES regulations 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 11 of 30
that would have established a more comprehensive body of federal commercial law for the 
Treasury holding system. During the Article 8 revision process, Treasury withdrew these 
regulations, anticipating that once Revised Article 8 is enacted, it will be possible to base the 
law for the Treasury system on the new Article 8 rules.
3.  Broker-customer relationships.
Whether the relationship between a broker and its customer is governed by the Article 8 Part 5 
rules depends on the nature of the services that the broker performs for the customer.
Some investors use brokers only to purchase and sell securities. These customers take 
delivery of certificates representing the securities they purchase and hold them in their own 
names. When they wish to sell, they deliver the certificates to the brokers. The Article 8 Part 5 
rules would not affect such customers, because the Part 5 rules deal with arrangements in 
which investors hold securities through securities intermediaries. The transaction between the 
customer and broker might be the traditional agency arrangement in which the broker buys or 
sells on behalf of the customer as agent for an undisclosed principal, or it might be a dealer 
transaction in which the "broker" as principal buys from or sells to the customer. In either case, 
if the customer takes delivery and holds the securities directly, she will become the "purchaser" 
of a "security" whose interest therein is governed by the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 of Article 8. If 
the customer meets the other requirements of Section 8-303(a), the customer who takes 
delivery can qualify as a "protected purchaser" who takes free from any adverse claims under 
Section 8-303(b). The broker's role in such transactions is primarily governed by non-Article 8 
law. There are only a few provisions of Article 8 that affect the relationship between the 
customer and broker in such cases. See Sections 8-108 (broker makes to the customer the 
warranties of a transferor) and 8-115 (broker not liable in conversion if customer was acting 
wrongfully against a third party in selling securities).
Many investors use brokers not only to purchase and sell securities, but also as the custodians 
through whom they hold their securities. The indirect holding system rules of Part 5 apply to the 
custodial aspect of this relationship. If a customer purchases a security through a broker and 
directs the broker to hold the security in an account for the customer, the customer will never 
become a "purchaser" of a "security" whose interest therein is governed by the rules of Parts 2, 
3, and 4 of Article 8. Accordingly, the customer does not become a "protected purchaser" under 
Section 8-303. Rather, the customer becomes an "entitlement holder" who has a "security 
entitlement" to the security against the broker as "securities intermediary." See Section 8-501. 
It would make no sense to say that the customer in such a case takes an interest in the security 
free from all other claims, since the nature of the relationship is that the customer has an 
interest in common with other customers who hold positions in the same security through the 
same broker.  Section 8-502, however, does protect an entitlement holder against adverse 
claims, in the sense that once the entitlement holder has acquired the package of rights that 
comprise a security entitlement no one else can take that package of rights away by arguing 
that the transaction that resulted in the customer's acquisition of the security entitlement was 
the traceable product of a transfer or transaction that was wrongful as against the claimant.
4.  Bank deposit accounts; brokerage asset management accounts.
An ordinary bank deposit account would not fall within the definition of "security" in Section 8-
102(a)(15), so the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 of Article 8 do not apply to deposit accounts. Nor 
would the relationship between a bank and its depositors be governed by the rules of Part 5 of 
Article 8. The Part 5 rules apply to "security entitlements." Section 8-501(b) provides that a 
person has a security entitlement when a securities intermediary credits a financial asset to the 
person's "securities account." "Securities account" is defined in Section 8-501(a) as "an 
account to which a financial asset is or may be credited in accordance with an agreement 
under which the person maintaining the account undertakes to treat the person for whom the 
account is maintained as entitled to exercise the rights that comprise the financial asset." The 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 12 of 30
definition of securities account plays a key role in setting the scope of Part 5 of Article 8. A 
person has a security entitlement governed by Part 5 only if the relationship in question falls 
within the definition of "securities account." The definition of securities account in Section 8-
501(a) excludes deposit accounts from the Part 5 rules of Article 8. One of the basic elements 
of the relationship between a securities intermediary and an entitlement holder is that the 
securities intermediary has the duty to hold exactly the quantity of securities that it carries for 
the account of its customers. See Section 8-504. The assets that a securities intermediary 
holds for its entitlement holder are not assets that the securities intermediary can use in its own 
proprietary business. See Section 8-503. A deposit account is an entirely different 
arrangement. A bank is not required to hold in its vaults or in deposit accounts with other banks 
a sum of money equal to the claims of all of its depositors. Banks are permitted to use 
depositors' funds in their ordinary lending business; indeed, that is a primary function of banks. 
A deposit account, unlike a securities account, is simply a debtor-creditor relationship. Thus a 
bank or other financial institution maintaining deposit accounts is not covered by Part 5 of 
Article 8.
Today, it is common for brokers to maintain securities accounts for their customers which 
include arrangements for the customers to hold liquid "cash" assets in the form of money 
market mutual fund shares. Insofar as the broker is holding money market mutual fund shares 
for its customer, the customer has a security entitlement to the money market mutual fund 
shares. It is also common for brokers to offer their customers an arrangement in which the 
customer has access to those liquid assets via a deposit account with a bank, whereby shares 
of the money market fund are redeemed to cover checks drawn on the account. Article 8 
applies only to the securities account; the linked bank account remains an account covered by 
other law. Thus the rights and duties of the customer and the bank are governed not by Article 
8, but by the relevant payment system law, such as Article 4 or Article 4A.
5.  Trusts.
The indirect holding system rules of Part 5 of Article 8 are not intended to govern all 
relationships in which one person holds securities "on behalf of" another. Rather, the Part 5 
rules come into play only if the relationship in question falls within the definition of securities 
account in Section 8-501(a). The definition of securities account serves the important function 
of ensuring that ordinary trust arrangements are not inadvertently swept into Part 5 of Article 8. 
Suppose that Bank serves as trustee of a trust for the benefit of Beneficiary. The corpus of the 
trust is invested in securities and other financial assets. Although Bank is, in some senses, 
holding securities for Beneficiary, the arrangement would not fall within the definition of 
securities account. Bank, as trustee, has not undertaken to treat Beneficiary as entitled to 
exercise all of the rights that comprise the portfolio securities. For instance, although 
Beneficiary receives the economic benefit of the portfolio securities, Beneficiary does not have 
the right to direct dispositions of individual trust assets or to exercise voting or other corporate 
law rights with respect to the individual securities. Thus Bank's obligations to Beneficiary as 
trustee are governed by ordinary trust law, not by Part 5 of Article 8. Of course, if Bank, as 
trustee, holds the securities through an intermediary, Part 5 of Revised Article 8 would govern 
the relationship between Bank, as entitlement holder, and the intermediary through which Bank 
holds the securities. It is also possible that a different department of Bank acts as the 
intermediary through which Bank, as trustee, holds the securities. Bank, qua securities 
custodian, might be holding securities for a large number of customers, including Bank's own 
trust department. Insofar as Bank may be regarded as acting in different capacities, Part 5 of 
Article 8 may be relevant to the relationship between the two sides of Bank's business. 
However, the relationship between Bank as trustee and the beneficiaries of the trust would 
remain governed by trust law, not Article 8.
6.  Mutual fund shares.

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 13 of 30
Shares of mutual funds are Article 8 securities, whether the fund is organized as a corporation, 
business trust, or other form of entity. See Sections 8-102(a)(15) and 8-103(b). Mutual funds 
commonly do not issue certificates. Thus, mutual fund shares are typically uncertificated 
securities under Article 8.
Although a mutual fund is, in a colloquial sense, holding the portfolio securities on behalf of the 
fund's shareholders, the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 do not apply to the relationship 
between the fund and its shareholders. The Part 5 rules apply to "security entitlements." 
Section 8-501(e) provides that issuance of a security is not establishment of a security 
entitlement. Thus, because mutual funds shares do fit within the Article 8 definition of security, 
the relationship between the fund and its shareholders is automatically excluded from the Part 
5 rules.
Of course, a person might hold shares in a mutual fund through a brokerage account. Because 
mutual fund shares are securities, they automatically fall within the broader term "financial 
asset," so the Part 5 indirect holding system rules apply to mutual fund shares that are held 
through securities accounts. That is, a person who holds mutual fund shares through a 
brokerage account could have a security entitlement to the mutual fund shares, just as the 
person would have a security entitlement to any other security carried in the brokerage 
account.
7.  Stock of closely held corporations.
Ordinary corporate stock falls within the Article 8 definition of security, whether or not it is 
publicly traded. See Sections 8-102(a)(15) and 8-103(a). There is nothing in the new indirect 
holding system rules of Article 8 that would preclude their application to shares of companies 
that are not publicly traded. The indirect holding system rules, however, would come into play 
only if the shares were in fact held through a securities account with a securities intermediary. 
Since that is typically not the case with respect to shares of closely held corporations, 
transactions involving those shares will continue to be governed by the traditional rules, as 
amended, that are set out in Parts 2, 3, and 4 of Article 8, and the corresponding provisions of 
Article 9. The simplification of the Article 8 rules on uncertificated securities may, however, 
make the alternative of dispensing with certificates more attractive for closely held corporations.
8.  Partnership interests and limited liability company shares.
Interests in partnerships or shares of limited liability companies are not Article 8 securities 
unless they are in fact dealt in or traded on securities exchanges or in securities markets. See 
Section 8-103(c). The issuers, however, may if they wish explicitly "opt-in" by specifying that 
the interests or shares are securities governed by Article 8. Even though interests in 
partnerships or shares of limited liability companies do not generally fall within the category of 
"security" in Article 8, they would fall within the broader term "financial asset." Accordingly, if 
such interests are held through a securities account with a securities intermediary, the indirect 
holding system rules of Part 5 apply, and the interest of a person who holds them through such 
an account is a security entitlement.
9.  Bankers' acceptances, commercial paper, and other money market instruments.
Money market instruments, such as commercial paper, bankers' acceptances, and certificates 
of deposit, are good examples of a form of property that may fall within the definition of 
"financial asset," even though they may not fall within the definition of "security." Section 8-
103(d) provides that a writing that meets the definition of security certificate under Section 8-
102(a)(15) is governed by Article 8, even though it also fits within the definition of "negotiable 
instrument" in Article 3.
Some forms of short term money market instruments may meet the requirements of an Article 8 
security, while others may not. For example, the Article 8 definition of security requires that the 
obligation be in registered or bearer form. Bankers' acceptances are typically payable "to 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 14 of 30
order," and thus do not qualify as Article 8 securities. Thus, the obligations of the immediate 
parties to a bankers' acceptance are governed by Article 3, rather than Article 8. That is an 
entirely appropriate classification, even for those bankers' acceptance that are handled as 
investment media in the securities markets, because Article 8, unlike Article 3, does not contain 
rules specifying the standardized obligations of parties to instruments. For example, the Article 
3 rules on the obligations of acceptors and drawers of drafts are necessary to specify the 
obligations represented by bankers' acceptances, but Article 8 contains no provisions dealing 
with these issues.
Immobilization through a depository system is, however, just as important for money market 
instruments as for traditional securities. Under the prior version of Article 8, the rules on the 
depository system, set out in Section 8-320, applied only to Article 8 securities. Although some 
forms of money market instruments could be fitted within the language of the Article 8 definition 
of "security," this is not true for bankers' acceptances. Accordingly, it was not thought feasible 
to make bankers' acceptances eligible for deposit in clearing corporations under the prior 
version of Article 8. Revised Article 8 solves this problem by separating the coverage of the 
Part 5 rules from the definition of security. Even though a bankers' acceptance or other money 
market instrument is an Article 3 negotiable instrument rather than an Article 8 security, it would 
still fall within the definition of financial asset in Section 8-102(a)(9). Accordingly, if the 
instrument is held through a clearing corporation or other securities intermediary, the rules of 
Part 5 of Article 8 apply.
10.  Repurchase agreement transactions.
Repurchase agreements are an important form of transaction in the securities business, 
particularly in connection with government securities. Repos and reverse repos can be used for 
a variety of purposes. The one that is of particular concern for purposes of commercial law 
rules is the use of repurchase agreements as a form of financing transaction for government 
securities dealers. Government securities dealers typically obtain intra-day financing from their 
clearing banks, and then at the end of the trading day seek overnight financing from other 
sources to repay that day's advances from the clearing bank. Repos are the principal source of 
this financing. The dealer ("repo seller") sells securities to the financing source ("repo buyer") 
for cash, and at the same time agrees to repurchase the same or like securities the following 
day, or at some other brief interval. The sources of the financing include a variety of entities 
seeking short term investments for surplus cash, such as pension funds, business 
corporations, money market funds, and banks. The pricing may be computed in various ways, 
but in essence the price at which the dealer agrees to repurchase the securities exceeds the 
price paid to the dealer by an amount equivalent to interest on the funds.
The transfer of the securities from a securities dealer as repo seller to a provider of funds as 
repo buyer can be effected in a variety of ways. The repo buyer might be willing to allow the 
repo seller to keep the securities "in its hands," relying on the dealer's representation that it will 
hold them on behalf of the repo buyer. In the jargon of the trade, these are known as "hold-in-
custody repos" or "HIC repos." At the other extreme, the repo buyer might insist that the dealer 
"hand over" the securities so that in the event that the dealer fails and is unable to perform its 
obligation to repurchase them, the repo buyer will have the securities "in its hands." The jargon 
for these is "delivered-out repos." A wide variety of arrangements between these two extremes 
might be devised, in which the securities are "handed over" to a third party with powers 
concerning their disposition allocated between the repo seller and repo buyer in a variety of 
ways.
Specification of the rights of repo buyers is complicated by the fact that the transfer of the 
interest in securities from the repo seller to the repo buyer might be characterized as an 
outright sale or as the creation of a security interest. Article 8 does not attempt to specify any 
categorical rules on that issue.

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 15 of 30
Article 8 sets out rules on the rights of parties who have implemented securities transactions in 
certain ways. It does not, however, deal with the legal characterization of the transactions that 
are implemented through the Article 8 mechanisms. Rather, the Article 8 rules apply without 
regard to the characterization of transactions for other purposes. For example, the Article 8 
rules for the direct holding system provide that a person who takes delivery of a duly indorsed 
security certificate for value and without notice of adverse claims takes free from any adverse 
claims. That rule applies without regard to the character of the transaction in which the security 
certificate was delivered. It applies both to delivery upon original issue and to delivery upon 
transfer. It applies to transfers in settlement of sales and to transfers in pledge. Similarly, the 
Article 8 indirect holding system rules, such as the adverse claim cut-off rules in Sections 8-502 
and 8-510, apply to the transactions that fall within their terms, whether those transactions were 
sales, secured transactions, or something else.
Repos involve transfers of interests in securities. The Article 8 rules apply to transfers of 
securities in repos, just as they apply to transfers of securities in any other form of transaction. 
The transfer of the interest in securities from the repo seller to the repo buyer might be 
characterized as an outright sale or as the creation of a security interest. Article 8 does not 
determine that question. The rules of Revised Article 8 have, however, been drafted to 
minimize the possibility that disputes over the characterization of the transfer in a repo would 
affect substantive questions that are governed by Article 8. See, e.g., Section 8-510 and 
Comment 4 thereto.
11.  Securities lending transactions.
In a typical securities lending transaction, the owner of securities lends them to another person 
who needs the securities to satisfy a delivery obligation. For example, when a customer of a 
broker sells a security short, the broker executes an ordinary trade as seller and so must 
deliver the securities at settlement. The customer is "short" against the broker because the 
customer has an open obligation to deliver the securities to the broker, which the customer 
hopes to be able to satisfy by buying in the securities at a lower price. If the short seller's 
broker does not have the securities in its own inventory, the broker will borrow them from 
someone else. The securities lender delivers the securities to the borrowing broker, and the 
borrowing broker becomes contractually obligated to redeliver a like quantity of the same 
security. Securities borrowers are required to provide collateral, usually government securities, 
to assure performance of their redelivery obligation.
The securities lender does not retain any property interest in the securities that are delivered to 
the borrower. The transaction is an outright transfer in which the borrower obtains full title. The 
whole point of securities lending is that the borrower needs the securities to transfer them to 
someone else. It would make no sense to say that the lender retains any property interest in 
the securities it has lent. Accordingly, even if the securities borrower defaults on its redelivery 
obligation, the securities lender has no property interest in the original securities that could be 
asserted against any person to whom the securities borrower may have transferred them. One 
need not look to adverse claim cut-off rules to reach that result; the securities lender never had 
an adverse claim. The securities borrower's default is no different from any other breach of 
contract. The securities lender's protection is its right to foreclose on the collateral given to 
secure the borrower's redelivery obligation. Perhaps the best way to understand securities 
lending is to note that the word "loan" in securities lending transactions is used in the sense it 
carries in loans of money, as distinguished from loans of specific identifiable chattels. Someone 
who lends money does not retain any property interest in the money that is handed over to the 
borrower. To use civil law terminology, securities lending is mutuum, rather than commodatum. 
See Story on Bailments, §§ 6 and 47.
12.  Traded stock options.

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 16 of 30
Stock options issued and cleared through the Options Clearing Corporation ("OCC") are a good 
example of a form of investment vehicle that is treated as a financial asset to which the Part 5 
rules apply, but not as an Article 8 security to which Parts 2, 3, and 4 apply. OCC carries on its 
books the options positions of the brokerage firms which are clearing members of OCC. The 
clearing members in turn carry on their books the options positions of their customers. The 
arrangements are structurally similar to the securities depository system. In the options 
structure, however, there is no issuer separate from the clearing corporation. The financial 
assets held through the system are standardized contracts entitling the holder to purchase or 
sell a certain security at a set price. Rather than being an interest in or obligation of a separate 
issuer, an option is a contractual right against the counter-party. In order to assure performance 
of the options, OCC interposes itself as counter-party to each options trade. The rules of Parts 
2, 3, and 4 of this Article, however, do not well describe the obligations and rights of OCC. On 
the other hand, the rules of Part 5, and the related Article 9 rules on security interests and 
priorities, do provide a workable legal framework for the commercial law analysis of the rights 
of the participants in the options market. Accordingly, publicly traded securities options are 
included within the definition of "financial asset," but not "security." See Section 8-103(e). Thus, 
although OCC would not be an issuer of a security for purposes of this Article, it would be a 
clearing corporation, against whom its clearing members have security entitlements to the 
options positions. Similarly, the clearing members' customers have security entitlements 
against the clearing members. Traded stock options are also a good illustration of the point that 
the classification issues under Article 8 are very different from classification under other law, 
such as the federal securities laws. See Section 8-102(d). Stock options are treated as 
securities for purposes of federal securities laws, but not for purposes of Article 8.
13.  Commodity futures.
 Section 8-103(f) provides that a "commodity contract" is not a security or a financial asset.  
Section 9-115 defines commodity contract to include commodity futures contracts, commodity 
options, and options on commodity futures contracts that are traded on or subject to the rules 
of a board of trade that has been designated as a contract market for that contract pursuant to 
the federal commodities laws. Thus, commodity contracts themselves are not Article 8 
securities to which the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 apply, nor is the relationship between a 
customer and a commodity futures commission merchant governed by the Part 5 rules of 
Article 8. Commodity contracts, however, are included within the Article 9 definition of 
"investment property." Thus security interests in commodity positions are governed by 
essentially the same set of rules as security interests in security entitlements.
14.  "Whatever else they have or may devise."
The classification question posed by the above-captioned category of investment products and 
arrangements is among the most difficult -- and important -- issue raised by the Article 8 
revision process. Rapid innovation is perhaps the only constant characteristic of the securities 
and financial markets. The rules of Revised Article 8 are intended to be sufficiently flexible to 
accommodate new developments.
A common mechanism by which new financial instruments are devised is that a financial 
institution that holds some security, financial instrument, or pool thereof, creates interests in 
that asset or pool which are sold to others. It is not possible to answer in the abstract the 
question of how such interests are treated under Article 8, because the variety of such products 
is limited only by human imagination and current regulatory structures. At this general level, 
however, one can note that there are at least three possible treatments under Article 8 of the 
relationship between the institution which creates the interests and the persons who hold them. 
(Again, it must be borne in mind that the Article 8 classification issue may be different from the 
classification question posed by federal securities law or other regulation.) First, creation of the 
new interests in the underlying assets may constitute issuance of a new Article 8 security. In 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 17 of 30
that case the relationship between the institution that created the interest and the persons who 
hold them is not governed by the Part 5 rules, but by the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4. See Section 
8-501(e). That, for example, is the structure of issuance of mutual fund shares. Second, the 
relationship between the entity creating the interests and those holding them may fit within the 
Part 5 rules, so that the persons are treating as having security entitlements against the 
institution with respect to the underlying assets. That, for example, is the structure used for 
stock options. Third, it may be that the creation of the new interests in the underlying assets 
does not constitute issuance of a new Article 8 security, nor does the relationship between the 
entity creating the interests and those holding them fit within the Part 5 rules. In that case, the 
relationship is governed by other law, as in the case of ordinary trusts.
The first of these three possibilities -- that the creation of the new interest is issuance of a new 
security for Article 8 purposes -- is a fairly common pattern. For example, an American 
depositary receipt facility does not maintain securities accounts but issues securities called 
ADRs in respect of foreign securities deposited in such facility. Similarly, custodians of 
government securities which issue receipts, certificates, or the like representing direct interests 
in those securities (sometimes interests split between principal and income) do not maintain 
securities accounts but issue securities representing those interests. Trusts holding assets, in a 
variety of structured and securitized transactions, which issue certificates or the like 
representing "pass-through" or undivided beneficial interests in the trust assets, do not maintain 
securities accounts but issue securities representing those interests.
In analyzing these classification questions, courts should take care to avoid mechanical 
jurisprudence based solely upon exegesis of the wording of definitions in Article 8. The result of 
classification questions is that different sets of rules come into play. In order to decide the 
classification question it is necessary to understand fully the commercial setting and consider 
which set of rules best fits the transaction. Rather than letting the choice of rules turn on 
interpretation of the words of the definitions, the interpretation of the words of the definitions 
should turn on the suitability of the application of the substantive rules.
IV.  CHANGES FROM PRIOR (1978) VERSION OF ARTICLE 8  
A.  Table of Disposition of Sections in Prior Version  
Article 8 (1978)
   Revised Articles 8 and 9
8-101
8-101
8-102(1)(a)
8-102(a)(4) & (15)
8-102(1)(b)
8-102(a)(15) & (18)
8-102(1)(c)
8-102(a)(15)
8-102(1)(d)
8-102(a)(13)
8-102(1)(e)
8-102(a)(2)
8-102(2)
8-202(b)(1)
8-102(3)
8-102(a)(5)
8-102(4)
omitted, see Revision Note 1
8-102(5)
8-102(b)
8-102(6)
8-102(c)
8-103
8-209
8-104
8-210
8-105(1)
omitted, see Revision Note 8

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 18 of 30
Article 8 (1978)
   Revised Articles 8 and 9
8-105(2)
omitted, see Revision Note 4
8-105(3)
8-114
8-106
8-110
8-107
omitted, see Revision Note 8
8-108
omitted, see Revision Note 5
8-201
8-201
8-202
8-202; transaction statement
provisions omitted, see
Revision Note 4
8-203
8-203
8-204
8-204; transaction statement
provisions omitted, see
Revision Note 4
8-205
8-205; transaction statement
provisions omitted, see
Revision Note 4
8-206
8-206; transaction statement
provisions omitted, see
Revision Note 4
8-207
8-207; registered pledge provisions
omitted, see
Revision Note 5
8-208
8-208; transaction statement
provisions omitted, see
Revision Note 4
8-301
8-302(a) & (b)
8-302(1)
8-303(a)
8-302(2)
8-102(a)(1)
8-302(3)
8-303(b)
8-302(4)
8-302(c)
8-303
8-102(a)(3)
8-304(1)
8-105(d)
8-304(2)
omitted, see Revision Note 4
8-304(3)
8-105(b)

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 19 of 30
Article 8 (1978)
   Revised Articles 8 and 9
8-305
8-105(c)
8-306(1)
8-108(f)
8-306(2)
8-108(a)
8-306(3)
8-108(g)
8-306(4)
8-108(h)
8-306(5)
8-108(e)
8-306(6)
8-306(h)
8-306(7)
8-108(b), 8-306(h)
8-306(8)
omitted, see Revision Note 5
8-306(9)
8-108(c)
8-306(10)
8-108(i)
8-307
8-304(d)
8-308(1)
8-102(a)(11), 8-107
8-308(2)
8-304(a)
8-308(3)
8-304(b)
8-308(4)
8-102(a)(12)
8-308(5)
8-107 & 8-305(a)
8-308(6)
8-107
8-308(7)
8-107
8-308(8)
8-107
8-308(9)
8-304(f) & 8-305(b)
8-308(10)
8-107
8-308(11)
8-107
8-309
8-304(c)
8-310
8-304(e)
8-311(a)
omitted, see 8-106(b)(2), 8-301(b)(1),
8-303
8-311(b)
8-404
8-312
8-306
8-313(1)(a)
omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-301(a)(1)
 & (2)
8-313(1)(b)
omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-301(b)(1)

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 20 of 30
Article 8 (1978)
   Revised Articles 8 and 9
 & (2)
8-313(1)(c)
omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-301(a)(3)
8-313(1)(d)
omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-501(b)
8-313(1)(e)
omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-301(a)(2)
8-313(1)(f)
omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-301(b)(2)
8-313(1)(g)
omitted, see Revision Notes 1 & 2;
see also
8-501(b), 8-111
8-313(1)(h)-(j)
omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 9-115
 & 9-203
8-313(2)
omitted, see Revision Note 2; see also
8-503
8-313(3)
omitted, see Revision Note 2
8-313(4)
8-102(a)(14)
8-314
omitted, see Revision Note 8
8-315
omitted, see Revision Note 8
8-316
8-307
8-317
8-112
8-318
8-115
8-319
omitted, see 8-113 and Revision
Note 7
8-320
omitted, see Revision Note 1
8-321
omitted, see 9-115, 9-203
8-401
8-401
8-402
8-402, see Revision Note 6
8-403
8-403, see Revision Note 6
8-404
8-404
8-405(1)
8-406
8-405(2)
8-405(a)

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 21 of 30
Article 8 (1978)
   Revised Articles 8 and 9
8-405(3)
8-405(b)
8-406
8-407
8-407
omitted, see Revision Note 8
8-408
omitted, see Revision Note 4
B.  Revision Notes  
1.  Provisions of former Article 8 on clearing corporations.
The keystone of the treatment of the indirect holding system in the prior version of 
Article 8 was the special provision on clearing corporations in Section 8-320.  
Section 8-320 was added to Article 8 in 1962, at the very end of the process that 
culminated in promulgation and enactment of the original version of the Code. The 
key concepts of the original version of Article 8 were "bona fide purchaser" and 
"delivery." Under Section 8-302 (1962) one could qualify as a "bona fide 
purchaser" only if one had taken delivery of a security, and Section 8-313 (1962) 
specified what counted as a delivery.
 Section 8-320 was added to take account of the development of the system in 
which trades can be settled by netted book-entry movements at a depository 
without physical deliveries of certificates. Rather than reworking the basic 
concepts, however, Section 8-320 brought the depository system within Article 8 by 
definitional fiat. Subsection (a) of Section 8-320 (1962) stated that a transfer or 
pledge could be effected by entries on the books of a central depository, and 
subsection (b) stated that such an entry "has the effect of a delivery of a security in 
bearer form or duly indorsed in blank." In 1978, Section 8-320 was revised to 
conform it to the general substitution of the concept of "transfer" for "delivery," but 
the basic structure remained the same. Under the 1978 version of Article 8, the 
only book-entry transfers that qualified the transferee for bona fide purchaser rights 
were those made on the books of a clearing corporation. See Sections 8-302(1)(c), 
8-313(1)(g), and 8-320. Thus, for practical purposes, the indirect holding system 
rules of the prior version of Article 8 required that the securities be held by a 
clearing corporation in accordance with the central depository rules of Section 8-
320.
Some of the definitional provisions concerning clearing corporation in the prior 
version of Article 8 seem to have conflated the commercial law rules on the effect 
of book-entry transactions with issues about the regulation of entities that are 
acting as clearing corporations. For example, the Section 8-320 rules that gave 
effect to book-entry transfers applied only if the security was "in the custody of the 
clearing corporation, another clearing corporation, [or] a custodian bank." 
"Custodian bank" was defined in Section 8-102(4) as "a bank or trust company that 
is supervised and examined by state or federal authority having supervision over 
banks and is acting as custodian for a clearing corporation." Although this was 
probably inadvertent, these definitional provisions have operated as an obstacle to 
the development of clearing arrangements for global trading, since they effectively 
precluded clearing corporations from using foreign banks as custodians.
Revised Article 8 is based on the view that Article 8 is not the proper place for 
regulatory decisions about whether certain sorts of financial institutions should or 
should not be permitted to engage in a particular aspect of the securities business, 
such as acting as a clearing corporation, or how they should be permitted to 
conduct that business. Rather, Article 8 should deal only with the commercial law 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 22 of 30
questions of what duties and rights flow from doing business as a clearing 
corporation, leaving it to other regulatory law to decide which entities should be 
permitted to act as clearing corporations, and to regulate their activities. Federal 
securities laws now establish a detailed regulatory structure for clearing 
corporations; there is no need for Article 8 to duplicate parts of that structure. 
Revised Article 8 deletes all provision of the prior version which had the effect of 
specifying how clearing corporations should conduct their operations. For example, 
Revised Article 8 deletes the definition of "custodian bank," which operated in the 
prior version only as a regulatory restriction on how clearing corporations could 
hold securities.
In general, the structure of Revised Article 8 is such that there is relatively little 
need for special provisions on clearing corporations. Book-entry transactions 
effected through clearing corporations are treated under the same rules in Part 5 
as book-entry transactions effected through any other securities intermediary. 
Accordingly, Revised Article 8 has no direct analog of the special provisions in 
Section 8-320 on transfers on the books of clearing corporations.
2.  Former Section 8-313 -- "Transfer."
 Section 8-313 of the 1978 version of Article was extremely complicated, because it 
attempted to cover many different issues. The following account of the evolution of 
Section 8-313 may assist in understanding why a different approach is taken in 
Revised Article 8. This explanation is, however, intended not as an actual account 
of historical events, but as a conceptual reconstruction, devised from the 
perspective of, and with the benefit of, hindsight.
The original objective of Article 8 was to ensure that certificates representing 
investment securities would be "negotiable" in the sense that purchasers would be 
protected by the bona fide purchaser rules. The requirements for bona fide 
purchaser status were that the purchaser had to (i) take delivery of the security and 
(ii) give value in good faith and without notice of adverse claims.  Section 8-313 
specified what counted as a "delivery," and Section 8-302 specified the other 
requirements.
The 1978 amendments added provisions on uncertificated securities, but the basic 
organizational pattern was retained.  Section 8-302 continued to state the 
requirements of value, good faith, and lack of notice for good faith purchase, and 
Section 8-313 stated the mechanism by which the purchase had to be 
implemented. Delivery as defined in the original version of Section 8-313 had a 
meaning similar to the concept known in colloquial securities jargon as "good 
delivery"; that is, physical delivery with any necessary indorsement. Although the 
word "delivery" has now come to be used in securities parlance in a broader sense 
than physical delivery, when the provisions for uncertificated securities were added 
it was thought preferable to use another word. Thus, the word "transfer" was 
substituted for "delivery" in Section 8-313.
The 1978 amendments also moved the rules governing security interests in 
securities from Article 9 to Article 8, though the basic conceptual structure of the 
common law of pledge was retained. Since a pledge required a delivery, and since 
the term transfer had been substituted for delivery, the 1978 amendments provided 
that in order to create a security interest there must be a "transfer," in the defined 
Article 8 sense, from the debtor to the secured party. Accordingly, provisions had 
to be added to Section 8-313 so that any of the steps that should suffice to create 
a perfected security interest would be deemed to constitute a "transfer" within the 
meaning of Section 8-313. Thus, the Section 8-313 rules on "transfer," which had 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 23 of 30
in the previous version dealt only with what counted as a delivery that qualified one 
for bona fide purchaser status, became the statutory locus for all of the rules on 
creation and perfection of security interests in securities. Accordingly the rather 
elaborate rules of subsections (1)(h), (1)(i), and (1)(j) were added.
Having expanded Section 8-313 to the point that it served as the rule specifying 
the formal requirements for transfer of all significant forms of interests in securities, 
it must have seemed only logical to take the next step and make the Section 8-313 
rules the exclusive means of transferring interests in securities. Thus, while the 
prior version had stated that "Delivery to a purchaser occurs when ...", the 1978 
version stated that "Transfer of a security or a limited interest (including a security 
interest) therein to a purchaser occurs only … ." Having taken that step, however, it 
then became necessary to ensure that anyone who should be regarded as having 
an interest in a security would be covered by some provision of Section 8-313. 
Thus, the provisions of subsection (1)(d)(ii) and (iii) were added to make it possible 
to say that the customers of a securities intermediary who hold interests in 
securities held by the intermediary in fungible bulk received "transfers."
 Section 8-313(1)(d) was the key provision in the 1978 version dealing with the 
indirect holding system at the level below securities depositories. It operated in 
essentially the same fashion as Section 8-320; that is, it stated that when a broker 
or bank holding securities in fungible bulk makes entries on its books identifying a 
quantity of the fungible bulk as belonging to the customer, that action is treated as 
a "transfer" -- in the special Section 8-313 sense -- of an interest in the security 
from the intermediary to the customer.
Revised Article 8 has no direct analog of the 1978 version of Section 8-313. The 
rules on secured transactions have been returned to Article 9, so subsections of 
Section 8-313 (1978) dealing with security interests are deleted from Article 8. 
Insofar as portions of Section 8-313 (1978) were designed to specify the formal 
requirements for transferees to qualify for protection against adverse claims, their 
place is taken by Revised Section 8-301, which defines "delivery," in a fashion 
somewhat akin to the pre-1978 version of Section 8-313. The descendant of the 
provisions of Section 8-313 (1978) dealing with the indirect holding system is 
Revised Section 8-501 which specifies when a person acquires a security 
entitlement.  Section 8-501, however, is based on a different analysis of the 
transaction in which a customer acquires a position in the indirect holding system. 
The transaction is not described as a "transfer" of an interest in some portion of a 
fungible bulk of securities held by the securities intermediary but as the creation of 
a security entitlement. Accordingly, just as Revised Article 8 has no direct analog of 
the Section 8-320 rules on clearing corporation transfers, it has no direct analog of 
the Section 8-313(1) rules on "transfers" of interests in securities held in fungible 
bulk.
3.  Uncertificated securities provisions.
Given the way that securities holding practices have evolved, the sharp distinction 
that the 1978 version of Article 8 drew between certificated securities and 
uncertificated securities has become somewhat misleading. Since many provisions 
of the 1978 version had separate subsections dealing first with certificated 
securities and then with uncertificated securities, and since people intuitively 
realize that the volume of trading in the modern securities markets could not 
possibly be handled by pushing around certificates, it was only natural for a reader 
of the statute to conclude that the uncertificated securities provisions of Article 8 
were the basis of the book-entry system. That, however, is not the case. Although 
physical delivery of certificates plays little role in the settlement system, most 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 24 of 30
publicly traded securities are still, in legal theory, certificated securities. To use 
clearance and settlement jargon, the book-entry securities holding system has 
used "immobilization" rather than "dematerialization."
The important legal and practical difference is between the direct holding system, 
in which the beneficial owners have a direct relationship with the issuer, and the 
indirect holding system, in which securities are held through tiers of securities 
intermediaries. Accordingly, in Revised Article 8 the contrast between certificated 
securities and uncertificated securities has been minimized or eliminated as much 
as possible in stating the substantive provisions.
4.  Transaction statements.
Although the 1978 provisions on uncertificated securities contemplated a system in 
which there would be no definitive certificates as reifications of the underlying 
interests or obligations, the 1978 amendments did not really dispense with all 
requirements of paper evidence of securities holding. The 1978 amendments 
required issuers of uncertificated securities to send paper "transaction statements" 
upon registration of transfer.  Section 8-408 regulated the content and format of 
these transaction statements in considerable detail. The statements had to be in 
writing, include specific information, and contain a conspicuous legend stating that 
"This statement is merely a record of the rights of the addressee as of the time of 
its issuance. Delivery of this statement, of itself, confers no rights on the recipient. 
This statement is neither a negotiable instrument nor a security." Issuers were 
required to send statements when any transfer was registered (known as "initial 
transaction statements") and also were required to send periodic statements at 
least annually and also upon any security holder's reasonable request. Fees were 
regulated to some extent, in that Section 8-408(8) specified that if periodic 
statements were sent at least quarterly, the issuer could charge for statements 
requested by security holders at other times.
The detailed specification of reporting requirements for issuers of uncertificated 
securities was quite different from the treatment of securities intermediaries. 
Though the prior version of Article 8 did require non-clearing corporation securities 
intermediaries to send confirmations of transfers -- a requirement deleted in 
Revised Article 8 -- it did not regulate their content or format. Article 8 has never 
imposed periodic reporting requirements on securities intermediaries. Thus, 
reporting requirements for the indirect holding system were left to agreements and 
regulatory authorities, while reporting requirements for a book-entry direct holding 
system were imposed by statute.
Securities holding systems based on transaction statements of the sort 
contemplated by the 1978 amendments have not yet evolved to any major extent -- 
indeed, the statutory specification of the details of the information system may itself 
have acted as an impediment to the evolution of a book-entry direct system. 
Accordingly, Revised Article 8 drops the statutory requirements concerning 
transaction statements. The record keeping and reporting obligations of issuers of 
uncertificated securities would be left to agreement and other law, as is the case 
today for securities intermediaries.
In the 1978 version, the Part 2 rules concerning transfer restrictions, issuers' 
defenses, and the like were based on the assumption that transaction statements 
would be used in a fashion analogous to traditional security certificates. For 
example, Sections 8-202 and 8-204 specified that the terms of a security, or any 
restrictions on transfer imposed by the issuer, had to be noted on the transaction 
statement. Revised Article 8 deletes all such references to transaction statements. 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 25 of 30
The terms of securities, or of restrictions of transfer, would be governed by 
whatever law or agreement specifies these matters, just as is the case for various 
other forms of business entities, such as partnerships, that have never issued 
certificates representing interests. Other Part 2 rules, such as Sections 8-205, 8-
206, and 8-208, attempted to state rules on forgery and related matters for 
transactions statements. Since Revised Article 8 does not specify the format for 
information systems for uncertificated securities, there is no point in attempting to 
state rules on the consequences of wrongful information transmission in the 
particular format of written statements authenticated by signatures.
5.  Deletion of provisions on registered pledges.
The 1978 version of Article 8 also added detailed provisions concerning "registered 
pledges" of uncertificated securities. Revised Article 8 adopts a new system of 
rules for security interests in securities, for both the direct and indirect holding 
systems that make it unnecessary to have special statutory provisions for 
registered pledges of uncertificated securities.
The reason that the 1978 version of Article 8 created this concept was that if the 
only means of creating security interests was the pledge, it seemed necessary to 
provide some substitute for the pledge in the absence of a certificate. The point of 
the registered pledge was, presumably, that it permitted a debtor to grant a 
perfected security interest in securities, yet still keep the securities in the debtor's 
own name for purposes of dividends, voting, and the like. The concept of 
registered pledge has, however, been thought troublesome by many legal 
commentators and securities industry participants. For example, in Massachusetts 
where many mutual funds have their headquarters, a non-uniform amendment was 
enacted to permit the issuer of an uncertificated security to refuse to register a 
pledge and instead issue a certificate to the owner that the owner could then 
pledge by ordinary means.
Under the 1978 version of Article 8, if an issuer chose to issue securities in 
uncertificated form, it was also required by statute to offer a registered pledge 
program. Revised Articles 8 and 9 take a different approach. All of the provisions 
dealing with registered pledges have been deleted. This does not mean, however, 
that issuers cannot offer such a service. The control rules of Revised Section 8-106 
and the related priority provisions in Article 9 establish a structure that permits 
issuers to develop systems akin to the registered pledge device, without mandating 
that they do so, or legislating the details of the system. In essence, the registered 
pledge or control device amounts to a record keeping service. A debtor can always 
transfer securities to its lender. In a registered pledge or control agreement 
arrangement, the issuer keeps track of which securities the secured party holds for 
its own account outright, and which securities it holds in pledge from its debtors.
Under the rules of Revised Articles 8 and 9, the registered pledge issue can easily 
be left to resolution by the market. The concept of control is defined in such fashion 
that if an issuer or securities intermediary wishes to offer a service akin to the 
registered pledge device it can do so. The issuer or securities intermediary would 
offer to enter into agreements with the debtor and secured party under which it 
would hold the securities for the account of the debtor, but subject to instructions 
from the secured party. The secured party would thereby obtain control assuring 
perfection and priority of its lien.
Even if such arrangements are not offered by issuers, persons who hold 
uncertificated securities will have several options for using them as collateral for 
secured loans. Under the new rules, filing is a permissible method of perfection, for 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 26 of 30
debtors other than securities firms. A secured party who relies on filing is, of 
course, exposed to the risk that the debtor will double finance and grant a later 
secured lender a security interest under circumstances that give that lender control 
and hence priority. If the lender is unwilling to run that risk, the debtor can transfer 
the securities outright to the lender on the books of the issuer, though between the 
parties the debtor would be the owner and the lender only a secured party. That, of 
course, requires that the debtor trust the secured party not to dispose of the 
collateral wrongfully, and the debtor may also need to make arrangements with the 
secured party to exercise benefits of ownership such as voting and receiving 
distributions.
It may well be that both lenders and borrowers would prefer to have some 
arrangement, such as the registered pledge device of current law, that permits the 
debtor to remain as the registered owner entitled to vote and receive dividends but 
gives the lender exclusive power to order their disposition. The approach taken in 
this revision is that if there is a genuine demand for such arrangements, it can be 
met by the market. The difficulty with the approach of present Article 8 is that it 
mandates that any issuer that wishes to issue securities in uncertificated form must 
also offer this record keeping service. That obligation may well have acted as a 
disincentive to the development of uncertificated securities. Thus, the deletion of 
the mandated registered pledge provisions is consistent with the principle of 
neutrality toward the evolution of securities holding practices.
6.  Former Section 8-403 -- Issuer's Duty as to Adverse Claims.
 Section 8-403 of the prior version of Article 8 dealt with the obligations of issuers 
to adverse claimants. The starting point of American law on issuers' liability in such 
circumstances is the old case of Lowry v. Commercial & Farmers' Bank, 15 F. Cas. 
1040 (C.C.D. Md. 1848) (No. 8551), under which issuers could be held liable for 
registering a transfer at the direction of a registered owner who was acting 
wrongfully as against a third person in making the transfer. The Lowry principle 
imposed onerous liability on issuers, particularly in the case of transfers by 
fiduciaries, such as executors and trustees. To protect against risk of such liability, 
issuers developed the practice of requiring extensive documentation for fiduciary 
stock transfers to assure themselves that the fiduciaries were acting rightfully. As a 
result, fiduciary stock transfers were cumbersome and time consuming.
In the present century, American law has gradually moved away from the Lowry 
principle. Statutes such as the Uniform Fiduciaries Act, the Model Fiduciary Stock 
Transfer Act, and the Uniform Act for the Simplification of Fiduciary Security 
Transfers sought to avoid the delays in stock transfers that could result from 
issuers' demands for documentation by limiting the issuer's responsibility for 
transfers in breach of the registered owner's duty to others. Although these 
statutes provided that issuers had no duty of inquiry to determine whether a 
fiduciary was acting rightfully, they all provided that an issuer could be liable if the 
issuer acted with notice of third party claims.
The prior version of Article 8 followed the same approach as the various fiduciary 
transfer statutes. Issuers were not required to seek out information from which they 
could determine whether a fiduciary was acting properly, but they were liable if they 
registered a transfer with notice that the fiduciary was acting improperly. Former 
Section 8-308(11) said that the failure of a fiduciary to comply with a controlling 
instrument or failure to obtain a court approval required under local law did not 
render the indorsement or instruction unauthorized. However, if a fiduciary was in 
fact acting improperly, then the beneficiary would be treated as an adverse 
claimant. See Section 8-302(2) (1978) and Comment 4. Former Section 8-403 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 27 of 30
specified that if written notice of an adverse claim had been sent to the issuer, the 
issuer "shall inquire into the adverse claim" before registering a transfer on the 
indorsement or instruction of the registered owner. The issuer could "discharge any 
duty of inquiry by any reasonable means," including by notifying the adverse 
claimant that the transfer would be registered unless the adverse claimant obtained 
a court order or gave an indemnity bond.
Revised Article 8 rejects the Lowry principle altogether. It provides that an issuer is 
not liable for wrongful registration if it acts on an effective indorsement or 
instruction, even though the issuer may have notice of adverse claims, so long as 
the issuer has not been served with legal process and is not acting in collusion with 
the wrongdoer in registering the transfer. See Revised Section 8-404 and 
Comments thereto. The provisions of prior Section 8-403 specifying that issuers 
had a duty to investigate adverse claims of which they had notice are deleted.
Revised Article 8 also deletes the provisions set out in Section 8-403(3) of prior law 
specifying that issuers did not have a duty to inquire into the rightfulness of 
transfers by fiduciaries. The omission of the rules formerly in Section 8-403(3) does 
not, of course, mean that issuers would be liable for acting on the instruction of 
fiduciaries in the circumstances covered by former Section 8-403(3). Former 
Section 8-403(3) assumed that issuers would be liable if they registered a transfer 
with notice of an adverse claim. Former Section 8-403(3) was necessary only to 
negate any inference that knowledge that a transfer was initiated by a fiduciary 
might give constructive notice of adverse claims. Under Section 8-404 of Revised 
Article 8, mere notice of adverse claims does not impose duties on the issuer. 
Accordingly the provisions included in former Section 8-403(3) are unnecessary.
Although the prior version of Article 8 included provisions similar or identical to 
those set out in the Uniform Act for the Simplification of Fiduciary Security 
Transfers and similar statutes, most states retained these statutes at the time the 
Uniform Commercial Code was adopted. These statutes are based on a premise 
different from Revised Article 8. The fiduciary simplification acts are predicated on 
the assumption that an issuer would be liable to an adverse claimant if the issuer 
had notice. These statutes seek only to preclude any inference that issuers have 
such notice when they register transfers on the instructions of a fiduciary. Revised 
Article 8 is based on the view that a third party should not be able to interfere with 
the relationship between an issuer and its registered shareholders unless the 
claimant obtains legal process. Since notice of an adverse claim does not impose 
duties on an issuer under Revised Article 8, the Uniform Act for the Simplification 
of Fiduciary Security Transfers, or similar statutes, should be repealed upon 
enactment of Revised Article 8.
7.  Former Section 8-319 -- Statute of Frauds.
Revised Article 8 deletes the special statute of frauds provision for securities 
contracts that was set out in former Section 8-319. See Revised Section 8-113. 
Most of the litigation involving the statute of frauds rule of the prior version of 
Article 8 involved informal transactions, rather than transactions on the organized 
securities markets. Typical cases were those in which an employee or former 
employee of a small enterprise sued to enforce an alleged promise that he or she 
would receive an equity interest in the business. The usual commercial policies 
relating to writings in contracts for the sale of personal property are at most 
tangentially implicated in such cases. There was a rather large and complex body 
of case law dealing with the applicability of Section 8-319 to cases of this sort. It 
seems doubtful that the cost of litigating these issues was warranted by whatever 
protections the statute of frauds offered against fraudulent claims.

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 28 of 30
Subsection (c) of former Section 8-319 provided that the statute of frauds bar did 
not apply if a written confirmation was sent and the recipient did not seasonably 
send an objection. That provision, however, presumably would not have had the 
effect of binding a broker's customer to the terms of a trade for which confirmation 
had been sent though the customer had not objected within 10 days. In the first 
place, the relationship between a broker and customer is ordinarily that of agent 
and principal; thus the broker is not seeking to enforce a contract for sale of a 
security, but to bind its principal for action taken by the broker as agent. Former 
Section 8-319 did not by its terms apply to the agency relationship. Moreover, even 
if former Section 8-319(c) applied, it is doubtful that it, of its own force, had the 
effect of precluding the customer from disputing whether there was a contract or 
what the terms of the contract were. Former Section 8-319(c) only removed the 
statute of frauds as a bar to enforcement; it did not say that there was a contract or 
that the confirmation had the effect of excluding other evidence of its terms. Thus, 
deletion of former Section 8-319 does not change the law one way or the other on 
whether a customer who fails to object to a written confirmation is precluded from 
denying the trade described in the confirmation, because that issue was never 
governed by former Section 8-319(c).
8.  Miscellaneous.
Prior Section 8-105. Revised Article 8 deletes the statement found in Section 8-
105(1) of the prior version that certificated securities "are negotiable instruments." 
This provision was added very late in the drafting process of the original Uniform 
Commercial Code. Apparently the thought was that it might be useful in dealing 
with potential transition problems arising out of the fact that bonds were then 
treated as negotiable instruments under the Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law. 
During that era, many other statutes, such as those specifying permissible 
categories of investments for regulated entities, might have used such phrases as 
"negotiable securities" or "negotiable instruments." Section 8-105 seems to have 
been included in the original version of Article 8 to avoid unfortunate interpretations 
of those other statutes once securities were moved from the Uniform Negotiable 
Instruments Law to UCC Article 8. Whether or not Section 8-105 was necessary at 
that time, it has surely outlived its purpose. The statement that securities "are 
negotiable instruments" is very confusing. As used in the Uniform Commercial 
Code, the term "negotiable instrument" means an instrument that is governed by 
Article 3; yet Article 8 securities are not governed by Article 3. Courts have 
occasionally cited Section 8-105(1) of prior law for the proposition that the rules 
that are generally thought of as characteristic of negotiability, such as the rule that 
bona fide purchasers take free from adverse claims, apply to certificated securities.  
Section 8-105(1), however, is unnecessary for that purpose, since the relevant 
rules are set out in specific provisions of Article 8.
Prior Sections 8-107 and 8-314. Article 8 has never been, and should not be, a 
comprehensive codification of the law of contracts for the purchase and sale of 
securities. The prior version of Article 8 did contain, however, a number of 
provisions dealing with miscellaneous aspects of the law of contracts as applied to 
contracts for the sale of securities.  Section 8-107 dealt with one remedy for 
breach, and Section 8-314 dealt with certain aspects of performance. Revised 
Article 8 deletes these on the theory that inclusion of a few sections on issues of 
contract law is likely to cause more harm than good since inferences might be 
drawn from the failure to cover related issues. The deletion of these sections is not, 
however, intended as a rejection of the rules of contract law and interpretation that 
they expressed.

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 29 of 30
Prior Section 8-315. It is not entirely clear what the function of Section 8-315 of 
prior law was. The section specified that the owner of a security could recover it 
from a person to whom it had been transferred, if the transferee did not qualify as a 
bona fide purchaser. It seems to have been intended only to recognize that 
securities, like any other form of personal property, are governed by the general 
principle of property law that an owner can recover property from a person to 
whom it has been transferred under circumstances that did not cut off the owner's 
claim. Although many other Articles of the UCC deal with cut-off rules, Article 8 
was the only one that included an affirmative statement of the rights of an owner to 
recover her property. It seems wiser to adopt the same approach as in Articles 2, 
3, 7, and 9, and leave this point to other law. Accordingly, Section 8-315 is deleted 
in Revised Article 8, without, of course, implying rejection of the nearly self-evident 
rule that it sought to express.
Prior Section 8-407. This section, entitled "Exchangeability of Securities," seemed 
to say that holders of securities had the right to cause issuers to convert them back 
and forth from certificated to uncertificated form. The provision, however, applied 
only if the issuer "regularly maintains a system for issuing the class of securities 
involved under which both certificated and uncertificated securities are regularly 
issued to the category of owners, which includes the person in whose name the 
new security is to be registered." The provision seems unnecessary, since it 
applied only if the issuer decided that it should. The matter can be covered by 
agreement or corporate charter or by-laws.
V.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
On behalf of the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and the American Law 
Institute, the Drafting Committee and the Reporter acknowledge with deep appreciation the dedicated 
and helpful assistance of a great many individuals and organizations. Among the large number of 
individuals who participated in the development of Revised Article 8, special mention should be made 
of a few whose contributions were extraordinary.
Preceding the preparation of Revised Article 8, the topic was carefully studied by the Advisory 
Committee on Settlement of Market Transactions of the American Bar Association Section of Business 
Law, under the chairmanship of Robert Haydock, Jr., of Boston, MA. Martin Aronstein, of Philadelphia, 
PA, reporter for the 1977 revision of Article 8, served on the Haydock Committee and continued to 
advise the Drafting Committee. Robert C. Mendelson, New York, NY, who also served on the Haydock 
Committee, is chair of the Market Transactions Advisory Committee set up by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission; Bob Mendelson's considerable contribution to the preparation of Revised 
Article 8 was most important. Other members of the Haydock Committee had continuing roles either as 
members of the Drafting Committee or as sources of valuable advice to that committee.
The revision of Article 8 is the culmination of a successful federal-state collaboration among the 
American Law Institute and the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, 
sponsors of the Uniform Commercial Code, and representatives of the United States Department of the 
Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal Reserve System, and other federal 
bodies. The product reflects the assistance of many people, and particularly of Jonathan Kallman and 
Ari Burstein on behalf of the SEC, Calvin Ninomiya, Cynthia E. Reese, and Virginia S. Rutledge of 
Treasury, Lawranne Stewart of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Debra W. Cook 
and Mary Sue Fisher of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and George Wilder and Carla 
Behnfeldt of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Representatives of organizations in the securities and banking industry and their counsel gave 
generously of their time and knowledge. Special mention should be made of Norman R. Nelson, New 
York Clearing House, R. May Lee, Public Securities Association, Robert J. Woldow and Karen 
Saperstein, National Securities Clearing Corporation, Leopold S. Rassnick, Participants Trust 

PREFATORY NOTE
Page 30 of 30
Company, Robert Wittie and Patricia Louie, Investment Company Institute, Thomas A. Williams, 
Richard B. Nesson and Carl Urist, Depository Trust Company, Dennis A. Dutterer, Board of Trade 
Clearing Corporation, Evalyn Lipton Fishbein, State Street Bank and Trust Company, Robert P. 
DeGregorie, Chemical Bank, Gail M. Inaba, Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, Anthony J. 
Leitner, Goldman, Sachs & Company, Robert M. MacAllister, The Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A., Kevin 
J. Moynihan, Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Inc., Lois J. Radisch, J.P. Morgan & Co., James J. 
Volpe, First Chicago Trust Company of New York, and Richard E. Smith, Securities Transfer 
Association.
Many lawyers and law professors contributed to the work of the Drafting Committee. Special 
appreciation is due to Sandra M. Rocks, New York, NY, who participated on behalf of the ABA UCC 
Investment Securities Subcommittee and ABA Task Force on TRADES Regulations. Others who 
participated included Steven Harris and James R. McDaniel, Chicago, IL, Kenneth B. Davis, Jr., 
Madison, WI, David M. Huggins and Bradley Y. Smith, New York, NY, David J. Schraa, Brussels, 
Belgium, and Randall D. Guynn, London, England. The Reporter and Drafting Committee also received 
assistance from the dedicated work of lawyers, not them selves experts in securities law, who reviewed 
and commented upon drafts and participated in the revision process through meetings of the Members 
Consultative Group of the American Law Institute and at various national, state, and local bar 
association programs.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document