U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. II, § 9-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX II. MODEL PROVISIONS FOR PRODUCTION-MONEY PRIORITY
[§ 9-102(a)]
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: States that enact these model provisions should add the following definitions to Section 9-102(a)
following the definition of "proceeds" and preceding the definition of "promissory note", renumbering paragraphs in
9-102(a) accordingly:
() "Production-money crops" means crops that secure a production-money obligation incurred with respect to the
production of those crops.
() "Production-money obligation" means an obligation of an obligor incurred for new value given to enable the
debtor to produce crops if the value is in fact used for the production of the crops.
() "Production of crops" includes tilling and otherwise preparing land for growing, planting, cultivating, fertilizing,
irrigating, harvesting, and gathering crops, and protecting them from damage or disease.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 6 § 1
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE A [Including repeal of Article 6]
[§ 1. REPEAL.]
Article 6 and Section 9-111 of the Uniform Commercial Code are hereby repealed, effective . . . . . . . . . . .
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 5, Appx.
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
[APPENDIX. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLES 1, 2, AND 9]
View conforming amendments.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 2A, Appx.
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES
[APPENDIX] ARTICLE 1 AND ARTICLE 9: CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
View conforming amendments.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. II, § 9-103A
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX II. MODEL PROVISIONS FOR PRODUCTION-MONEY PRIORITY
[MODEL SECTION 9-103A]. "PRODUCTION-MONEY CROPS";
"PRODUCTION-MONEY OBLIGATION"; PRODUCTION-MONEY SECURITY
INTEREST; BURDEN OF ESTABLISHING
(a) A security interest in crops is a production-money security interest to the extent that the crops are
production-money crops.
(b) If the extent to which a security interest is a production-money security interest depends on the
application of a payment to a particular obligation, the payment must be applied:
(1) in accordance with any reasonable method of application to which the parties agree;
(2) in the absence of the parties' agreement to a reasonable method, in accordance with any intention
of the obligor manifested at or before the time of payment; or
(3) in the absence of an agreement to a reasonable method and a timely manifestation of the obligor's
intention, in the following order:
(A) to obligations that are not secured; and
(B) if more than one obligation is secured, to obligations secured by production-money security
interests in the order in which those obligations were incurred.
(c) A production-money security interest does not lose its status as such, even if:
(1) the production-money crops also secure an obligation that is not a production-money obligation;
(2) collateral that is not production-money crops also secures the production-money obligation; or
(3) the production-money obligation has been renewed, refinanced, or restructured.
(d) A secured party claiming a production-money security interest has the burden of establishing the extent
to which the security interest is a production-money security interest.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: This section is optional. States that enact this section should place it between Sections 9-103
and 9-104 and number it accordingly, e.g., as Section 9-103A or 9-103.1.
1. Source. New.
2. Production-Money Priority; "Production-Money Security Interest." This section is patterned closely on
Section 9-103, which defines "purchase-money security interest." Subsection (b) makes clear that a security
interest can obtain production-money status only to the extent that it secures value that actually can be traced to the
[MODEL SECTION 9-103A]. "PRODUCTION-MONEY CROPS"; "PRODUCTION-MONEY OBLIGATION";
PRODUCTION-MONEY SECURITY INTEREST; BURDEN OF ESTABLISHING
Page 2 of 2
direct production of crops. To the extent that a security interest secures indirect costs of production, such as
general living expenses, the security interest is not entitled to production-money treatment.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. II, § 9-324A
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX II. MODEL PROVISIONS FOR PRODUCTION-MONEY PRIORITY
[MODEL SECTION 9-324A]. PRIORITY OF PRODUCTION-MONEY SECURITY
INTERESTS AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (c), (d), and (e), if the requirements of subsection (b) are
satisfied, a perfected production-money security interest in production-money crops has priority over a
conflicting security interest in the same crops and, except as otherwise provided in Section 9-327, also has
priority in their identifiable proceeds.
(b) A production-money security interest has priority under subsection (a) if:
(1) the production-money security interest is perfected by filing when the production-money secured
party first gives new value to enable the debtor to produce the crops;
(2) the production-money secured party sends an authenticated notification to the holder of the
conflicting security interest not less than 10 or more than 30 days before the production-money secured
party first gives new value to enable the debtor to produce the crops if the holder had filed a financing
statement covering the crops before the date of the filing made by the production-money secured party;
and
(3) the notification states that the production-money secured party has or expects to acquire a
production-money security interest in the debtor's crops and provides a description of the crops.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) or (e), if more than one security interest qualifies for
priority in the same collateral under subsection (a), the security interests rank according to priority in time of
filing under Section 9-322(a).
(d) To the extent that a person holding a perfected security interest in production-money crops that are the
subject of a production-money security interest gives new value to enable the debtor to produce the
production-money crops and the value is in fact used for the production of the production-money crops, the
security interests rank according to priority in time of filing under Section 9-322(a).
(e) To the extent that a person holds both an agricultural lien and a production-money security interest in
the same collateral securing the same obligations, the rules of priority applicable to agricultural liens govern
priority.]
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: This section is optional. States that enact this section should place it between Sections 9-324
and 9-325 and number it accordingly, e.g., as Section 9-324A or 9-324.1.
1. Source. New; replaces former Section 9-312(2).
[MODEL SECTION 9-324A]. PRIORITY OF PRODUCTION-MONEY SECURITY INTERESTS AND
AGRICULTURAL LIENS
Page 2 of 2
2. Priority of Production-Money Security Interests and Conflicting Security Interests. This section replaces
the limited priority in crops afforded by former Section 9-312(2). That priority generally has been thought to be of
little value for its intended beneficiaries. This section attempts to balance the interests of the production-money
secured party with those of a secured party who has previously filed a financing statement covering the crops that
are to be produced. For example, to qualify for priority under this section, the production-money secured party must
notify the earlier-filed secured party prior to extending the production-money credit. The notification affords the
earlier secured party the opportunity to prevent subordination by extending the credit itself. Subsection (d) makes
this explicit. If the holder of a security interest in production-money crops which conflicts with a production-money
security interest gives new value for the production of the crops, the security interests rank according to priority in
time of filing under Section 9-322(a).
3. Multiple Production-Money Security Interests. In the case of multiple production-money security interests
that qualify for priority under subsection (a), the first to file has priority. See subsection (c). Note that only a security
interest perfected by filing is entitled to production-money priority. See subsection (b)(1). Consequently, subsection
(c) does not adopt the first-to-file-or-perfect formulation.
4. Holder of Agricultural Lien and Production-Money Security Interest. Subsection (e) deals with a creditor
who holds both an agricultural lien and an Article 9 production-money security interest in the same collateral. In
these cases, the priority rules applicable to agricultural liens govern. The creditor can avoid this result by waiving its
agricultural lien.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-101. SHORT TITLES
(a) This [Act] may be cited as the Uniform Commercial Code.
(b) This article may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code- General Provisions.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-101.
Changes from former law: Subsection (b) is new. It is added in order to make the structure of Article 1 parallel
with that of the other articles of the Uniform Commercial Code.
1. Each other article of the Uniform Commercial Code (except Articles 10 and 11) may also be cited by its own
short title. See Sections 2-101, 2A-101, 3-101, 4-101, 4A-101, 5-101, 6-101, 7-101, 8-101, and 9-101.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-102. SCOPE OF ARTICLE
This article applies to a transaction to the extent that it is governed by another article of [the Uniform Commercial
Code].
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: New.
1. This section is intended to resolve confusion that has occasionally arisen as to the applicability of the
substantive rules in this article. This section makes clear what has always been the case - the rules in Article 1
apply to transactions to the extent that those transactions are governed by one of the other articles of the Uniform
Commercial Code. See also Comment 1 to Section 1-301.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-103. CONSTRUCTION OF [UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE] TO
PROMOTE ITS PURPOSES AND POLICIES; APPLICABILITY OF
SUPPLEMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW
(a) [The Uniform Commercial Code] must be liberally construed and applied to promote its underlying
purposes and policies, which are:
(1) to simplify, clarify, and modernize the law governing commercial transactions;
(2) to permit the continued expansion of commercial practices through custom, usage, and agreement
of the parties; and
(3) to make uniform the law among the various jurisdictions.
(b) Unless displaced by the particular provisions of [the Uniform Commercial Code], the principles of law
and equity, including the law merchant and the law relative to capacity to contract, principal and agent,
estoppel, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake, bankruptcy, and other validating or
invalidating cause supplement its provisions.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-102 (1)-(2); Former Section 1-103.
Changes from former law: This section is derived from subsections (1) and (2) of former Section 1-102 and from
former Section 1-103. Subsection (a) of this section combines subsections (1) and (2) of former Section 1-102.
Except for changing the form of reference to the Uniform Commercial Code and minor stylistic changes, its
language is the same as subsections (1) and (2) of former Section 1-102. Except for changing the form of reference
to the Uniform Commercial Code and minor stylistic changes, subsection (b) of this section is identical to former
Section 1-103. The provisions have been combined in this section to reflect the interrelationship between them.
1. The Uniform Commercial Code is drawn to provide flexibility so that, since it is intended to be a semipermanent
and infrequently-amended piece of legislation, it will provide its own machinery for expansion of
commercial practices. It is intended to make it possible for the law embodied in the Uniform Commercial Code to be
applied by the courts in the light of unforeseen and new circumstances and practices. The proper construction of
the Uniform Commercial Code requires, of course, that its interpretation and application be limited to its reason.
Even prior to the enactment of the Uniform Commercial Code, courts were careful to keep broad acts from being
hampered in their effects by later acts of limited scope. See Pacific Wool Growers v. Draper & Co., 158 Or. 1, 73
P.2d 1391 (1937), and compare Section 1-104. The courts have often recognized that the policies embodied in an
act are applicable in reason to subject-matter that was not expressly included in the language of the act,
Commercial Nat. Bank of New Orleans v. Canal-Louisiana Bank & Trust Co., 239 U.S. 520, 36 S.Ct. 194, 60 L.Ed.
417 (1916) (bona fide purchase policy of Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act extended to case not covered but of
§ 1-103. CONSTRUCTION OF [UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE] TO PROMOTE ITS PURPOSES AND
POLICIES; APPLICABILITY OF SUPPLEMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW
Page 2 of 3
equivalent nature), and did the same where reason and policy so required, even where the subject-matter had been
intentionally excluded from the act in general. Agar v. Orda, 264 N.Y. 248, 190 N.E. 479 (1934) (Uniform Sales Act
change in seller's remedies applied to contract for sale of choses in action even though the general coverage of that
Act was intentionally limited to goods "other than things in action.") They implemented a statutory policy with liberal
and useful remedies not provided in the statutory text. They disregarded a statutory limitation of remedy where the
reason of the limitation did not apply. Fiterman v. J. N. Johnson & Co., 156 Minn. 201, 194 N.W. 399 (1923)
(requirement of return of the goods as a condition to rescission for breach of warranty; also, partial rescission
allowed). Nothing in the Uniform Commercial Code stands in the way of the continuance of such action by the
courts.
The Uniform Commercial Code should be construed in accordance with its underlying purposes and policies. The
text of each section should be read in the light of the purpose and policy of the rule or principle in question, as also
of the Uniform Commercial Code as a whole, and the application of the language should be construed narrowly or
broadly, as the case may be, in conformity with the purposes and policies involved.
2. Applicability of supplemental principles of law. Subsection (b) states the basic relationship of the Uniform
Commercial Code to supplemental bodies of law. The Uniform Commercial Code was drafted against the backdrop
of existing bodies of law, including the common law and equity, and relies on those bodies of law to supplement it
provisions in many important ways. At the same time, the Uniform Commercial Code is the primary source of
commercial law rules in areas that it governs, and its rules represent choices made by its drafters and the enacting
legislatures about the appropriate policies to be furthered in the transactions it covers. Therefore, while principles of
common law and equity may supplement provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code, they may not be used to
supplant its provisions, or the purposes and policies those provisions reflect, unless a specific provision of the
Uniform Commercial Code provides otherwise. In the absence of such a provision, the Uniform Commercial Code
preempts principles of common law and equity that are inconsistent with either its provisions or its purposes and
policies.
The language of subsection (b) is intended to reflect both the concept of supplementation and the concept of
preemption. Some courts, however, had difficulty in applying the identical language of former Section 1-103 to
determine when other law appropriately may be applied to supplement the Uniform Commercial Code, and when
that law has been displaced by the Code. Some decisions applied other law in situations in which that application,
while not inconsistent with the text of any particular provision of the Uniform Commercial Code, clearly was
inconsistent with the underlying purposes and policies reflected in the relevant provisions of the Code. See, e.g.,
Sheerbonnet, Ltd. v. American Express Bank, Ltd., 951 F. Supp. 403 (S.D.N.Y. 1995). In part, this difficulty arose
from Comment 1 to former Section 1-103, which stated that "this section indicates the continued applicability to
commercial contracts of all supplemental bodies of law except insofar as they are explicitly displaced by this Act."
The "explicitly displaced" language of that Comment did not accurately reflect the proper scope of Uniform
Commercial Code preemption, which extends to displacement of other law that is inconsistent with the purposes
and policies of the Uniform Commercial Code, as well as with its text.
3. Application of subsection (b) to statutes. The primary focus of Section 1-103 is on the relationship between
the Uniform Commercial Code and principles of common law and equity as developed by the courts. State law,
however, increasingly is statutory. Not only are there a growing number of state statutes addressing specific issues
that come within the scope of the Uniform Commercial Code, but in some States many general principles of
common law and equity have been codified. When the other law relating to a matter within the scope of the Uniform
Commercial Code is a statute, the principles of subsection (b) remain relevant to the court's analysis of the
relationship between that statute and the Uniform Commercial Code, but other principles of statutory interpretation
that specifically address the interrelationship between statutes will be relevant as well. In some situations, the
principles of subsection (b) still will be determinative. For example, the mere fact that an equitable principle is stated
in statutory form rather than in judicial decisions should not change the court's analysis of whether the principle can
be used to supplement the Uniform Commercial Code - under subsection (b), equitable principles may supplement
provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code only if they are consistent with the purposes and policies of the Uniform
§ 1-103. CONSTRUCTION OF [UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE] TO PROMOTE ITS PURPOSES AND
POLICIES; APPLICABILITY OF SUPPLEMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW
Page 3 of 3
Commercial Code as well as its text. In other situations, however, other interpretive principles addressing the
interrelationship between statutes may lead the court to conclude that the other statute is controlling, even though it
conflicts with the Uniform Commercial Code. This, for example, would be the result in a situation where the other
statute was specifically intended to provide additional protection to a class of individuals engaging in transactions
covered by the Uniform Commercial Code.
4. Listing not exclusive. The list of sources of supplemental law in subsection (b) is intended to be merely
illustrative of the other law that may supplement the Uniform Commercial Code, and is not exclusive. No listing
could be exhaustive. Further, the fact that a particular section of the Uniform Commercial Code makes express
reference to other law is not intended to suggest the negation of the general application of the principles of
subsection (b). Note also that the word "bankruptcy" in subsection (b), continuing the use of that word from former
Section 1-103, should be understood not as a specific reference to federal bankruptcy law but, rather as a reference
to general principles of insolvency, whether under federal or state law.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-104. CONSTRUCTION AGAINST IMPLIED REPEAL
[The Uniform Commercial Code] being a general act intended as a unified coverage of its subject matter, no part of
it shall be deemed to be impliedly repealed by subsequent legislation if such construction can reasonably be
avoided.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-104.
Changes from former law: Except for changing the form of reference to the Uniform Commercial Code, this
section is identical to former Section 1-104.
1. This section embodies the policy that an act that bears evidence of carefully considered permanent regulative
intention should not lightly be regarded as impliedly repealed by subsequent legislation. The Uniform Commercial
Code, carefully integrated and intended as a uniform codification of permanent character covering an entire "field"
of law, is to be regarded as particularly resistant to implied repeal.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-105. SEVERABILITY
If any provision or clause of [the Uniform Commercial Code] or its application to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of [the Uniform Commercial Code] which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of [the Uniform
Commercial Code] are severable.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-108.
Changes from former law: Except for changing the form of reference to the Uniform Commercial Code, this
section is identical to former Section 1-108.
1. This is the model severability section recommended by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform
State Laws for inclusion in all acts of extensive scope.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-106. USE OF SINGULAR AND PLURAL; GENDER
In [the Uniform Commercial Code], unless the statutory context otherwise requires:
(1) words in the singular number include the plural, and those in the plural include the singular; and
(2) words of any gender also refer to any other gender.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-102(5). See also 1 U.S.C. Section1.
Changes from former law: Other than minor stylistic changes, this section is identical to former Section 1-
102(5).
1. This section makes it clear that the use of singular or plural in the text of the Uniform Commercial Code is
generally only a matter of drafting style - singular words may be applied in the plural, and plural words may be
applied in the singular. Only when it is clear from the statutory context that the use of the singular or plural does not
include the other is this rule inapplicable. See, e.g., Section 9-322.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-107. SECTION CAPTIONS
Section captions are part of [the Uniform Commercial Code].
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-109.
Changes from former law: None.
1. Section captions are a part of the text of the Uniform Commercial Code, and not mere surplusage. This is not
the case, however, with respect to subsection headings appearing in Article 9. See Comment 3 to Section 9-101
("subsection headings are not a part of the official text itself and have not been approved by the sponsors.").
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-108
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-108. RELATION TO ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES IN GLOBAL AND
NATIONAL COMMERCE ACT
This [Act] modifies, limits, and supersedes the federal Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act,
( 15 U.S.C. Section 7001, et. seq.) but does not modify, limit, or supersede Section 101(c) of that act ( 15 U.S.C.
Section 7001(c)) or authorize electronic delivery of any of the notices described in Section 103(b) of that act (15
U.S.C. Section 103(b)).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: New
1. The federal Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act, 15 U.S.C. Section 7001 et seq
became effective in 2000. Section 102(a) of that Act provides that a State statute may modify, limit, or supersede
the provisions of section 101 of that Act with respect to state law if such statute, inter alia, specifies the alternative
procedures or requirements for the use or acceptance (or both) of electronic records or electronic signatures to
establish the legal effect, validity, or enforceability of contracts or other records, and (i) such alternative procedures
or requirements are consistent with Titles I and II of that Act, (ii) such alternative procedures or requirements do not
require, or accord greater legal status or effect to, the implementation or application of a specific technology or
technical specification for performing the functions of creating, storing, generating, receiving, communicating, or
authenticating electronic records or electronic signatures; and (iii) if enacted or adopted after the date of the
enactment of that Act, makes specific reference to that Act. Article 1 fulfills the first two of those three criteria; this
Section fulfills the third criterion listed above.
2. As stated in this section, however, Article 1 does not modify, limit, or supersede Section 101(c) of the Electronic
Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (requiring affirmative consent from a consumer to electronic
delivery of transactional disclosures that are required by state law to be in writing); nor does it authorize electronic
delivery of any of the notices described in Section 103(b) of that Act.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I § 1-201
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
§ 1-201. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Subject to additional definitions contained in the subsequent Articles of this Act which are applicable to
specific Articles or Parts thereof, and unless the context otherwise requires, in this Act:
* * *
(9) "Buyer in ordinary course of business" means a person that buys goods in good faith, without
knowledge that the sale violates the rights of another person in the goods, and in the ordinary
course from a person, other than a pawnbroker, in the business of selling goods of that kind. A
person buys goods in the ordinary course if the sale to the person comports with the usual or
customary practices in the kind of business in which the seller is engaged or with the seller's own
usual or customary practices. A person that sells oil, gas, or other minerals at the wellhead or
minehead is a person in the business of selling goods of that kind. A buyer in ordinary course of
business may buy for cash, by exchange of other property, or on secured or unsecured credit, and
may acquire goods or documents of title under a pre-existing contract for sale. Only a buyer that
takes possession of the goods or has a right to recover the goods from the seller under Article 2
may be a buyer in ordinary course of business. A person that acquires goods in a transfer in bulk or
as security for or in total or partial satisfaction of a money debt is not a buyer in ordinary course of
business.
* * *
(32) "Purchase" includes taking by sale, discount, negotiation, mortgage, pledge, lien, security
interest, issue or re-issue, gift, or any other voluntary transaction creating an interest in property.
* * *
(37) "Security interest" means an interest in personal property or fixtures which secures payment
or performance of an obligation. The term also includes any interest of a consignor and a buyer of
accounts, chattel paper, a payment intangible, or a promissory note in a transaction that is subject
to Article 9. The special property interest of a buyer of goods on identification of those goods to a
contract for sale under Section 2-401 is not a "security interest", but a buyer may also acquire a
"security interest" by complying with Article 9. Except as otherwise provided in Section 2-505, the
right of a seller or lessor of goods under Article 2 or 2A to retain or acquire possession of the goods
is not a "security interest", but a seller or lessor may also acquire a "security interest" by complying
with Article 9. The retention or reservation of title by a seller of goods notwithstanding shipment or
delivery to the buyer ( Section 2-401) is limited in effect to a reservation of a "security interest".
* * *
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
* * *
§ 1-201. GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 2
9. "Buyer in Ordinary Course of Business." From Section 1, Uniform Trust Receipts Act. The definition has been
expanded to make clear the type of person protected. Its major significance lies in Section 2-403 and in the Article
on Secured Transactions (Article 9).
The first sentence of paragraph (9) makes clear that a buyer from a pawnbroker cannot be a buyer in ordinary
course of business. The second sentence tracks Section 6-102(1)(m). It explains what it means to buy "in the
ordinary course." The penultimate sentence prevents a buyer that does not have the right to possession as against
the seller from being a buyer in ordinary course of business. Concerning when a buyer obtains possessory rights,
see Sections 2-502 and 2-716. However, the penultimate sentence is not intended to affect a buyer's status as a
buyer in ordinary course of business in cases (such as a "drop shipment") involving delivery by the seller to a
person buying from the buyer or a donee from the buyer. The requirement relates to whether as against the seller
the buyer or one taking through the buyer has possessory rights.
* * *
32. "Purchase." Section 58, Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act; Section 76, Uniform Sales Act; Section 53,
Uniform Bills of Lading Act; Section 22, Uniform Stock Transfer Act; Section 1, Uniform Trust Receipts Act.
Rephrased. With the addition of taking "by . . . security interest," the revised definition makes explicit what formerly
was implicit.
* * *
37. "Security Interest." See Section 1, Uniform Trust Receipts Act. The definition of "security interest" was revised
in connection with the promulgation of Article 2A and also to take account of the expanded scope of Article 9 as
revised in the 1998 Official Text. It includes the interest of a consignor and the interest of a buyer of accounts,
chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes. See Section 9-109. It also makes clear that, with certain
exceptions, in rem rights of sellers and lessors under Articles 2 and 2A are not "security interests." Among the rights
that are not security interests are the right to withhold delivery under Section 2-702(1), 2-703(a), or 2A-525, the right
to stop delivery under Section 2-705 or 2A-526, and the right to reclaim under Section 2-507(2) or 2-702(2).
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-202
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 2. GENERAL DEFINITIONS AND PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION
§ 1-202. NOTICE; KNOWLEDGE
(a) Subject to subsection (f), a person has "notice" of a fact if the person:
(1) has actual knowledge of it;
(2) has received a notice or notification of it; or
(3) from all the facts and circumstances known to the person at the time in question, has reason to
know that it exists.
(b) "Knowledge" means actual knowledge. "Knows" has a corresponding meaning.
(c) "Discover", "learn", or words of similar import refer to knowledge rather than to reason to know.
(d) A person "notifies" or "gives" a notice or notification to another person by taking such steps as may be
reasonably required to inform the other person in ordinary course, whether or not the other person actually
comes to know of it.
(e) Subject to subsection (f), a person "receives" a notice or notification when:
(1) it comes to that person's attention; or
(2) it is duly delivered in a form reasonable under the circumstances at the place of business through
which the contract was made or at another location held out by that person as the place for receipt of
such communications.
(f) Notice, knowledge, or a notice or notification received by an organization is effective for a particular
transaction from the time it is brought to the attention of the individual conducting that transaction and, in
any event, from the time it would have been brought to the individual's attention if the organization had
exercised due diligence. An organization exercises due diligence if it maintains reasonable routines for
communicating significant information to the person conducting the transaction and there is reasonable
compliance with the routines. Due diligence does not require an individual acting for the organization to
communicate information unless the communication is part of the individual's regular duties or the individual
has reason to know of the transaction and that the transaction would be materially affected by the
information.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Derived from former Section 1-201(25)-(27).
Changes from former law: These provisions are substantive rather than purely definitional. Accordingly, they
have been relocated from Section 1-201 to this section. The reference to the "forgotten notice" doctrine has been
deleted.
§ 1-202. NOTICE; KNOWLEDGE
Page 2 of 2
1. Under subsection (a), a person has notice of a fact when, inter alia, the person has received a notification of
the fact in question.
2. As provided in subsection (d), the word "notifies" is used when the essential fact is the proper dispatch of the
notice, not its receipt. Compare "Send." When the essential fact is the other party's receipt of the notice, that is
stated. Subsection (e) states when a notification is received.
3. Subsection (f) makes clear that notice, knowledge, or a notification, although "received," for instance, by a clerk
in Department A of an organization, is effective for a transaction conducted in Department B only from the time
when it was or should have been communicated to the individual conducting that transaction.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-203
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 2. GENERAL DEFINITIONS AND PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION
§ 1-203. LEASE DISTINGUISHED FROM SECURITY INTEREST
(a) Whether a transaction in the form of a lease creates a lease or security interest is determined by the
facts of each case.
(b) A transaction in the form of a lease creates a security interest if the consideration that the lessee is to
pay the lessor for the right to possession and use of the goods is an obligation for the term of the lease and
is not subject to termination by the lessee, and:
(1) the original term of the lease is equal to or greater than the remaining economic life of the goods;
(2) the lessee is bound to renew the lease for the remaining economic life of the goods or is bound to
become the owner of the goods;
(3) the lessee has an option to renew the lease for the remaining economic life of the goods for no
additional consideration or for nominal additional consideration upon compliance with the lease
agreement; or
(4) the lessee has an option to become the owner of the goods for no additional consideration or for
nominal additional consideration upon compliance with the lease agreement.
(c) A transaction in the form of a lease does not create a security interest merely because:
(1) the present value of the consideration the lessee is obligated to pay the lessor for the right to
possession and use of the goods is substantially equal to or is greater than the fair market value of the
goods at the time the lease is entered into;
(2) the lessee assumes risk of loss of the goods;
(3) the lessee agrees to pay, with respect to the goods, taxes, insurance, filing, recording, or
registration fees, or service or maintenance costs;
(4) the lessee has an option to renew the lease or to become the owner of the goods;
(5) the lessee has an option to renew the lease for a fixed rent that is equal to or greater than the
reasonably predictable fair market rent for the use of the goods for the term of the renewal at the time
the option is to be performed; or
(6) the lessee has an option to become the owner of the goods for a fixed price that is equal to or
greater than the reasonably predictable fair market value of the goods at the time the option is to be
performed.
(d) Additional consideration is nominal if it is less than the lessee's reasonably predictable cost of
performing under the lease agreement if the option is not exercised. Additional consideration is not nominal
if:
(1) when the option to renew the lease is granted to the lessee, the rent is stated to be the fair market
rent for the use of the goods for the term of the renewal determined at the time the option is to be
performed; or
(2) when the option to become the owner of the goods is granted to the lessee, the price is stated to be
the fair market value of the goods determined at the time the option is to be performed.
§ 1-203. LEASE DISTINGUISHED FROM SECURITY INTEREST
Page 2 of 4
(e) The "remaining economic life of the goods" and "reasonably predictable" fair market rent, fair market
value, or cost of performing under the lease agreement must be determined with reference to the facts and
circumstances at the time the transaction is entered into.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-201(37).
Changes from former law: This section is substantively identical to those portions of former Section 1-201(37)
that distinguished "true" leases from security interests, except that the definition of "present value" formerly
embedded in Section 1-201(37) has been placed in Section 1-201(28).
1. An interest in personal property or fixtures which secures payment or performance of an obligation is a
"security interest." See Section 1-201(37). Security interests are sometimes created by transactions in the form of
leases. Because it can be difficult to distinguish leases that create security interests from those that do not, this
section provides rules that govern the determination of whether a transaction in the form of a lease creates a
security interest.
2. One of the reasons it was decided to codify the law with respect to leases was to resolve an issue that created
considerable confusion in the courts: what is a lease? The confusion existed, in part, due to the last two sentences
of the definition of security interest in the 1978 Official Text of the Act, Section 1-201(37). The confusion was
compounded by the rather considerable change in the federal, state and local tax laws and accounting rules as they
relate to leases of goods. The answer is important because the definition of lease determines not only the rights
and remedies of the parties to the lease but also those of third parties. If a transaction creates a lease and not a
security interest, the lessee's interest in the goods is limited to its leasehold estate; the residual interest in the
goods belongs to the lessor. This has significant implications to the lessee's creditors. "On common law theory, the
lessor, since he has not parted with title, is entitled to full protection against the lessee's creditors and trustee in
bankruptcy...." 1 G. Gilmore, Security Interests in Personal Property Section3.6, at 76 (1965).
Under pre-UCC chattel security law there was generally no requirement that the lessor file the lease, a financing
statement, or the like, to enforce the lease agreement against the lessee or any third party; the Article on Secured
Transactions (Article 9) did not change the common law in that respect. Coogan, Leasing and the Uniform
Commercial Code, in Equipment Leasing-Leveraged Leasing 681, 700 n.25, 729 n.80 (2d ed.1980). The Article on
Leases (Article 2A) did not change the law in that respect, except for leases of fixtures. Section 2A-309. An
examination of the common law will not provide an adequate answer to the question of what is a lease. The
definition of security interest in Section 1-201(37) of the 1978 Official Text of the Act provided that the Article on
Secured Transactions (Article 9) governs security interests disguised as leases, i.e., leases intended as security;
however, the definition became vague and outmoded.
Lease is defined in Article 2A as a transfer of the right to possession and use of goods for a term, in return for
consideration. Section 2A-103(1)(j). The definition continues by stating that the retention or creation of a security
interest is not a lease. Thus, the task of sharpening the line between true leases and security interests disguised as
leases continues to be a function of this Article.
This section begins where Section 1-201(35) leaves off. It draws a sharper line between leases and security
interests disguised as leases to create greater certainty in commercial transactions.
Prior to enactment of the rules now codified in this section, the 1978 Official Text of Section 1-201(37) provided
that whether a lease was intended as security (i.e., a security interest disguised as a lease) was to be determined
from the facts of each case; however, (a) the inclusion of an option to purchase did not itself make the lease one
§ 1-203. LEASE DISTINGUISHED FROM SECURITY INTEREST
Page 3 of 4
intended for security, and (b) an agreement that upon compliance with the terms of the lease the lessee would
become, or had the option to become, the owner of the property for no additional consideration, or for a nominal
consideration, did make the lease one intended for security.
Reference to the intent of the parties to create a lease or security interest led to unfortunate results. In discovering
intent, courts relied upon factors that were thought to be more consistent with sales or loans than leases. Most of
these criteria, however, were as applicable to true leases as to security interests. Examples include the typical net
lease provisions, a purported lessor's lack of storage facilities or its character as a financing party rather than a
dealer in goods. Accordingly, this section contains no reference to the parties' intent.
Subsections (a) and (b) were originally taken from Section 1(2) of the Uniform Conditional Sales Act (act
withdrawn 1943), modified to reflect current leasing practice. Thus, reference to the case law prior to the
incorporation of those concepts in this article will provide a useful source of precedent. Gilmore, Security Law,
Formalism and Article 9, 47 Neb.L.Rev. 659, 671 (1968). Whether a transaction creates a lease or a security
interest continues to be determined by the facts of each case. Subsection (b) further provides that a transaction
creates a security interest if the lessee has an obligation to continue paying consideration for the term of the lease,
if the obligation is not terminable by the lessee (thus correcting early statutory gloss, e.g., In re Royer's Bakery, Inc.,
1 U.C.C. Rep.Serv. (Callaghan) 342 (Bankr.E.D.Pa.1963)) and if one of four additional tests is met. The first of
these four tests, subparagraph (1), is that the original lease term is equal to or greater than the remaining economic
life of the goods. The second of these tests, subparagraph (2), is that the lessee is either bound to renew the lease
for the remaining economic life of the goods or to become the owner of the goods. In re Gehrke Enters., 1 Bankr.
647, 651-52 (Bankr.W.D.Wis.1979). The third of these tests, subparagraph (3), is whether the lessee has an option
to renew the lease for the remaining economic life of the goods for no additional consideration or for nominal
additional consideration, which is defined later in this section. In re Celeryvale Transp., 44 Bankr. 1007, 1014-15
(Bankr.E.D.Tenn.1984). The fourth of these tests, subparagraph (4), is whether the lessee has an option to become
the owner of the goods for no additional consideration or for nominal additional consideration. All of these tests
focus on economics, not the intent of the parties. In re Berge, 32 Bankr. 370, 371-73 (Bankr.W.D.Wis.1983).
The focus on economics is reinforced by subsection (c). It states that a transaction does not create a security
interest merely because the transaction has certain characteristics listed therein. Subparagraph (1) has no statutory
derivative; it states that a full payout lease does not per se create a security interest. Rushton v. Shea, 419 F.Supp.
1349, 1365 (D.Del.1976). Subparagraphs (2) and (3) provide the same regarding the provisions of the typical net
lease. Compare All- States Leasing Co. v. Ochs, 42 Or.App. 319, 600 P.2d 899 (Ct.App.1979), with In re Tillery,
571 F.2d 1361 (5th Cir.1978). Subparagraph (4) restates and expands the provisions of the 1978 Official Text of
Section 1-201(37) to make clear that the option can be to buy or renew. Subparagraphs (5) and (6) treat fixed price
options and provide that fair market value must be determined at the time the transaction is entered into. Compare
Arnold Mach. Co. v. Balls, 624 P.2d 678 (Utah 1981), with Aoki v. Shepherd Mach. Co., 665 F.2d 941 (9th
Cir.1982).
The relationship of subsection (b) to subsection (c) deserves to be explored. The fixed price purchase option
provides a useful example. A fixed price purchase option in a lease does not of itself create a security interest. This
is particularly true if the fixed price is equal to or greater than the reasonably predictable fair market value of the
goods at the time the option is to be performed. A security interest is created only if the option price is nominal and
the conditions stated in the introduction to the second paragraph of this subsection are met. There is a set of
purchase options whose fixed price is less than fair market value but greater than nominal that must be determined
on the facts of each case to ascertain whether the transaction in which the option is included creates a lease or a
security interest.
It was possible to provide for various other permutations and combinations with respect to options to purchase
and renew. For example, this section could have stated a rule to govern the facts of In re Marhoefer Packing Co.,
674 F.2d 1139 (7th Cir.1982). This was not done because it would unnecessarily complicate the definition. Further
development of this rule is left to the courts.
Subsections (d) and (e) provide definitions and rules of construction.
§ 1-203. LEASE DISTINGUISHED FROM SECURITY INTEREST
Page 4 of 4
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-204
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 2. GENERAL DEFINITIONS AND PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION
§ 1-204. VALUE
Except as otherwise provided in Articles 3, 4, [and] 5, [and 6], a person gives value for rights if the person
acquires them:
(1) in return for a binding commitment to extend credit or for the extension of immediately available
credit, whether or not drawn upon and whether or not a charge-back is provided for in the event of
difficulties in collection;
(2) as security for, or in total or partial satisfaction of, a preexisting claim;
(3) by accepting delivery under a preexisting contract for purchase; or
(4) in return for any consideration sufficient to support a simple contract.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-201(44).
Changes from former law: Unchanged from former Section 1-201, which was derived from Sections 25, 26, 27,
191, Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law; Section 76, Uniform Sales Act; Section 53, Uniform Bills of Lading Act;
Section 58, Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act; Section 22(1), Uniform Stock Transfer Act; Section 1, Uniform Trust
Receipts Act. These provisions are substantive rather than purely definitional. Accordingly, they have been
relocated from former Section 1-201 to this section.
1. All the Uniform Acts in the commercial law field (except the Uniform Conditional Sales Act) have carried
definitions of "value." All those definitions provided that value was any consideration sufficient to support a simple
contract, including the taking of property in satisfaction of or as security for a pre-existing claim. Subsections (1),
(2), and (4) in substance continue the definitions of "value" in the earlier acts. Subsection (3) makes explicit that
"value" is also given in a third situation: where a buyer by taking delivery under a pre-existing contract converts a
contingent into a fixed obligation.
This definition is not applicable to Articles 3 and 4, but the express inclusion of immediately available credit as
value follows the separate definitions in those Articles. See Sections 4-208, 4-209, 3-303. A bank or other financing
agency which in good faith makes advances against property held as collateral becomes a bona fide purchaser of
that property even though provision may be made for charge-back in case of trouble. Checking credit is
"immediately available" within the meaning of this section if the bank would be subject to an action for slander of
credit in case checks drawn against the credit were dishonored, and when a charge-back is not discretionary with
the bank, but may only be made when difficulties in collection arise in connection with the specific transaction
involved.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 1-204. VALUE
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-205
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 2. GENERAL DEFINITIONS AND PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION
§ 1-205. REASONABLE TIME; SEASONABLENESS
(a) Whether a time for taking an action required by [the Uniform Commercial Code] is reasonable depends
on the nature, purpose, and circumstances of the action.
(b) An action is taken seasonably if it is taken at or within the time agreed or, if no time is agreed, at or
within a reasonable time.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-204(2)-(3).
Changes from former law: This section is derived from subsections (2) and (3) of former Section 1-204.
Subsection (1) of that section is now incorporated in Section 1-302(b).
1. Subsection (a) makes it clear that requirements that actions be taken within a "reasonable" time are to be
applied in the transactional context of the particular action.
2. Under subsection (b), the agreement that fixes the time need not be part of the main agreement, but may occur
separately. Notice also that under the definition of "agreement" (Section 1-201) the circumstances of the
transaction, including course of dealing or usages of trade or course of performance may be material. On the
question what is a reasonable time these matters will often be important.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-206
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 2. GENERAL DEFINITIONS AND PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION
§ 1-206. PRESUMPTIONS
Whenever [the Uniform Commercial Code] creates a "presumption" with respect to a fact, or provides that a fact is
"presumed," the trier of fact must find the existence of the fact unless and until evidence is introduced that supports
a finding of its nonexistence.
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: Former Section 1-206, a Statute of Frauds for sales of "kinds of personal property not otherwise
covered," has been deleted. The other articles of the Uniform Commercial Code make individual determinations as
to requirements for memorializing transactions within their scope, so that the primary effect of former Section 1-206
was to impose a writing requirement on sales transactions not otherwise governed by the UCC. Deletion of former
Section 1-206 does not constitute a recommendation to legislatures as to whether such sales transactions should
be covered by a Statute of Frauds; rather, it reflects a determination that there is no need for uniform commercial
law to resolve that issue.
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-201(31).
Changes from former law. None, other than stylistic changes.
1. Several sections of the Uniform Commercial Code state that there is a "presumption" as to a certain fact, or
that the fact is "presumed." This section, derived from the definition appearing in former Section 1-201(31),
indicates the effect of those provisions on the proof process.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-301
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES
§ 1-301. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY; PARTIES' POWER TO CHOOSE
APPLICABLE LAW
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, when a transaction bears a reasonable relation to this
state and also to another state or nation the parties may agree that the law either of this state or of such
other state or nation shall govern their rights and duties.
(b) In the absence of an agreement effective under subsection (a), and except as provided in subsection
(c), [the Uniform Commercial Code] applies to transactions bearing an appropriate relation to this state.
(c) If one of the following provisions of [the Uniform Commercial Code] specifies the applicable law, that
provision governs and a contrary agreement is effective only to the extent permitted by the law so specified:
(1) Section 2-402;
(2) Sections 2A-105 and 2A-106;
(3) Section 4-102;
(4) Section 4A-507;
(5) Section 5-116;
[(6) Section 6-103;]
(7) Section 8-110;
(8) Sections 9-301 through 9-307.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Source: Former Section 1-105.
Changes from former law: This section is substantively identical to former Section 1-105. Changes in language
are stylistic only.
1. Subsection (a) states affirmatively the right of the parties to a multi-state transaction or a transaction involving
foreign trade to choose their own law. That right is subject to the firm rules stated in the sections listed in subsection
(c), and is limited to jurisdictions to which the transaction bears a "reasonable relation." In general, the test of
"reasonable relation" is similar to that laid down by the Supreme Court in Seeman v. Philadelphia Warehouse Co.,
274 U.S. 403, 47 S.Ct. 626, 71 L.Ed. 1123 (1927). Ordinarily the law chosen must be that of a jurisdiction where a
significant enough portion of the making or performance of the contract is to occur or occurs. But an agreement as
to choice of law may sometimes take effect as a shorthand expression of the intent of the parties as to matters
governed by their agreement, even though the transaction has no significant contact with the jurisdiction chosen.
§ 1-301. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY; PARTIES' POWER TO CHOOSE APPLICABLE LAW
Page 2 of 2
2. Where there is no agreement as to the governing law, the Act is applicable to any transaction having an
"appropriate" relation to any state which enacts it. Of course, the Act applies to any transaction which takes place in
its entirety in a state which has enacted the Act. But the mere fact that suit is brought in a state does not make it
appropriate to apply the substantive law of that state. Cases where a relation to the enacting state is not
"appropriate" include, for example, those where the parties have clearly contracted on the basis of some other law,
as where the law of the place of contracting and the law of the place of contemplated performance are the same
and are contrary to the law under the Code.
3. Where a transaction has significant contacts with a state which has enacted the Act and also with other
jurisdictions, the question what relation is "appropriate" is left to judicial decision. In deciding that question, the court
is not strictly bound by precedents established in other contexts. Thus a conflict-of-laws decision refusing to apply a
purely local statute or rule of law to a particular multi-state transaction may not be valid precedent for refusal to
apply the Code in an analogous situation. Application of the Code in such circumstances may be justified by its
comprehensiveness, by the policy of uniformity, and by the fact that it is in large part a reformulation and
restatement of the law merchant and of the understanding of a business community which transcends state and
even national boundaries. Compare Global Commerce Corp. v. Clark-Babbitt Industries, Inc., 239 F.2d 716, 719 (2d
Cir. 1956). In particular, where a transaction is governed in large part by the Code, application of another law to
some detail of performance because of an accident of geography may violate the commercial understanding of the
parties.
4. Subsection (c) spells out essential limitations on the parties' right to choose the applicable law. Especially in
Article 9 parties taking a security interest or asked to extend credit which may be subject to a security interest must
have sure ways to find out whether and where to file and where to look for possible existing filings.
5. Sections 9-301 through 9-307 should be consulted as to the rules for perfection of security interests and
agricultural liens and the effect of perfection and nonperfection and priority.
6. This section is subject to Section 1-102, which states the scope of Article 1. As that section indicates, the rules
of Article 1, including this section, apply to a transaction to the extent that transaction is governed by one of the
other Articles of the Uniform Commercial Code.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-302
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES
§ 1-302. VARIATION BY AGREEMENT
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) or elsewhere in [the Uniform Commercial Code], the
effect of provisions of [the Uniform Commercial Code] may be varied by agreement.
(b) The obligations of good faith, diligence, reasonableness, and care prescribed by [the Uniform
Commercial Code] may not be disclaimed by agreement. The parties, by agreement, may determine the
standards by which the performance of those obligations is to be measured if those standards are not
manifestly unreasonable. Whenever [the Uniform Commercial Code] requires an action to be taken within a
reasonable time, a time that is not manifestly unreasonable may be fixed by agreement.
(c) The presence in certain provisions of [the Uniform Commercial Code] of the phrase "unless otherwise
agreed", or words of similar import, does not imply that the effect of other provisions may not be varied by
agreement under this section.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Sections 1-102(3)-(4) and 1-204(1).
Changes: This section combines the rules from subsections (3) and (4) of former Section 1-102 and subsection
(1) of former Section 1-204. No substantive changes are made.
1. Subsection (a) states affirmatively at the outset that freedom of contract is a principle of the Uniform
Commercial Code: "the effect" of its provisions may be varied by "agreement." The meaning of the statute itself
must be found in its text, including its definitions, and in appropriate extrinsic aids; it cannot be varied by agreement.
But the Uniform Commercial Code seeks to avoid the type of interference with evolutionary growth found in pre-
Code cases such as Manhattan Co. v. Morgan, 242 N.Y. 38, 150 N.E. 594 (1926). Thus, private parties cannot
make an instrument negotiable within the meaning of Article 3 except as provided in Section 3-104; nor can they
change the meaning of such terms as "bona fide purchaser," "holder in due course," or "due negotiation," as used
in the Uniform Commercial Code. But an agreement can change the legal consequences that would otherwise flow
from the provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code. "Agreement" here includes the effect given to course of
dealing, usage of trade and course of performance by Sections 1-201 and 1-303; the effect of an agreement on the
rights of third parties is left to specific provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code and to supplementary principles
applicable under Section 1-103. The rights of third parties under Section 9-317 when a security interest is
unperfected, for example, cannot be destroyed by a clause in the security agreement.
This principle of freedom of contract is subject to specific exceptions found elsewhere in the Uniform Commercial
Code and to the general exception stated here. The specific exceptions vary in explicitness: the statute of frauds
found in Section 2-201, for example, does not explicitly preclude oral waiver of the requirement of a writing, but a
fair reading denies enforcement to such a waiver as part of the "contract" made unenforceable; Section 9-602, on
the other hand, is a quite explicit limitation on freedom of contract. Under the exception for "the obligations of good
§ 1-302. VARIATION BY AGREEMENT
Page 2 of 2
faith, diligence, reasonableness and care prescribed by [the Uniform Commercial Code]," provisions of the Uniform
Commercial Code prescribing such obligations are not to be disclaimed. However, the section also recognizes the
prevailing practice of having agreements set forth standards by which due diligence is measured and explicitly
provides that, in the absence of a showing that the standards manifestly are unreasonable, the agreement controls.
In this connection, Section 1-303 incorporating into the agreement prior course of dealing and usages of trade is of
particular importance.
Subsection (b) also recognizes that nothing is stronger evidence of a reasonable time than the fixing of such time
by a fair agreement between the parties. However, provision is made for disregarding a clause which whether by
inadvertence or overreaching fixes a time so unreasonable that it amounts to eliminating all remedy under the
contract. The parties are not required to fix the most reasonable time but may fix any time which is not obviously
unfair as judged by the time of contracting.
2. An agreement that varies the effect of provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code may do so by stating the
rules that will govern in lieu of the provisions varied. Alternatively, the parties may vary the effect of such provisions
by stating that their relationship will be governed by recognized bodies of rules or principles applicable to
commercial transactions. Such bodies of rules or principles may include, for example, those that are promulgated
by intergovernmental authorities such as UNCITRAL or Unidroit (see, e.g., Unidroit Principles of International
Commercial Contracts), or non-legal codes such as trade codes.
3. Subsection (c) is intended to make it clear that, as a matter of drafting, phrases such as "unless otherwise
agreed" have been used to avoid controversy as to whether the subject matter of a particular section does or does
not fall within the exceptions to subsection (b), but absence of such words contains no negative implication since
under subsection (b) the general and residual rule is that the effect of all provisions of the Uniform Commercial
Code may be varied by agreement.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-303
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES
§ 1-303. COURSE OF PERFORMANCE, COURSE OF DEALING, AND USAGE
OF TRADE
(a) A "course of performance" is a sequence of conduct between the parties to a particular transaction that
exists if:
(1) the agreement of the parties with respect to the transaction involves repeated occasions for
performance by a party; and
(2) the other party, with knowledge of the nature of the performance and opportunity for objection to it,
accepts the performance or acquiesces in it without objection.
(b) A "course of dealing" is a sequence of conduct concerning previous transactions between the parties to
a particular transaction that is fairly to be regarded as establishing a common basis of understanding for
interpreting their expressions and other conduct.
(c) A "usage of trade" is any practice or method of dealing having such regularity of observance in a place,
vocation, or trade as to justify an expectation that it will be observed with respect to the transaction in
question. The existence and scope of such a usage must be proved as facts. If it is established that such a
usage is embodied in a trade code or similar record, the interpretation of the record is a question of law.
(d) A course of performance or course of dealing between the parties or usage of trade in the vocation or
trade in which they are engaged or of which they are or should be aware is relevant in ascertaining the
meaning of the parties' agreement, may give particular meaning to specific terms of the agreement, and
may supplement or qualify the terms of the agreement. A usage of trade applicable in the place in which
part of the performance under the agreement is to occur may be so utilized as to that part of the
performance.
(e) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (f), the express terms of an agreement and any applicable
course of performance, course of dealing, or usage of trade must be construed whenever reasonable as
consistent with each other. If such a construction is unreasonable:
(1) express terms prevail over course of performance, course of dealing, and usage of trade;
(2) course of performance prevails over course of dealing and usage of trade; and
(3) course of dealing prevails over usage of trade.
(f) Subject to Section 2-209, a course of performance is relevant to show a waiver or modification of any
term inconsistent with the course of performance.
(g) Evidence of a relevant usage of trade offered by one party is not admissible unless that party has given
the other party notice that the court finds sufficient to prevent unfair surprise to the other party.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
§ 1-303. COURSE OF PERFORMANCE, COURSE OF DEALING, AND USAGE OF TRADE
Page 2 of 3
Source: Former Sections 1-205, 2-208, and Section 2A-207.
Changes from former law: This section integrates the "course of performance" concept from Articles 2 and 2A
into the principles of former Section 1-205, which deals with course of dealing and usage of trade. In so doing, the
section slightly modifies the articulation of the course of performance rules to fit more comfortably with the approach
and structure of former Section 1-205. There are also slight modifications to be more consistent with the definition
of "agreement" in former Section 1-201(3). It should be noted that a course of performance that might otherwise
establish a defense to the obligation of a party to a negotiable instrument is not available as a defense against a
holder in due course who took the instrument without notice of that course of performance.
1. The Uniform Commercial Code rejects both the "lay-dictionary" and the "conveyancer's" reading of a
commercial agreement. Instead the meaning of the agreement of the parties is to be determined by the language
used by them and by their action, read and interpreted in the light of commercial practices and other surrounding
circumstances. The measure and background for interpretation are set by the commercial context, which may
explain and supplement even the language of a formal or final writing.
2. "Course of dealing," as defined in subsection (b), is restricted, literally, to a sequence of conduct between the
parties previous to the agreement. A sequence of conduct after or under the agreement, however, is a "course of
performance." "Course of dealing" may enter the agreement either by explicit provisions of the agreement or by
tacit recognition.
3. The Uniform Commercial Code deals with "usage of trade" as a factor in reaching the commercial meaning of
the agreement that the parties have made. The language used is to be interpreted as meaning what it may fairly be
expected to mean to parties involved in the particular commercial transaction in a given locality or in a given
vocation or trade. By adopting in this context the term "usage of trade," the Uniform Commercial Code expresses its
intent to reject those cases which see evidence of "custom" as representing an effort to displace or negate
"established rules of law." A distinction is to be drawn between mandatory rules of law such as the Statute of
Frauds provisions of Article 2 on Sales whose very office is to control and restrict the actions of the parties, and
which cannot be abrogated by agreement, or by a usage of trade, and those rules of law (such as those in Part 3 of
Article 2 on Sales) which fill in points which the parties have not considered and in fact agreed upon. The latter
rules hold "unless otherwise agreed" but yield to the contrary agreement of the parties. Part of the agreement of the
parties to which such rules yield is to be sought for in the usages of trade which furnish the background and give
particular meaning to the language used, and are the framework of common understanding controlling any general
rules of law which hold only when there is no such understanding.
4. A usage of trade under subsection (c) must have the "regularity of observance" specified. The ancient English
tests for "custom" are abandoned in this connection. Therefore, it is not required that a usage of trade be "ancient
or immemorial," "universal," or the like. Under the requirement of subsection (c) full recognition is thus available for
new usages and for usages currently observed by the great majority of decent dealers, even though dissidents
ready to cut corners do not agree. There is room also for proper recognition of usage agreed upon by merchants in
trade codes.
5. The policies of the Uniform Commercial Code controlling explicit unconscionable contracts and clauses
(Sections 1-304, 2-302) apply to implicit clauses that rest on usage of trade and carry forward the policy underlying
the ancient requirement that a custom or usage must be "reasonable." However, the emphasis is shifted. The very
fact of commercial acceptance makes out a prima facie case that the usage is reasonable, and the burden is no
longer on the usage to establish itself as being reasonable. But the anciently established policing of usage by the
courts is continued to the extent necessary to cope with the situation arising if an unconscionable or dishonest
practice should become standard.
6. Subsection (d), giving the prescribed effect to usages of which the parties "are or should be aware," reinforces
the provision of subsection (c) requiring not universality but only the described "regularity of observance" of the
practice or method. This subsection also reinforces the point of subsection (c) that such usages may be either
general to trade or particular to a special branch of trade.
§ 1-303. COURSE OF PERFORMANCE, COURSE OF DEALING, AND USAGE OF TRADE
Page 3 of 3
7. Although the definition of "agreement" in Section 1-201 includes the elements of course of performance, course
of dealing, and usage of trade, the fact that express reference is made in some sections to those elements is not to
be construed as carrying a contrary intent or implication elsewhere. Compare Section 1-302(c).
8. In cases of a well established line of usage varying from the general rules of the Uniform Commercial Code
where the precise amount of the variation has not been worked out into a single standard, the party relying on the
usage is entitled, in any event, to the minimum variation demonstrated. The whole is not to be disregarded because
no particular line of detail has been established. In case a dominant pattern has been fairly evidenced, the party
relying on the usage is entitled under this section to go to the trier of fact on the question of whether such dominant
pattern has been incorporated into the agreement.
9. Subsection (g) is intended to insure that this Act's liberal recognition of the needs of commerce in regard to
usage of trade shall not be made into an instrument of abuse.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-304
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES
§ 1-304. OBLIGATION OF GOOD FAITH
Every contract or duty within [the Uniform Commercial Code] imposes an obligation of good faith in its performance
and enforcement.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-203.
Changes from former law: Except for changing the form of reference to the Uniform Commercial Code, this
section is identical to former Section 1-203.
1. This section sets forth a basic principle running throughout the Uniform Commercial Code. The principle is that
in commercial transactions good faith is required in the performance and enforcement of all agreements or duties.
While this duty is explicitly stated in some provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code, the applicability of the duty
is broader than merely these situations and applies generally, as stated in this section, to the performance or
enforcement of every contract or duty within this Act. It is further implemented by Section 1-303 on course of
dealing, course of performance, and usage of trade. This section does not support an independent cause of action
for failure to perform or enforce in good faith. Rather, this section means that a failure to perform or enforce, in good
faith, a specific duty or obligation under the contract, constitutes a breach of that contract or makes unavailable,
under the particular circumstances, a remedial right or power. This distinction makes it clear that the doctrine of
good faith merely directs a court towards interpreting contracts within the commercial context in which they are
created, performed, and enforced, and does not create a separate duty of fairness and reasonableness which can
be independently breached.
2. "Performance and enforcement" of contracts and duties within the Uniform Commercial Code include the
exercise of rights created by the Uniform Commercial Code.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-305
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES
§ 1-305. REMEDIES TO BE LIBERALLY ADMINISTERED
(a) The remedies provided by [the Uniform Commercial Code] must be liberally administered to the end
that the aggrieved party may be put in as good a position as if the other party had fully performed but
neither consequential or special damages nor penal damages may be had except as specifically provided
in [the Uniform Commercial Code] or by other rule of law.
(b) Any right or obligation declared by [the Uniform Commercial Code] is enforceable by action unless the
provision declaring it specifies a different and limited effect.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-106.
Changes from former law: Other than changes in the form of reference to the Uniform Commercial Code, this
section is identical to former Section 1-106.
1. Subsection (a) is intended to effect three propositions. The first is to negate the possibility of unduly narrow or
technical interpretation of remedial provisions by providing that the remedies in the Uniform Commercial Code are
to be liberally administered to the end stated in this section. The second is to make it clear that compensatory
damages are limited to compensation. They do not include consequential or special damages, or penal damages;
and the Uniform Commercial Code elsewhere makes it clear that damages must be minimized. Cf. Sections 1-304,
2-706(1), and 2-712(2). The third purpose of subsection (a) is to reject any doctrine that damages must be
calculable with mathematical accuracy. Compensatory damages are often at best approximate: they have to be
proved with whatever definiteness and accuracy the facts permit, but no more. Cf. Section 2-204(3).
2. Under subsection (b), any right or obligation described in the Uniform Commercial Code is enforceable by
action, even though no remedy may be expressly provided, unless a particular provision specifies a different and
limited effect. Whether specific performance or other equitable relief is available is determined not by this section
but by specific provisions and by supplementary principles. Cf. Sections 1-103, 2-716.
3. "Consequential" or "special" damages and "penal" damages are not defined in the Uniform Commercial Code;
rather, these terms are used in the sense in which they are used outside the Uniform Commercial Code.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-306
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES
§ 1-306. WAIVER OR RENUNCIATION OF CLAIM OR RIGHT AFTER BREACH
A claim or right arising out of an alleged breach may be discharged in whole or in part without consideration by
agreement of the aggrieved party in an authenticated record.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-107.
Changes from former law: This section changes former law in two respects. First, former Section 1-107,
requiring the "delivery" of a "written waiver or renunciation" merges the separate concepts of the aggrieved party's
agreement to forego rights and the manifestation of that agreement. This section separates those concepts, and
explicitly requires agreement of the aggrieved party. Second, the revised section reflects developments in electronic
commerce by providing for memorialization in an authenticated record. In this context, a party may "authenticate" a
record by (i) signing a record that is a writing or (ii) attaching to or logically associating with a record that is not a
writing an electronic sound, symbol or process with the present intent to adopt or accept the record. See Sections
1-201(b)(37) and 9-102(a)(7).
1. This section makes consideration unnecessary to the effective renunciation or waiver of rights or claims arising
out of an alleged breach of a commercial contract where the agreement effecting such renunciation is memorialized
in a record authenticated by the aggrieved party. Its provisions, however, must be read in conjunction with the
section imposing an obligation of good faith. (Section 1-304).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-307
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES
§ 1-307. PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE BY THIRD-PARTY DOCUMENTS
A document in due form purporting to be a bill of lading, policy or certificate of insurance, official weigher's or
inspector's certificate, consular invoice, or any other document authorized or required by the contract to be issued
by a third party is prima facie evidence of its own authenticity and genuineness and of the facts stated in the
document by the third party.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-202.
Changes from former law: Except for minor stylistic changes, this Section is identical to former Section 1-202.
1. This section supplies judicial recognition for documents that are relied upon as trustworthy by commercial
parties.
2. This section is concerned only with documents that have been given a preferred status by the parties
themselves who have required their procurement in the agreement, and for this reason the applicability of the
section is limited to actions arising out of the contract that authorized or required the document. The list of
documents is intended to be illustrative and not exclusive.
3. The provisions of this section go no further than establishing the documents in question as prima facie
evidence and leave to the court the ultimate determination of the facts where the accuracy or authenticity of the
documents is questioned. In this connection the section calls for a commercially reasonable interpretation.
4. Documents governed by this section need not be writings if records in another medium are generally relied
upon in the context.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-308
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES
§ 1-308. PERFORMANCE OR ACCEPTANCE UNDER RESERVATION OF
RIGHTS
(a) A party that with explicit reservation of rights performs or promises performance or assents to
performance in a manner demanded or offered by the other party does not thereby prejudice the rights
reserved. Such words as "without prejudice," "under protest," or the like are sufficient.
(b) Subsection (a) does not apply to an accord and satisfaction.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-207.
Changes from former law: This section is identical to former Section 1-207.
1. This section provides machinery for the continuation of performance along the lines contemplated by the
contract despite a pending dispute, by adopting the mercantile device of going ahead with delivery, acceptance, or
payment "without prejudice," "under protest," "under reserve," "with reservation of all our rights," and the like. All of
these phrases completely reserve all rights within the meaning of this section. The section therefore contemplates
that limited as well as general reservations and acceptance by a party may be made "subject to satisfaction of our
purchaser," "subject to acceptance by our customers," or the like.
2. This section does not add any new requirement of language of reservation where not already required by law,
but merely provides a specific measure on which a party can rely as that party makes or concurs in any interim
adjustment in the course of performance. It does not affect or impair the provisions of this Act such as those under
which the buyer's remedies for defect survive acceptance without being expressly claimed if notice of the defects is
given within a reasonable time. Nor does it disturb the policy of those cases which restrict the effect of a waiver of a
defect to reasonable limits under the circumstances, even though no such reservation is expressed.
The section is not addressed to the creation or loss of remedies in the ordinary course of performance but rather
to a method of procedure where one party is claiming as of right something which the other believes to be
unwarranted.
3. Subsection (b) states that this section does not apply to an accord and satisfaction. Section 3-311 governs if an
accord and satisfaction is attempted by tender of a negotiable instrument as stated in that section. If Section 3-311
does not apply, the issue of whether an accord and satisfaction has been effected is determined by the law of
contract. Whether or not Section 3-311 applies, this section has no application to an accord and satisfaction.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-309
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES
§ 1-309. OPTION TO ACCELERATE AT WILL
A term providing that one party or that party's successor in interest may accelerate payment or performance or
require collateral or additional collateral "at will" or when the party "deems itself insecure," or words of similar
import, means that the party has power to do so only if that party in good faith believes that the prospect of payment
or performance is impaired. The burden of establishing lack of good faith is on the party against which the power
has been exercised.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-208.
Changes from former law: Except for minor stylistic changes, this section is identical to former Section 1-208.
1. The common use of acceleration clauses in many transactions governed by the Uniform Commercial Code,
including sales of goods on credit, notes payable at a definite time, and secured transactions, raises an issue as to
the effect to be given to a clause that seemingly grants the power to accelerate at the whim and caprice of one
party. This section is intended to make clear that despite language that might be so construed and which further
might be held to make the agreement void as against public policy or to make the contract illusory or too indefinite
for enforcement, the option is to be exercised only in the good faith belief that the prospect of payment or
performance is impaired.
Obviously this section has no application to demand instruments or obligations whose very nature permits call at
any time with or without reason. This section applies only to an obligation of payment or performance which in the
first instance is due at a future date.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 1-310
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS >
PART 3. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL RULES
§ 1-310. SUBORDINATED OBLIGATIONS
An obligation may be issued as subordinated to performance of another obligation of the person obligated, or a
creditor may subordinate its right to performance of an obligation by agreement with either the person obligated or
another creditor of the person obligated. Subordination does not create a security interest as against either the
common debtor or a subordinated creditor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
Source: Former Section 1-209.
Changes from former law: This section is substantively identical to former Section 1-209. The language in that
section stating that it "shall be construed as declaring the law as it existed prior to the enactment of this section and
not as modifying it" has been deleted.
1. Billions of dollars of subordinated debt are held by the public and by institutional investors. Commonly, the
subordinated debt is subordinated on issue or acquisition and is evidenced by an investment security or by a
negotiable or non-negotiable note. Debt is also sometimes subordinated after it arises, either by agreement
between the subordinating creditor and the debtor, by agreement between two creditors of the same debtor, or by
agreement of all three parties. The subordinated creditor may be a stockholder or other "insider" interested in the
common debtor; the subordinated debt may consist of accounts or other rights to payment not evidenced by any
instrument. All such cases are included in the terms "subordinated obligation," "subordination," and "subordinated
creditor."
2. Subordination agreements are enforceable between the parties as contracts; and in the bankruptcy of the
common debtor dividends otherwise payable to the subordinated creditor are turned over to the superior creditor.
This "turn-over" practice has on occasion been explained in terms of "equitable lien," "equitable assignment," or
"constructive trust," but whatever the label the practice is essentially an equitable remedy and does not mean that
there is a transaction "that creates a security interest in personal property. . . by contract" or a "sale of accounts,
chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes" within the meaning of Section 9-109. On the other hand,
nothing in this section prevents one creditor from assigning his rights to another creditor of the same debtor in such
a way as to create a security interest within Article 9, where the parties so intend.
3. The enforcement of subordination agreements is largely left to supplementary principles under Section 1-103. If
the subordinated debt is evidenced by a certificated security, Section 8-202(a) authorizes enforcement against
purchasers on terms stated or referred to on the security certificate. If the fact of subordination is noted on a
negotiable instrument, a holder under Sections 3-302 and 3-306 is subject to the term because notice precludes
him from taking free of the subordination. Sections 3-302(3)(a), 3-306, and 8-317 severely limit the rights of levying
creditors of a subordinated creditor in such cases.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 1-310. SUBORDINATED OBLIGATIONS
Page 2 of 2
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 6 § 2
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE A [Including repeal of Article 6]
Notice
Deleted: Red text with a strikethrough
§ 2. AMENDMENT.
Section 1-105(2) of the Uniform Commercial Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
(2) Where one of the following provisions of this Act specifies the applicable law, that provision
governs and a contrary agreement is effective only to the extent permitted by the law (including the
conflict of laws rules) so specified:
Rights of creditors against sold goods. Section 2-402.
Applicability of the Article on Leases. Sections 2A-105 and 2A-106.
Applicability of the Article on Bank Deposits and Collections. Section 4-102.
Bulk transfers subject to the Article on Bulk Transfers. Section 6-102.
Applicability of the Article on Investment Securities. Section 8-106.
Perfection provisions of the Article on Secured Transactions. Section 9-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 1.
SHORT TITLE, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND SUBJECT MATTER
§ 2-101. Short Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code-Sales.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
This Article is a complete revision and modernization of the Uniform Sales Act which was promulgated by the
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws in 1906 and has been adopted in 34 states and
Alaska, the District of Columbia and Hawaii.
The coverage of the present Article is much more extensive than that of the old Sales Act and extends to the
various bodies of case law which have been developed both outside of and under the latter.
The arrangement of the present Article is in terms of contract for sale and the various steps of its performance. The
legal consequences are stated as following directly from the contract and action taken under it without resorting to
the idea of when property or title passed or was to pass as being the determining factor. The purpose is to avoid
making practical issues between practical men turn upon the location of an intangible something, the passing of
which no man can prove by evidence and to substitute for such abstractions proof of words and actions of a
tangible character.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 1.
SHORT TITLE, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND SUBJECT MATTER
§ 2-102. Scope; Certain Security and Other Transactions Excluded From This
Article.
Unless the context otherwise requires, this Article applies to transactions in goods; it does not apply to any
transaction which although in the form of an unconditional contract to sell or present sale is intended to operate only
as a security transaction nor does this Article impair or repeal any statute regulating sales to consumers, farmers or
other specified classes of buyers.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 75, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Section 75 has been rephrased.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter: To make it clear that:
The Article leaves substantially unaffected the law relating to purchase money security such as conditional sale or
chattel mortgage though it regulates the general sales aspects of such transactions. "Security transaction" is used
in the same sense as in the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9).
Cross Reference:
Article 9.
Definitional Cross References:
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Present sale". Section 2-106.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 1.
SHORT TITLE, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND SUBJECT MATTER
§ 2-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
(1) In this Article unless the context otherwise requires
(a) "Buyer" means a person who buys or contracts to buy goods.
(b) "Good faith" in the case of a merchant means honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable
commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade.
(c) "Receipt" of goods means taking physical possession of them.
(d) "Seller" means a person who sells or contracts to sell goods.
(2) Other definitions applying to this Article or to specified Parts thereof, and the sections in which they
appear are:
"Acceptance". Section 2-606.
"Banker's credit". Section 2-325.
"Between merchants". Section 2-104.
"Cancellation". Section 2-106(4).
"Commercial unit". Section 2-105.
"Confirmed credit". Section 2-325.
"Conforming to contract". Section 2-106.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Cover". Section 2-712.
"Entrusting". Section 2-403.
"Financing agency". Section 2-104.
"Future goods". Section 2-105.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Identification". Section 2-501.
"Installment contract". Section 2-612.
"Letter of Credit". Section 2-325.
"Lot". Section 2-105.
"Merchant". Section 2-104.
"Overseas". Section 2-323.
"Person in position of seller". Section 2-707.
"Present sale". Section 2-106.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
"Sale on approval". Section 2-326.
"Sale or return". Section 2-326.
"Termination". Section 2-106.
(3) "Control" as provided in Section 7-106 and the following definitions in other Articles apply to this Article:
§ 2-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
Page 2 of 3
"Check". Section 3-104.
"Consignee". Section 7-102.
"Consignor". Section 7-102.
"Consumer goods". Section 9-109.
"Dishonor". Section 3-502.
"Draft". Section 3-104.
(4) In addition Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation
applicable throughout this Article.
As amended in 1994.
See Appendix XI for material relating to changes made in text in 1994.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsection (1): Section 76, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes:
The definitions of "buyer" and "seller" have been slightly rephrased, the reference in Section 76 of the prior Act to
"any legal successor in interest of such person" being omitted. The definition of "receipt" is new.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. The phrase "any legal successor in interest of such person" has been eliminated since Section 2-210 of this
Article, which limits some types of delegation of performance on assignment of a sales contract, makes it clear that
not every such successor can be safely included in the definition. In every ordinary case, however, such
successors are as of course included.
2. "Receipt" must be distinguished from delivery particularly in regard to the problems arising out of shipment of
goods, whether or not the contract calls for making delivery by way of documents of title, since the seller may
frequently fulfill his obligations to "deliver" even though the buyer may never "receive" the goods. Delivery with
respect to documents of title is defined in Article 1 and requires transfer of physical delivery of a tangible document
of title and transfer of control of an electronic document of title. Otherwise the many divergent incidents of delivery
are handled incident by incident.
Cross References:
Point 1: See Section 2-210 and Comment thereon.
Point 2: Section 1-201.
Definitional Cross Reference:
"Person". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 2-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
Page 3 of 3
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 1.
SHORT TITLE, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND SUBJECT MATTER
§ 2-104. Definitions: "Merchant"; "Between Merchants"; "Financing Agency".
(1) "Merchant" means a person who deals in goods of the kind or otherwise by his occupation holds
himself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the practices or goods involved in the transaction or to
whom such knowledge or skill may be attributed by his employment of an agent or broker or other
intermediary who by his occupation holds himself out as having such knowledge or skill.
(2) "Financing agency" means a bank, finance company or other person who in the ordinary course of
business makes advances against goods or documents of title or who by arrangement with either the seller
or the buyer intervenes in ordinary course to make or collect payment due or claimed under the contract for
sale, as by purchasing or paying the seller's draft or making advances against it or by merely taking it for
collection whether or not documents of title accompany or are associated with the draft. "Financing
agency" includes also a bank or other person who similarly intervenes between persons who are in the
position of seller and buyer in respect to the goods ( Section 2-707).
(3) "Between merchants" means in any transaction with respect to which both parties are chargeable with
the knowledge or skill of merchants.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None. But see Sections 15(2), (5), 16(c), 45(2) and 71, Uniform Sales Act, and
Sections 35 and 37, Uniform Bills of Lading Act for examples of the policy expressly provided for in this Article.
Purposes:
1. This Article assumes that transactions between professionals in a given field require special and clear rules
which may not apply to a casual or inexperienced seller or buyer. It thus adopts a policy of expressly stating rules
applicable "between merchants" and "as against a merchant", wherever they are needed instead of making them
depend upon the circumstances of each case as in the statutes cited above. This section lays the foundation of this
policy by defining those who are to be regarded as professionals or "merchants" and by stating when a transaction
is deemed to be "between merchants".
2. The term "merchant" as defined here roots in the "law merchant" concept of a professional in business. The
professional status under the definition may be based upon specialized knowledge as to the goods, specialized
knowledge as to business practices, or specialized knowledge as to both and which kind of specialized knowledge
may be sufficient to establish the merchant status is indicated by the nature of the provisions.
The special provisions as to merchants appear only in this Article and they are of three kinds. Sections 2-201(2), 2-
205, 2-207 and 2-209 dealing with the statute of frauds, firm offers, confirmatory memoranda and modification rest
on normal business practices which are or ought to be typical of and familiar to any person in business. For
purposes of these sections almost every person in business would, therefore, be deemed to be a "merchant" under
the language "who … by his occupation holds himself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to the practices …
§ 2-104. Definitions: "Merchant"; "Between Merchants"; "Financing Agency".
Page 2 of 2
involved in the transaction ..." since the practices involved in the transaction are non-specialized business practices
such as answering mail. In this type of provision, banks or even universities, for example, well may be "merchants."
But even these sections only apply to a merchant in his mercantile capacity; a lawyer or bank president buying
fishing tackle for his own use is not a merchant.
On the other hand, in Section 2-314 on the warranty of merchantability, such warranty is implied only "if the seller is
a merchant with respect to goods of that kind." Obviously this qualification restricts the implied warranty to a much
smaller group than everyone who is engaged in business and requires a professional status as to particular kinds of
goods. The exception in Section 2-402(2) for retention of possession by a merchant-seller falls in the same class;
as does Section 2-403(2) on entrusting of possession to a merchant "who deals in goods of that kind".
A third group of sections includes 2-103(1)(b), which provides that in the case of a merchant "good faith" includes
observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade; 2-327(1)(c), 2-603 and 2-605, dealing
with responsibilities of merchant buyers to follow seller's instructions, etc.; 2-509 on risk of loss, and 2-609 on
adequate assurance of performance. This group of sections applies to persons who are merchants under either the
"practices" or the "goods" aspect of the definition of merchant.
3. The "or to whom such knowledge or skill may be attributed by his employment of an agent or broker ..." clause of
the definition of merchant means that even persons such as universities, for example, can come within the definition
of merchant if they have regular purchasing departments or business personnel who are familiar with business
practices and who are equipped to take any action required.
Cross References:
Point 1: See Sections 1-102 and 1-203.
Point 2: See Sections 2-314, 2-315 and 2-320 to 2-325, of this Article, and Article 9.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bank". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Draft". Section 3-104.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchase". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 1.
SHORT TITLE, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND SUBJECT MATTER
§ 2-105. Definitions: Transferability; "Goods"; "Future" Goods; "Lot";
"Commercial Unit".
(1) "Goods" means all things (including specially manufactured goods) which are movable at the time of
identification to the contract for sale other than the money in which the price is to be paid, investment
securities (Article 8) and things in action. "Goods" also includes the unborn young of animals and growing
crops and other identified things attached to realty as described in the section on goods to be severed from
realty ( Section 2-107).
(2) Goods must be both existing and identified before any interest in them can pass. Goods which are not
both existing and identified are "future" goods. A purported present sale of future goods or of any interest
therein operates as a contract to sell.
(3) There may be a sale of a part interest in existing identified goods.
(4) An undivided share in an identified bulk of fungible goods is sufficiently identified to be sold although
the quantity of the bulk is not determined. Any agreed proportion of such a bulk or any quantity thereof
agreed upon by number, weight or other measure may to the extent of the seller's interest in the bulk be
sold to the buyer who then becomes an owner in common.
(5) "Lot" means a parcel or a single article which is the subject matter of a separate sale or delivery,
whether or not it is sufficient to perform the contract.
(6) "Commercial unit" means such a unit of goods as by commercial usage is a single whole for purposes
of sale and division of which materially impairs its character or value on the market or in use. A commercial
unit may be a single article (as a machine) or a set of articles (as a suite of furniture or an assortment of
sizes) or a quantity (as a bale, gross, or carload) or any other unit treated in use or in the relevant market
as a single whole.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4)-Sections 5, 6 and 76, Uniform Sales Act;
Subsections (5) and (6)-none.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. Subsection (1) on "goods": The phraseology of the prior uniform statutory provision has been changed so that:
The definition of goods is based on the concept of movability and the term "chattels personal" is not used. It is not
intended to deal with things which are not fairly identifiable as movables before the contract is performed.
§ 2-105. Definitions: Transferability; "Goods"; "Future" Goods; "Lot"; "Commercial Unit".
Page 2 of 3
Growing crops are included within the definition of goods since they are frequently intended for sale. The concept
of "industrial" growing crops has been abandoned, for under modern practices fruit, perennial hay, nursery stock
and the like must be brought within the scope of this Article. The young of animals are also included expressly in
this definition since they, too, are frequently intended for sale and may be contracted for before birth. The period of
gestation of domestic animals is such that the provisions of the section on identification can apply as in the case of
crops to be planted. The reason of this definition also leads to the inclusion of a wool crop or the like as "goods"
subject to identification under this Article.
The exclusion of "money in which the price is to be paid" from the definition of goods does not mean that foreign
currency which is included in the definition of money may not be the subject matter of a sales transaction. Goods is
intended to cover the sale of money when money is being treated as a commodity but not to include it when money
is the medium of payment.
As to contracts to sell timber, minerals, or structures to be removed from the land Section 2-107(1) (Goods to be
severed from Realty: recording) controls.
The use of the word "fixtures" is avoided in view of the diversity of definitions of that term. This Article in including
within its scope "things attached to realty" adds the further test that they must be capable of severance without
material harm thereto. As between the parties any identified things which fall within that definition become "goods"
upon the making of the contract for sale.
"Investment securities" are expressly excluded from the coverage of this Article. It is not intended by this exclusion,
however, to prevent the application of a particular section of this Article by analogy to securities (as was done with
the Original Sales Act in Agar v. Orda, 264 N.Y. 248, 190 N.E. 479, 99 A.L.R. 269 (1934) ) when the reason of that
section makes such application sensible and the situation involved is not covered by the Article of this Act dealing
specifically with such securities (Article 8).
2. References to the fact that a contract for sale can extend to future or contingent goods and that ownership in
common follows the sale of a part interest have been omitted here as obvious without need for expression; hence
no inference to negate these principles should be drawn from their omission.
3. Subsection (4) does not touch the question of how far an appropriation of a bulk of fungible goods may or may
not satisfy the contract for sale.
4. Subsections (5) and (6) on "lot" and "commercial unit" are introduced to aid in the phrasing of later sections.
5. The question of when an identification of goods takes place is determined by the provisions of Section 2-501 and
all that this section says is what kinds of goods may be the subject of a sale.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-107, 2-201, 2-501 and Article 8.
Point 5: Section 2-501.
See also Section 1-201.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Fungible". Section 1-201.
§ 2-105. Definitions: Transferability; "Goods"; "Future" Goods; "Lot"; "Commercial Unit".
Page 3 of 3
"Money". Section 1-201.
"Present sale". Section 2-106.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 1.
SHORT TITLE, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND SUBJECT MATTER
§ 2-106. Definitions: "Contract"; "Agreement"; "Contract for Sale"; "Sale";
"Present Sale"; "Conforming" to Contract; "Termination"; "Cancellation".
(1) In this Article unless the context otherwise requires "contract" and "agreement" are limited to those
relating to the present or future sale of goods. "Contract for sale" includes both a present sale of goods and
a contract to sell goods at a future time. A "sale" consists in the passing of title from the seller to the buyer
for a price ( Section 2-401). A "present sale" means a sale which is accomplished by the making of the
contract.
(2) Goods or conduct including any part of a performance are "conforming" or conform to the contract
when they are in accordance with the obligations under the contract.
(3) "Termination" occurs when either party pursuant to a power created by agreement or law puts an end
to the contract otherwise than for its breach. On "termination" all obligations which are still executory on
both sides are discharged but any right based on prior breach or performance survives.
(4) "Cancellation" occurs when either party puts an end to the contract for breach by the other and its effect
is the same as that of "termination" except that the cancelling party also retains any remedy for breach of
the whole contract or any unperformed balance.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsection (1)-Section 1(1) and (2), Uniform Sales Act; Subsection (2)-none, but
subsection generally continues policy of Sections 11, 44 and 69, Uniform Sales Act; Subsections (3) and (4)-none.
Changes: Completely rewritten.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. Subsection (1): "Contract for sale" is used as a general concept throughout this Article, but the rights of the
parties do not vary according to whether the transaction is a present sale or a contract to sell unless the Article
expressly so provides.
2. Subsection (2): It is in general intended to continue the policy of requiring exact performance by the seller of his
obligations as a condition to his right to require acceptance. However, the seller is in part safeguarded against
surprise as a result of sudden technicality on the buyer's part by the provisions of Section 2-508 on seller's cure of
improper tender or delivery. Moreover usage of trade frequently permits commercial leeways in performance and
the language of the agreement itself must be read in the light of such custom or usage and also, prior course of
dealing, and in a long term contract, the course of performance.
3. Subsections (3) and (4): These subsections are intended to make clear the distinction carried forward throughout
this Article between termination and cancellation.
§ 2-106. Definitions: "Contract"; "Agreement"; "Contract for Sale"; "Sale"; "Present Sale "; "Conforming" to
Contract; "Termination"; "Cancellation".
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 1-203, 1-205, 2-208 and 2-508.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 1.
SHORT TITLE, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND SUBJECT MATTER
§ 2-107. Goods to Be Severed From Realty: Recording.
(1) A contract for the sale of minerals or the like (including oil and gas) or a structure or its materials to be
removed from realty is a contract for the sale of goods within this Article if they are to be severed by the
seller but until severance a purported present sale thereof which is not effective as a transfer of an interest
in land is effective only as a contract to sell.
(2) A contract for the sale apart from the land of growing crops or other things attached to realty and
capable of severance without material harm thereto but not described in subsection (1) or of timber to be
cut is a contract for the sale of goods within this Article whether the subject matter is to be severed by the
buyer or by the seller even though it forms part of the realty at the time of contracting, and the parties can
by identification effect a present sale before severance.
(3) The provisions of this section are subject to any third party rights provided by the law relating to realty
records, and the contract for sale may be executed and recorded as a document transferring an interest in
land and shall then constitute notice to third parties of the buyer's rights under the contract for sale.
As amended in 1972.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See Section 76, Uniform Sales Act on prior policy; Section 7, Uniform Conditional
Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1). Notice that this subsection applies only if the minerals or structures "are to be severed by the
seller". If the buyer is to sever, such transactions are considered contracts affecting land and all problems of the
Statute of Frauds and of the recording of land rights apply to them. Therefore, the Statute of Frauds section of this
Article does not apply to such contracts though they must conform to the Statute of Frauds affecting the transfer of
interests in land.
2. Subsection (2). "Things attached" to the realty which can be severed without material harm are goods within this
Article regardless of who is to effect the severance. The word "fixtures" has been avoided because of the diverse
definitions of this term, the test of "severance without material harm" being substituted.
The provision in subsection (3) for recording such contracts is within the purview of this Article since it is a means of
preserving the buyer's rights under the contract of sale.
3. The security phases of things attached to or to become attached to realty are dealt with in the Article on Secured
Transactions (Article 9) and it is to be noted that the definition of goods in that Article differs from the definition of
goods in this Article.
§ 2-107. Goods to Be Severed From Realty: Recording.
Page 2 of 2
However, both Articles treat as goods growing crops and also timber to be cut under a contract of severance.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-201.
Point 2: Section 2-105.
Point 3: Articles 9 and 9-105.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Present sale". Section 2-106.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-201
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 2.
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT
§ 2-201. Formal Requirements; Statute of Frauds.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section a contract for the sale of goods for the price of $500 or
more is not enforceable by way of action or defense unless there is some writing sufficient to indicate that a
contract for sale has been made between the parties and signed by the party against whom enforcement is
sought or by his authorized agent or broker. A writing is not insufficient because it omits or incorrectly
states a term agreed upon but the contract is not enforceable under this paragraph beyond the quantity of
goods shown in such writing.
(2) Between merchants if within a reasonable time a writing in confirmation of the contract and sufficient
against the sender is received and the party receiving it has reason to know its contents, it satisfies the
requirements of subsection (1) against such party unless written notice of objection to its contents is given
within 10 days after it is received.
(3) A contract which does not satisfy the requirements of subsection (1) but which is valid in other respects
is enforceable
(a) if the goods are to be specially manufactured for the buyer and are not suitable for sale to others in
the ordinary course of the seller's business and the seller, before notice of repudiation is received and
under circumstances which reasonably indicate that the goods are for the buyer, has made either a
substantial beginning of their manufacture or commitments for their procurement; or
(b) if the party against whom enforcement is sought admits in his pleading, testimony or otherwise in
court that a contract for sale was made, but the contract is not enforceable under this provision beyond
the quantity of goods admitted; or
(c) with respect to goods for which payment has been made and accepted or which have been
received and accepted ( Sec. 2-606).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 4, Uniform Sales Act (which was based on Section 17 of the Statute of 29
Charles II).
Changes: Completely rephrased; restricted to sale of goods. See also Sections 1-206, 8-319 and 9-203.
Purposes of Changes: The changed phraseology of this section is intended to make it clear that:
1. The required writing need not contain all the material terms of the contract and such material terms as are stated
need not be precisely stated. All that is required is that the writing afford a basis for believing that the offered oral
evidence rests on a real transaction. It may be written in lead pencil on a scratch pad. It need not indicate which
party is the buyer and which the seller. The only term which must appear is the quantity term which need not be
§ 2-201. Formal Requirements; Statute of Frauds.
Page 2 of 3
accurately stated but recovery is limited to the amount stated. The price, time and place of payment or delivery, the
general quality of the goods, or any particular warranties may all be omitted.
Special emphasis must be placed on the permissibility of omitting the price term in view of the insistence of some
courts on the express inclusion of this term even where the parties have contracted on the basis of a published
price list. In many valid contracts for sale the parties do not mention the price in express terms, the buyer being
bound to pay and the seller to accept a reasonable price which the trier of the fact may well be trusted to determine.
Again, frequently the price is not mentioned since the parties have based their agreement on a price list or
catalogue known to both of them and this list serves as an efficient safeguard against perjury. Finally, "market"
prices and valuations that are current in the vicinity constitute a similar check. Thus if the price is not stated in the
memorandum it can normally be supplied without danger of fraud. Of course if the "price" consists of goods rather
than money the quantity of goods must be stated.
Only three definite and invariable requirements as to the memorandum are made by this subsection. First, it must
evidence a contract for the sale of goods; second, it must be "signed", a word which includes any authentication
which identifies the party to be charged; and third, it must specify a quantity.
2. "Partial performance" as a substitute for the required memorandum can validate the contract only for the goods
which have been accepted or for which payment has been made and accepted.
Receipt and acceptance either of goods or of the price constitutes an unambiguous overt admission by both parties
that a contract actually exists. If the court can make a just apportionment, therefore, the agreed price of any goods
actually delivered can be recovered without a writing or, if the price has been paid, the seller can be forced to
deliver an apportionable part of the goods. The overt actions of the parties make admissible evidence of the other
terms of the contract necessary to a just apportionment. This is true even though the actions of the parties are not
in themselves inconsistent with a different transaction such as a consignment for resale or a mere loan of money.
Part performance by the buyer requires the delivery of something by him that is accepted by the seller as such
performance. Thus, part payment may be made by money or check, accepted by the seller. If the agreed price
consists of goods or services, then they must also have been delivered and accepted.
3. Between merchants, failure to answer a written confirmation of a contract within ten days of receipt is tantamount
to a writing under subsection (2) and is sufficient against both parties under subsection (1). The only effect,
however, is to take away from the party who fails to answer the defense of the Statute of Frauds; the burden of
persuading the trier of fact that a contract was in fact made orally prior to the written confirmation is unaffected.
Compare the effect of a failure to reply under Section 2-207.
4. Failure to satisfy the requirements of this section does not render the contract void for all purposes, but merely
prevents it from being judicially enforced in favor of a party to the contract. For example, a buyer who takes
possession of goods as provided in an oral contract which the seller has not meanwhile repudiated, is not a
trespasser. Nor would the Statute of Frauds provisions of this section be a defense to a third person who
wrongfully induces a party to refuse to perform an oral contract, even though the injured party cannot maintain an
action for damages against the party so refusing to perform.
5. The requirement of "signing" is discussed in the comment to Section 1-201.
6. It is not necessary that the writing be delivered to anybody. It need not be signed or authenticated by both
parties but it is, of course, not sufficient against one who has not signed it. Prior to a dispute no one can determine
which party's signing of the memorandum may be necessary but from the time of contracting each party should be
aware that to him it is signing by the other which is important.
7. If the making of a contract is admitted in court, either in a written pleading, by stipulation or by oral statement
before the court, no additional writing is necessary for protection against fraud. Under this section it is no longer
possible to admit the contract in court and still treat the Statute as a defense. However, the contract is not thus
§ 2-201. Formal Requirements; Statute of Frauds.
Page 3 of 3
conclusively established. The admission so made by a party is itself evidential against him of the truth of the facts
so admitted and of nothing more; as against the other party, it is not evidential at all.
Cross References:
See Sections 1-201, 2-202, 2-207, 2-209 and 2-304.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201.
"Between merchants". Section 2-104.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Notice". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-202
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 2.
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT
§ 2-202. Final Written Expression: Parol or Extrinsic Evidence.
Terms with respect to which the confirmatory memoranda of the parties agree or which are otherwise set
forth in a writing intended by the parties as a final expression of their agreement with respect to such terms
as are included therein may not be contradicted by evidence of any prior agreement or of a
contemporaneous oral agreement but may be explained or supplemented
(a) by course of dealing or usage of trade ( Section 1-205) or by course of performance ( Section 2-
208); and
(b) by evidence of consistent additional terms unless the court finds the writing to have been intended
also as a complete and exclusive statement of the terms of the agreement.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provisions: None.
Purposes:
1. This section definitely rejects:
(a) Any assumption that because a writing has been worked out which is final on some matters, it is to be taken as
including all the matters agreed upon;
(b) The premise that the language used has the meaning attributable to such language by rules of construction
existing in the law rather than the meaning which arises out of the commercial context in which it was used; and
(c) The requirement that a condition precedent to the admissibility of the type of evidence specified in paragraph (a)
is an original determination by the court that the language used is ambiguous.
2. Paragraph (a) makes admissible evidence of course of dealing, usage of trade and course of performance to
explain or supplement the terms of any writing stating the agreement of the parties in order that the true
understanding of the parties as to the agreement may be reached. Such writings are to be read on the assumption
that the course of prior dealings between the parties and the usages of trade were taken for granted when the
document was phrased. Unless carefully negated they have become an element of the meaning of the words used.
Similarly, the course of actual performance by the parties is considered the best indication of what they intended the
writing to mean.
3. Under paragraph (b) consistent additional terms, not reduced to writing, may be proved unless the court finds
that the writing was intended by both parties as a complete and exclusive statement of all the terms. If the
additional terms are such that, if agreed upon, they would certainly have been included in the document in the view
of the court, then evidence of their alleged making must be kept from the trier of fact.
§ 2-202. Final Written Expression: Parol or Extrinsic Evidence.
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Point 3: Sections 1-205, 2-207, 2-302 and 2-316.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed" and "agreement". Section 1-201.
"Course of dealing". Section 1-205.
"Parties". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Usage of trade". Section 1-205.
"Written" and "writing". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-203
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 2.
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT
§ 2-203. Seals Inoperative.
The affixing of a seal to a writing evidencing a contract for sale or an offer to buy or sell goods does not constitute
the writing a sealed instrument and the law with respect to sealed instruments does not apply to such a contract or
offer.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 3, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Portion pertaining to "seals" rewritten.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section makes it clear that every effect of the seal which relates to "sealed instruments" as such is wiped out
insofar as contracts for sale are concerned. However, the substantial effects of a seal, except extension of the
period of limitations, may be had by appropriate drafting as in the case of firm offers (see Section 2-205).
2. This section leaves untouched any aspects of a seal which relate merely to signatures or to authentication of
execution and the like. Thus, a statute providing that a purported signature gives prima facie evidence of its own
authenticity or that a signature gives prima facie evidence of consideration is still applicable to sales transactions
even though a seal may be held to be a signature within the meaning of such a statute. Similarly, the authorized
affixing of a corporate seal bearing the corporate name to a contractual writing purporting to be made by the
corporation may have effect as a signature without any reference to the law of sealed instruments.
Cross Reference:
Point 1: Section 2-205.
Definitional Cross References:
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Writing". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-204
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 2.
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT
§ 2-204. Formation in General.
(1) A contract for sale of goods may be made in any manner sufficient to show agreement, including
conduct by both parties which recognizes the existence of such a contract.
(2) An agreement sufficient to constitute a contract for sale may be found even though the moment of its
making is undetermined.
(3) Even though one or more terms are left open a contract for sale does not fail for indefiniteness if the
parties have intended to make a contract and there is a reasonably certain basis for giving an appropriate
remedy.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 1 and 3, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten by this and other sections of this Article.
Purposes of Changes:
Subsection (1) continues without change the basic policy of recognizing any manner of expression of agreement,
oral, written or otherwise. The legal effect of such an agreement is, of course, qualified by other provisions of this
Article.
Under subsection (1) appropriate conduct by the parties may be sufficient to establish an agreement. Subsection
(2) is directed primarily to the situation where the interchanged correspondence does not disclose the exact point at
which the deal was closed, but the actions of the parties indicate that a binding obligation has been undertaken.
Subsection (3) states the principle as to "open terms" underlying later sections of the Article. If the parties intend to
enter into a binding agreement, this subsection recognizes that agreement as valid in law, despite missing terms, if
there is any reasonably certain basis for granting a remedy. The test is not certainty as to what the parties were to
do nor as to the exact amount of damages due the plaintiff. Nor is the fact that one or more terms are left to be
agreed upon enough of itself to defeat an otherwise adequate agreement. Rather, commercial standards on the
point of "indefiniteness" are intended to be applied, this Act making provision elsewhere for missing terms needed
for performance, open price, remedies and the like.
The more terms the parties leave open, the less likely it is that they have intended to conclude a binding agreement,
but their actions may be frequently conclusive on the matter despite the omissions.
Cross References:
Subsection (1): Sections 1-103, 2-201 and 2-302.
§ 2-204. Formation in General.
Page 2 of 2
Subsection (2): Sections 2-205 through 2-209.
Subsection (3): See Part 3.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-205
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 2.
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT
§ 2-205. Firm Offers.
An offer by a merchant to buy or sell goods in a signed writing which by its terms gives assurance that it will be held
open is not revocable, for lack of consideration, during the time stated or if no time is stated for a reasonable time,
but in no event may such period of irrevocability exceed three months; but any such term of assurance on a form
supplied by the offeree must be separately signed by the offeror.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 1 and 3, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten by this and other sections of this Article.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section is intended to modify the former rule which required that "firm offers" be sustained by consideration
in order to bind, and to require instead that they must merely be characterized as such and expressed in signed
writings.
2. The primary purpose of this section is to give effect to the deliberate intention of a merchant to make a current
firm offer binding. The deliberation is shown in the case of an individualized document by the merchant's signature
to the offer, and in the case of an offer included on a form supplied by the other party to the transaction by the
separate signing of the particular clause which contains the offer. "Signed" here also includes authentication but
the reasonableness of the authentication herein allowed must be determined in the light of the purpose of the
section. The circumstances surrounding the signing may justify something less than a formal signature or initialing
but typically the kind of authentication involved here would consist of a minimum of initialing of the clause involved.
A handwritten memorandum on the writer's letterhead purporting in its terms to "confirm" a firm offer already made
would be enough to satisfy this section, although not subscribed, since under the circumstances it could not be
considered a memorandum of mere negotiation and it would adequately show its own authenticity. Similarly, an
authorized telegram will suffice, and this is true even though the original draft contained only a typewritten
signature. However, despite settled courses of dealing or usages of the trade whereby firm offers are made by oral
communication and relied upon without more evidence, such offers remain revocable under this Article since
authentication by a writing is the essence of this section.
3. This section is intended to apply to current "firm" offers and not to long term options, and an outside time limit of
three months during which such offers remain irrevocable has been set. The three month period during which firm
offers remain irrevocable under this section need not be stated by days or by date. If the offer states that it is
"guaranteed" or "firm" until the happening of a contingency which will occur within the three month period, it will
remain irrevocable until that event. A promise made for a longer period will operate under this section to bind the
offeror only for the first three months of the period but may of course be renewed. If supported by consideration it
§ 2-205. Firm Offers.
Page 2 of 2
may continue for as long as the parties specify. This section deals only with the offer which is not supported by
consideration.
4. Protection is afforded against the inadvertent signing of a firm offer when contained in a form prepared by the
offeree by requiring that such a clause be separately authenticated. If the offer clause is called to the offeror's
attention and he separately authenticates it, he will be bound; Section 2-302 may operate, however, to prevent an
unconscionable result which otherwise would flow from other terms appearing in the form.
5. Safeguards are provided to offer relief in the case of material mistake by virtue of the requirement of good faith
and the general law of mistake.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 1-102.
Point 2: Section 1-102.
Point 3: Section 2-201.
Point 5: Section 2-302.
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Merchant". Section 2-104.
"Signed". Section 1-201.
"Writing". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-206
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 2.
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT
§ 2-206. Offer and Acceptance in Formation of Contract.
(1) Unless otherwise unambiguously indicated by the language or circumstances
(a) an offer to make a contract shall be construed as inviting acceptance in any manner and by any
medium reasonable in the circumstances;
(b) an order or other offer to buy goods for prompt or current shipment shall be construed as inviting
acceptance either by a prompt promise to ship or by the prompt or current shipment of conforming or
non-conforming goods, but such a shipment of non-conforming goods does not constitute an
acceptance if the seller seasonably notifies the buyer that the shipment is offered only as an
accommodation to the buyer.
(2) Where the beginning of a requested performance is a reasonable mode of acceptance an offeror who is
not notified of acceptance within a reasonable time may treat the offer as having lapsed before acceptance.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 1 and 3, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten in this and other sections of this Article.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. Any reasonable manner of acceptance is intended to be regarded as available unless the offeror has made quite
clear that it will not be acceptable. Former technical rules as to acceptance, such as requiring that telegraphic
offers be accepted by telegraphed acceptance, etc., are rejected and a criterion that the acceptance be "in any
manner and by any medium reasonable under the circumstances," is substituted. This section is intended to
remain flexible and its applicability to be enlarged as new media of communication develop or as the more timesaving
present day media come into general use.
2. Either shipment or a prompt promise to ship is made a proper means of acceptance of an offer looking to current
shipment. In accordance with ordinary commercial understanding the section interprets an order looking to current
shipment as allowing acceptance either by actual shipment or by a prompt promise to ship and rejects the artificial
theory that only a single mode of acceptance is normally envisaged by an offer. This is true even though the
language of the offer happens to be "ship at once" or the like. "Shipment" is here used in the same sense as in
Section 2-504; it does not include the beginning of delivery by the seller's own truck or by messenger. But loading
on the seller's own truck might be a beginning of performance under subsection (2).
3. The beginning of performance by an offeree can be effective as acceptance so as to bind the offeror only if
followed within a reasonable time by notice to the offeror. Such a beginning of performance must unambiguously
express the offeree's intention to engage himself. For the protection of both parties it is essential that notice follow
§ 2-206. Offer and Acceptance in Formation of Contract.
Page 2 of 2
in due course to constitute acceptance. Nothing in this section however bars the possibility that under the common
law performance begun may have an intermediate effect of temporarily barring revocation of the offer, or at the
offeror's option, final effect in constituting acceptance.
4. Subsection (1)(b) deals with the situation where a shipment made following an order is shown by a notification of
shipment to be referable to that order but has a defect. Such a non-conforming shipment is normally to be
understood as intended to close the bargain, even though it proves to have been at the same time a breach.
However, the seller by stating that the shipment is non-conforming and is offered only as an accommodation to the
buyer keeps the shipment or notification from operating as an acceptance.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conforming". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-207
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 2.
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT
§ 2-207. Additional Terms in Acceptance or Confirmation.
(1) A definite and seasonable expression of acceptance or a written confirmation which is sent within a
reasonable time operates as an acceptance even though it states terms additional to or different from those
offered or agreed upon, unless acceptance is expressly made conditional on assent to the additional or
different terms.
(2) The additional terms are to be construed as proposals for addition to the contract. Between merchants
such terms become part of the contract unless:
(a) the offer expressly limits acceptance to the terms of the offer;
(b) they materially alter it; or
(c) notification of objection to them has already been given or is given within a reasonable time after
notice of them is received.
(3) Conduct by both parties which recognizes the existence of a contract is sufficient to establish a contract
for sale although the writings of the parties do not otherwise establish a contract. In such case the terms of
the particular contract consist of those terms on which the writings of the parties agree, together with any
supplementary terms incorporated under any other provisions of this Act.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 1 and 3, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten by this and other sections of this Article.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section is intended to deal with two typical situations. The one is the written confirmation, where an
agreement has been reached either orally or by informal correspondence between the parties and is followed by
one or both of the parties sending formal memoranda embodying the terms so far as agreed upon and adding terms
not discussed. The other situation is offer and acceptance, in which a wire or letter expressed and intended as an
acceptance or the closing of an agreement adds further minor suggestions or proposals such as "ship by Tuesday,"
"rush," "ship draft against bill of lading inspection allowed," or the like. A frequent example of the second situation
is the exchange of printed purchase order and acceptance (sometimes called "acknowledgment") forms. Because
the forms are oriented to the thinking of the respective drafting parties, the terms contained in them often do not
correspond. Often the seller's form contains terms different from or additional to those set forth in the buyer's form.
Nevertheless, the parties proceed with the transaction. [Comment 1 was amended in 1966.]
2. Under this Article a proposed deal which in commercial understanding has in fact been closed is recognized as a
contract. Therefore, any additional matter contained in the confirmation or in the acceptance falls within subsection
§ 2-207. Additional Terms in Acceptance or Confirmation.
Page 2 of 3
(2) and must be regarded as a proposal for an added term unless the acceptance is made conditional on the
acceptance of the additional or different terms. [Comment 2 was amended in 1966.]
3. Whether or not additional or different terms will become part of the agreement depends upon the provisions of
subsection (2). If they are such as materially to alter the original bargain, they will not be included unless expressly
agreed to by the other party. If, however, they are terms which would not so change the bargain they will be
incorporated unless notice of objection to them has already been given or is given within a reasonable time.
4. Examples of typical clauses which would normally "materially alter" the contract and so result in surprise or
hardship if incorporated without express awareness by the other party are: a clause negating such standard
warranties as that of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose in circumstances in which either warranty
normally attaches; a clause requiring a guaranty of 90% or 100% deliveries in a case such as a contract by
cannery, where the usage of the trade allows greater quantity leeways; a clause reserving to the seller the power to
cancel upon the buyer's failure to meet any invoice when due; a clause requiring that complaints be made in a time
materially shorter than customary or reasonable.
5. Examples of clauses which involve no element of unreasonable surprise and which therefore are to be
incorporated in the contract unless notice of objection is seasonably given are: a clause setting forth and perhaps
enlarging slightly upon the seller's exemption due to supervening causes beyond his control, similar to those
covered by the provision of this Article on merchant's excuse by failure of presupposed conditions or a clause fixing
in advance any reasonable formula of proration under such circumstances; a clause fixing a reasonable time for
complaints within customary limits, or in the case of a purchase for sub-sale, providing for inspection by the subpurchaser;
a clause providing for interest on overdue invoices or fixing the seller's standard credit terms where they
are within the range of trade practice and do not limit any credit bargained for; a clause limiting the right of rejection
for defects which fall within the customary trade tolerances for acceptance "with adjustment" or otherwise limiting
remedy in a reasonable manner (see Sections 2-718 and 2-719).
6. If no answer is received within a reasonable time after additional terms are proposed, it is both fair and
commercially sound to assume that their inclusion has been assented to. Where clauses on confirming forms sent
by both parties conflict each party must be assumed to object to a clause of the other conflicting with one on the
confirmation sent by himself. As a result the requirement that there be notice of objection which is found in
subsection (2) is satisfied and the conflicting terms do not become a part of the contract. The contract then consists
of the terms originally expressly agreed to, terms on which the confirmations agree, and terms supplied by this Act,
including subsection (2). The written confirmation is also subject to Section 2-201. Under that section a failure to
respond permits enforcement of a prior oral agreement; under this section a failure to respond permits additional
terms to become part of the agreement. [Comment 6 was amended in 1966.]
7. In many cases, as where goods are shipped, accepted and paid for before any dispute arises, there is no
question whether a contract has been made. In such cases, where the writings of the parties do not establish a
contract, it is not necessary to determine which act or document constituted the offer and which the acceptance.
See Section 2-204. The only question is what terms are included in the contract, and subsection (3) furnishes the
governing rule. [Comment 7 was added in 1966.]
Cross References:
See generally Section 2-302.
Point 5: Sections 2-513, 2-602, 2-607, 2-609, 2-612, 2-614, 2-615, 2-616, 2-718 and 2-719.
Point 6: Sections 1-102 and 2-104.
Definitional Cross References:
"Between merchants". Section 2-104.
§ 2-207. Additional Terms in Acceptance or Confirmation.
Page 3 of 3
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Send". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Written". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-208
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 2.
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT
§ 2-208. Course of Performance or Practical Construction.
(1) Where the contract for sale involves repeated occasions for performance by either party with
knowledge of the nature of the performance and opportunity for objection to it by the other, any course of
performance accepted or acquiesced in without objection shall be relevant to determine the meaning of the
agreement.
(2) The express terms of the agreement and any such course of performance, as well as any course of
dealing and usage of trade, shall be construed whenever reasonable as consistent with each other; but
when such construction is unreasonable, express terms shall control course of performance and course of
performance shall control both course of dealing and usage of trade ( Section 1-205).
(3) Subject to the provisions of the next section on modification and waiver, such course of performance
shall be relevant to show a waiver or modification of any term inconsistent with such course of
performance.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: No such general provision but concept of this section recognized by terms such
as "course of dealing", "the circumstances of the case," "the conduct of the parties," etc., in Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. The parties themselves know best what they have meant by their words of agreement and their action under that
agreement is the best indication of what that meaning was. This section thus rounds out the set of factors which
determines the meaning of the "agreement" and therefore also of the "unless otherwise agreed" qualification to
various provisions of this Article.
2. Under this section a course of performance is always relevant to determine the meaning of the agreement.
Express mention of course of performance elsewhere in this Article carries no contrary implication when there is a
failure to refer to it in other sections.
3. Where it is difficult to determine whether a particular act merely sheds light on the meaning of the agreement or
represents a waiver of a term of the agreement, the preference is in favor of "waiver" whenever such construction,
plus the application of the provisions on the reinstatement of rights waived (see Section 2-209), is needed to
preserve the flexible character of commercial contracts and to prevent surprise or other hardship.
4. A single occasion of conduct does not fall within the language of this section but other sections such as the ones
on silence after acceptance and failure to specify particular defects can affect the parties' rights on a single
occasion (see Sections 2-605 and 2-607).
Cross References:
§ 2-208. Course of Performance or Practical Construction.
Page 2 of 2
Point 1: Section 1-201.
Point 2: Section 2-202.
Point 3: Sections 2-209, 2-601 and 2-607.
Point 4: Sections 2-605 and 2-607.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-209
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 2.
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT
§ 2-209. Modification, Rescission and Waiver.
(1) An agreement modifying a contract within this Article needs no consideration to be binding.
(2) A signed agreement which excludes modification or rescission except by a signed writing cannot be
otherwise modified or rescinded, but except as between merchants such a requirement on a form supplied
by the merchant must be separately signed by the other party.
(3) The requirements of the statute of frauds section of this Article ( Section 2-201) must be satisfied if the
contract as modified is within its provisions.
(4) Although an attempt at modification or rescission does not satisfy the requirements of subsection (2) or
(3) it can operate as a waiver.
(5) A party who has made a waiver affecting an executory portion of the contract may retract the waiver by
reasonable notification received by the other party that strict performance will be required of any term
waived, unless the retraction would be unjust in view of a material change of position in reliance on the
waiver.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsection (1)-Compare Section 1, Uniform Written Obligations Act; Subsections
(2) to (5)-none.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. This section seeks to protect and make effective all necessary and desirable modifications of sales contracts
without regard to the technicalities which at present hamper such adjustments.
2. Subsection (1) provides that an agreement modifying a sales contract needs no consideration to be binding.
However, modifications made thereunder must meet the test of good faith imposed by this Act. The effective use of
bad faith to escape performance on the original contract terms is barred, and the extortion of a "modification"
without legitimate commercial reason is ineffective as a violation of the duty of good faith. Nor can a mere technical
consideration support a modification made in bad faith.
The test of "good faith" between merchants or as against merchants includes "observance of reasonable
commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade" (Section 2-103), and may in some situations require an
objectively demonstrable reason for seeking a modification. But such matters as a market shift which makes
performance come to involve a loss may provide such a reason even though there is no such unforeseen difficulty
as would make out a legal excuse from performance under Sections 2-615 and 2-616.
§ 2-209. Modification, Rescission and Waiver.
Page 2 of 2
3. Subsections (2) and (3) are intended to protect against false allegations of oral modifications. "Modification or
rescission" includes abandonment or other change by mutual consent, contrary to the decision in Green v. Doniger,
300 N.Y. 238, 90 N.E.2d 56 (1949); it does not include unilateral "termination" or "cancellation" as defined in
Section 2-106.
The Statute of Frauds provisions of this Article are expressly applied to modifications by subsection (3). Under
those provisions the "delivery and acceptance" test is limited to the goods which have been accepted, that is, to the
past. "Modification" for the future cannot therefore be conjured up by oral testimony if the price involved is $500.00
or more since such modification must be shown at least by an authenticated memo. And since a memo is limited in
its effect to the quantity of goods set forth in it there is safeguard against oral evidence.
Subsection (2) permits the parties in effect to make their own Statute of Frauds as regards any future modification
of the contract by giving effect to a clause in a signed agreement which expressly requires any modification to be by
signed writing. But note that if a consumer is to be held to such a clause on a form supplied by a merchant it must
be separately signed.
4. Subsection (4) is intended, despite the provisions of subsections (2) and (3), to prevent contractual provisions
excluding modification except by a signed writing from limiting in other respects the legal effect of the parties' actual
later conduct. The effect of such conduct as a waiver is further regulated in subsection (5).
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 1-203.
Point 2: Sections 1-201, 1-203, 2-615 and 2-616.
Point 3: Sections 2-106, 2-201 and 2-202.
Point 4: Sections 2-202 and 2-208.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Between merchants". Section 2-104.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Signed". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Writing". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-210
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 2.
FORM, FORMATION AND READJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT
§ 2-210. Delegation of Performance; Assignment of Rights.
(1) A party may perform his duty through a delegate unless otherwise agreed or unless the other party has
a substantial interest in having his original promisor perform or control the acts required by the contract. No
delegation of performance relieves the party delegating of any duty to perform or any liability for breach.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-406, unless otherwise agreed, all rights of either seller or
buyer can be assigned except where the assignment would materially change the duty of the other party, or
increase materially the burden or risk imposed on him by his contract, or impair materially his chance of
obtaining return performance. A right to damages for breach of the whole contract or a right arising out of
the assignor's due performance of his entire obligation can be assigned despite agreement otherwise.
(3) The creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of a security interest in the seller's interest under
a contract is not a transfer that materially changes the duty of or increases materially the burden or risk
imposed on the buyer or impairs materially the buyer's chance of obtaining return performance within the
purview of subsection (2) unless, and then only to the extent that, enforcement actually results in a
delegation of material performance of the seller. Even in that event, the creation, attachment, perfection,
and enforcement of the security interest remain effective, but (i) the seller is liable to the buyer for damages
caused by the delegation to the extent that the damages could not reasonably be prevented by the buyer,
and (ii) a court having jurisdiction may grant other appropriate relief, including cancellation of the contract
for sale or an injunction against enforcement of the security interest or consummation of the enforcement.
(4) An assignment of "the contract" or of "all my rights under the contract" or an assignment in similar
general terms is an assignment of rights and unless the language or the circumstances (as in an
assignment for security) indicate the contrary, it is a delegation of performance of the duties of the assignor
and its acceptance by the assignee constitutes a promise by him to perform those duties. This promise is
enforceable by either the assignor or the other party to the original contract.
(5) The other party may treat any assignment which delegates performance as creating reasonable
grounds for insecurity and may without prejudice to his rights against the assignor demand assurances
from the assignee ( Section 2-609).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Generally, this section recognizes both delegation of performance and assignability as normal and permissible
incidents of a contract for the sale of goods.
§ 2-210. Delegation of Performance; Assignment of Rights.
Page 2 of 3
2. Delegation of performance, either in conjunction with an assignment or otherwise, is provided for by subsection
(1) where no substantial reason can be shown as to why the delegated performance will not be as satisfactory as
personal performance.
3. Under subsection (2) rights which are no longer executory such as a right to damages for breach or a right to
payment of an "account" as defined in the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9) may be assigned although the
agreement prohibits assignment. In such cases no question of delegation of any performance is involved. The
assignment of a "contract right" as defined in the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9) is not covered by this
subsection.
4. The nature of the contract or the circumstances of the case, however, may bar assignment of the contract even
where delegation of performance is not involved. This Article and this section are intended to clarify this problem,
particularly in cases dealing with output requirement and exclusive dealing contracts. In the first place the section
on requirements and exclusive dealing removes from the construction of the original contract most of the "personal
discretion" element by substituting the reasonably objective standard of good faith operation of the plant or
business to be supplied. Secondly, the section on insecurity and assurances, which is specifically referred to in
subsection (5) of this section, frees the other party from the doubts and uncertainty which may afflict him under an
assignment of the character in question by permitting him to demand adequate assurance of due performance
without which he may suspend his own performance. Subsection (5) is not in any way intended to limit the effect of
the section on insecurity and assurances and the word "performance" includes the giving of orders under a
requirements contract. Of course, in any case where a material personal discretion is sought to be transferred,
effective assignment is barred by subsection (2).
5. Subsection (4) lays down a general rule of construction distinguishing between a normal commercial assignment,
which substitutes the assignee for the assignor both as to rights and duties, and a financing assignment in which
only the assignor's rights are transferred.
This Article takes no position on the possibility of extending some recognition or power to the original parties to
work out normal commercial readjustments of the contract in the case of financing assignments even after the
original obligor has been notified of the assignment. This question is dealt with in the Article on Secured
Transactions (Article 9).
6. Subsection (5) recognizes that the non-assigning original party has a stake in the reliability of the person with
whom he has closed the original contract, and is, therefore, entitled to due assurance that any delegated
performance will be properly forthcoming.
7. This section is not intended as a complete statement of the law of delegation and assignment but is limited to
clarifying a few points doubtful under the case law. Particularly, neither this section nor this Article touches directly
on such questions as the need or effect of notice of the assignment, the rights of successive assignees, or any
question of the form of an assignment, either as between the parties or as against any third parties. Some of these
questions are dealt with in Article 9.
Cross References:
Point 3: Articles 5 and 9.
Point 4: Sections 2-306 and 2-609.
Point 5: Article 9, Sections 9-317 and 9-318.
Point 7: Article 9.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
§ 2-210. Delegation of Performance; Assignment of Rights.
Page 3 of 3
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-301
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-301. General Obligations of Parties.
The obligation of the seller is to transfer and deliver and that of the buyer is to accept and pay in accordance with
the contract.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 11 and 41, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes:
This section uses the term "obligation" in contrast to the term "duty" in order to provide for the "condition" aspects of
delivery and payment insofar as they are not modified by other sections of this Article such as those on cure of
tender. It thus replaces not only the general provisions of the Uniform Sales Act on the parties' duties, but also the
general provisions of that Act on the effect of conditions. In order to determine what is "in accordance with the
contract" under this Article usage of trade, course of dealing and performance, and the general background of
circumstances must be given due consideration in conjunction with the lay meaning of the words used to define the
scope of the conditions and duties.
Cross References:
Section 1-106. See also Sections 1-205, 2-208, 2-209, 2-508 and 2-612.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-302
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-302. Unconscionable Contract or Clause.
(1) If the court as a matter of law finds the contract or any clause of the contract to have been
unconscionable at the time it was made the court may refuse to enforce the contract, or it may enforce the
remainder of the contract without the unconscionable clause, or it may so limit the application of any
unconscionable clause as to avoid any unconscionable result.
(2) When it is claimed or appears to the court that the contract or any clause thereof may be
unconscionable the parties shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to present evidence as to its
commercial setting, purpose and effect to aid the court in making the determination.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. This section is intended to make it possible for the courts to police explicitly against the contracts or clauses
which they find to be unconscionable. In the past such policing has been accomplished by adverse construction of
language, by manipulation of the rules of offer and acceptance or by determinations that the clause is contrary to
public policy or to the dominant purpose of the contract. This section is intended to allow the court to pass directly
on the unconscionability of the contract or particular clause therein and to make a conclusion of law as to its
unconscionability. The basic test is whether, in the light of the general commercial background and the commercial
needs of the particular trade or case, the clauses involved are so one-sided as to be unconscionable under the
circumstances existing at the time of the making of the contract. Subsection (2) makes it clear that it is proper for
the court to hear evidence upon these questions. The principle is one of the prevention of oppression and unfair
surprise (Cf. Campbell Soup Co. v. Wentz, 172 F.2d 80, 3d Cir. 1948) and not of disturbance of allocation of risks
because of superior bargaining power. The underlying basis of this section is illustrated by the results in cases
such as the following:
Kansas City Wholesale Grocery Co. v. Weber Packing Corporation, 93 Utah 414, 73 P.2d 1272 (1937), where a
clause limiting time for complaints was held inapplicable to latent defects in a shipment of catsup which could be
discovered only by microscopic analysis; Hardy v. General Motors Acceptance Corporation, 38 Ga.App. 463, 144
S.E. 327 (1928), holding that a disclaimer of warranty clause applied only to express warranties, thus letting in a fair
implied warranty; Andrews Bros. v. Singer & Co. (1934 CA) 1 K.B. 17, holding that where a car with substantial
mileage was delivered instead of a "new" car, a disclaimer of warranties, including those "implied," left unaffected
an "express obligation" on the description, even though the Sale of Goods Act called such an implied warranty; New
Prague Flouring Mill Co. v. G. A. Spears, 194 Iowa 417, 189 N.W. 815 (1922), holding that a clause permitting the
seller, upon the buyer's failure to supply shipping instructions, to cancel, ship, or allow delivery date to be
indefinitely postponed 30 days at a time by the inaction, does not indefinitely postpone the date of measuring
§ 2-302. Unconscionable Contract or Clause.
Page 2 of 2
damages for the buyer's breach, to the seller's advantage; and Kansas Flour Mills Co. v. Dirks, 100 Kan. 376, 164
P. 273 (1917), where under a similar clause in a rising market the court permitted the buyer to measure his
damages for non-delivery at the end of only one 30 day postponement; Green v. Arcos, Ltd. (1931 CA) 47 T.L.R.
336, where a blanket clause prohibiting rejection of shipments by the buyer was restricted to apply to shipments
where discrepancies represented merely mercantile variations; Meyer v. Packard Cleveland Motor Co., 106 Ohio
St. 328, 140 N.E. 118 (1922), in which the court held that a "waiver" of all agreements not specified did not preclude
implied warranty of fitness of a rebuilt dump truck for ordinary use as a dump truck; Austin Co. v. J. H. Tillman Co.,
104 Or. 541, 209 P. 131 (1922), where a clause limiting the buyer's remedy to return was held to be applicable only
ifthe seller had delivered a machine needed for a construction job which reasonably met the contract description;
Bekkevold v. Potts, 173 Minn. 87, 216 N.W. 790, 59 A.L.R. 1164 (1927), refusing to allow warranty of fitness for
purpose imposed by law to be negated by clause excluding all warranties "made" by the seller; Robert A. Munroe &
Co. v. Meyer (1930) 2 K.B. 312, holding that the warranty of description overrides a clause reading "with all faults
and defects" where adulterated meat not up to the contract description was delivered.
2. Under this section the court, in its discretion, may refuse to enforce the contract as a whole if it is permeated by
the unconscionability, or it may strike any single clause or group of clauses which are so tainted or which are
contrary to the essential purpose of the agreement, or it may simply limit unconscionable clauses so as to avoid
unconscionable results.
3. The present section is addressed to the court, and the decision is to be made by it. The commercial evidence
referred to in subsection (2) is for the court's consideration, not the jury's. Only the agreement which results from
the court's action on these matters is to be submitted to the general triers of the facts.
Definitional Cross Reference:
"Contract". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-303
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-303. Allocation or Division of Risks.
Where this Article allocates a risk or a burden as between the parties "unless otherwise agreed", the agreement
may not only shift the allocation but may also divide the risk or burden.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. This section is intended to make it clear that the parties may modify or allocate "unless otherwise agreed" risks or
burdens imposed by this Article as they desire, always subject, of course, to the provisions on unconscionability.
Compare Section 1-102(4).
2. The risk or burden may be divided by the express terms of the agreement or by the attending circumstances,
since under the definition of "agreement" in this Act the circumstances surrounding the transaction as well as the
express language used by the parties enter into the meaning and substance of the agreement.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 1-102, 2-302.
Point 2: Section 1-201.
Definitional Cross References:
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-304
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-304. Price Payable in Money, Goods, Realty, or Otherwise.
(1) The price can be made payable in money or otherwise. If it is payable in whole or in part in goods each
party is a seller of the goods which he is to transfer.
(2) Even though all or part of the price is payable in an interest in realty the transfer of the goods and the
seller's obligations with reference to them are subject to this Article, but not the transfer of the interest in
realty or the transferor's obligations in connection therewith.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsections (2) and (3) of Section 9, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section corrects the phrasing of the Uniform Sales Act so as to avoid misconstruction and produce greater
accuracy in commercial result. While it continues the essential intent and purpose of the Uniform Sales Act it
rejects any purely verbalistic construction in disregard of the underlying reason of the provisions.
2. Under subsection (1) the provisions of this Article are applicable to transactions where the "price" of goods is
payable in something other than money. This does not mean, however, that this whole Article applies automatically
and in its entirety simply because an agreed transfer of title to goods is not a gift. The basic purposes and reasons
of the Article must always be considered in determining the applicability of any of its provisions.
3. Subsection (2) lays down the general principle that when goods are to be exchanged for realty, the provisions of
this Article apply only to those aspects of the transaction which concern the transfer of title to goods but do not
affect the transfer of the realty since the detailed regulation of various particular contracts which fall outside the
scope of this Article is left to the courts and other legislation. However, the complexities of these situations may be
such that each must be analyzed in the light of the underlying reasons in order to determine the applicable
principles. Local statutes dealing with realty are not to be lightly disregarded or altered by language of this Article.
In contrast, this Article declares definite policies in regard to certain matters legitimately within its scope though
concerned with real property situations, and in those instances the provisions of this Article control.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 1-102.
Point 3: Sections 1-102, 1-103, 1-104 and 2-107.
Definitional Cross References:
§ 2-304. Price Payable in Money, Goods, Realty, or Otherwise.
Page 2 of 2
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Money". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-305
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-305. Open Price Term.
(1) The parties if they so intend can conclude a contract for sale even though the price is not settled. In
such a case the price is a reasonable price at the time for delivery if
(a) nothing is said as to price; or
(b) the price is left to be agreed by the parties and they fail to agree; or
(c) the price is to be fixed in terms of some agreed market or other standard as set or recorded by a
third person or agency and it is not so set or recorded.
(2) A price to be fixed by the seller or by the buyer means a price for him to fix in good faith.
(3) When a price left to be fixed otherwise than by agreement of the parties fails to be fixed through fault of
one party the other may at his option treat the contract as cancelled or himself fix a reasonable price.
(4) Where, however, the parties intend not to be bound unless the price be fixed or agreed and it is not
fixed or agreed there is no contract. In such a case the buyer must return any goods already received or if
unable so to do must pay their reasonable value at the time of delivery and the seller must return any
portion of the price paid on account.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 9 and 10, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section applies when the price term is left open on the making of an agreement which is nevertheless
intended by the parties to be a binding agreement. This Article rejects in these instances the formula that "an
agreement to agree is unenforceable" if the case falls within subsection (1) of this section, and rejects also
defeating such agreements on the ground of "indefiniteness". Instead this Article recognizes the dominant intention
of the parties to have the deal continue to be binding upon both. As to future performance, since this Article
recognizes remedies such as cover (Section 2-712), resale (Section 2-706) and specific performance (Section 2-
716) which go beyond any mere arithmetic as between contract price and market price, there is usually a
"reasonably certain basis for granting an appropriate remedy for breach" so that the contract need not fail for
indefiniteness.
2. Under some circumstances the postponement of agreement on price will mean that no deal has really been
concluded, and this is made express in the preamble of subsection (1) ("The parties if they so intend") and in
subsection (4). Whether or not this is so is, in most cases, a question to be determined by the trier of fact.
§ 2-305. Open Price Term.
Page 2 of 3
3. Subsection (2), dealing with the situation where the price is to be fixed by one party rejects the uncommercial
idea that an agreement that the seller may fix the price means that he may fix any price he may wish by the express
qualification that the price so fixed must be fixed in good faith. Good faith includes observance of reasonable
commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade if the party is a merchant. (Section 2-103). But in the normal case
a "posted price" or a future seller's or buyer's "given price," "price in effect," "market price," or the like satisfies the
good faith requirement.
4. The section recognizes that there may be cases in which a particular person's judgment is not chosen merely as
a barometer or index of a fair price but is an essential condition to the parties' intent to make any contract at all. For
example, the case where a known and trusted expert is to "value" a particular painting for which there is no market
standard differs sharply from the situation where a named expert is to determine the grade of cotton, and the
difference would support a finding that in the one the parties did not intend to make a binding agreement if that
expert were unavailable whereas in the other they did so intend. Other circumstances would of course affect the
validity of such a finding.
5. Under subsection (3), wrongful interference by one party with any agreed machinery for price fixing in the
contract may be treated by the other party as a repudiation justifying cancellation, or merely as a failure to take
cooperative action thus shifting to the aggrieved party the reasonable leeway in fixing the price.
6. Throughout the entire section, the purpose is to give effect to the agreement which has been made. That effect,
however, is always conditioned by the requirement of good faith action which is made an inherent part of all
contracts within this Act. (Section 1-203).
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-204(3), 2-706, 2-712 and 2-716.
Point 3: Section 2-103.
Point 5: Sections 2-311 and 2-610.
Point 6: Section 1-203.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Burden of establishing". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Cancellation". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Fault". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Receipt of goods". Section 2-103.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
§ 2-305. Open Price Term.
Page 3 of 3
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-306
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-306. Output, Requirements and Exclusive Dealings.
(1) A term which measures the quantity by the output of the seller or the requirements of the buyer means
such actual output or requirements as may occur in good faith, except that no quantity unreasonably
disproportionate to any stated estimate or in the absence of a stated estimate to any normal or otherwise
comparable prior output or requirements may be tendered or demanded.
(2) A lawful agreement by either the seller or the buyer for exclusive dealing in the kind of goods
concerned imposes unless otherwise agreed an obligation by the seller to use best efforts to supply the
goods and by the buyer to use best efforts to promote their sale.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) of this section, in regard to output and requirements, applies to this specific problem the general
approach of this Act which requires the reading of commercial background and intent into the language of any
agreement and demands good faith in the performance of that agreement. It applies to such contracts of
nonproducing establishments such as dealers or distributors as well as to manufacturing concerns.
2. Under this Article, a contract for output or requirements is not too indefinite since it is held to mean the actual
good faith output or requirements of the particular party. Nor does such a contract lack mutuality of obligation
since, under this section, the party who will determine quantity is required to operate his plant or conduct his
business in good faith and according to commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade so that his output or
requirements will approximate a reasonably foreseeable figure. Reasonable elasticity in the requirements is
expressly envisaged by this section and good faith variations from prior requirements are permitted even when the
variation may be such as to result in discontinuance. A shut-down by a requirements buyer for lack of orders might
be permissible when a shut-down merely to curtail losses would not. The essential test is whether the party is
acting in good faith. Similarly, a sudden expansion of the plant by which requirements are to be measured would
not be included within the scope of the contract as made but normal expansion undertaken in good faith would be
within the scope of this section. One of the factors in an expansion situation would be whether the market price had
risen greatly in a case in which the requirements contract contained a fixed price. Reasonable variation of an
extreme sort is exemplified in Southwest Natural Gas Co. v. Oklahoma Portland Cement Co., 102 F.2d 630
(C.C.A.10, 1939). This Article takes no position as to whether a requirements contract is a provable claim in
bankruptcy.
3. If an estimate of output or requirements is included in the agreement, no quantity unreasonably disproportionate
to it may be tendered or demanded. Any minimum or maximum set by the agreement shows a clear limit on the
§ 2-306. Output, Requirements and Exclusive Dealings.
Page 2 of 2
intended elasticity. In similar fashion, the agreed estimate is to be regarded as a center around which the parties
intend the variation to occur.
4. When an enterprise is sold, the question may arise whether the buyer is bound by an existing output or
requirements contract. That question is outside the scope of this Article, and is to be determined on other principles
of law. Assuming that the contract continues, the output or requirements in the hands of the new owner continue to
be measured by the actual good faith output or requirements under the normal operation of the enterprise prior to
sale. The sale itself is not grounds for sudden expansion or decrease.
5. Subsection (2), on exclusive dealing, makes explicit the commercial rule embodied in this Act under which the
parties to such contracts are held to have impliedly, even when not expressly, bound themselves to use reasonable
diligence as well as good faith in their performance of the contract. Under such contracts the exclusive agent is
required, although no express commitment has been made, to use reasonable effort and due diligence in the
expansion of the market or the promotion of the product, as the case may be. The principal is expected under such
a contract to refrain from supplying any other dealer or agent within the exclusive territory. An exclusive dealing
agreement brings into play all of the good faith aspects of the output and requirement problems of subsection (1). It
also raises questions of insecurity and right to adequate assurance under this Article.
Cross References:
Point 4: Section 2-210.
Point 5: Sections 1-203 and 2-609.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Good faith". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-307
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-307. Delivery in Single Lot or Several Lots.
Unless otherwise agreed all goods called for by a contract for sale must be tendered in a single delivery and
payment is due only on such tender but where the circumstances give either party the right to make or demand
delivery in lots the price if it can be apportioned may be demanded for each lot.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 45(1), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten and expanded.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section applies where the parties have not specifically agreed whether delivery and payment are to be by
lots and generally continues the essential intent of original Act, Section 45(1) by assuming that the parties intended
delivery to be in a single lot.
2. Where the actual agreement or the circumstances do not indicate otherwise, delivery in lots is not permitted
under this section and the buyer is properly entitled to reject for a deficiency in the tender, subject to any privilege in
the seller to cure the tender.
3. The "but" clause of this section goes to the case in which it is not commercially feasible to deliver or to receive
the goods in a single lot as for example, where a contract calls for the shipment of ten carloads of coal and only
three cars are available at a given time. Similarly, in a contract involving brick necessary to build a building the
buyer's storage space may be limited so that it would be impossible to receive the entire amount of brick at once, or
it may be necessary to assemble the goods as in the case of cattle on the range, or to mine them.
In such cases, a partial delivery is not subject to rejection for the defect in quantity alone, if the circumstances do
not indicate a repudiation or default by the seller as to the expected balance or do not give the buyer ground for
suspending his performance because of insecurity under the provisions of Section 2-609. However, in such cases
the undelivered balance of goods under the contract must be forthcoming within a reasonable time and in a
reasonable manner according to the policy of Section 2-503 on manner of tender of delivery. This is reinforced by
the express provisions of Section 2-608 that if a lot has been accepted on the reasonable assumption that its
nonconformity will be cured, the acceptance may be revoked if the cure does not seasonably occur. The section
rejects the rule of Kelly Construction Co. v. Hackensack Brick Co., 91 N.J.L. 585, 103 A. 417, 2 A.L.R. 685 (1918)
and approves the result in Lynn M. Ranger, Inc. v. Gildersleeve, 106 Conn. 372, 138 A. 142 (1927) in which a
contract was made for six carloads of coal then rolling from the mines and consigned to the seller but the seller
agreed to divert the carloads to the buyer as soon as the car numbers became known to him. He arranged a
diversion of two cars and then notified the buyer who then repudiated the contract. The seller was held to be
§ 2-307. Delivery in Single Lot or Several Lots.
Page 2 of 2
entitled to his full remedy for the two cars diverted because simultaneous delivery of all of the cars was not
contemplated by either party.
4. Where the circumstances indicate that a party has a right to delivery in lots, the price may be demanded for each
lot if it is apportionable.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 1-201.
Point 2: Sections 2-508 and 2-601.
Point 3: Sections 2-503, 2-608 and 2-609.
Definitional Cross References:
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Lot". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-308
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-308. Absence of Specified Place for Delivery.
Unless otherwise agreed
(a) the place for delivery of goods is the seller's place of business or if he has none his residence; but
(b) in a contract for sale of identified goods which to the knowledge of the parties at the time of
contracting are in some other place, that place is the place for their delivery; and
(c) documents of title may be delivered through customary banking channels.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Paragraphs (a) and (b)-Section 43(1), Uniform Sales Act; Paragraph (c)-none.
Changes: Slight modification in language.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. Paragraphs (a) and (b) provide for those noncommercial sales and for those occasional commercial sales where
no place or means of delivery has been agreed upon by the parties. Where delivery by carrier is "required or
authorized by the agreement", the seller's duties as to delivery of the goods are governed not by this section but by
Section 2-504.
2. Under paragraph (b) when the identified goods contracted for are known to both parties to be in some location
other than the seller's place of business or residence, the parties are presumed to have intended that place to be
the place of delivery. This paragraph also applies (unless, as would be normal, the circumstances show that
delivery by way of documents is intended) to a bulk of goods in the possession of a bailee. In such a case,
however, the seller has the additional obligation to procure the acknowledgment by the bailee of the buyer's right to
possession.
3. Where "customary banking channels" call only for due notification by the banker that the documents are
available, leaving the buyer himself to see to the physical receipt of the goods, tender at the buyer's address is not
required under paragraph (c). But that paragraph merely eliminates the possibility of a default by the seller if
"customary banking channels" have been properly used in giving notice to the buyer. Where the bank has
purchased a draft accompanied by or associated with documents or has undertaken its collection on behalf of the
seller, Part 5 of Article 4 spells out its duties and relations to its customer. Where the documents move forward
under a letter of credit the Article on Letters of Credit spells out the duties and relations between the bank, the seller
and the buyer. Delivery in relationship to either tangible or electronic documents of title is defined in Article 1,
Section 1-201.
§ 2-308. Absence of Specified Place for Delivery.
Page 2 of 2
4. The rules of this section apply only "unless otherwise agreed." The surrounding circumstances, usage of trade,
course of dealing and course of performance, as well as the express language of the parties, may constitute an
"otherwise agreement".
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-504 and 2-505.
Point 2: Section 2-503.
Point 3: Section 2-512, Articles 4, Part 5, and 5.
Definitional Cross References:
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-309
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-309. Absence of Specific Time Provisions; Notice of Termination.
(1) The time for shipment or delivery or any other action under a contract if not provided in this Article or
agreed upon shall be a reasonable time.
(2) Where the contract provides for successive performances but is indefinite in duration it is valid for a
reasonable time but unless otherwise agreed may be terminated at any time by either party.
(3) Termination of a contract by one party except on the happening of an agreed event requires that
reasonable notification be received by the other party and an agreement dispensing with notification is
invalid if its operation would be unconscionable.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsection (1)-see Sections 43(2), 45(2), 47(1) and 48, Uniform Sales Act, for
policy continued under this Article; Subsection (2)-none; Subsection (3)-none.
Changes: Completely different in scope.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. Subsection (1) requires that all actions taken under a sales contract must be taken within a reasonable time
where no time has been agreed upon. The reasonable time under this provision turns on the criteria as to
"reasonable time" and on good faith and commercial standards set forth in Sections 1-203, 1-204 and 2-103. It thus
depends upon what constitutes acceptable commercial conduct in view of the nature, purpose and circumstances of
the action to be taken. Agreement as to a definite time, however, may be found in a term implied from the
contractual circumstances, usage of trade or course of dealing or performance as well as in an express term. Such
cases fall outside of this subsection since in them the time for action is "agreed" by usage.
2. The time for payment, where not agreed upon, is related to the time for delivery; the particular problems which
arise in connection with determining the appropriate time of payment and the time for any inspection before
payment which is both allowed by law and demanded by the buyer are covered in Section 2-513.
3. The facts in regard to shipment and delivery differ so widely as to make detailed provision for them in the text of
this Article impracticable. The applicable principles, however, make it clear that surprise is to be avoided, good faith
judgment is to be protected, and notice or negotiation to reduce the uncertainty to certainty is to be favored.
4. When the time for delivery is left open, unreasonably early offers of or demands for delivery are intended to be
read under this Article as expressions of desire or intention, requesting the assent or acquiescence of the other
party, not as final positions which may amount without more to breach or to create breach by the other side. See
Sections 2-207 and 2-609.
§ 2-309. Absence of Specific Time Provisions; Notice of Termination.
Page 2 of 3
5. The obligation of good faith under this Act requires reasonable notification before a contract may be treated as
breached because a reasonable time for delivery or demand has expired. This operates both in the case of a
contract originally indefinite as to time and of one subsequently made indefinite by waiver.
When both parties let an originally reasonable time go by in silence, the course of conduct under the contract may
be viewed as enlarging the reasonable time for tender or demand of performance. The contract may be terminated
by abandonment.
6. Parties to a contract are not required in giving reasonable notification to fix, at peril of breach, a time which is in
fact reasonable in the unforeseeable judgment of a later trier of fact. Effective communication of a proposed time
limit calls for a response, so that failure to reply will make out acquiescence. Where objection is made, however, or
if the demand is merely for information as to when goods will be delivered or will be ordered out, demand for
assurances on the ground of insecurity may be made under this Article pending further negotiations. Only when a
party insists on undue delay or on rejection of the other party's reasonable proposal is there a question of flat
breach under the present section.
7. Subsection (2) applies a commercially reasonable view to resolve the conflict which has arisen in the cases as to
contracts of indefinite duration. The "reasonable time" of duration appropriate to a given arrangement is limited by
the circumstances. When the arrangement has been carried on by the parties over the years, the "reasonable time"
can continue indefinitely and the contract will not terminate until notice.
8. Subsection (3) recognizes that the application of principles of good faith and sound commercial practice normally
call for such notification of the termination of a going contract relationship as will give the other party reasonable
time to seek a substitute arrangement. An agreement dispensing with notification or limiting the time for the
seeking of a substitute arrangement is, of course, valid under this subsection unless the results of putting it into
operation would be the creation of an unconscionable state of affairs.
9. Justifiable cancellation for breach is a remedy for breach and is not the kind of termination covered by the
present subsection.
10. The requirement of notification is dispensed with where the contract provides for termination on the happening
of an "agreed event." "Event" is a term chosen here to contrast with "option" or the like.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 1-203, 1-204 and 2-103.
Point 2: Sections 2-320, 2-321, 2-504, and 2-511 through 2-514.
Point 5: Section 1-203.
Point 6: Section 2-609.
Point 7: Section 2-204.
Point 9: Sections 2-106, 2-318, 2-610 and 2-703.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
§ 2-309. Absence of Specific Time Provisions; Notice of Termination.
Page 3 of 3
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Termination". Section 2-106.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-310
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-310. Open Time for Payment or Running of Credit; Authority to Ship
Under Reservation.
Unless otherwise agreed
(a) payment is due at the time and place at which the buyer is to receive the goods even though the
place of shipment is the place of delivery; and
(b) if the seller is authorized to send the goods he may ship them under reservation, and may tender
the documents of title, but the buyer may inspect the goods after their arrival before payment is due
unless such inspection is inconsistent with the terms of the contract ( Section 2-513); and
(c) if delivery is authorized and made by way of documents of title otherwise than by subsection (b)
then payment is due regardless of where the goods are to be received (i) at the time and place at which
the buyer is to receive delivery of the tangible documents or (ii) at the time the buyer is to receive
delivery of the electronic documents and at the seller's place of business or if none, the seller's
residence; and
(d) where the seller is required or authorized to ship the goods on credit the credit period runs from the
time of shipment but post-dating the invoice or delaying its dispatch will correspondingly delay the
starting of the credit period.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 42 and 47(2), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten in this and other sections.
Purposes of Changes: This section is drawn to reflect modern business methods of dealing at a distance rather
than face to face. Thus:
1. Paragraph (a) provides that payment is due at the time and place "the buyer is to receive the goods" rather than
at the point of delivery except in documentary shipment cases (paragraph (c) ). This grants an opportunity for the
exercise by the buyer of his preliminary right to inspection before paying even though under the delivery term the
risk of loss may have previously passed to him or the running of the credit period has already started.
2. Paragraph (b) while providing for inspection by the buyer before he pays, protects the seller. He is not required
to give up possession of the goods until he has received payment, where no credit has been contemplated by the
parties. The seller may collect through a bank by a sight draft against an order bill of lading "hold until arrival;
inspection allowed." The obligations of the bank under such a provision are set forth in Part 5 of Article 4. Under
subsection (c), in the absence of a credit term, the seller is permitted to ship under reservation and if he does
payment is then due where and when the buyer is to receive delivery of the tangible documents of title. In the case
§ 2-310. Open Time for Payment or Running of Credit; Authority to Ship Under Reservation.
Page 2 of 2
of an electronic document of title, payment is due when the buyer is to receive delivery of the electronic document
and at the seller's place of business, or if none, the seller's residence. Delivery as to documents of title is stated in
Article 1, Section 1-201.
3. Unless otherwise agreed, the place for the delivery of the documents and payment is the buyer's city but the time
for payment is only after arrival of the goods, since under paragraph (b), and Sections 2-512 and 2-513 the buyer is
under no duty to pay prior to inspection. Tender of a document of title requires that the seller be ready, willing and
able to transfer possession of a tangible document of title or control of an electronic document of title to the buyer.
4. Where the mode of shipment is such that goods must be unloaded immediately upon arrival, too rapidly to permit
adequate inspection before receipt, the seller must be guided by the provisions of this Article on inspection which
provide that if the seller wishes to demand payment before inspection, he must put an appropriate term into the
contract. Even requiring payment against documents will not of itself have this desired result if the documents are
to be held until the arrival of the goods. But under (b) and (c) if the terms are C.I.F., C.O.D., or cash against
documents payment may be due before inspection.
5. Paragraph (d) states the common commercial understanding that an agreed credit period runs from the time of
shipment or from that dating of the invoice which is commonly recognized as a representation of the time of
shipment. The provision concerning any delay in sending forth the invoice is included because such conduct
results in depriving the buyer of his full notice and warning as to when he must be prepared to pay.
Cross References:
Generally: Part 5.
Point 1: Section 2-509.
Point 2: Sections 2-505, 2-511, 2-512, 2-513 and Article 4.
Point 3: Sections 2-308(b), 2-512 and 2-513.
Point 4: Section 2-513(3)(b).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Receipt of goods". Section 2-103.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Send". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-311
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-311. Options and Cooperation Respecting Performance.
(1) An agreement for sale which is otherwise sufficiently definite (subsection (3) of Section 2-204) to be a
contract is not made invalid by the fact that it leaves particulars of performance to be specified by one of the
parties. Any such specification must be made in good faith and within limits set by commercial
reasonableness.
(2) Unless otherwise agreed specifications relating to assortment of the goods are at the buyer's option
and except as otherwise provided in subsections (1)(c) and (3) of Section 2-319 specifications or
arrangements relating to shipment are at the seller's option.
(3) Where such specification would materially affect the other party's performance but is not seasonably
made or where one party's cooperation is necessary to the agreed performance of the other but is not
seasonably forthcoming, the other party in addition to all other remedies
(a) is excused for any resulting delay in his own performance; and
(b) may also either proceed to perform in any reasonable manner or after the time for a material part of
his own performance treat the failure to specify or to cooperate as a breach by failure to deliver or
accept the goods.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) permits the parties to leave certain detailed particulars of performance to be filled in by either of
them without running the risk of having the contract invalidated for indefiniteness. The party to whom the
agreement gives power to specify the missing details is required to exercise good faith and to act in accordance
with commercial standards so that there is no surprise and the range of permissible variation is limited by what is
commercially reasonable. The "agreement" which permits one party so to specify may be found as well in a course
of dealing, usage of trade, or implication from circumstances as in explicit language used by the parties.
2. Options as to assortment of goods or shipping arrangements are specifically reserved to the buyer and seller
respectively under subsection (2) where no other arrangement has been made. This section rejects the test which
mechanically and without regard to usage or the purpose of the option gave the option to the party "first under a
duty to move" and applies instead a standard commercial interpretation to these circumstances. The "unless
otherwise agreed" provision of this subsection covers not only express terms but the background and
circumstances which enter into the agreement.
3. Subsection (3) applies when the exercise of an option or cooperation by one party is necessary to or materially
affects the other party's performance, but it is not seasonably forthcoming; the subsection relieves the other party
§ 2-311. Options and Cooperation Respecting Performance.
Page 2 of 2
from the necessity for performance or excuses his delay in performance as the case may be. The contract-keeping
party may at his option under this subsection proceed to perform in any commercially reasonable manner rather
than wait. In addition to the special remedies provided, this subsection also reserves "all other remedies". The
remedy of particular importance in this connection is that provided for insecurity. Request may also be made
pursuant to the obligation of good faith for a reasonable indication of the time and manner of performance for which
a party is to hold himself ready.
4. The remedy provided in subsection (3) is one which does not operate in the situation which falls within the scope
of Section 2-614 on substituted performance. Where the failure to cooperate results from circumstances set forth in
that Section, the other party is under a duty to proffer or demand (as the case may be) substitute performance as a
condition to claiming rights against the noncooperating party.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 1-201, 2-204 and 1-203.
Point 3: Sections 1-203 and 2-609.
Point 4: Section 2-614.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-312
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-312. Warranty of Title and Against Infringement; Buyer's Obligation
Against Infringement.
(1) Subject to subsection (2) there is in a contract for sale a warranty by the seller that
(a) the title conveyed shall be good, and its transfer rightful; and
(b) the goods shall be delivered free from any security interest or other lien or encumbrance of which
the buyer at the time of contracting has no knowledge.
(2) A warranty under subsection (1) will be excluded or modified only by specific language or by
circumstances which give the buyer reason to know that the person selling does not claim title in himself or
that he is purporting to sell only such right or title as he or a third person may have.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed a seller who is a merchant regularly dealing in goods of the kind warrants that
the goods shall be delivered free of the rightful claim of any third person by way of infringement or the like
but a buyer who furnishes specifications to the seller must hold the seller harmless against any such claim
which arises out of compliance with the specifications.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 13, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten, the provisions concerning infringement being new.
Purposes of Changes:
1. Subsection (1) makes provision for a buyer's basic needs in respect to a title which he in good faith expects to
acquire by his purchase, namely, that he receive a good, clean title transferred to him also in a rightful manner so
that he will not be exposed to a lawsuit in order to protect it.
The warranty extends to a buyer whether or not the seller was in possession of the goods at the time the sale or
contract to sell was made.
The warranty of quiet possession is abolished. Disturbance of quiet possession, although not mentioned
specifically, is one way, among many, in which the breach of the warranty of title may be established.
The "knowledge" referred to in subsection 1(b) is actual knowledge as distinct from notice.
2. The provisions of this Article requiring notification to the seller within a reasonable time after the buyer's
discovery of a breach apply to notice of a breach of the warranty of title, where the seller's breach was innocent.
However, if the seller's breach was in bad faith he cannot be permitted to claim that he has been misled or
prejudiced by the delay in giving notice. In such case the "reasonable" time for notice should receive a very liberal
§ 2-312. Warranty of Title and Against Infringement; Buyer's Obligation Against Infringement.
Page 2 of 3
interpretation. Whether the breach by the seller is in good or bad faith Section 2-725 provides that the cause of
action accrues when the breach occurs. Under the provisions of that section the breach of the warranty of good title
occurs when tender of delivery is made since the warranty is not one which extends to "future performance of the
goods."
3. When the goods are part of the seller's normal stock and are sold in his normal course of business, it is his duty
to see that no claim of infringement of a patent or trademark by a third party will mar the buyer's title. A sale by a
person other than a dealer, however, raises no implication in its circumstances of such a warranty. Nor is there
such an implication when the buyer orders goods to be assembled, prepared or manufactured on his own
specifications. If, in such a case, the resulting product infringes a patent or trademark, the liability will run from
buyer to seller. There is, under such circumstances, a tacit representation on the part of the buyer that the seller
will be safe in manufacturing according to the specifications, and the buyer is under an obligation in good faith to
indemnify him for any loss suffered.
4. This section rejects the cases which recognize the principle that infringements violate the warranty of title but
deny the buyer a remedy unless he has been expressly prevented from using the goods. Under this Article
"eviction" is not a necessary condition to the buyer's remedy since the buyer's remedy arises immediately upon
receipt of notice of infringement; it is merely one way of establishing the fact of breach.
5. Subsection (2) recognizes that sales by sheriffs, executors, foreclosing lienors and persons similarly situated are
so out of the ordinary commercial course that their peculiar character is immediately apparent to the buyer and
therefore no personal obligation is imposed upon the seller who is purporting to sell only an unknown or limited
right. This subsection does not touch upon and leaves open all questions of restitution arising in such cases, when
a unique article so sold is reclaimed by a third party as the rightful owner.
6. The warranty of subsection (1) is not designated as an "implied" warranty, and hence is not subject to Section 2-
316(3). Disclaimer of the warranty of title is governed instead by subsection (2), which requires either specific
language or the described circumstances.
5. Subsection (2) recognizes that sales by sheriffs, executors, certain foreclosing lienors and persons similarly
situated may be so out of the ordinary commercial course that their peculiar character is immediately apparent to
the buyer and therefore no personal obligation is imposed upon the seller who is purporting to sell only an unknown
or limited right. This subsection does not touch upon and leaves open all questions of restitution arising in such
cases, when a unique article so sold is reclaimed by a third party as the rightful owner.
Foreclosure sales under Article 9 are another matter. Section 9-610 provides that a disposition of collateral under
that section includes warranties such as those imposed by this section on a voluntary disposition of property of the
kind involved. Consequently, unless properly excluded under subsection (2) or under the special provisions for
exclusion in Section 9-610, a disposition under Section 9-610 of collateral consisting of goods includes the
warranties imposed by subsection (1) and, if applicable, subsection (3).
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-403.
Point 2: Sections 2-607 and 2-725.
Point 3: Section 1-203.
Point 4: Sections 2-609 and 2-725.
Point 6: Section 2-316.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
§ 2-312. Warranty of Title and Against Infringement; Buyer's Obligation Against Infringement.
Page 3 of 3
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Right". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-313
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-313. Express Warranties by Affirmation, Promise, Description, Sample.
(1) Express warranties by the seller are created as follows:
(a) Any affirmation of fact or promise made by the seller to the buyer which relates to the goods and
becomes part of the basis of the bargain creates an express warranty that the goods shall conform to
the affirmation or promise.
(b) Any description of the goods which is made part of the basis of the bargain creates an express
warranty that the goods shall conform to the description.
(c) Any sample or model which is made part of the basis of the bargain creates an express warranty
that the whole of the goods shall conform to the sample or model.
(2) It is not necessary to the creation of an express warranty that the seller use formal words such as
"warrant" or "guarantee" or that he have a specific intention to make a warranty, but an affirmation merely
of the value of the goods or a statement purporting to be merely the seller's opinion or commendation of the
goods does not create a warranty.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 12, 14 and 16, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To consolidate and systematize basic principles with the result that:
1. "Express" warranties rest on "dickered" aspects of the individual bargain, and go so clearly to the essence of that
bargain that words of disclaimer in a form are repugnant to the basic dickered terms. "Implied" warranties rest so
clearly on a common factual situation or set of conditions that no particular language or action is necessary to
evidence them and they will arise in such a situation unless unmistakably negated.
This section reverts to the older case law insofar as the warranties of description and sample are designated
"express" rather than "implied".
2. Although this section is limited in its scope and direct purpose to warranties made by the seller to the buyer as
part of a contract for sale, the warranty sections of this Article are not designed in any way to disturb those lines of
case law growth which have recognized that warranties need not be confined either to sales contracts or to the
direct parties to such a contract. They may arise in other appropriate circumstances such as in the case of
bailments for hire, whether such bailment is itself the main contract or is merely a supplying of containers under a
contract for the sale of their contents. The provisions of Section 2-318 on third party beneficiaries expressly
recognize this case law development within one particular area. Beyond that, the matter is left to the case law with
the intention that the policies of this Act may offer useful guidance in dealing with further cases as they arise.
§ 2-313. Express Warranties by Affirmation, Promise, Description, Sample.
Page 2 of 3
3. The present section deals with affirmations of fact by the seller, descriptions of the goods or exhibitions of
samples, exactly as any other part of a negotiation which ends in a contract is dealt with. No specific intention to
make a warranty is necessary if any of these factors is made part of the basis of the bargain. In actual practice
affirmations of fact made by the seller about the goods during a bargain are regarded as part of the description of
those goods; hence no particular reliance on such statements need be shown in order to weave them into the fabric
of the agreement. Rather, any fact which is to take such affirmations, once made, out of the agreement requires
clear affirmative proof. The issue normally is one of fact.
4. In view of the principle that the whole purpose of the law of warranty is to determine what it is that the seller has
in essence agreed to sell, the policy is adopted of those cases which refuse except in unusual circumstances to
recognize a material deletion of the seller's obligation. Thus, a contract is normally a contract for a sale of
something describable and described. A clause generally disclaiming "all warranties, express or implied" cannot
reduce the seller's obligation with respect to such description and therefore cannot be given literal effect under
Section 2-316.
This is not intended to mean that the parties, if they consciously desire, cannot make their own bargain as they
wish. But in determining what they have agreed upon good faith is a factor and consideration should be given to
the fact that the probability is small that a real price is intended to be exchanged for a pseudo-obligation.
5. Paragraph (1)(b) makes specific some of the principles set forth above when a description of the goods is given
by the seller.
A description need not be by words. Technical specifications, blueprints and the like can afford more exact
description than mere language and if made part of the basis of the bargain goods must conform with them. Past
deliveries may set the description of quality, either expressly or impliedly by course of dealing. Of course, all
descriptions by merchants must be read against the applicable trade usages with the general rules as to
merchantability resolving any doubts.
6. The basic situation as to statements affecting the true essence of the bargain is no different when a sample or
model is involved in the transaction. This section includes both a "sample" actually drawn from the bulk of goods
which is the subject matter of the sale, and a "model" which is offered for inspection when the subject matter is not
at hand and which has not been drawn from the bulk of the goods.
Although the underlying principles are unchanged, the facts are often ambiguous when something is shown as
illustrative, rather than as a straight sample. In general, the presumption is that any sample or model just as any
affirmation of fact is intended to become a basis of the bargain. But there is no escape from the question of fact.
When the seller exhibits a sample purporting to be drawn from an existing bulk, good faith of course requires that
the sample be fairly drawn. But in mercantile experience the mere exhibition of a "sample" does not of itself show
whether it is merely intended to "suggest" or to "be" the character of the subject-matter of the contract. The
question is whether the seller has so acted with reference to the sample as to make him responsible that the whole
shall have at least the values shown by it. The circumstances aid in answering this question. If the sample has
been drawn from an existing bulk, it must be regarded as describing values of the goods contracted for unless it is
accompanied by an unmistakable denial of such responsibility. If, on the other hand, a model of merchandise not
on hand is offered, the mercantile presumption that it has become a literal description of the subject matter is not so
strong, and particularly so if modification on the buyer's initiative impairs any feature of the model.
7. The precise time when words of description or affirmation are made or samples are shown is not material. The
sole question is whether the language or samples or models are fairly to be regarded as part of the contract. If
language is used after the closing of the deal (as when the buyer when taking delivery asks and receives an
additional assurance), the warranty becomes a modification, and need not be supported by consideration if it is
otherwise reasonable and in order (Section 2-209).
8. Concerning affirmations of value or a seller's opinion or commendation under subsection (2), the basic question
remains the same: What statements of the seller have in the circumstances and in objective judgment become part
§ 2-313. Express Warranties by Affirmation, Promise, Description, Sample.
Page 3 of 3
of the basis of the bargain? As indicated above, all of the statements of the seller do so unless good reason is
shown to the contrary. The provisions of subsection (2) are included, however, since common experience discloses
that some statements or predictions cannot fairly be viewed as entering into the bargain. Even as to false
statements of value, however, the possibility is left open that a remedy may be provided by the law relating to fraud
or misrepresentation.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-316.
Point 2: Sections 1-102(3) and 2-318.
Point 3: Section 2-316(2)(b).
Point 4: Section 2-316.
Point 5: Sections 1-205(4) and 2-314.
Point 6: Section 2-316.
Point 7: Section 2-209.
Point 8: Section 1-103.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conforming". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-314
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-314. Implied Warranty: Merchantability; Usage of Trade.
(1) Unless excluded or modified ( Section 2-316), a warranty that the goods shall be merchantable is
implied in a contract for their sale if the seller is a merchant with respect to goods of that kind. Under this
section the serving for value of food or drink to be consumed either on the premises or elsewhere is a sale.
(2) Goods to be merchantable must be at least such as
(a) pass without objection in the trade under the contract description; and
(b) in the case of fungible goods, are of fair average quality within the description; and
(c) are fit for the ordinary purposes for which such goods are used; and
(d) run, within the variations permitted by the agreement, of even kind, quality and quantity within each
unit and among all units involved; and
(e) are adequately contained, packaged, and labeled as the agreement may require; and
(f) conform to the promise or affirmations of fact made on the container or label if any.
(3) Unless excluded or modified ( Section 2-316) other implied warranties may arise from course of dealing
or usage of trade.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 15(2), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: This section, drawn in view of the steadily developing case law on the subject, is intended to
make it clear that:
1. The seller's obligation applies to present sales as well as to contracts to sell subject to the effects of any
examination of specific goods. (Subsection (2) of Section 2-316). Also, the warranty of merchantability applies to
sales for use as well as to sales for resale.
2. The question when the warranty is imposed turns basically on the meaning of the terms of the agreement as
recognized in the trade. Goods delivered under an agreement made by a merchant in a given line of trade must be
of a quality comparable to that generally acceptable in that line of trade under the description or other designation of
the goods used in the agreement. The responsibility imposed rests on any merchant-seller, and the absence of the
words "grower or manufacturer or not" which appeared in Section 15(2) of the Uniform Sales Act does not restrict
the applicability of this section.
§ 2-314. Implied Warranty: Merchantability; Usage of Trade.
Page 2 of 3
3. A specific designation of goods by the buyer does not exclude the seller's obligation that they be fit for the
general purposes appropriate to such goods. A contract for the sale of second-hand goods, however, involves only
such obligation as is appropriate to such goods for that is their contract description. A person making an isolated
sale of goods is not a "merchant" within the meaning of the full scope of this section and, thus, no warranty of
merchantability would apply. His knowledge of any defects not apparent on inspection would, however, without
need for express agreement and in keeping with the underlying reason of the present section and the provisions on
good faith, impose an obligation that known material but hidden defects be fully disclosed.
4. Although a seller may not be a "merchant" as to the goods in question, if he states generally that they are
"guaranteed" the provisions of this section may furnish a guide to the content of the resulting express warranty.
This has particular significance in the case of second-hand sales, and has further significance in limiting the effect
of fine-print disclaimer clauses where their effect would be inconsistent with large-print assertions of "guarantee".
5. The second sentence of subsection (1) covers the warranty with respect to food and drink. Serving food or drink
for value is a sale, whether to be consumed on the premises or elsewhere. Cases to the contrary are rejected. The
principal warranty is that stated in subsections (1) and (2)(c) of this section.
6. Subsection (2) does not purport to exhaust the meaning of "merchantable" nor to negate any of its attributes not
specifically mentioned in the text of the statute, but arising by usage of trade or through case law. The language
used is "must be at least such as ...," and the intention is to leave open other possible attributes of merchantability.
7. Paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (2) are to be read together. Both refer, as indicated above, to the standards
of that line of the trade which fits the transaction and the seller's business. "Fair average" is a term directly
appropriate to agricultural bulk products and means goods centering around the middle belt of quality, not the least
or the worst that can be understood in the particular trade by the designation, but such as can pass "without
objection." Of course a fair percentage of the least is permissible but the goods are not "fair average" if they are all
of the least or worst quality possible under the description. In cases of doubt as to what quality is intended, the
price at which a merchant closes a contract is an excellent index of the nature and scope of his obligation under the
present section.
8. Fitness for the ordinary purposes for which goods of the type are used is a fundamental concept of the present
section and is covered in paragraph (c). As stated above, merchantability is also a part of the obligation owing to
the purchaser for use. Correspondingly, protection, under this aspect of the warranty, of the person buying for
resale to the ultimate consumer is equally necessary, and merchantable goods must therefore be "honestly"
resalable in the normal course of business because they are what they purport to be.
9. Paragraph (d) on evenness of kind, quality and quantity follows case law. But precautionary language has been
added as a remainder of the frequent usages of trade which permit substantial variations both with and without an
allowance or an obligation to replace the varying units.
10. Paragraph (e) applies only where the nature of the goods and of the transaction require a certain type of
container, package or label. Paragraph (f) applies, on the other hand, wherever there is a label or container on
which representations are made, even though the original contract, either by express terms or usage of trade, may
not have required either the labelling or the representation. This follows from the general obligation of good faith
which requires that a buyer should not be placed in the position of reselling or using goods delivered under false
representations appearing on the package or container. No problem of extra consideration arises in this connection
since, under this Article, an obligation is imposed by the original contract not to deliver mislabeled articles, and the
obligation is imposed where mercantile good faith so requires and without reference to the doctrine of
consideration.
11. Exclusion or modification of the warranty of merchantability, or of any part of it, is dealt with in the section to
which the text of the present section makes explicit precautionary references. That section must be read with
particular reference to its subsection (4) on limitation of remedies. The warranty of merchantability, wherever it is
§ 2-314. Implied Warranty: Merchantability; Usage of Trade.
Page 3 of 3
normal, is so commonly taken for granted that its exclusion from the contract is a matter threatening surprise and
therefore requiring special precaution.
12. Subsection (3) is to make explicit that usage of trade and course of dealing can create warranties and that they
are implied rather than express warranties and thus subject to exclusion or modification under Section 2-316. A
typical instance would be the obligation to provide pedigree papers to evidence conformity of the animal to the
contract in the case of a pedigreed dog or blooded bull.
13. In an action based on breach of warranty, it is of course necessary to show not only the existence of the
warranty but the fact that the warranty was broken and that the breach of the warranty was the proximate cause of
the loss sustained. In such an action an affirmative showing by the seller that the loss resulted from some action or
event following his own delivery of the goods can operate as a defense. Equally, evidence indicating that the seller
exercised care in the manufacture, processing or selection of the goods is relevant to the issue of whether the
warranty was in fact broken. Action by the buyer following an examination of the goods which ought to have
indicated the defect complained of can be shown as matter bearing on whether the breach itself was the cause of
the injury.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-316.
Point 3: Sections 1-203 and 2-104.
Point 5: Section 2-315.
Point 11: Section 2-316.
Point 12: Sections 1-201, 1-205 and 2-316.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Merchant". Section 2-104.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-315
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-315. Implied Warranty: Fitness for Particular Purpose.
Where the seller at the time of contracting has reason to know any particular purpose for which the goods are
required and that the buyer is relying on the seller's skill or judgment to select or furnish suitable goods, there is
unless excluded or modified under the next section an implied warranty that the goods shall be fit for such purpose.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 15(1), (4), (5), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes:
1. Whether or not this warranty arises in any individual case is basically a question of fact to be determined by the
circumstances of the contracting. Under this section the buyer need not bring home to the seller actual knowledge
of the particular purpose for which the goods are intended or of his reliance on the seller's skill and judgment, if the
circumstances are such that the seller has reason to realize the purpose intended or that the reliance exists. The
buyer, of course, must actually be relying on the seller.
2. A "particular purpose" differs from the ordinary purpose for which the goods are used in that it envisages a
specific use by the buyer which is peculiar to the nature of his business whereas the ordinary purposes for which
goods are used are those envisaged in the concept of merchantability and go to uses which are customarily made
of the goods in question. For example, shoes are generally used for the purpose of walking upon ordinary ground,
but a seller may know that a particular pair was selected to be used for climbing mountains.
A contract may of course include both a warranty of merchantability and one of fitness for a particular purpose.
The provisions of this Article on the cumulation and conflict of express and implied warranties must be considered
on the question of inconsistency between or among warranties. In such a case any question of fact as to which
warranty was intended by the parties to apply must be resolved in favor of the warranty of fitness for particular
purpose as against all other warranties except where the buyer has taken upon himself the responsibility of
furnishing the technical specifications.
3. In connection with the warranty of fitness for a particular purpose the provisions of this Article on the allocation or
division of risks are particularly applicable in any transaction in which the purpose for which the goods are to be
used combines requirements both as to the quality of the goods themselves and compliance with certain laws or
regulations. How the risks are divided is a question of fact to be determined, where not expressly contained in the
agreement, from the circumstances of contracting, usage of trade, course of performance and the like, matters
which may constitute the "otherwise agreement" of the parties by which they may divide the risk or burden.
§ 2-315. Implied Warranty: Fitness for Particular Purpose.
Page 2 of 2
4. The absence from this section of the language used in the Uniform Sales Act in referring to the seller, "whether
he be the grower or manufacturer or not," is not intended to impose any requirement that the seller be a grower or
manufacturer. Although normally the warranty will arise only where the seller is a merchant with the appropriate
"skill or judgment," it can arise as to non-merchants where this is justified by the particular circumstances.
5. The elimination of the "patent or other trade name" exception constitutes the major extension of the warranty of
fitness which has been made by the cases and continued in this Article. Under the present section the existence of
a patent or other trade name and the designation of the article by that name, or indeed in any other definite manner,
is only one of the facts to be considered on the question of whether the buyer actually relied on the seller, but it is
not of itself decisive of the issue. If the buyer himself is insisting on a particular brand he is not relying on the
seller's skill and judgment and so no warranty results. But the mere fact that the article purchased has a particular
patent or trade name is not sufficient to indicate nonreliance if the article has been recommended by the seller as
adequate for the buyer's purposes.
6. The specific reference forward in the present section to the following section on exclusion or modification of
warranties is to call attention to the possibility of eliminating the warranty in any given case. However it must be
noted that under the following section the warranty of fitness for a particular purpose must be excluded or modified
by a conspicuous writing.
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 2-314 and 2-317.
Point 3: Section 2-303.
Point 6: Section 2-316.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-316
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-316. Exclusion or Modification of Warranties.
(1) Words or conduct relevant to the creation of an express warranty and words or conduct tending to
negate or limit warranty shall be construed wherever reasonable as consistent with each other; but subject
to the provisions of this Article on parol or extrinsic evidence ( Section 2-202) negation or limitation is
inoperative to the extent that such construction is unreasonable.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), to exclude or modify the implied warranty of merchantability or any part of it
the language must mention merchantability and in case of a writing must be conspicuous, and to exclude or
modify any implied warranty of fitness the exclusion must be by a writing and conspicuous. Language to
exclude all implied warranties of fitness is sufficient if it states, for example, that "There are no warranties
which extend beyond the description on the face hereof."
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2)
(a) unless the circumstances indicate otherwise, all implied warranties are excluded by expressions
like "as is", "with all faults" or other language which in common understanding calls the buyer's
attention to the exclusion of warranties and makes plain that there is no implied warranty; and
(b) when the buyer before entering into the contract has examined the goods or the sample or model
as fully as he desired or has refused to examine the goods there is no implied warranty with regard to
defects which an examination ought in the circumstances to have revealed to him; and
(c) an implied warranty can also be excluded or modified by course of dealing or course of
performance or usage of trade.
(4) Remedies for breach of warranty can be limited in accordance with the provisions of this Article on
liquidation or limitation of damages and on contractual modification of remedy ( Sections 2-718 and 2-719).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None. See sections 15 and 71, Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. This section is designed principally to deal with those frequent clauses in sales contracts which seek to exclude
"all warranties, express or implied." It seeks to protect a buyer from unexpected and unbargained language of
disclaimer by denying effect to such language when inconsistent with language of express warranty and permitting
the exclusion of implied warranties only by conspicuous language or other circumstances which protect the buyer
from surprise.
2. The seller is protected under this Article against false allegations of oral warranties by its provisions on parol and
extrinsic evidence and against unauthorized representations by the customary "lack of authority" clauses. This
§ 2-316. Exclusion or Modification of Warranties.
Page 2 of 3
Article treats the limitation or avoidance of consequential damages as a matter of limiting remedies for breach,
separate from the matter of creation of liability under a warranty. If no warranty exists, there is of course no
problem of limiting remedies for breach of warranty. Under subsection (4) the question of limitation of remedy is
governed by the sections referred to rather than by this section.
3. Disclaimer of the implied warranty of merchantability is permitted under subsection (2), but with the safeguard
that such disclaimers must mention merchantability and in case of a writing must be conspicuous.
4. Unlike the implied warranty of merchantability, implied warranties of fitness for a particular purpose may be
excluded by general language, but only if it is in writing and conspicuous.
5. Subsection (2) presupposes that the implied warranty in question exists unless excluded or modified. Whether or
not language of disclaimer satisfies the requirements of this section, such language may be relevant under other
sections to the question whether the warranty was ever in fact created. Thus, unless the provisions of this Article
on parol and extrinsic evidence prevent, oral language of disclaimer may raise issues of fact as to whether reliance
by the buyer occurred and whether the seller had "reason to know" under the section on implied warranty of fitness
for a particular purpose.
6. The exceptions to the general rule set forth in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of subsection (3) are common factual
situations in which the circumstances surrounding the transaction are in themselves sufficient to call the buyer's
attention to the fact that no implied warranties are made or that a certain implied warranty is being excluded.
7. Paragraph (a) of subsection (3) deals with general terms such as "as is," "as they stand," "with all faults," and the
like. Such terms in ordinary commercial usage are understood to mean that the buyer takes the entire risk as to the
quality of the goods involved. The terms covered by paragraph (a) are in fact merely a particularization of
paragraph (c) which provides for exclusion or modification of implied warranties by usage of trade.
8. Under paragraph (b) of subsection (3) warranties may be excluded or modified by the circumstances where the
buyer examines the goods or a sample or model of them before entering into the contract. "Examination" as used
in this paragraph is not synonymous with inspection before acceptance or at any other time after the contract has
been made. It goes rather to the nature of the responsibility assumed by the seller at the time of the making of the
contract. Of course if the buyer discovers the defect and uses the goods anyway, or if he unreasonably fails to
examine the goods before he uses them, resulting injuries may be found to result from his own action rather than
proximately from a breach of warranty. See Sections 2-314 and 2-715 and comments thereto.
In order to bring the transaction within the scope of "refused to examine" in paragraph (b), it is not sufficient that the
goods are available for inspection. There must in addition be a demand by the seller that the buyer examine the
goods fully. The seller by the demand puts the buyer on notice that he is assuming the risk of defects which the
examination ought to reveal. The language "refused to examine" in this paragraph is intended to make clear the
necessity for such demand.
Application of the doctrine of "caveat emptor" in all cases where the buyer examines the goods regardless of
statements made by the seller is, however, rejected by this Article. Thus, if the offer of examination is accompanied
by words as to their merchantability or specific attributes and the buyer indicates clearly that he is relying on those
words rather than on his examination, they give rise to an "express" warranty. In such cases the question is one of
fact as to whether a warranty of merchantability has been expressly incorporated in the agreement. Disclaimer of
such an express warranty is governed by subsection (1) of the present section.
The particular buyer's skill and the normal method of examining goods in the circumstances determine what defects
are excluded by the examination. A failure to notice defects which are obvious cannot excuse the buyer. However,
an examination under circumstances which do not permit chemical or other testing of the goods would not exclude
defects which could be ascertained only by such testing. Nor can latent defects be excluded by a simple
examination. A professional buyer examining a product in his field will be held to have assumed the risk as to all
§ 2-316. Exclusion or Modification of Warranties.
Page 3 of 3
defects which a professional in the field ought to observe, while a nonprofessional buyer will be held to have
assumed the risk only for such defects as a layman might be expected to observe.
9. The situation in which the buyer gives precise and complete specifications to the seller is not explicitly covered in
this section, but this is a frequent circumstance by which the implied warranties may be excluded. The warranty of
fitness for a particular purpose would not normally arise since in such a situation there is usually no reliance on the
seller by the buyer. The warranty of merchantability in such a transaction, however, must be considered in
connection with the next section on the cumulation and conflict of warranties. Under paragraph (c) of that section in
case of such an inconsistency the implied warranty of merchantability is displaced by the express warranty that the
goods will comply with the specifications. Thus, where the buyer gives detailed specifications as to the goods,
neither of the implied warranties as to quality will normally apply to the transaction unless consistent with the
specifications.
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 2-202, 2-718 and 2-719.
Point 7: Sections 1-205 and 2-208.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Course of dealing". Section 1-205.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Usage of trade". Section 1-205.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-317
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-317. Cumulation and Conflict of Warranties Express or Implied.
Warranties whether express or implied shall be construed as consistent with each other and as cumulative,
but if such construction is unreasonable the intention of the parties shall determine which warranty is
dominant. In ascertaining that intention the following rules apply:
(a) Exact or technical specifications displace an inconsistent sample or model or general language of
description.
(b) A sample from an existing bulk displaces inconsistent general language of description.
(c) Express warranties displace inconsistent implied warranties other than an implied warranty of
fitness for a particular purpose.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: On cumulation of warranties see Sections 14, 15, and 16, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten into one section.
Purposes of Changes:
1. The present section rests on the basic policy of this Article that no warranty is created except by some conduct
(either affirmative action or failure to disclose) on the part of the seller. Therefore, all warranties are made
cumulative unless this construction of the contract is impossible or unreasonable.
This Article thus follows the general policy of the Uniform Sales Act except that in case of the sale of an article by its
patent or trade name the elimination of the warranty of fitness depends solely on whether the buyer has relied on
the seller's skill and judgment; the use of the patent or trade name is but one factor in making this determination.
2. The rules of this section are designed to aid in determining the intention of the parties as to which of inconsistent
warranties which have arisen from the circumstances of their transaction shall prevail. These rules of intention are
to be applied only where factors making for an equitable estoppel of the seller do not exist and where he has in
perfect good faith made warranties which later turn out to be inconsistent. To the extent that the seller has led the
buyer to believe that all of the warranties can be performed, he is estopped from setting up any essential
inconsistency as a defense.
3. The rules in subsections (a), (b) and (c) are designed to ascertain the intention of the parties by reference to the
factor which probably claimed the attention of the parties in the first instance. These rules are not absolute but may
be changed by evidence showing that the conditions which existed at the time of contracting make the construction
called for by the section inconsistent or unreasonable.
Cross Reference:
§ 2-317. Cumulation and Conflict of Warranties Express or Implied.
Page 2 of 2
Point 1: Section 2-315.
Definitional Cross Reference:
"Party". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-318
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-318. Third Party Beneficiaries of Warranties Express or Implied.
Note: If this Act is introduced in the Congress of the United States this section should be omitted. (States to select
one alternative.)
Alternative A
A seller's warranty whether express or implied extends to any natural person who is in the family or household of
his buyer or who is a guest in his home if it is reasonable to expect that such person may use, consume or be
affected by the goods and who is injured in person by breach of the warranty. A seller may not exclude or limit the
operation of this section.
Alternative B
A seller's warranty whether express or implied extends to any natural person who may reasonably be expected to
use, consume or be affected by the goods and who is injured in person by breach of the warranty. A seller may not
exclude or limit the operation of this section.
Alternative C
A seller's warranty whether express or implied extends to any person who may reasonably be expected to use,
consume or be affected by the goods and who is injured by breach of the warranty. A seller may not exclude or
limit the operation of this section with respect to injury to the person of an individual to whom the warranty extends.
As amended in 1966.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. The last sentence of this section does not mean that a seller is precluded from excluding or disclaiming a
warranty which might otherwise arise in connection with the sale provided such exclusion or modification is
permitted by Section 2-316. Nor does that sentence preclude the seller from limiting the remedies of his own buyer
and of any beneficiaries, in any manner provided in Sections 2-718 or 2-719. To the extent that the contract of sale
contains provisions under which warranties are excluded or modified, or remedies for breach are limited, such
provisions are equally operative against beneficiaries of warranties under this section. What this last sentence
forbids is exclusion of liability by the seller to the persons to whom the warranties which he has made to his buyer
would extend under this section.
§ 2-318. Third Party Beneficiaries of Warranties Express or Implied.
Page 2 of 2
2. The purpose of this section is to give certain beneficiaries the benefit of the same warranty which the buyer
received in the contract of sale, thereby freeing any such beneficiaries from any technical rules as to "privity." It
seeks to accomplish this purpose without any derogation of any right or remedy resting on negligence. It rests
primarily upon the merchant-seller's warranty under this Article that the goods sold are merchantable and fit for the
ordinary purposes for which such goods are used rather than the warranty of fitness for a particular purpose.
Implicit in the section is that any beneficiary of a warranty may bring a direct action for breach of warranty against
the seller whose warranty extends to him [As amended in 1966].
3. The first alternative expressly includes as beneficiaries within its provisions the family, household and guests of
the purchaser. Beyond this, the section in this form is neutral and is not intended to enlarge or restrict the
developing case law on whether the seller's warranties, given to his buyer who resells, extend to other persons in
the distributive chain.
The second alternative is designed for states where the case law has already developed further and for those that
desire to expand the class of beneficiaries. The third alternative goes further, following the trend of modern
decisions as indicated by Restatement of Torts 2d § 402A (Tentative Draft No. 10, 1965) in extending the rule
beyond injuries to the person [As amended in 1966].
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-316, 2-718 and 2-719.
Point 2: Section 2-314.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-319
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-319. F.O.B. and F.A.S. Terms.
(1) Unless otherwise agreed the term F.O.B. (which means "free on board") at a named place, even
though used only in connection with the stated price, is a delivery term under which
(a) when the term is F.O.B. the place of shipment, the seller must at that place ship the goods in the
manner provided in this Article ( Section 2-504) and bear the expense and risk of putting them into the
possession of the carrier; or
(b) when the term is F.O.B. the place of destination, the seller must at his own expense and risk
transport the goods to that place and there tender delivery of them in the manner provided in this Article
( Section 2-503);
(c) when under either (a) or (b) the term is also F.O.B. vessel, car or other vehicle, the seller must in
addition at his own expense and risk load the goods on board. If the term is F.O.B. vessel the buyer
must name the vessel and in an appropriate case the seller must comply with the provisions of this
Article on the form of bill of lading ( Section 2-323).
(2) Unless otherwise agreed the term F.A.S. vessel (which means "free alongside") at a named port, even
though used only in connection with the stated price, is a delivery term under which the seller must
(a) at his own expense and risk deliver the goods alongside the vessel in the manner usual in that port
or on a dock designated and provided by the buyer; and
(b) obtain and tender a receipt for the goods in exchange for which the carrier is under a duty to issue
a bill of lading.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed in any case falling within subsection (1)(a) or (c) or subsection (2) the buyer
must seasonably give any needed instructions for making delivery, including when the term is F.A.S. or
F.O.B. the loading berth of the vessel and in an appropriate case its name and sailing date. The seller may
treat the failure of needed instructions as a failure of cooperation under this Article ( Section 2-311). He
may also at his option move the goods in any reasonable manner preparatory to delivery or shipment.
(4) Under the term F.O.B. vessel or F.A.S. unless otherwise agreed the buyer must make payment against
tender of the required documents and the seller may not tender nor the buyer demand delivery of the goods
in substitution for the documents.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
§ 2-319. F.O.B. and F.A.S. Terms.
Page 2 of 2
1. This section is intended to negate the uncommercial line of decision which treats an "F.O.B." term as "merely a
price term." The distinctions taken in subsection (1) handle most of the issues which have on occasion led to the
unfortunate judicial language just referred to. Other matters which have led to sound results being based on
unhappy language in regard to F.O.B. clauses are dealt with in this Act by Section 2-311(2) (seller's option re
arrangements relating to shipment) and Sections 2-614 and 615 (substituted performance and seller's excuse).
2. Subsection (1)(c) not only specifies the duties of a seller who engages to deliver "F.O.B. vessel," or the like, but
ought to make clear that no agreement is soundly drawn when it looks to reshipment from San Francisco or New
York, but speaks merely of "F.O.B." the place.
3. The buyer's obligations stated in subsection (1)(c) and subsection (3) are, as shown in the text, obligations of
cooperation. The last sentence of subsection (3) expressly, though perhaps unnecessarily, authorizes the seller,
pending instructions, to go ahead with such preparatory moves as shipment from the interior to the named point of
delivery. The sentence presupposes the usual case in which instructions "fail"; a prior repudiation by the buyer,
giving notice that breach was intended, would remove the reason for the sentence, and would normally bring into
play, instead, the second sentence of Section 2-704, which duly calls for lessening damages.
4. The treatment of "F.O.B. vessel" in conjunction with F.A.S. fits, in regard to the need for payment against
documents, with standard practice and case-law; but "F.O.B. vessel" is a term which by its very language makes
express the need for an "on board" document. In this respect, that term is stricter than the ordinary overseas
"shipment" contract (C.I.F., etc., Section 2-320).
Cross References:
Sections 2-311(3), 2-323, 2-503 and 2-504.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed". Section 1-201.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-320
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-320. C.I.F. and C. & F. Terms.
(1) The term C.I.F. means that the price includes in a lump sum the cost of the goods and the insurance
and freight to the named destination. The term C. & F. or C.F. means that the price so includes cost and
freight to the named destination.
(2) Unless otherwise agreed and even though used only in connection with the stated price and
destination, the term C.I.F. destination or its equivalent requires the seller at his own expense and risk to
(a) put the goods into the possession of a carrier at the port for shipment and obtain a negotiable bill or
bills of lading covering the entire transportation to the named destination; and
(b) load the goods and obtain a receipt from the carrier (which may be contained in the bill of lading)
showing that the freight has been paid or provided for; and
(c) obtain a policy or certificate of insurance, including any war risk insurance, of a kind and on terms
then current at the port of shipment in the usual amount, in the currency of the contract, shown to cover
the same goods covered by the bill of lading and providing for payment of loss to the order of the buyer
or for the account of whom it may concern; but the seller may add to the price the amount of the
premium for any such war risk insurance; and
(d) prepare an invoice of the goods and procure any other documents required to effect shipment or to
comply with the contract; and
(e) forward and tender with commercial promptness all the documents in due form and with any
indorsement necessary to perfect the buyer's rights.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed the term C. & F. or its equivalent has the same effect and imposes upon the
seller the same obligations and risks as a C.I.F. term except the obligation as to insurance.
(4) Under the term C.I.F. or C. & F. unless otherwise agreed the buyer must make payment against tender
of the required documents and the seller may not tender nor the buyer demand delivery of the goods in
substitution for the documents.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provisions: None.
Purposes: To make it clear that:
1. The C.I.F. contract is not a destination but a shipment contract with risk of subsequent loss or damage to the
goods passing to the buyer upon shipment if the seller has properly performed all his obligations with respect to the
goods. Delivery to the carrier is delivery to the buyer for purposes of risk and "title". Delivery of possession of the
goods is accomplished by delivery of the bill of lading, and upon tender of the required documents the buyer must
§ 2-320. C.I.F. and C. & F. Terms.
Page 2 of 5
pay the agreed price without awaiting the arrival of the goods and if they have been lost or damaged after proper
shipment he must seek his remedy against the carrier or insurer. The buyer has no right of inspection prior to
payment or acceptance of the documents.
2. The seller's obligations remain the same even though the C.I.F. term is "used only in connection with the stated
price and destination".
3. The insurance stipulated by the C.I.F. term is for the buyer's benefit, to protect him against the risk of loss or
damage to the goods in transit. A clause in a C.I.F. contract "insurance-for the account of sellers" should be viewed
in its ordinary mercantile meaning that the sellers must pay for the insurance and not that it is intended to run to the
seller's benefit.
4. A bill of lading covering the entire transportation from the port of shipment is explicitly required but the provision
on this point must be read in the light of its reason to assure the buyer of as full protection as the conditions of
shipment reasonably permit, remembering always that this type of contract is designed to move the goods in the
channels commercially available. To enable the buyer to deal with the goods while they are afloat the bill of lading
must be one that covers only the quantity of goods called for by the contract. The buyer is not required to accept
his part of the goods without a bill of lading because the latter covers a larger quantity, nor is he required to accept
a bill of lading for the whole quantity under a stipulation to hold the excess for the owner. Although the buyer is not
compelled to accept either goods or documents under such circumstances he may of course claim his rights in any
goods which have been identified to his contract.
5. The seller is given the option of paying or providing for the payment of freight. He has no option to ship "freight
collect" unless the agreement so provides. The rule of the common law that the buyer need not pay the freight if
the goods do not arrive is preserved.
Unless the shipment has been sent "freight collect" the buyer is entitled to receive documentary evidence that he is
not obligated to pay the freight; the seller is therefore required to obtain a receipt "showing that the freight has been
paid or provided for." The usual notation on the bill of lading that the freight has been prepaid is a sufficient receipt,
as at common law. The phrase "provided for" is intended to cover the frequent situation in which the carrier
extends credit to a shipper for the freight on successive shipments and receives periodical payments of the accrued
freight charges from him.
6. The requirement that unless otherwise agreed the seller must procure insurance "of a kind and on terms then
current at the port for shipment in the usual amount, in the currency of the contract, sufficiently shown to cover the
same goods covered by the bill of lading", applies to both marine and war risk insurance. As applied to marine
insurance, it means such insurance as is usual or customary at the port for shipment with reference to the particular
kind of goods involved, the character and equipment of the vessel, the route of the voyage, the port of destination
and any other considerations that affect the risk. It is the substantial equivalent of the ordinary insurance in the
particular trade and on the particular voyage and is subject to agreed specifications of type or extent of coverage.
The language does not mean that the insurance must be adequate to cover all risks to which the goods may be
subject in transit. There are some types of loss or damage that are not covered by the usual marine insurance and
are excepted in bills of lading or in applicable statutes from the causes of loss or damage for which the carrier or the
vessel is liable. Such risks must be borne by the buyer under this Article.
Insurance secured in compliance with a C.I.F. term must cover the entire transportation of the goods to the named
destination.
7. An additional obligation is imposed upon the seller in requiring him to procure customary war risk insurance at
the buyer's expense. This changes the common law on the point. The seller is not required to assume the risk of
including in the C.I.F. price the cost of such insurance, since it often fluctuates rapidly, but is required to treat it
simply as a necessary for the buyer's account. What war risk insurance is "current" or usual turns on the standard
forms of policy or rider in common use.
§ 2-320. C.I.F. and C. & F. Terms.
Page 3 of 5
8. The C.I.F. contract calls for insurance covering the value of the goods at the time and place of shipment and
does not include any increase in market value during transit or any anticipated profit to the buyer on a sale by him.
The contract contemplates that before the goods arrive at their destination they may be sold again and again on
C.I.F. terms and that the original policy of insurance and bill of lading will run with the interest in the goods by being
transferred to each successive buyer. A buyer who becomes the seller in such an intermediate contract for sale
does not thereby, if his sub-buyer knows the circumstances, undertake to insure the goods again at an increased
price fixed in the new contract or to cover the increase in price by additional insurance, and his buyer may not reject
the documents on the ground that the original policy does not cover such higher price. If such a sub-buyer desires
additional insurance he must procure it for himself.
Where the seller exercises an option to ship "freight collect" and to credit the buyer with the freight against the C.I.F.
price, the insurance need not cover the freight since the freight is not at the buyer's risk. On the other hand, where
the seller prepays the freight upon shipping under a bill of lading requiring prepayment and providing that the freight
shall be deemed earned and shall be retained by the carrier "ship and/or cargo lost or not lost," or using words of
similar import, he must procure insurance that will cover the freight, because notwithstanding that the goods are lost
in transit the buyer is bound to pay the freight as part of the C.I.F. price and will be unable to recover it back from
the carrier.
9. Insurance "for the account of whom it may concern" is usual and sufficient. However, for a valid tender the policy
of insurance must be one which can be disposed of together with the bill of lading and so must be "sufficiently
shown to cover the same goods covered by the bill of lading". It must cover separately the quantity of goods called
for by the buyer's contract and not merely insure his goods as part of a larger quantity in which others are
interested, a case provided for in American mercantile practice by the use of negotiable certificates of insurance
which are expressly authorized by this section. By usage these certificates are treated as the equivalent of
separate policies and are good tender under C.I.F. contracts. The term "certificate of insurance", however, does
not of itself include certificates or "cover notes" issued by the insurance broker and stating that the goods are
covered by a policy. Their sufficiency as substitutes for policies will depend upon proof of an established usage or
course of dealing. The present section rejects the English rule that not only brokers' certificates and "cover notes"
but also certain forms of American insurance certificates are not the equivalent of policies and are not good tender
under a C.I.F. contract.
The seller's failure to tender a proper insurance document is waived if the buyer refuses to make payment on other
and untenable grounds at a time when proper insurance could have been obtained and tendered by the seller if
timely objection had been made. Even a failure to insure on shipment may be cured by seasonable tender of a
policy retroactive in effect; e.g., one insuring the goods "lost or not lost." The provisions of this Article on cure of
improper tender and on waiver of buyer's objections by silence are applicable to insurance tenders under a C.I.F.
term. Where there is no waiver by the buyer as described above, however, the fact that the goods arrive safely
does not cure the seller's breach of his obligations to insure them and tender to the buyer a proper insurance
document.
10. The seller's invoice of the goods shipped under a C.I.F. contract is regarded as a usual and necessary
document upon which reliance may properly be placed. It is the document which evidences points of description,
quality and the like which do not readily appear in other documents. This Article rejects those statements to the
effect that the invoice is a usual but not a necessary document under a C.I.F. term.
11. The buyer needs all of the documents required under a C.I.F. contract, in due form and, if a tangible document
of title, with necessary endorsements, so that before the goods arrive he may deal with them by negotiating the
documents or may obtain prompt possession of the goods after their arrival. If the goods are lost or damaged in
transit the documents are necessary to enable him promptly to assert his remedy against the carrier or insurer. The
seller is therefore obligated to do what is mercantilely reasonable in the circumstances and should make every
reasonable exertion to send forward the documents as soon as possible after the shipment. The requirement that
§ 2-320. C.I.F. and C. & F. Terms.
Page 4 of 5
the documents be forwarded with "commercial promptness" expresses a more urgent need for action than that
suggested by the phrase "reasonable time".
12. Under a C.I.F. contract the buyer, as under the common law, must pay the price upon tender of the required
documents without first inspecting the goods, but his payment in these circumstances does not constitute an
acceptance of the goods nor does it impair his right of subsequent inspection or his options and remedies in the
case of improper delivery. All remedies and rights for the seller's breach are reserved to him. The buyer must pay
before inspection and assert his remedy against the seller afterward unless the nonconformity of the goods
amounts to a real failure of consideration, since the purpose of choosing this form of contract is to give the seller
protection against the buyer's unjustifiable rejection of the goods at a distant port of destination which would
necessitate taking possession of the goods and suing the buyer there.
13. A valid C.I.F. contract may be made which requires part of the transportation to be made on land and part on
the sea, as where the goods are to be brought by rail from an inland point to a seaport and thence transported by
vessel to the named destination under a "through" or combination bill of lading issued by the railroad company. In
such a case shipment by rail from the inland point within the contract period is a timely shipment notwithstanding
that the loading of the goods on the vessel is delayed by causes beyond the seller's control.
14. Although subsection (2) stating the legal effects of the C.I.F. term is an "unless otherwise agreed" provision, the
express language used in an agreement is frequently a precautionary, fuller statement of the normal C.I.F. terms
and hence not intended as a departure or variation from them. Moreover, the dominant outlines of the C.I.F. term
are so well understood commercially that any variation should, whenever reasonably possible, be read as falling
within those dominant outlines rather than as destroying the whole meaning of a term which essentially indicates a
contract for proper shipment rather than one for delivery at destination. Particularly careful consideration is
necessary before a printed form or clause is construed to mean agreement otherwise and where a C.I.F. contract is
prepared on a printed form designed for some other type of contract, the C.I.F. terms must prevail over printed
clauses repugnant to them.
15. Under subsection (4) the fact that the seller knows at the time of the tender of the documents that the goods
have been lost in transit does not affect his rights if he has performed his contractual obligations. Similarly, the
seller cannot perform under a C.I.F. term by purchasing and tendering landed goods.
16. Under the C. & F. term, as under the C.I.F. term, title and risk of loss are intended to pass to the buyer on
shipment. A stipulation in a C. & F. contract that the seller shall effect insurance on the goods and charge the buyer
with the premium (in effect that he shall act as the buyer's agent for that purpose) is entirely in keeping with the
pattern. On the other hand, it often happens that the buyer is in a more advantageous position than the seller to
effect insurance on the goods or that he has in force an "open" or "floating" policy covering all shipments made by
him or to him, in either of which events the C. & F. term is adequate without mention of insurance.
17. It is to be remembered that in a French contract the term "C.A.F." does not mean "Cost and Freight" but has
exactly the same meaning as the term "C.I.F." since it is merely the French equivalent of that term. The "A" does
not stand for "and" but for "assurance" which means insurance.
Cross References:
Point 4: Section 2-323.
Point 6: Section 2-509(1)(a).
Point 9: Sections 2-508 and 2-605(1)(a).
Point 12: Sections 2-321(3), 2-512 and 2-513(3) and Article 5.
Definitional Cross References:
§ 2-320. C.I.F. and C. & F. Terms.
Page 5 of 5
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-321
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-321. C.I.F. or C. & F.: "Net Landed Weights"; "Payment on Arrival";
Warranty of Condition on Arrival.
Under a contract containing a term C.I.F. or C. & F.
(1) Where the price is based on or is to be adjusted according to "net landed weights", "delivered
weights", "out turn" quantity or quality or the like, unless otherwise agreed the seller must reasonably
estimate the price. The payment due on tender of the documents called for by the contract is the
amount so estimated, but after final adjustment of the price a settlement must be made with commercial
promptness.
(2) An agreement described in subsection (1) or any warranty of quality or condition of the goods on
arrival places upon the seller the risk of ordinary deterioration, shrinkage and the like in transportation
but has no effect on the place or time of identification to the contract for sale or delivery or on the
passing of the risk of loss.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed where the contract provides for payment on or after arrival of the goods
the seller must before payment allow such preliminary inspection as is feasible; but if the goods are lost
delivery of the documents and payment are due when the goods should have arrived.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
This section deals with two variations of the C.I.F. contract which have evolved in mercantile practice but are
entirely consistent with the basic C.I.F. pattern. Subsections (1) and (2), which provide for a shift to the seller of the
risk of quality and weight deterioration during shipment, are designed to conform the law to the best mercantile
practice and usage without changing the legal consequences of the C.I.F. or C. & F. term as to the passing of
marine risks to the buyer at the point of shipment. Subsection (3) provides that where under the contract
documents are to be presented for payment after arrival of the goods, this amounts merely to a postponement of
the payment under the C.I.F. contract and is not to be confused with the "no arrival, no sale" contract. If the goods
are lost, delivery of the documents and payment against them are due when the goods should have arrived. The
clause for payment on or after arrival is not to be construed as such a condition precedent to payment that if the
goods are lost in transit the buyer need never pay and the seller must bear the loss.
Cross Reference:
Section 2-324.
Definitional Cross References:
§ 2-321. C.I.F. or C. & F.: "Net Landed Weights"; "Payment on Arrival"; Warranty of Condition on Arrival.
Page 2 of 2
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-322
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-322. Delivery "Ex-Ship".
(1) Unless otherwise agreed a term for delivery of goods "ex-ship" (which means from the carrying vessel)
or in equivalent language is not restricted to a particular ship and requires delivery from a ship which has
reached a place at the named port of destination where goods of the kind are usually discharged.
(2) Under such a term unless otherwise agreed
(a) the seller must discharge all liens arising out of the carriage and furnish the buyer with a direction
which puts the carrier under a duty to deliver the goods; and
(b) the risk of loss does not pass to the buyer until the goods leave the ship's tackle or are otherwise
properly unloaded.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. The delivery term, "ex-ship", as between seller and buyer, is the reverse of the f.a.s. term covered.
2. Delivery need not be made from any particular vessel under a clause calling for delivery "ex-ship", even though a
vessel on which shipment is to be made originally is named in the contract, unless the agreement by appropriate
language, restricts the clause to delivery from a named vessel.
3. The appropriate place and manner of unloading at the port of destination depend upon the nature of the goods
and the facilities and usages of the port.
4. A contract fixing a price "ex-ship" with payment "cash against documents" calls only for such documents as are
appropriate to the contract. Tender of a delivery order and of a receipt for the freight after the arrival of the carrying
vessel is adequate. The seller is not required to tender a bill of lading as a document of title nor is he required to
insure the goods for the buyer's benefit, as the goods are not at the buyer's risk during the voyage.
Cross Reference:
Point 1: Section 2-319(2).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
§ 2-322. Delivery "Ex-Ship".
Page 2 of 2
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-323
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-323. Form of Bill of Lading Required in Overseas Shipment; "Overseas".
(1) Where the contract contemplates overseas shipment and contains a term C.I.F. or C. & F. or F.O.B.
vessel, the seller unless otherwise agreed must obtain a negotiable bill of lading stating that the goods have
been loaded in board or, in the case of a term C.I.F. or C. & F., received for shipment.
(2) Where in a case within subsection (1) a tangible bill of lading has been issued in a set of parts, unless
otherwise agreed if the documents are not to be sent from abroad the buyer may demand tender of the full
set; otherwise only one part of the bill of lading need be tendered. Even if the agreement expressly
requires a full set
(a) due tender of a single part is acceptable within the provisions of this Article on cure of improper
delivery (subsection (1) of Section 2-508); and
(b) even though the full set is demanded, if the documents are sent from abroad the person tendering
an incomplete set may nevertheless require payment upon furnishing an indemnity which the buyer in
good faith deems adequate.
(3) A shipment by water or by air or a contract contemplating such shipment is "overseas" insofar as by
usage of trade or agreement it is subject to the commercial, financing or shipping practices characteristic of
international deep water commerce.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) follows the "American" rule that a regular bill of lading indicating delivery of the goods at the dock
for shipment is sufficient, except under a term "F.O.B. vessel." See Section 2-319 and comment thereto.
2. Subsection (2) deals with the problem of bills of lading covering deep water shipments, issued not as a single bill
of lading but in a set of parts, each part referring to the other parts and the entire set constituting in commercial
practice and at law a single bill of lading. Commercial practice in international commerce is to accept and pay
against presentation of the first part of a set if the part is sent from overseas even though the contract of the buyer
requires presentation of a full set of bills of lading provided adequate indemnity for the missing parts is forthcoming.
In accord with the amendment to Section 7-304, bills of lading in a set are limited to tangible bills.
This subsection codifies that practice as between buyer and seller. Article 5 (Section 5-113) authorizes banks
presenting drafts under letters of credit to give indemnities against the missing parts, and this subsection means
that the buyer must accept and act on such indemnities if he in good faith deems them adequate. But neither this
subsection nor Article 5 decides whether a bank which has issued a letter of credit is similarly bound. The issuing
bank's obligation under a letter of credit is independent and depends on its own terms. See Article 5.
§ 2-323. Form of Bill of Lading Required in Overseas Shipment; "Overseas".
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Sections 2-508(2), 5-113.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Financing agency". Section 2-104.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Send". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-324
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-324. "No Arrival, No Sale" Term.
Under a term "no arrival, no sale" or terms of like meaning, unless otherwise agreed,
(a) the seller must properly ship conforming goods and if they arrive by any means he must tender
them on arrival but he assumes no obligation that the goods will arrive unless he has caused the nonarrival;
and
(b) where without fault of the seller the goods are in part lost or have so deteriorated as no longer to
conform to the contract or arrive after the contract time, the buyer may proceed as if there had been
casualty to identified goods ( Section 2-613).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. The "no arrival, no sale" term in a "destination" overseas contract leaves risk of loss on the seller but gives him
an exemption from liability for non-delivery. Both the nature of the case and the duty of good faith require that the
seller must not interfere with the arrival of the goods in any way. If the circumstances impose upon him the
responsibility for making or arranging the shipment, he must have a shipment made despite the exemption clause.
Further, the shipment made must be a conforming one, for the exemption under a "no arrival, no sale" term applies
only to the hazards of transportation and the goods must be proper in all other respects.
The reason of this section is that where the seller is reselling goods bought by him as shipped by another and this
fact is known to the buyer, so that the seller is not under any obligation to make the shipment himself, the seller is
entitled under the "no arrival, no sale" clause to exemption from payment of damages for non-delivery if the goods
do not arrive or if the goods which actually arrive are non-conforming. This does not extend to sellers who arrange
shipment by their own agents, in which case the clause is limited to casualty due to marine hazards. But sellers
who make known that they are contracting only with respect to what will be delivered to them by parties over whom
they assume no control are entitled to the full quantum of the exemption.
2. The provisions of this Article on identification must be read together with the present section in order to bring the
exemption into application. Until there is some designation of the goods in a particular shipment or on a particular
ship as being those to which the contract refers there can be no application of an exemption for their non-arrival.
3. The seller's duty to tender the agreed or declared goods if they do arrive is not impaired because of their delay in
arrival or by their arrival after transshipment.
4. The phrase "to arrive" is often employed in the same sense as "no arrival, no sale" and may then be given the
same effect. But a "to arrive" term, added to a C.I.F. or C. & F. contract, does not have the full meaning given by
§ 2-324. "No Arrival, No Sale" Term.
Page 2 of 2
this section to "no arrival, no sale". Such a "to arrive" term is usually intended to operate only to the extent that the
risks are not covered by the agreed insurance and the loss or casualty is due to such uncovered hazards. In some
instances the "to arrive" term may be regarded as a time of payment term, or, in the case of the reselling seller
discussed in point 1 above, as negating responsibility for conformity of the goods, if they arrive, to any description
which was based on his good faith belief of the quality. Whether this is the intention of the parties is a question of
fact based on all the circumstances surrounding the resale and in case of ambiguity the rules of Sections 2-316 and
2-317 apply to preclude dishonor.
5. Paragraph (b) applies where goods arrive impaired by damage or partial loss during transportation and makes
the policy of this Article on casualty to identified goods applicable to such a situation. For the term cannot be
regarded as intending to give the seller an unforeseen profit through casualty; it is intended only to protect him from
loss due to causes beyond his control.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 1-203.
Point 2: Section 2-501(a) and (c).
Point 5: Section 2-613.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conforming". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Fault". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-325
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-325. "Letter of Credit" Term; "Confirmed Credit".
(1) Failure of the buyer seasonably to furnish an agreed letter of credit is a breach of the contract for sale.
(2) The delivery to seller of a proper letter of credit suspends the buyer's obligation to pay. If the letter of
credit is dishonored, the seller may on seasonable notification to the buyer require payment directly from
him.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed the term "letter of credit" or "banker's credit" in a contract for sale means an
irrevocable credit issued by a financing agency of good repute and, where the shipment is overseas, of
good international repute. The term "confirmed credit" means that the credit must also carry the direct
obligation of such an agency which does business in the seller's financial market.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To express the established commercial and banking understanding as to the meaning and effects of
terms calling for "letters of credit" or "confirmed credit":
1. Subsection (2) follows the general policy of this Article and Article 3 (Section 3-802) on conditional payment,
under which payment by check or other short-term instrument is not ordinarily final as between the parties if the
recipient duly presents the instrument and honor is refused. Thus the furnishing of a letter of credit does not
substitute the financing agency's obligation for the buyer's, but the seller must first give the buyer reasonable notice
of his intention to demand direct payment from him.
2. Subsection (2) requires that the credit be irrevocable and be a prime credit as determined by the standing of the
issuer. It is not necessary, unless otherwise agreed, that the credit be a negotiation credit; the seller can finance
himself by an assignment of the proceeds under Section 5-116(2).
3. The definition of "confirmed credit" is drawn on the supposition that the credit is issued by a bank which is not
doing direct business in the seller's financial market; there is no intention to require the obligation of two banks both
local to the seller.
Cross References:
Sections 2-403, 2-511(3) and 3-802 and Article 5.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
§ 2-325. "Letter of Credit" Term; "Confirmed Credit".
Page 2 of 2
"Draft". Section 3-104.
"Financing agency". Section 2-104.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Overseas". Section 2-323.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-326
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-326. Sale on Approval and Sale or Return; Rights of Creditors.
(1) Unless otherwise agreed, if delivered goods may be returned by the buyer even though they conform to
the contract, the transaction is
(a) a "sale on approval" if the goods are delivered primarily for use, and
(b) a "sale or return" if the goods are delivered primarily for resale.
(2) Goods held on approval are not subject to the claims of the buyer's creditors until acceptance; goods
held on sale or return are subject to such claims while in the buyer's possession.
(3) Any "or return" term of a contract for sale is to be treated as a separate contract for sale within the
statute of frauds section of this Article ( Section 2-201) and as contradicting the sale aspect of the contract
within the provisions of this Article on parol or extrinsic evidence ( Section 2-202).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 19(3), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten in this and the succeeding section.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. Both a "sale on approval" and a "sale or return" should be distinguished from other types of transactions with
which they frequently have been confused. A "sale on approval," sometimes also called a sale "on trial" or "on
satisfaction," deals with a contract under which the seller undertakes a risk in order to satisfy its prospective buyer
with the appearance or performance of the goods that are sold. The goods are delivered to the proposed purchaser
but they remain the property of the seller until the buyer accepts them. The price has already been agreed. The
buyer's willingness to receive and test the goods is the consideration for the seller's engagement to deliver and sell.
A "sale or return," on the other hand, typically is a sale to a merchant whose unwillingness to buy is overcome by
the seller's engagement to take back the goods (or any commercial unit of goods) in lieu of payment if they fail to be
resold. A sale or return is a present sale of goods which may be undone at the buyer's option. Accordingly,
subsection (2) provides that goods delivered on approval are not subject to the prospective buyer's creditors until
acceptance, and goods delivered in a sale or return are subject to the buyer's creditors while in the buyer's
possession.
These two transactions are so strongly delineated in practice and in general understanding that every
presumption runs against a delivery to a consumer being a "sale or return" and against a delivery to a merchant for
resale being a "sale on approval."
2. The right to return goods for failure to conform to the contract of sale does not make the transaction a "sale on
approval" or "sale or return" and has nothing to do with this section or Section 2-327. This section is not concerned
with remedies for breach of contract. It deals instead with a power given by the contract to turn back the goods even
§ 2-326. Sale on Approval and Sale or Return; Rights of Creditors.
Page 2 of 2
though they are wholly as warranted. This section nevertheless presupposes that a contract for sale is
contemplated by the parties, although that contract may be of the particular character that this section addresses
(i.e., a sale on approval or a sale or return).
If a buyer's obligation as a buyer is conditioned not on its personal approval but on the article's passing a
described objective test, the risk of loss by casualty pending the test is properly the seller's and proper return is at
its expense. On the point of "satisfaction" as meaning "reasonable satisfaction" when an industrial machine is
involved, this Article takes no position.
3. Subsection (3) resolves a conflict in the pre-UCC case law by recognizing that an "or return" provision is so
definitely at odds with any ordinary contract for sale of goods that if a written agreement is involved the "or return"
term must be contained in a written memorandum. The "or return" aspect of a sales contract must be treated as a
separate contract under the Statute of Frauds section and as contradicting the sale insofar as questions of parol or
extrinsic evidence are concerned.
4. Certain true consignment transactions were dealt with in former Sections 2-326(3) and 9-114. These provisions
have been deleted and have been replaced by new provisions in Article 9. See, e.g., Sections 9-109(a)(4); 9-
103(d); 9-319.
Cross References:
Point 2: Article 9.
Point 3: Sections 2-201 and 2-202.
Definitional Cross References:
"Between merchants". Section 2-104.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Creditor". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-327
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-327. Special Incidents of Sale on Approval and Sale or Return.
(1) Under a sale on approval unless otherwise agreed
(a) although the goods are identified to the contract the risk of loss and the title do not pass to the
buyer until acceptance; and
(b) use of the goods consistent with the purpose of trial is not acceptance but failure seasonably to
notify the seller of election to return the goods is acceptance, and if the goods conform to the contract
acceptance of any part is acceptance of the whole; and
(c) after due notification of election to return, the return is at the seller's risk and expense but a
merchant buyer must follow any reasonable instructions.
(2) Under a sale or return unless otherwise agreed
(a) the option to return extends to the whole or any commercial unit of the goods while in substantially
their original condition, but must be exercised seasonably; and
(b) the return is at the buyer's risk and expense.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 19(3), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten in preceding and this section.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. In the case of a sale on approval:
If all of the goods involved conform to the contract, the buyer's acceptance of part of the goods constitutes
acceptance of the whole. Acceptance of part falls outside the normal intent of the parties in the "on approval"
situation and the policy of this Article allowing partial acceptance of a defective delivery has no application here. A
case where a buyer takes home two dresses to select one commonly involves two distinct contracts; if not, it is
covered by the words "unless otherwise agreed".
2. In the case of a sale or return, the return of any unsold unit merely because it is unsold is the normal intent of the
"sale or return" provision, and therefore the right to return for this reason alone is independent of any other action
under the contract which would turn on wholly different considerations. On the other hand, where the return of
goods is for breach, including return of items resold by the buyer and returned by the ultimate purchasers because
of defects, the return procedure is governed not by the present section but by the provisions on the effects and
revocation of acceptance.
§ 2-327. Special Incidents of Sale on Approval and Sale or Return.
Page 2 of 2
3. In the case of a sale on approval the risk rests on the seller until acceptance of the goods by the buyer, while in a
sale or return the risk remains throughout on the buyer.
4. Notice of election to return given by the buyer in a sale on approval is sufficient to relieve him of any further
liability. Actual return by the buyer to the seller is required in the case of a sale or return contract. What constitutes
due "giving" of notice, as required in "on approval" sales, is governed by the provisions on good faith and notice.
"Seasonable" is used here as defined in Section 1-204. Nevertheless, the provisions of both this Article and of the
contract on this point must be read with commercial reason and with full attention to good faith.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-501, 2-601 and 2-603.
Point 2: Sections 2-607 and 2-608.
Point 4: Sections 1-201 and 1-204.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Commercial unit". Section 2-105.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Merchant". Section 2-104.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Sale on approval". Section 2-326.
"Sale or return". Section 2-326.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-328
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 3.
GENERAL OBLIGATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF CONTRACT
§ 2-328. Sale by Auction.
(1) In a sale by auction if goods are put up in lots each lot is the subject of a separate sale.
(2) A sale by auction is complete when the auctioneer so announces by the fall of the hammer or in other
customary manner. Where a bid is made while the hammer is falling in acceptance of a prior bid the
auctioneer may in his discretion reopen the bidding or declare the goods sold under the bid on which the
hammer was falling.
(3) Such a sale is with reserve unless the goods are in explicit terms put up without reserve. In an auction
with reserve the auctioneer may withdraw the goods at any time until he announces completion of the sale.
In an auction without reserve, after the auctioneer calls for bids on an article or lot, that article or lot cannot
be withdrawn unless no bid is made within a reasonable time. In either case a bidder may retract his bid
until the auctioneer's announcement of completion of the sale, but a bidder's retraction does not revive any
previous bid.
(4) If the auctioneer knowingly receives a bid on the seller's behalf or the seller makes or procures such a
bid, and notice has not been given that liberty for such bidding is reserved, the buyer may at his option
avoid the sale or take the goods at the price of the last good faith bid prior to the completion of the sale.
This subsection shall not apply to any bid at a forced sale.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 21, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. The auctioneer may in his discretion either reopen the bidding or close the sale on the bid on which the hammer
was falling when a bid is made at that moment. The recognition of a bid of this kind by the auctioneer in his
discretion does not mean a closing in favor of such a bidder, but only that the bid has been accepted as a
continuation of the bidding. If recognized, such a bid discharges the bid on which the hammer was falling when it
was made.
2. An auction "with reserve" is the normal procedure. The crucial point, however, for determining the nature of an
auction is the "putting up" of the goods. This Article accepts the view that the goods may be withdrawn before they
are actually "put up," regardless of whether the auction is advertised as one without reserve, without liability on the
part of the auction announcer to persons who are present. This is subject to any peculiar facts which might bring
the case within the "firm offer" principle of this Article, but an offer to persons generally would require unmistakable
language in order to fall within that section. The prior announcement of the nature of the auction either as with
reserve or without reserve will, however, enter as an "explicit term" in the "putting up" of the goods and conduct
§ 2-328. Sale by Auction.
Page 2 of 2
thereafter must be governed accordingly. The present section continues the prior rule permitting withdrawal of bids
in auctions both with and without reserve; and the rule is made explicit that the retraction of a bid does not revive a
prior bid.
Cross Reference:
Point 2: Section 2-205.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Good faith". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Lot". Section 2-105.
"Notice". Section 1-201.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-401
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 4.
TITLE, CREDITORS AND GOOD FAITH PURCHASERS
§ 2-401. Passing of Title; Reservation for Security; Limited Application of
This Section.
Each provision of this Article with regard to the rights, obligations and remedies of the seller, the buyer,
purchasers or other third parties applies irrespective of title to the goods except where the provision refers
to such title. Insofar as situations are not covered by the other provisions of this Article and matters
concerning title become material the following rules apply:
(1) Title to goods cannot pass under a contract for sale prior to their identification to the contract (
Section 2-501), and unless otherwise explicitly agreed the buyer acquires by their identification a
special property as limited by this Act. Any retention or reservation by the seller of the title (property) in
goods shipped or delivered to the buyer is limited in effect to a reservation of a security interest.
Subject to these provisions and to the provisions of the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9), title
to goods passes from the seller to the buyer in any manner and on any conditions explicitly agreed on
by the parties.
(2) Unless otherwise explicitly agreed title passes to the buyer at the time and place at which the seller
completes his performance with reference to the physical delivery of the goods, despite any reservation
of a security interest and even though a document of title is to be delivered at a different time or place;
and in particular and despite any reservation of a security interest by the bill of lading
(a) if the contract requires or authorizes the seller to send the goods to the buyer but does not
require him to deliver them at destination, title passes to the buyer at the time and place of
shipment; but
(b) if the contract requires delivery at destination, title passes on tender there.
(3) Unless otherwise explicitly agreed where delivery is to be made without moving the goods,
(a) if the seller is to deliver a tangible document of title, title passes at the time when and the place
where he delivers such documents and if the seller is to deliver an electronic document of title, title
passes when the seller delivers the document; or
(b) if the goods are at the time of contracting already identified and no documents are to be
delivered, title passes at the time and place of contracting.
(4) A rejection or other refusal by the buyer to receive or retain the goods, whether or not justified, or a
justified revocation of acceptance revests title to the goods in the seller. Such revesting occurs by
operation of law and is not a "sale".
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See generally, Sections 17, 18, 19 and 20, Uniform Sales Act.
§ 2-401. Passing of Title; Reservation for Security; Limited Application of This Section.
Page 2 of 3
Purposes: To make it clear that:
1. This Article deals with the issues between seller and buyer in terms of step by step performance or nonperformance
under the contract for sale and not in terms of whether or not "title" to the goods has passed. That the
rules of this section in no way alter the rights of either the buyer, seller or third parties declared elsewhere in the
Article is made clear by the preamble of this section. This section, however, in no way intends to indicate which line
of interpretation should be followed in cases where the applicability of "public" regulation depends upon a "sale" or
upon location of "title" without further definition. The basic policy of this Article that known purpose and reason
should govern interpretation cannot extend beyond the scope of its own provisions. It is therefore necessary to
state what a "sale" is and when title passes under this Article in case the courts deem any public regulation to
incorporate the defined term of the "private" law.
2. "Future" goods cannot be the subject of a present sale. Before title can pass the goods must be identified in the
manner set forth in Section 2-501. The parties, however, have full liberty to arrange by specific terms for the
passing of title to goods which are existing.
3. The "special property" of the buyer in goods identified to the contract is excluded from the definition of "security
interest"; its incidents are defined in provisions of this Article such as those on the rights of the seller's creditors, on
good faith purchase, on the buyer's right to goods on the seller's insolvency, and on the buyer's right to specific
performance or replevin.
4. The factual situations in subsections (2) and (3) upon which passage of title turn actually base the test upon the
time when the seller has finally committed himself in regard to specific goods. Thus in a "shipment" contract he
commits himself by the act of making the shipment. If shipment is not contemplated subsection (3) turns on the
seller's final commitment, i.e. the delivery of documents or the making of the contract. As to delivery of an electronic
document of title, see definition of delivery in Article 1, Section 1-201. This Article does not state a rule as to the
place of title passage as to goodscovered by an electronic document of title.
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 2-102, 2-501 and 2-502.
Point 3: Sections 1-201, 2-402, 2-403, 2-502 and 2-716.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Good faith". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
§ 2-401. Passing of Title; Reservation for Security; Limited Application of This Section.
Page 3 of 3
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Receipt" of goods. Section 2-103.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Send". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-402
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 4.
TITLE, CREDITORS AND GOOD FAITH PURCHASERS
§ 2-402. Rights of Seller's Creditors Against Sold Goods.
(1) Except as provided in subsections (2) and (3), rights of unsecured creditors of the seller with respect to
goods which have been identified to a contract for sale are subject to the buyer's rights to recover the
goods under this Article ( Sections 2-502 and 2-716).
(2) A creditor of the seller may treat a sale or an identification of goods to a contract for sale as void if as
against him a retention of possession by the seller is fraudulent under any rule of law of the state where the
goods are situated, except that retention of possession in good faith and current course of trade by a
merchant-seller for a commercially reasonable time after a sale or identification is not fraudulent.
(3) Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to impair the rights of creditors of the seller
(a) under the provisions of the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9); or
(b) where identification to the contract or delivery is made not in current course of trade but in
satisfaction of or as security for a pre-existing claim for money, security or the like and is made under
circumstances which under any rule of law of the state where the goods are situated would apart from
this Article constitute the transaction a fraudulent transfer or voidable preference.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsection (2)-Section 26, Uniform Sales Act; Subsections (1) and (3)-none.
Changes: Rephrased.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter: To avoid confusion on ordinary issues between current sellers and buyers
and issues in the field of preference and hindrance by making it clear that:
1. Local law on questions of hindrance of creditors by the seller's retention of possession of the goods are outside
the scope of this Article, but retention of possession in the current course of trade is legitimate. Transactions which
fall within the law's policy against improper preferences are reserved from the protection of this Article.
2. The retention of possession of the goods by a merchant seller for a commercially reasonable time after a sale or
identification in current course is exempted from attack as fraudulent. Similarly, the provisions of subsection (3)
have no application to identification or delivery made in the current course of trade, as measured against general
commercial understanding of what a "current" transaction is.
Definitional Cross References:
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Creditor". Section 1-201.
§ 2-402. Rights of Seller's Creditors Against Sold Goods.
Page 2 of 2
"Good faith". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Merchant". Section 2-104.
"Money". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-403
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 4.
TITLE, CREDITORS AND GOOD FAITH PURCHASERS
§ 2-403. Power to Transfer; Good Faith Purchase of Goods; "Entrusting".
(1) A purchaser of goods acquires all title which his transferor had or had power to transfer except that a
purchaser of a limited interest acquires rights only to the extent of the interest purchased. A person with
voidable title has power to transfer a good title to a good faith purchaser for value. When goods have been
delivered under a transaction of purchase the purchaser has such power even though
(a) the transferor was deceived as to the identity of the purchaser, or
(b) the delivery was in exchange for a check which is later dishonored, or
(c) it was agreed that the transaction was to be a "cash sale", or
(d) the delivery was procured through fraud punishable as larcenous under the criminal law.
(2) Any entrusting of possession of goods to a merchant who deals in goods of that kind gives him power
to transfer all rights of the entruster to a buyer in ordinary course of business.
(3) "Entrusting" includes any delivery and any acquiescence in retention of possession regardless of any
condition expressed between the parties to the delivery or acquiescence and regardless of whether the
procurement of the entrusting or the possessor's disposition of the goods have been such as to be
larcenous under the criminal law.
[Publisher's Editorial Note: If a state adopts the repealer of Article 6-Bulk Transfers (Alternative A), subsec.
(4) should read as follows:]
(4) The rights of other purchasers of goods and of lien creditors are governed by the Articles on Secured
Transactions (Article 9) and Documents of Title (Article 7).
[Publisher's Editorial Note: If a state adopts Revised Article 6-Bulk Sales (Alternative B), subsec. (4) should
read as follows:]
(4) The rights of other purchasers of goods and of lien creditors are governed by the Articles on Secured
Transactions (Article 9), Bulk Sales (Article 6) and Documents of Title (Article 7).
As amended in 1988.
For material relating to the changes made in text in 1988, see section 3 of Alternative A (Repealer of Article
6-Bulk Transfers) and Conforming Amendment to Section 2-403 following end of Alternative B (Revised
Article 6-Bulk Sales).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 20(4), 23, 24, 25, Uniform Sales Act; Section 9, especially 9(2), Uniform
Trust Receipts Act; Section 9, Uniform Conditional Sales Act.
Changes: Consolidated and rewritten.
§ 2-403. Power to Transfer; Good Faith Purchase of Goods; "Entrusting".
Page 2 of 3
Purposes of Changes: To gather together a series of prior uniform statutory provisions and the case-law thereunder
and to state a unified and simplified policy on good faith purchase of goods.
1. The basic policy of our law allowing transfer of such title as the transferor has is generally continued and
expanded under subsection (1). In this respect the provisions of the section are applicable to a person taking by
any form of "purchase" as defined by this Act. Moreover the policy of this Act expressly providing for the application
of supplementary general principles of law to sales transactions wherever appropriate joins with the present section
to continue unimpaired all rights acquired under the law of agency or of apparent agency or ownership or other
estoppel, whether based on statutory provisions or on case law principles. The section also leaves unimpaired the
powers given to selling factors under the earlier Factors Acts. In addition subsection (1) provides specifically for the
protection of the good faith purchaser for value in a number of specific situations which have been troublesome
under prior law.
On the other hand, the contract of purchase is of course limited by its own terms as in a case of pledge for a limited
amount or of sale of a fractional interest in goods.
2. The many particular situations in which a buyer in ordinary course of business from a dealer has been protected
against reservation of property or other hidden interest are gathered by subsections (2)-(4) into a single principle
protecting persons who buy in ordinary course out of inventory. Consignors have no reason to complain, nor have
lenders who hold a security interest in the inventory, since the very purpose of goods in inventory is to be turned
into cash by sale.
The principle is extended in subsection (3) to fit with the abolition of the old law of "cash sale" by subsection (1)(c).
It is also freed from any technicalities depending on the extended law of larceny; such extension of the concept of
theft to include trick, particular types of fraud, and the like is for the purpose of helping conviction of the offender; it
has no proper application to the long-standing policy of civil protection of buyers from persons guilty of such trick or
fraud. Finally, the policy is extended, in the interest of simplicity and sense, to any entrusting by a bailor; this is in
consonance with the explicit provisions of Section 7-205 on the powers of a warehouseman who is also in the
business of buying and selling fungible goods of the kind he stores. As to entrusting by a secured party, subsection
(2) is limited by the more specific provisions of Section 9-307(1), which deny protection to a person buying farm
products from a person engaged in farming operations.
3. The definition of "buyer in ordinary course of business" (Section 1-201) is effective here and preserves the
essence of the healthy limitations engrafted by the case-law on the older statutes. The older loose concept of good
faith and wide definition of value combined to create apparent good faith purchasers in many situations in which the
result outraged common sense; the court's solution was to protect the original title especially by use of "cash sale"
or of over-technical construction of the enabling clauses of the statutes. But such rulings then turned into limitations
on the proper protection of buyers in the ordinary market. Section 1-201(9) cuts down the category of buyer in
ordinary course in such fashion as to take care of the results of the cases, but with no price either in confusion or in
injustice to proper dealings in the normal market.
4. Except as provided in subsection (1), the rights of purchasers other than buyers in ordinary course are left to the
Articles on Secured Transactions, Documents of Title, and Bulk Sales.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 1-103 and 1-201.
Point 2: Sections 1-201, 2-402, 7-205 and 9-307(1).
Points 3 and 4: Sections 1-102, 1-201, 2-104, 2-707 and Articles 6, 7 and 9.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer in ordinary course of business". Section 1-201.
§ 2-403. Power to Transfer; Good Faith Purchase of Goods; "Entrusting".
Page 3 of 3
"Good faith". Sections 1-201 and 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Signed". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-501
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-501. Insurable Interest in Goods; Manner of Identification of Goods.
(1) The buyer obtains a special property and an insurable interest in goods by identification of existing
goods as goods to which the contract refers even though the goods so identified are non-conforming and
he has an option to return or reject them. Such identification can be made at any time and in any manner
explicitly agreed to by the parties. In the absence of explicit agreement identification occurs
(a) when the contract is made if it is for the sale of goods already existing and identified;
(b) if the contract is for the sale of future goods other than those described in paragraph (c), when
goods are shipped, marked or otherwise designated by the seller as goods to which the contract refers;
(c) when the crops are planted or otherwise become growing crops or the young are conceived if the
contract is for the sale of unborn young to be born within twelve months after contracting or for the sale
of crops to be harvested within twelve months or the next normal harvest season after contracting
whichever is longer.
(2) The seller retains an insurable interest in goods so long as title to or any security interest in the goods
remains in him and where the identification is by the seller alone he may until default or insolvency or
notification to the buyer that the identification is final substitute other goods for those identified.
(3) Nothing in this section impairs any insurable interest recognized under any other statute or rule of law.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See Sections 17 and 19, Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. The present section deals with the manner of identifying goods to the contract so that an insurable interest in the
buyer and the rights set forth in the next section will accrue. Generally speaking, identification may be made in any
manner "explicitly agreed to" by the parties. The rules of paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) apply only in the absence of
such "explicit agreement".
2. In the ordinary case identification of particular existing goods as goods to which the contract refers is
unambiguous and may occur in one of many ways. It is possible, however, for the identification to be tentative or
contingent. In view of the limited effect given to identification by this Article, the general policy is to resolve all
doubts in favor of identification.
3. The provision of this section as to "explicit agreement" clarifies the present confusion in the law of sales which
has arisen from the fact that under prior uniform legislation all rules of presumption with reference to the passing of
title or to appropriation (which in turn depended upon identification) were regarded as subject to the contrary
intention of the parties or of the party appropriating. Such uncertainty is reduced to a minimum under this section
§ 2-501. Insurable Interest in Goods; Manner of Identification of Goods.
Page 2 of 3
by requiring "explicit agreement" of the parties before the rules of paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) are displaced-as they
would be by a term giving the buyer power to select the goods. An "explicit" agreement, however, need not
necessarily be found in the terms used in the particular transaction. Thus, where a usage of the trade has
previously been made explicit by reduction to a standard set of "rules and regulations" currently incorporated by
reference into the contracts of the parties, a relevant provision of those "rules and regulations" is "explicit" within the
meaning of this section.
4. In view of the limited function of identification there is no requirement in this section that the goods be in
deliverable state or that all of the seller's duties with respect to the processing of the goods be completed in order
that identification occur. For example, despite identification the risk of loss remains on the seller under the risk of
loss provisions until completion of his duties as to the goods and all of his remedies remain dependent upon his not
defaulting under the contract.
5. Undivided shares in an identified fungible bulk, such as grain in an elevator or oil in a storage tank, can be sold.
The mere making of the contract with reference to an undivided share in an identified fungible bulk is enough under
subsection (a) to effect an identification if there is no explicit agreement otherwise. The seller's duty, however, to
segregate and deliver according to the contract is not affected by such an identification but is controlled by other
provisions of this Article.
6. Identification of crops under paragraph (c) is made upon planting only if they are to be harvested within the year
or within the next normal harvest season. The phrase "next normal harvest season" fairly includes nursery stock
raised for normally quick "harvest," but plainly excludes a "timber" crop to which the concept of a harvest "season"
is inapplicable.
Paragraph (c) is also applicable to a crop of wool or the young of animals to be born within twelve months after
contracting. The product of a lumbering, mining or fishing operation, though seasonal, is not within the concept of
"growing". Identification under a contract for all or part of the output of such an operation can be effected early in
the operation.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-502.
Point 4: Sections 2-509, 2-510 and 2-703.
Point 5: Sections 2-105, 2-308, 2-503 and 2-509.
Point 6: Sections 2-105(1), 2-107(1) and 2-402.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Future goods". Section 2-105.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
§ 2-501. Insurable Interest in Goods; Manner of Identification of Goods.
Page 3 of 3
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-502
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-502. Buyer's Right to Goods on Seller's Repudiation, Failure to Deliver,
or Insolvency.
(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3) and even though the goods have not been shipped a buyer who has
paid a part or all of the price of goods in which he has a special property under the provisions of the
immediately preceding section may on making and keeping good a tender of any unpaid portion of their
price recover them from the seller if:
(a) in the case of goods bought for personal, family, or household purposes, the seller repudiates or
fails to deliver as required by the contract; or
(b) in all cases, the seller becomes insolvent within ten days after receipt of the first installment on their
price.
(2) The buyer's right to recover the goods under subsection (1)(a) vests upon acquisition of a special
property, even if the seller had not then repudiated or failed to deliver.
(3) If the identification creating his special property has been made by the buyer he acquires the right to
recover the goods only if they conform to the contract for sale.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Compare Sections 17, 18 and 19, Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. This section gives an additional right to the buyer as a result of identification of the goods to the contract in the
manner provided in Section 2-501. The buyer is given a right to recover the goods, conditioned upon making and
keeping good a tender of any unpaid portion of the price, in two limited circumstances. First, the buyer may recover
goods bought for personal, family, or household purposes if the seller repudiates the contract or fails to deliver the
goods. Second, in any case, the buyer may recover the goods if the seller becomes insolvent within 10 days after
the seller receives the first installment on their price. The buyer's right to recover the goods under this section is an
exception to the usual rule, under which the disappointed buyer must resort to an action to recover damages.
2. The question of whether the buyer also acquires a security interest in identified goods and has rights to the
goods when insolvency takes place after the ten-day period provided in this section depends upon compliance with
the provisions of the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9).
3. Under subsection (2), the buyer's right to recover consumer goods under subsection (1)(a) vests upon
acquisition of a special property, which occurs upon identification of the goods to the contract. See Section 2-501.
Inasmuch as a secured party normally acquires no greater rights in its collateral that its debtor had or had power to
convey, see Section 2-403(1) (first sentence), a buyer who acquires a right to recover under this section will take
free of a security interest created by the seller if it attaches to the goods after the goods have been identified to the
§ 2-502. Buyer's Right to Goods on Seller's Repudiation, Failure to Deliver, or Insolvency.
Page 2 of 2
contract. The buyer will take free, even if the buyer does not buy in ordinary course and even if the security interest
is perfected. Of course, to the extent that the buyer pays the price after the security interest attaches, the payments
will constitute proceeds of the security interest.
4. Subsection (3) is included to preclude the possibility of unjust enrichment, which would exist if the buyer were
permitted to recover goods even though they were greatly superior in quality or quantity to that called for by the
contract for sale.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 1-201 and 2-702.
Point 2: Article 9.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Insolvent". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-503
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-503. Manner of Seller's Tender of Delivery.
(1) Tender of delivery requires that the seller put and hold conforming goods at the buyer's disposition and
give the buyer any notification reasonably necessary to enable him to take delivery. The manner, time and
place for tender are determined by the agreement and this Article, and in particular
(a) tender must be at a reasonable hour, and if it is of goods they must be kept available for the period
reasonably necessary to enable the buyer to take possession; but
(b) unless otherwise agreed the buyer must furnish facilities reasonably suited to the receipt of the
goods.
(2) Where the case is within the next section respecting shipment tender requires that the seller comply
with its provisions.
(3) Where the seller is required to deliver at a particular destination tender requires that he comply with
subsection (1) and also in any appropriate case tender documents as described in subsections (4) and (5)
of this section.
(4) Where goods are in the possession of a bailee and are to be delivered without being moved
(a) tender requires that the seller either tender a negotiable document of title covering such goods or
procure acknowledgment by the bailee of the buyer's right to possession of the goods; but
(b) tender to the buyer of a non-negotiable document of title or of a record directing the bailee to
deliver is sufficient tender unless the buyer seasonably objects, and except as otherwise provided in
Article 9 receipt by the bailee of notification of the buyer's rights fixes those rights as against the bailee
and all third persons; but risk of loss of the goods and of any failure by the bailee to honor the nonnegotiable
document of title or to obey the direction remains on the seller until the buyer has had a
reasonable time to present the document or direction, and a refusal by the bailee to honor the
document or to obey the direction defeats the tender.
(5) Where the contract requires the seller to deliver documents
(a) he must tender all such documents in correct form, except as provided in this Article with respect to
bills of lading in a set (subsection (2) of Section 2-323); and
(b) tender through customary banking channels is sufficient and dishonor of a draft accompanying or
associated with the documents constitutes non-acceptance or rejection.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See Sections 11, 19, 20, 43(3) and (4), 46 and 51, Uniform Sales Act.
§ 2-503. Manner of Seller's Tender of Delivery.
Page 2 of 4
Changes: The general policy of the above sections is continued and supplemented but subsection (3) changes the
rule of prior section 19(5) as to what constitutes a "destination" contract and subsection (4) incorporates a minor
correction as to tender of delivery of goods in the possession of a bailee.
Purposes of Changes:
1. The major general rules governing the manner of proper or due tender of delivery are gathered in this section.
The term "tender" is used in this Article in two different senses. In one sense it refers to "due tender" which
contemplates an offer coupled with a present ability to fulfill all the conditions resting on the tendering party and
must be followed by actual performance if the other party shows himself ready to proceed. Unless the context
unmistakably indicates otherwise this is the meaning of "tender" in this Article and the occasional addition of the
word "due" is only for clarity and emphasis. At other times it is used to refer to an offer of goods or documents
under a contract as if in fulfillment of its conditions even though there is a defect when measured against the
contract obligation. Used in either sense, however, "tender" connotes such performance by the tendering party as
puts the other party in default if he fails to proceed in some manner. These concepts of tender would apply to
tender of either tangible or electronic documents of title.
2. The seller's general duty to tender and deliver is laid down in Section 2-301 and more particularly in Section 2-
507. The seller's right to a receipt if he demands one and receipts are customary is governed by Section 1-205.
Subsection (1) of the present section proceeds to set forth two primary requirements of tender: first, that the seller
"put and hold conforming goods at the buyer's disposition" and, second, that he "give the buyer any notice
reasonably necessary to enable him to take delivery."
In cases in which payment is due and demanded upon delivery the "buyer's disposition" is qualified by the seller's
right to retain control of the goods until payment by the provision of this Article on delivery on condition. However,
where the seller is demanding payment on delivery he must first allow the buyer to inspect the goods in order to
avoid impairing his tender unless the contract for sale is on C.I.F., C.O.D., cash against documents or similar terms
negating the privilege of inspection before payment.
In the case of contracts involving documents the seller can "put and hold conforming goods at the buyer's
disposition" under subsection (1) by tendering documents which give the buyer complete control of the goods under
the provisions of Article 7 on due negotiation.
3. Under paragraph (a) of subsection (1) usage of the trade and the circumstances of the particular case determine
what is a reasonable hour for tender and what constitutes a reasonable period of holding the goods available.
4. The buyer must furnish reasonable facilities for the receipt of the goods tendered by the seller under subsection
(1), paragraph (b). This obligation of the buyer is no part of the seller's tender.
5. For the purposes of subsections (2) and (3) there is omitted from this Article the rule under prior uniform
legislation that a term requiring the seller to pay the freight or cost of transportation to the buyer is equivalent to an
agreement by the seller to deliver to the buyer or at an agreed destination. This omission is with the specific
intention of negating the rule, for under this Article the "shipment" contract is regarded as the normal one and the
"destination" contract as the variant type. The seller is not obligated to deliver at a named destination and bear the
concurrent risk of loss until arrival, unless he has specifically agreed so to deliver or the commercial understanding
of the terms used by the parties contemplates such delivery.
6. Paragraph (a) of subsection (4) continues the rule of the prior uniform legislation as to acknowledgment by the
bailee. Paragraph (b) of subsection (4) adopts the rule that between the buyer and the seller the risk of loss
remains on the seller during a period reasonable for securing acknowledgment of the transfer from the bailee, while
as against all other parties the buyer's rights are fixed as of the time the bailee receives notice of the transfer.
7. Under subsection (5) documents are never "required" except where there is an express contract term or it is
plainly implicit in the peculiar circumstances of the case or in a usage of trade. Documents may, of course, be
§ 2-503. Manner of Seller's Tender of Delivery.
Page 3 of 4
"authorized" although not required, but such cases are not within the scope of this subsection. When documents
are required, there are three main requirements of this subsection: (1) "All": each required document is essential to
a proper tender; (2) "Such": the documents must be the ones actually required by the contract in terms of source
and substance; (3) "Correct form": All documents must be in correct form. These requirements apply to both
tangible and electronic documents of title. When tender is made through customary banking channels, a draft may
accompany or be associated with a document of title. The language has been broadened to allow for drafts to be
associated with an electronic document of title. Compare Section 2-104(2) definition of financing agency.
When a prescribed document cannot be procured, a question of fact arises under the provision of this Article on
substituted performance as to whether the agreed manner of delivery is actually commercially impracticable and
whether the substitute is commercially reasonable.
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 1-205, 2-301, 2-310, 2-507 and 2-513 and Article 7.
Point 5: Sections 2-308, 2-310 and 2-509.
Point 7: Section 2-614(1).
Specific matters involving tender are covered in many additional sections of this Article. See Sections 1-205, 2-301,
2-306 to 2-319, 2-321(3), 2-504, 2-507(2), 2-511(1), 2-513, 2-612 and 2-614.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conforming". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Dishonor". Section 3-508.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Draft". Section 3-104.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Receipt" of goods. Section 2-103.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Written". Section 1-201.
§ 2-503. Manner of Seller's Tender of Delivery.
Page 4 of 4
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-504
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-504. Shipment by Seller.
Where the seller is required or authorized to send the goods to the buyer and the contract does not require
him to deliver them at a particular destination, then unless otherwise agreed he must
(a) put the goods in the possession of such a carrier and make such a contract for their transportation
as may be reasonable having regard to the nature of the goods and other circumstances of the case;
and
(b) obtain and promptly deliver or tender in due form any document necessary to enable the buyer to
obtain possession of the goods or otherwise required by the agreement or by usage of trade; and
(c) promptly notify the buyer of the shipment.
Failure to notify the buyer under paragraph (c) or to make a proper contract under paragraph (a) is a
ground for rejection only if material delay or loss ensues.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 46, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To continue the general policy of the prior uniform statutory provision while incorporating
certain modifications with respect to the requirement that the contract with the carrier be made expressly on behalf
of the buyer and as to the necessity of giving notice of the shipment to the buyer, so that:
1. The section is limited to "shipment" contracts as contrasted with "destination" contracts or contracts for delivery
at the place where the goods are located. The general principles embodied in this section cover the special cases
of F.O.B. point of shipment contracts and C.I.F. and C. & F. contracts. Under the preceding section on manner of
tender of delivery, due tender by the seller requires that he comply with the requirements of this section in
appropriate cases.
2. The contract to be made with the carrier under paragraph (a) must conform to all express terms of the
agreement, subject to any substitution necessary because of failure of agreed facilities as provided in the later
provision on substituted performance. However, under the policies of this Article on good faith and commercial
standards and on buyer's rights on improper delivery, the requirements of explicit provisions must be read in terms
of their commercial and not their literal meaning. This policy is made express with respect to bills of lading in a set
in the provision of this Article on form of bills of lading required in overseas shipment.
3. In the absence of agreement, the provision of this Article on options and cooperation respecting performance
gives the seller the choice of any reasonable carrier, routing and other arrangements. Whether or not the shipment
is at the buyer's expense the seller must see to any arrangements, reasonable in the circumstances, such as
§ 2-504. Shipment by Seller.
Page 2 of 3
refrigeration, watering of live stock, protection against cold, the sending along of any necessary help, selection of
specialized cars and the like for paragraph (a) is intended to cover all necessary arrangements whether made by
contract with the carrier or otherwise. There is, however, a proper relaxation of such requirements if the buyer is
himself in a position to make the appropriate arrangements and the seller gives him reasonable notice of the need
to do so. It is an improper contract under paragraph (a) for the seller to agree with the carrier to a limited valuation
below the true value and thus cut off the buyer's opportunity to recover from the carrier in the event of loss, when
the risk of shipment is placed on the buyer by his contract with the seller.
4. Both the language of paragraph (b) and the nature of the situation it concerns indicate that the requirement that
the seller must obtain and deliver promptly to the buyer in due form any document necessary to enable him to
obtain possession of the goods is intended to cumulate with the other duties of the seller such as those covered in
paragraph (a).
In this connection, in the case of pool car shipments a delivery order furnished by the seller on the pool car
consignee, or on the carrier for delivery out of a larger quantity, satisfies the requirements of paragraph (b) unless
the contract requires some other form of document.
5. This Article, unlike the prior uniform statutory provision, makes it the seller's duty to notify the buyer of shipment
in all cases. The consequences of his failure to do so, however, are limited in that the buyer may reject on this
ground only where material delay or loss ensues.
A standard and acceptable manner of notification in open credit shipments is the sending of an invoice and in the
case of documentary contracts is the prompt forwarding of the documents as under paragraph (b) of this section. It
is also usual to send on a straight bill of lading but this is not necessary to the required notification. However,
should such a document prove necessary or convenient to the buyer, as in the case of loss and claim against the
carrier, good faith would require the seller to send it on request.
Frequently the agreement expressly requires prompt notification as by wire or cable. Such a term may be of the
essence and the final clause of paragraph (c) does not prevent the parties from making this a particular ground for
rejection. To have this vital and irreparable effect upon the seller's duties, such a term should be part of the
"dickered" terms written in any "form," or should otherwise be called seasonably and sharply to the seller's
attention.
6. Generally, under the final sentence of the section, rejection by the buyer is justified only when the seller's
dereliction as to any of the requirements of this section in fact is followed by material delay or damage. It rests on
the seller, so far as concerns matters not within the peculiar knowledge of the buyer, to establish that his error has
not been followed by events which justify rejection.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-319, 2-320 and 2-503(2).
Point 2: Sections 1-203, 2-323(2), 2-601 and 2-614(1).
Point 3: Section 2-311(2).
Point 5: Section 1-203.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
§ 2-504. Shipment by Seller.
Page 3 of 3
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Send". Section 1-201.
"Usage of trade". Section 1-205.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-505
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-505. Seller's Shipment Under Reservation.
(1) Where the seller has identified goods to the contract by or before shipment:
(a) his procurement of a negotiable bill of lading to his own order or otherwise reserves in him a
security interest in the goods. His procurement of the bill to the order of a financing agency or of the
buyer indicates in addition only the seller's expectation of transferring that interest to the person named.
(b) a non-negotiable bill of lading to himself or his nominee reserves possession of the goods as
security but except in a case of conditional delivery (subsection (2) of Section 2-507) a non-negotiable
bill of lading naming the buyer as consignee reserves no security interest even though the seller retains
possession or control of the bill of lading.
(2) When shipment by the seller with reservation of a security interest is in violation of the contract for sale
it constitutes an improper contract for transportation within the preceding section but impairs neither the
rights given to the buyer by shipment and identification of the goods to the contract nor the seller's powers
as a holder of a negotiable document of title.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 20(2), (3), (4), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Completely rephrased, the "powers" of the parties in cases of reservation being emphasized primarily
rather than the "rightfulness" of reservation.
Purposes of Changes: To continue in general the policy of the prior uniform statutory provision with certain
modifications of emphasis and language, so that:
1. The security interest reserved to the seller under subsection (1) is restricted to securing payment or performance
by the buyer and the seller is strictly limited in his disposition and control of the goods as against the buyer and third
parties. Under this Article, the provision as to the passing of interest expressly applies "despite any reservation of
security title" and also provides that the "rights, obligations and remedies" of the parties are not altered by the
incidence of title generally. The security interest, therefore, must be regarded as a means given to the seller to
enforce his rights against the buyer which is unaffected by and in turn does not affect the location of title generally.
The rules set forth in subsection (1) are not to be altered by any apparent "contrary intent" of the parties as to
passing of title, since the rights and remedies of the parties to the contract of sale, as defined in this Article, rest on
the contract and its performance or breach and not on stereotyped presumptions as to the location of title.
This Article does not attempt to regulate local procedure in regard to the effective maintenance of the seller's
security interest when the action is in replevin by the buyer against the carrier.
§ 2-505. Seller's Shipment Under Reservation.
Page 2 of 3
2. Every shipment of identified goods under a negotiable bill of lading reserves a security interest in the seller under
subsection (1) paragraph (a).
It is frequently convenient for the seller to make the bill of lading to the order of a nominee such as his agent at
destination, the financing agency to which he expects to negotiate the document or the bank issuing a credit to him.
In many instances, also, the buyer is made the order party. This Article does not deal directly with the question as
to whether a bill of lading made out by the seller to the order of a nominee gives the carrier notice of any rights
which the nominee may have so as to limit its freedom or obligation to honor the bill of lading in the hands of the
seller as the original shipper if the expected negotiation fails. This is dealt with in the Article on Documents of Title
(Article 7).
3. A non-negotiable bill of lading taken to a party other than the buyer under subsection (1) paragraph (b) reserves
possession of the goods as security in the seller but if he seeks to withhold the goods improperly the buyer can
tender payment and recover them.
4. In the case of a shipment by non-negotiable bill of lading taken to a buyer, the seller, under subsection (1) retains
no security interest or possession as against the buyer and by the shipment he de facto loses control as against the
carrier except where he rightfully and effectively stops delivery in transit. In cases in which the contract gives the
seller the right to payment against delivery, the seller, by making an immediate demand for payment, can show that
his delivery is conditional, but this does not prevent the buyer's power to transfer full title to a sub-buyer in ordinary
course or other purchaser under Section 2-403.
5. Under subsection (2) an improper reservation by the seller which would constitute a breach in no way impairs
such of the buyer's rights as result from identification of the goods. The security title reserved by the seller under
subsection (1) does not protect his retaining possession or control of the document or the goods for the purpose of
exacting more than is due him under the contract.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 1-201.
Point 2: Article 7.
Point 3: Sections 2-501(2) and 2-504.
Point 4: Sections 2-403, 2-507(2) and 2-705.
Point 5: Sections 2-310, 2-319(4), 2-320(4), 2-501 and 2-502 and Article 7.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Consignee". Section 7-102.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Financing agency". Section 2-104.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
§ 2-505. Seller's Shipment Under Reservation.
Page 3 of 3
"Holder". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-506
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-506. Rights of Financing Agency.
(1) A financing agency by paying or purchasing for value a draft which relates to a shipment of goods
acquires to the extent of the payment or purchase and in addition to its own rights under the draft and any
document of title securing it any rights of the shipper in the goods including the right to stop delivery and the
shipper's right to have the draft honored by the buyer.
(2) The right to reimbursement of a financing agency which has in good faith honored or purchased the
draft under commitment to or authority from the buyer is not impaired by subsequent discovery of defects
with reference to any relevant document which was apparently regular.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. "Financing agency" is broadly defined in this Article to cover every normal instance in which a party aids or
intervenes in the financing of a sales transaction. The term as used in subsection (1) is not in any sense intended
as a limitation and covers any other appropriate situation which may arise outside the scope of the definition.
2. "Paying" as used in subsection (1) is typified by the letter of credit, or "authority to pay" situation in which a
banker, by arrangement with the buyer or other consignee, pays on his behalf a draft for the price of the goods. It is
immaterial whether the draft is formally drawn on the party paying or his principal, whether it is a sight draft paid in
cash or a time draft "paid" in the first instance by acceptance, or whether the payment is viewed as absolute or
conditional. All of these cases constitute "payment" under this subsection. Similarly, "purchasing for value" is used
to indicate the whole area of financing by the seller's banker, and the principle of subsection (1) is applicable
without any niceties of distinction between "purchase," "discount," "advance against collection" or the like. But it is
important to notice that the only right to have the draft honored that is acquired is that against the buyer; if any right
against any one else is claimed it will have to be under some separate obligation of that other person. A letter of
credit does not necessarily protect purchasers of drafts. See Article 5. And for the relations of the parties to
documentary drafts see Part 5 of Article 4.
3. Subsection (1) is made applicable to payments or advances against a draft which "relates to" a shipment of
goods and this has been chosen as a term of maximum breadth. In particular the term is intended to cover the
case of a draft against an invoice or against a delivery order. Further, it is unnecessary that there be an explicit
assignment of the invoice attached to the draft to bring the transaction within the reason of this subsection.
4. After shipment, "the rights of the shipper in the goods" are merely security rights and are subject to the buyer's
right to force delivery upon tender of the price. The rights acquired by the financing agency are similarly limited
and, moreover, if the agency fails to procure any outstanding negotiable document of title, it may find its exercise of
§ 2-506. Rights of Financing Agency.
Page 2 of 2
these rights hampered or even defeated by the seller's disposition of the document to a third party. This section
does not attempt to create any new rights in the financing agency against the carrier which would force the latter to
honor a stop order from the agency, a stranger to the shipment, or any new rights against a holder to whom a
document of title has been duly negotiated under Article 7.
5. The deletion of the language "on its face" from subsection (2) is designed to accommodate electronic documents
of title without changing the requirement ofregularity of the document.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-104(2) and Article 4.
Point 2: Part 5 of Article 4, and Article 5.
Point 4: Sections 2-501 and 2-502(1) and Article 7.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Draft". Section 3-104.
"Financing agency". Section 2-104.
"Good faith". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Honor". Section 1-201.
"Purchase". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-507
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-507. Effect of Seller's Tender; Delivery on Condition.
(1) Tender of delivery is a condition to the buyer's duty to accept the goods and, unless otherwise agreed,
to his duty to pay for them. Tender entitles the seller to acceptance of the goods and to payment according
to the contract.
(2) Where payment is due and demanded on the delivery to the buyer of goods or documents of title, his
right as against the seller to retain or dispose of them is conditional upon his making the payment due.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See Sections 11, 41, 42 and 69, Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) continues the policies of the prior uniform statutory provisions with respect to tender and delivery
by the seller. Under this Article the same rules in these matters are applied to present sales and to contracts for
sale. But the provisions of this subsection must be read within the framework of the other sections of this Article
which bear upon the question of delivery and payment.
2. The "unless otherwise agreed" provision of subsection (1) is directed primarily to cases in which payment in
advance has been promised or a letter of credit term has been included. Payment "according to the contract"
contemplates immediate payment, payment at the end of an agreed credit term, payment by a time acceptance or
the like. Under this Act, "contract" means the total obligation in law which results from the parties' agreement
including the effect of this Article. In this context, therefore, there must be considered the effect in law of such
provisions as those on means and manner of payment and on failure of agreed means and manner of payment.
3. Subsection (2) deals with the effect of a conditional delivery by the seller and in such a situation makes the
buyer's "right as against the seller" conditional upon payment. These words are used as words of limitation to
conform with the policy set forth in the bona fide purchase sections of this Article. Should the seller after making
such a conditional delivery fail to follow up his rights, the condition is waived. This subsection (2) codifies the cash
seller's right of reclamation which is in the nature of a lien. There is no specific time limit for a cash seller to
exercise the right of reclamation. However, the right will be defeated by delay causing prejudice to the buyer,
waiver, estoppel, or ratification of the buyer's right to retain possession. Common law rules and precedents
governing such principles are applicable (Section 1-103). If third parties are involved, Section 2-403(1) protects
good faith purchasers. See PEB Commentary No. 1, dated March 10, 1990 [Appendix V, infra].
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-310, 2-503, 2-511, 2-601 and 2-711 to 2-713.
Point 2: Sections 1-201, 2-511 and 2-614.
§ 2-507. Effect of Seller's Tender; Delivery on Condition.
Page 2 of 2
Point 3: Sections 2-401, 2-403, and 2-702(1)(b).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-508
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-508. Cure by Seller of Improper Tender or Delivery; Replacement.
(1) Where any tender or delivery by the seller is rejected because non-conforming and the time for
performance has not yet expired, the seller may seasonably notify the buyer of his intention to cure and
may then within the contract time make a conforming delivery.
(2) Where the buyer rejects a non-conforming tender which the seller had reasonable grounds to believe
would be acceptable with or without money allowance the seller may if he seasonably notifies the buyer
have a further reasonable time to substitute a conforming tender.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) permits a seller who has made a non-conforming tender in any case to make a conforming
delivery within the contract time upon seasonable notification to the buyer. It applies even where the seller has
taken back the non-conforming goods and refunded the purchase price. He may still make a good tender within the
contract period. The closer, however, it is to the contract date, the greater is the necessity for extreme promptness
on the seller's part in notifying of his intention to cure, if such notification is to be "seasonable" under this
subsection.
The rule of this subsection, moreover, is qualified by its underlying reasons. Thus if, after contracting for June
delivery, a buyer later makes known to the seller his need for shipment early in the month and the seller ships
accordingly, the "contract time" has been cut down by the supervening modification and the time for cure of tender
must be referred to this modified time term.
2. Subsection (2) seeks to avoid injustice to the seller by reason of a surprise rejection by the buyer. However, the
seller is not protected unless he had "reasonable grounds to believe" that the tender would be acceptable. Such
reasonable grounds can lie in prior course of dealing, course of performance or usage of trade as well as in the
particular circumstances surrounding the making of the contract. The seller is charged with commercial knowledge
of any factors in a particular sales situation which require him to comply strictly with his obligations under the
contract as, for example, strict conformity of documents in an overseas shipment or the sale of precision parts or
chemicals for use in manufacture. Further, if the buyer gives notice either implicitly, as by a prior course of dealing
involving rigorous inspections, or expressly, as by the deliberate inclusion of a "no replacement" clause in the
contract, the seller is to be held to rigid compliance. If the clause appears in a "form" contract evidence that it is out
of line with trade usage or the prior course of dealing and was not called to the seller's attention may be sufficient to
show that the seller had reasonable grounds to believe that the tender would be acceptable.
§ 2-508. Cure by Seller of Improper Tender or Delivery; Replacement.
Page 2 of 2
3. The words "a further reasonable time to substitute a conforming tender" are intended as words of limitation to
protect the buyer. What is a "reasonable time" depends upon the attending circumstances. Compare Section 2-
511 on the comparable case of a seller's surprise demand for legal tender.
4. Existing trade usages permitting variations without rejection but with price allowance enter into the agreement
itself as contractual limitations of remedy and are not covered by this section.
Cross References:
Point 2: Section 2-302.
Point 3: Section 2-511.
Point 4: Sections 1-205 and 2-721.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conforming". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Money". Section 1-201.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-509
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-509. Risk of Loss in the Absence of Breach.
(1) Where the contract requires or authorizes the seller to ship the goods by carrier
(a) if it does not require him to deliver them at a particular destination, the risk of loss passes to the
buyer when the goods are duly delivered to the carrier even though the shipment is under reservation (
Section 2-505); but
(b) if it does require him to deliver them at a particular destination and the goods are there duly
tendered while in the possession of the carrier, the risk of loss passes to the buyer when the goods are
there duly so tendered as to enable the buyer to take delivery.
(2) Where the goods are held by a bailee to be delivered without being moved, the risk of loss passes to
the buyer
(a) on his receipt of possession or control of a negotiable document of title covering the goods; or
(b) on acknowledgment by the bailee of the buyer's right to possession of the goods; or
(c) after his receipt of possession or control of a non-negotiable document of title or other direction to
deliver in a record, as provided in subsection (4)(b) of Section 2-503.
(3) In any case not within subsection (1) or (2), the risk of loss passes to the buyer on his receipt of the
goods if the seller is a merchant; otherwise the risk passes to the buyer on tender of delivery.
(4) The provisions of this section are subject to contrary agreement of the parties and to the provisions of
this Article on sale on approval ( Section 2-327) and on effect of breach on risk of loss ( Section 2-510).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 22, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten, subsection (3) of this section modifying prior law.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. The underlying theory of these sections on risk of loss is the adoption of the contractual approach rather than an
arbitrary shifting of the risk with the "property" in the goods. The scope of the present section, therefore, is limited
strictly to those cases where there has been no breach by the seller. Where for any reason his delivery or tender
fails to conform to the contract, the present section does not apply and the situation is governed by the provisions
on effect of breach on risk of loss.
2. The provisions of subsection (1) apply where the contract "requires or authorizes" shipment of the goods. This
language is intended to be construed parallel to comparable language in the section on shipment by seller. In order
that the goods be "duly delivered to the carrier" under paragraph (a) a contract must be entered into with the carrier
§ 2-509. Risk of Loss in the Absence of Breach.
Page 2 of 3
which will satisfy the requirements of the section on shipment by the seller and the delivery must be made under
circumstances which will enable the seller to take any further steps necessary to a due tender. The underlying
reason of this subsection does not require that the shipment be made after contracting, but where, for example, the
seller buys the goods afloat and later diverts the shipment to the buyer, he must identify the goods to the contract
before the risk of loss can pass. To transfer the risk it is enough that a proper shipment and a proper identification
come to apply to the same goods although, aside from special agreement, the risk will not pass retroactively to the
time of shipment in such a case.
3. Whether the contract involves delivery at the seller's place of business or at the situs of the goods, a merchant
seller cannot transfer risk of loss and it remains upon him until actual receipt by the buyer, even though full payment
has been made and the buyer has been notified that the goods are at his disposal. Protection is afforded him, in
the event of breach by the buyer, under the next section.
The underlying theory of this rule is that a merchant who is to make physical delivery at his own place continues
meanwhile to control the goods and can be expected to insure his interest in them. The buyer, on the other hand,
has no control of the goods and it is extremely unlikely that he will carry insurance on goods not yet in his
possession.
4. Where the agreement provides for delivery of the goods as between the buyer and seller without removal from
the physical possession of a bailee, the provisions on manner of tender of delivery apply on the point of transfer of
risk. Due delivery of a negotiable document of title covering the goods or acknowledgment by the bailee that he
holds for the buyer completes the "delivery" and passes the risk. See definition of delivery in Article 1, Section 1-
201 and the definition of control in Article 7, Section 7-106.
5. The provisions of this section are made subject by subsection (4) to the "contrary agreement" of the parties. This
language is intended as the equivalent of the phrase "unless otherwise agreed" used more frequently throughout
this Act. "Contrary" is in no way used as a word of limitation and the buyer and seller are left free to readjust their
rights and risks as declared by this section in any manner agreeable to them. Contrary agreement can also be
found in the circumstances of the case, a trade usage or practice, or a course of dealing or performance.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-510(1).
Point 2: Sections 2-503 and 2-504.
Point 3: Sections 2-104, 2-503 and 2-510.
Point 4: Section 2-503(4).
Point 5: Section 1-201.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
§ 2-509. Risk of Loss in the Absence of Breach.
Page 3 of 3
"Merchant". Section 2-104.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Receipt" of goods. Section 2-103.
"Sale on approval". Section 2-326.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-510
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-510. Effect of Breach on Risk of Loss.
(1) Where a tender or delivery of goods so fails to conform to the contract as to give a right of rejection the
risk of their loss remains on the seller until cure or acceptance.
(2) Where the buyer rightfully revokes acceptance he may to the extent of any deficiency in his effective
insurance coverage treat the risk of loss as having rested on the seller from the beginning.
(3) Where the buyer as to conforming goods already identified to the contract for sale repudiates or is
otherwise in breach before risk of their loss has passed to him, the seller may to the extent of any
deficiency in his effective insurance coverage treat the risk of loss as resting on the buyer for a
commercially reasonable time.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To make clear that:
1. Under subsection (1) the seller by his individual action cannot shift the risk of loss to the buyer unless his action
conforms with all the conditions resting on him under the contract.
2. The "cure" of defective tenders contemplated by subsection (1) applies only to those situations in which the seller
makes changes in goods already tendered, such as repair, partial substitution, sorting out from an improper mixture
and the like since "cure" by repossession and new tender has no effect on the risk of loss of the goods originally
tendered. The seller's privilege of cure does not shift the risk, however, until the cure is completed.
Where defective documents are involved a cure of the defect by the seller or a waiver of the defects by the buyer
will operate to shift the risk under this section. However, if the goods have been destroyed prior to the cure or the
buyer is unaware of their destruction at the time he waives the defect in the documents, the risk of the loss must still
be borne by the seller, for the risk shifts only at the time of cure, waiver of documentary defects or acceptance of
the goods.
3. In cases where there has been a breach of the contract, if the one in control of the goods is the aggrieved party,
whatever loss or damage may prove to be uncovered by his insurance falls upon the contract breaker under
subsections (2) and (3) rather than upon him. The word "effective" as applied to insurance coverage in those
subsections is used to meet the case of supervening insolvency of the insurer. The "deficiency" referred to in the
text means such deficiency in the insurance coverage as exists without subrogation. This section merely distributes
the risk of loss as stated and is not intended to be disturbed by any subrogation of an insurer.
Cross Reference:
§ 2-510. Effect of Breach on Risk of Loss.
Page 2 of 2
Section 2-509.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-511
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-511. Tender of Payment by Buyer; Payment by Check.
(1) Unless otherwise agreed tender of payment is a condition to the seller's duty to tender and complete
any delivery.
(2) Tender of payment is sufficient when made by any means or in any manner current in the ordinary
course of business unless the seller demands payment in legal tender and gives any extension of time
reasonably necessary to procure it.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act on the effect of an instrument on an obligation ( Section 3-310),
payment by check is conditional and is defeated as between the parties by dishonor of the check on due
presentment.
As amended in 1994.
See Appendix XI for material relating to changes made in text in 1994.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 42, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten by this section and Section 2-507.
Purposes of Changes:
1. The requirement of payment against delivery in subsection (1) is applicable to non-commercial sales generally
and to ordinary sales at retail although it has no application to the great body of commercial contracts which carry
credit terms. Subsection (1) applies also to documentary contracts in general and to contracts which look to
shipment by the seller but contain no term on time and manner of payment, in which situations the payment may, in
proper case, be demanded against delivery of appropriate documents.
In the case of specific transactions such as C.O.D. sales or agreements providing for payment against documents,
the provisions of this subsection must be considered in conjunction with the special sections of the Article dealing
with such terms. The provision that tender of payment is a condition to the seller's duty to tender and complete
"any delivery" integrates this section with the language and policy of the section on delivery in several lots which
call for separate payment. Finally, attention should be directed to the provision on right to adequate assurance of
performance which recognizes, even before the time for tender, an obligation on the buyer not to impair the seller's
expectation of receiving payment in due course.
2. Unless there is agreement otherwise the concurrence of the conditions as to tender of payment and tender of
delivery requires their performance at a single place or time. This Article determines that place and time by
determining in various other sections the place and time for tender of delivery under various circumstances and in
particular types of transactions. The sections dealing with time and place of delivery together with the section on
§ 2-511. Tender of Payment by Buyer; Payment by Check.
Page 2 of 3
right to inspection of goods answer the subsidiary question as to when payment may be demanded before
inspection by the buyer.
3. The essence of the principle involved in subsection (2) is avoidance of commercial surprise at the time of
performance. The section on substituted performance covers the peculiar case in which legal tender is not
available to the commercial community.
4. Subsection (3) is concerned with the rights and obligations as between the parties to a sales transaction when
payment is made by check. This Article recognizes that the taking of a seemingly solvent party's check is
commercially normal and proper and, if due diligence is exercised in collection, is not to be penalized in any way.
The conditional character of the payment under this section refers only to the effect of the transaction "as between
the parties" thereto and does not purport to cut into the law of "absolute" and "conditional" payment as applied to
such other problems as the discharge of sureties or the responsibilities of a drawee bank which is at the same time
an agent for collection.
The phrase "by check" includes not only the buyer's own but any check which does not effect a discharge under
Article 3 (Section 3-802). Similarly the reason of this subsection should apply and the same result should be
reached where the buyer "pays" by sight draft on a commercial firm which is financing him.
5. Under subsection (3) payment by check is defeated if it is not honored upon due presentment. This corresponds
to the provisions of article on Commercial Paper. (Section 3-802). But if the seller procures certification of the
check instead of cashing it, the buyer is discharged. (Section 3-411).
6. Where the instrument offered by the buyer is not a payment but a credit instrument such as a note or a check
post-dated by even one day, the seller's acceptance of the instrument insofar as third parties are concerned,
amounts to a delivery on credit and his remedies are set forth in the section on buyer's insolvency. As between the
buyer and the seller, however, the matter turns on the present subsection and the section on conditional delivery
and subsequent dishonor of the instrument gives the seller rights on it as well as for breach of the contract for sale.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-307, 2-310, 2-320, 2-325, 2-503, 2-513 and 2-609.
Point 2: Sections 2-307, 2-310, 2-319, 2-322, 2-503, 2-504 and 2-513.
Point 3: Section 2-614.
Point 5: Article 3, esp. Sections 3-802 and 3-411.
Point 6: Sections 2-507, 2-702, and Article 3.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Check". Section 3-104.
"Dishonor". Section 3-508.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 2-511. Tender of Payment by Buyer; Payment by Check.
Page 3 of 3
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-512
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-512. Payment by Buyer Before Inspection.
(1) Where the contract requires payment before inspection non-conformity of the goods does not excuse
the buyer from so making payment unless
(a) the non-conformity appears without inspection; or
(b) despite tender of the required documents the circumstances would justify injunction against honor
under this Act ( Section 5-109(b)).
(2) Payment pursuant to subsection (1) does not constitute an acceptance of goods or impair the buyer's
right to inspect or any of his remedies.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None, but see Sections 47 and 49, Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) of the present section recognizes that the essence of a contract providing for payment before
inspection is the intention of the parties to shift to the buyer the risks which would usually rest upon the seller. The
basic nature of the transaction is thus preserved and the buyer is in most cases required to pay first and litigate as
to any defects later.
2. "Inspection" under this section is an inspection in a manner reasonable for detecting defects in goods whose
surface appearance is satisfactory.
3. Clause (a) of this subsection states an exception to the general rule based on common sense and normal
commercial practice. The apparent non-conformity referred to is one which is evident in the mere process of taking
delivery.
4. Clause (b) is concerned with contracts for payment against documents and incorporates the general clarification
and modification of the case law contained in the section on excuse of a financing agency. Section 5-114.
5. Subsection (2) makes explicit the general policy of the Uniform Sales Act that the payment required before
inspection in no way impairs the buyer's remedies or rights in the event of a default by the seller. The remedies
preserved to the buyer are all of his remedies, which include as a matter of reason the remedy for total non-delivery
after payment in advance.
The provision on performance or acceptance under reservation of rights does not apply to the situations
contemplated here in which payment is made in due course under the contract and the buyer need not pay "under
protest" or the like in order to preserve his rights as to defects discovered upon inspection.
§ 2-512. Payment by Buyer Before Inspection.
Page 2 of 2
6. This section applies to cases in which the contract requires payment before inspection either by the express
agreement of the parties or by reason of the effect in law of that contract. The present section must therefore be
considered in conjunction with the provision on right to inspection of goods which sets forth the instances in which
the buyer is not entitled to inspection before payment.
Cross References:
Point 4: Article 5.
Point 5: Section 1-207.
Point 6: Section 2-513(3).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Financing agency". Section 2-104.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-513
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-513. Buyer's Right to Inspection of Goods.
(1) Unless otherwise agreed and subject to subsection (3), where goods are tendered or delivered or
identified to the contract for sale, the buyer has a right before payment or acceptance to inspect them at
any reasonable place and time and in any reasonable manner. When the seller is required or authorized to
send the goods to the buyer, the inspection may be after their arrival.
(2) Expenses of inspection must be borne by the buyer but may be recovered from the seller if the goods
do not conform and are rejected.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed and subject to the provisions of this Article on C.I.F. contracts (subsection (3)
of Section 2-321), the buyer is not entitled to inspect the goods before payment of the price when the
contract provides
(a) for delivery "C.O.D." or on other like terms; or
(b) for payment against documents of title, except where such payment is due only after the goods are
to become available for inspection.
(4) A place or method of inspection fixed by the parties is presumed to be exclusive but unless otherwise
expressly agreed it does not postpone identification or shift the place for delivery or for passing the risk of
loss. If compliance becomes impossible, inspection shall be as provided in this section unless the place or
method fixed was clearly intended as an indispensable condition failure of which avoids the contract.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provisions: Section 47(2), (3), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten, Subsections (2) and (3) being new.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter: To correspond in substance with the prior uniform statutory provision and to
incorporate in addition some of the results of the better case law so that:
1. The buyer is entitled to inspect goods as provided in subsection (1) unless it has been otherwise agreed by the
parties. The phrase "unless otherwise agreed" is intended principally to cover such situations as those outlined in
subsections (3) and (4) and those in which the agreement of the parties negates inspection before tender of
delivery. However, no agreement by the parties can displace the entire right of inspection except where the
contract is simply for the sale of "this thing." Even in a sale of boxed goods "as is" inspection is a right of the buyer,
since if the boxes prove to contain some other merchandise altogether the price can be recovered back; nor do the
limitations of the provision on effect of acceptance apply in such a case.
2. The buyer's right of inspection is available to him upon tender, delivery or appropriation of the goods with notice
to him. Since inspection is available to him on tender, where payment is due against delivery he may, unless
§ 2-513. Buyer's Right to Inspection of Goods.
Page 2 of 4
otherwise agreed, make his inspection before payment of the price. It is also available to him after receipt of the
goods and so may be postponed after receipt for a reasonable time. Failure to inspect before payment does not
impair the right to inspect after receipt of the goods unless the case falls within subsection (4) on agreed and
exclusive inspection provisions. The right to inspect goods which have been appropriated with notice to the buyer
holds whether or not the sale was by sample.
3. The buyer may exercise his right of inspection at any reasonable time or place and in any reasonable manner. It
is not necessary that he select the most appropriate time, place or manner to inspect or that his selection be the
customary one in the trade or locality. Any reasonable time, place or manner is available to him and the
reasonableness will be determined by trade usages, past practices between the parties and the other
circumstances of the case.
The last sentence of subsection (1) makes it clear that the place of arrival of shipped goods is a reasonable place
for their inspection.
4. Expenses of an inspection made to satisfy the buyer of the seller's performance must be assumed by the buyer
in the first instance. Since the rule provides merely for an allocation of expense there is no policy to prevent the
parties from providing otherwise in the agreement. Where the buyer would normally bear the expenses of the
inspection but the goods are rightly rejected because of what the inspection reveals, demonstrable and reasonable
costs of the inspection are part of his incidental damage caused by the seller's breach.
5. In the case of payment against documents, subsection (3) requires payment before inspection, since shipping
documents against which payment is to be made will commonly be tendered while the goods are still in transit. This
Article recognizes no exception in any peculiar case in which the goods happen to arrive before the documents are
tendered. However, where by the agreement payment is to await the arrival of the goods, inspection before
payment becomes proper since the goods are then "available for inspection."
Where by the agreement the documents are to be tendered after arrival of the goods the buyer is entitled to inspect
before payment since the goods are then "available for inspection". Proof of usage is not necessary to establish
this right, but if inspection before payment is disputed the contrary must be established by usage or by an explicit
contract term to that effect.
For the same reason, that the goods are available for inspection, a term calling for payment against storage
documents or a delivery order does not normally bar the buyer's right to inspection before payment under
subsection (3)(b). This result is reinforced by the buyer's right under subsection (1) to inspect goods which have
been appropriated with notice to him.
6. Under subsection (4) an agreed place or method of inspection is generally held to be intended as exclusive.
However, where compliance with such an agreed inspection term becomes impossible, the question is basically
one of intention. If the parties clearly intend that the method of inspection named is to be a necessary condition
without which the entire deal is to fail, the contract is at an end if that method becomes impossible. On the other
hand, if the parties merely seek to indicate a convenient and reliable method but do not intend to give up the deal in
the event of its failure, any reasonable method of inspection may be substituted under this Article.
Since the purpose of an agreed place of inspection is only to make sure at that point whether or not the goods will
be thrown back, the "exclusive" feature of the named place is satisfied under this Article if the buyer's failure to
inspect there is held to be an acceptance with the knowledge of such defects as inspection would have revealed
within the section on waiver of buyer's objections by failure to particularize. Revocation of the acceptance is limited
to the situations stated in the section pertaining to that subject. The reasonable time within which to give notice of
defects within the section on notice of breach begins to run from the point of the "acceptance."
7. Clauses on time of inspection are commonly clauses which limit the time in which the buyer must inspect and
give notice of defects. Such clauses are therefore governed by the section of this Article which requires that such a
time limitation must be reasonable.
§ 2-513. Buyer's Right to Inspection of Goods.
Page 3 of 4
8. Inspection under this Article is not to be regarded as a "condition precedent to the passing of title" so that risk
until inspection remains on the seller. Under subsection (4) such an approach cannot be sustained. Issues
between the buyer and seller are settled in this Article almost wholly by special provisions and not by the technical
determination of the locus of the title. Thus "inspection as a condition to the passing of title" becomes a concept
almost without meaning. However, in peculiar circumstances inspection may still have some of the consequences
hitherto sought and obtained under that concept.
9. "Inspection" under this section has to do with the buyer's check-up on whether the seller's performance is in
accordance with a contract previously made and is not to be confused with the "examination" of the goods or of a
sample or model of them at the time of contracting which may affect the warranties involved in the contract.
Cross References:
Generally: Sections 2-310(b), 2-321(3) and 2-606(1)(b).
Point 1: Section 2-607.
Point 2: Sections 2-501 and 2-502.
Point 4: Section 2-715.
Point 5: Section 2-321(3).
Point 6: Sections 2-606 to 2-608.
Point 7: Section 1-204.
Point 8: Comment to Section 2-401.
Point 9: Section 2-316(3)(b).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Presumed". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Send". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
§ 2-513. Buyer's Right to Inspection of Goods.
Page 4 of 4
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-514
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-514. When Documents Deliverable on Acceptance; When on Payment.
Unless otherwise agreed documents against which a draft is drawn are to be delivered to the drawee on
acceptance of the draft if it is payable more than three days after presentment; otherwise, only on payment.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 41, Uniform Bills of Lading Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To make the provision one of general application so that:
1. It covers any document against which a draft may be drawn, whatever may be the form of the document, and
applies to interpret the action of a seller or consignor insofar as it may affect the rights and duties of any buyer,
consignee or financing agency concerned with the paper. Supplementary or corresponding provisions are found in
Sections 4-503 and 5-112.
2. An "arrival" draft is a sight draft within the purpose of this section.
Cross References:
Point 1: See Sections 2-502, 2-505(2), 2-507(2), 2-512, 2-513, 2-607 concerning protection of rights of buyer and
seller, and 4-503 and 5-112 on delivery of documents.
Definitional Cross References:
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Draft". Section 3-104.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-515
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 5.
PERFORMANCE
§ 2-515. Preserving Evidence of Goods in Dispute.
In furtherance of the adjustment of any claim or dispute
(a) either party on reasonable notification to the other and for the purpose of ascertaining the facts and
preserving evidence has the right to inspect, test and sample the goods including such of them as may
be in the possession or control of the other; and
(b) the parties may agree to a third party inspection or survey to determine the conformity or condition
of the goods and may agree that the findings shall be binding upon them in any subsequent litigation or
adjustment.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. To meet certain serious problems which arise when there is a dispute as to the quality of the goods and thereby
perhaps to aid the parties in reaching a settlement, and to further the use of devices which will promote certainty as
to the condition of the goods, or at least aid in preserving evidence of their condition.
2. Under paragraph (a), to afford either party an opportunity for preserving evidence, whether or not agreement has
been reached, and thereby to reduce uncertainty in any litigation and, in turn perhaps, to promote agreement.
Paragraph (a) does not conflict with the provisions on the seller's right to resell rejected goods or the buyer's similar
right. Apparent conflict between these provisions which will be suggested in certain circumstances is to be resolved
by requiring prompt action by the parties. Nor does paragraph (a) impair the effect of a term for payment before
inspection. Short of such defects as amount to fraud or substantial failure of consideration, non-conformity is
neither an excuse nor a defense to an action for non-acceptance of documents. Normally, therefore, until the buyer
has made payment, inspected and rejected the goods, there is no occasion or use for the rights under paragraph
(a).
3. Under paragraph (b), to provide for third party inspection upon the agreement of the parties, thereby opening the
door to amicable adjustments based upon the findings of such third parties.
The use of the phrase "conformity or condition" makes it clear that the parties' agreement may range from a
complete settlement of all aspects of the dispute by a third party to the use of a third party merely to determine and
record the condition of the goods so that they can be resold or used to reduce the stake in controversy.
"Conformity", at one end of the scale of possible issues, includes the whole question of interpretation of the
agreement and its legal effect, the state of the goods in regard to quality and condition, whether any defects are due
to factors which operate at the risk of the buyer, and the degree of non-conformity where that may be material.
§ 2-515. Preserving Evidence of Goods in Dispute.
Page 2 of 2
"Condition", at the other end of the scale, includes nothing but the degree of damage or deterioration which the
goods show. Paragraph (b) is intended to reach any point in the gamut which the parties may agree upon.
The principle of the section on reservation of rights reinforces this paragraph in simplifying such adjustments as the
parties wish to make in partial settlement while reserving their rights as to any further points. Paragraph (b) also
suggests the use of arbitration, where desired, of any points left open, but nothing in this section is intended to
repeal or amend any statute governing arbitration. Where any question arises as to the extent of the parties'
agreement under the paragraph, the presumption should be that it was meant to extend only to the relation between
the contract description and the goods as delivered, since that is what a craftsman in the trade would normally be
expected to report upon. Finally, a written and authenticated report of inspection or tests by a third party, whether
or not sampling has been practicable, is entitled to be admitted as evidence under this Act, for it is a third party
document.
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 2-513(3), 2-706 and 2-711(2) and Article 5.
Point 3: Sections 1-202 and 1-207.
Definitional Cross References:
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-601
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-601. Buyer's Rights on Improper Delivery.
Subject to the provisions of this Article on breach in installment contracts ( Section 2-612) and unless
otherwise agreed under the sections on contractual limitations of remedy ( Sections 2-718 and 2-719), if the
goods or the tender of delivery fail in any respect to conform to the contract, the buyer may
(a) reject the whole; or
(b) accept the whole; or
(c) accept any commercial unit or units and reject the rest.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: No one general equivalent provision but numerous provisions, dealing with
situations of non-conformity where buyer may accept or reject, including Sections 11, 44 and 69(1), Uniform Sales
Act.
Changes: Partial acceptance in good faith is recognized and the buyer's remedies on the contract for breach of
warranty and the like, where the buyer has returned the goods after transfer of title, are no longer barred.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. A buyer accepting a non-conforming tender is not penalized by the loss of any remedy otherwise open to him.
This policy extends to cover and regulate the acceptance of a part of any lot improperly tendered in any case where
the price can reasonably be apportioned. Partial acceptance is permitted whether the part of the goods accepted
conforms or not. The only limitation on partial acceptance is that good faith and commercial reasonableness must
be used to avoid undue impairment of the value of the remaining portion of the goods. This is the reason for the
insistence on the "commercial unit" in paragraph (c). In this respect, the test is not only what unit has been the
basis of contract, but whether the partial acceptance produces so materially adverse an effect on the remainder as
to constitute bad faith.
2. Acceptance made with the knowledge of the other party is final. An original refusal to accept may be withdrawn
by a later acceptance if the seller has indicated that he is holding the tender open. However, if the buyer attempts
to accept, either in whole or in part, after his original rejection has caused the seller to arrange for other disposition
of the goods, the buyer must answer for any ensuing damage since the next section provides that any exercise of
ownership after rejection is wrongful as against the seller. Further, he is liable even though the seller may choose
to treat his action as acceptance rather than conversion, since the damage flows from the misleading notice. Such
arrangements for resale or other disposition of the goods by the seller must be viewed as within the normal
contemplation of a buyer who has given notice of rejection. However, the buyer's attempts in good faith to dispose
of defective goods where the seller has failed to give instructions within a reasonable time are not to be regarded as
an acceptance.
§ 2-601. Buyer's Rights on Improper Delivery.
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Sections 2-602(2)(a), 2-612, 2-718 and 2-719.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Commercial unit". Section 2-105.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Installment contract". Section 2-612.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-602
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-602. Manner and Effect of Rightful Rejection.
(1) Rejection of goods must be within a reasonable time after their delivery or tender. It is ineffective
unless the buyer seasonably notifies the seller.
(2) Subject to the provisions of the two following sections on rejected goods ( Sections 2-603 and 2-604),
(a) after rejection any exercise of ownership by the buyer with respect to any commercial unit is
wrongful as against the seller; and
(b) if the buyer has before rejection taken physical possession of goods in which he does not have a
security interest under the provisions of this Article (subsection (3) of Section 2-711), he is under a duty
after rejection to hold them with reasonable care at the seller's disposition for a time sufficient to permit
the seller to remove them; but
(c) the buyer has no further obligations with regard to goods rightfully rejected.
(3) The seller's rights with respect to goods wrongfully rejected are governed by the provisions of this
Article on Seller's remedies in general ( Section 2-703).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 50, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. A tender or delivery of goods made pursuant to a contract of sale, even though wholly non-conforming, requires
affirmative action by the buyer to avoid acceptance. Under subsection (1), therefore, the buyer is given a
reasonable time to notify the seller of his rejection, but without such seasonable notification his rejection is
ineffective. The sections of this Article dealing with inspection of goods must be read in connection with the buyer's
reasonable time for action under this subsection. Contract provisions limiting the time for rejection fall within the
rule of the section on "Time" and are effective if the time set gives the buyer a reasonable time for discovery of
defects. What constitutes a due "notifying" of rejection by the buyer to the seller is defined in Section 1-201.
2. Subsection (2) lays down the normal duties of the buyer upon rejection, which flow from the relationship of the
parties. Beyond his duty to hold the goods with reasonable care for the buyer's [seller's] disposition, this section
continues the policy of prior uniform legislation in generally relieving the buyer from any duties with respect to them,
except when the circumstances impose the limited obligation of salvage upon him under the next section.
3. The present section applies only to rightful rejection by the buyer. If the seller has made a tender which in all
respects conforms to the contract, the buyer has a positive duty to accept and his failure to do so constitutes a
§ 2-602. Manner and Effect of Rightful Rejection.
Page 2 of 2
"wrongful rejection" which gives the seller immediate remedies for breach. Subsection (3) is included here to
emphasize the sharp distinction between the rejection of an improper tender and the non-acceptance which is a
breach by the buyer.
4. The provisions of this section are to be appropriately limited or modified when a negotiation is in process.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 1-201, 1-204(1) and (3), 2-512(2), 2-513(1) and 2-606(1)(b).
Point 2: Section 2-603(1).
Point 3: Section 2-703.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Commercial unit". Section 2-105.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Merchant". Section 2-104.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-603
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-603. Merchant Buyer's Duties as to Rightfully Rejected Goods.
(1) Subject to any security interest in the buyer (subsection (3) of Section 2-711), when the seller has no
agent or place of business at the market of rejection a merchant buyer is under a duty after rejection of
goods in his possession or control to follow any reasonable instructions received from the seller with
respect to the goods and in the absence of such instructions to make reasonable efforts to sell them for the
seller's account if they are perishable or threaten to decline in value speedily. Instructions are not
reasonable if on demand indemnity for expenses is not forthcoming.
(2) When the buyer sells goods under subsection (1), he is entitled to reimbursement from the seller or out
of the proceeds for reasonable expenses of caring for and selling them, and if the expenses include no
selling commission then to such commission as is usual in the trade or if there is none to a reasonable sum
not exceeding ten per cent on the gross proceeds.
(3) In complying with this section the buyer is held only to good faith and good faith conduct hereunder is
neither acceptance nor conversion nor the basis of an action for damages.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. This section recognizes the duty imposed upon the merchant buyer by good faith and commercial practice to
follow any reasonable instructions of the seller as to reshipping, storing, delivery to a third party, reselling or the like.
Subsection (1) goes further and extends the duty to include the making of reasonable efforts to effect a salvage
sale where the value of the goods is threatened and the seller's instructions do not arrive in time to prevent serious
loss.
2. The limitations on the buyer's duty to resell under subsection (1) are to be liberally construed. The buyer's duty
to resell under this section arises from commercial necessity and thus is present only when the seller has "no agent
or place of business at the market of rejection". A financing agency which is acting in behalf of the seller in
handling the documents rejected by the buyer is sufficiently the seller's agent to lift the burden of salvage resale
from the buyer. (See provisions of Sections 4-503 and 5-112 on bank's duties with respect to rejected documents.)
The buyer's duty to resell is extended only to goods in his "possession or control", but these are intended as words
of wide, rather than narrow, import. In effect, the measure of the buyer's "control" is whether he can practicably
effect control without undue commercial burden.
3. The explicit provisions for reimbursement and compensation to the buyer in subsection (2) are applicable and
necessary only where he is not acting under instructions from the seller. As provided in subsection (1) the seller's
instructions to be "reasonable" must on demand of the buyer include indemnity for expenses.
§ 2-603. Merchant Buyer's Duties as to Rightfully Rejected Goods.
Page 2 of 2
4. Since this section makes the resale of perishable goods an affirmative duty in contrast to a mere right to sell as
under the case law, subsection (3) makes it clear that the buyer is liable only for the exercise of good faith in
determining whether the value of the goods is sufficiently threatened to justify a quick resale or whether he has
waited a sufficient length of time for instructions, or what a reasonable means and place of resale is.
5. A buyer who fails to make a salvage sale when his duty to do so under this section has arisen is subject to
damages pursuant to the section on liberal administration of remedies.
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 4-503 and 5-112.
Point 5: Section 1-106. Compare generally section 2-706.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Good faith". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Merchant". Section 2-104.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-604
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-604. Buyer's Options as to Salvage of Rightfully Rejected Goods.
Subject to the provisions of the immediately preceding section on perishables if the seller gives no instructions
within a reasonable time after notification of rejection the buyer may store the rejected goods for the seller's account
or reship them to him or resell them for the seller's account with reimbursement as provided in the preceding
section. Such action is not acceptance or conversion.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
The basic purpose of this section is twofold: on the one hand it aims at reducing the stake in dispute and on the
other at avoiding the pinning of a technical "acceptance" on a buyer who has taken steps towards realization on or
preservation of the goods in good faith. This section is essentially a salvage section and the buyer's right to act
under it is conditioned upon (1) non-conformity of the goods, (2) due notification of rejection to the seller under the
section on manner of rejection, and (3) the absence of any instructions from the seller which the merchant-buyer
has a duty to follow under the preceding section.
This section is designed to accord all reasonable leeway to a rightfully rejecting buyer acting in good faith. The
listing of what the buyer may do in the absence of instructions from the seller is intended to be not exhaustive but
merely illustrative. This is not a "merchant's" section and the options are pure options given to merchant and
nonmerchant buyers alike. The merchant-buyer, however, may in some instances be under a duty rather than an
option to resell under the provisions of the preceding section.
Cross References:
Sections 2-602(1), and 2-603(1) and 2-706.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 2-604. Buyer's Options as to Salvage of Rightfully Rejected Goods.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-605
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-605. Waiver of Buyer's Objections by Failure to Particularize.
(1) The buyer's failure to state in connection with rejection a particular defect which is ascertainable by
reasonable inspection precludes him from relying on the unstated defect to justify rejection or to establish
breach
(a) where the seller could have cured it if stated seasonably; or
(b) between merchants when the seller has after rejection made a request in writing for a full and final
written statement of all defects on which the buyer proposes to rely.
(2) Payment against documents made without reservation of rights precludes recovery of the payment for
defects apparent in the documents.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. The present section rests upon a policy of permitting the buyer to give a quick and informal notice of defects in a
tender without penalizing him for omissions in his statement, while at the same time protecting a seller who is
reasonably misled by the buyer's failure to state curable defects.
2. Where the defect in a tender is one which could have been cured by the seller, a buyer who merely rejects the
delivery without stating his objections to it is probably acting in commercial bad faith and seeking to get out of a deal
which has become unprofitable. Subsection (1)(a), following the general policy of this Article which looks to
preserving the deal wherever possible, therefore insists that the seller's right to correct his tender in such
circumstances be protected.
3. When the time for cure is past, subsection (1)(b) makes it plain that a seller is entitled upon request to a final
statement of objections upon which he can rely. What is needed is that he make clear to the buyer exactly what is
being sought. A formal demand under paragraph (b) will be sufficient in the case of a merchant-buyer.
4. Subsection (2) applies to the particular case of documents the same principle which the section on effects of
acceptance applies to the case of goods. The matter is dealt with in this section in terms of "waiver" of objections
rather than of right to revoke acceptance, partly to avoid any confusion with the problems of acceptance of goods
and partly because defects in documents which are not taken as grounds for rejection are generally minor ones.
The only defects concerned in the present subsection are defects in the documents which are apparent. This rule
applies to both tangible and electronic documents of title. Where payment is required against the documents they
must be inspected before payment, and the payment then constitutes acceptance of thedocuments. Under the
section dealing with this problem, such acceptance of the documents does not constitute an acceptance of the
§ 2-605. Waiver of Buyer's Objections by Failure to Particularize.
Page 2 of 2
goods or impair any options or remedies of the buyer for their improper delivery. Where the documents are
delivered without requiring such contemporary action as payment from the buyer, the reason of the next section on
what constitutes acceptance of goods, applies. Their acceptance by non-objection is therefore postponed until after
a reasonable time for their inspection. In either situation, however, the buyer "waives" only the defects apparent in
the documents.
Cross References:
Point 2: Section 2-508.
Point 4: Sections 2-512(2), 2-606(1)(b), 2-607(2).
Definitional Cross References:
"Between merchants". Section 2-104.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Writing" and "written". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-606
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-606. What Constitutes Acceptance of Goods.
(1) Acceptance of goods occurs when the buyer
(a) after a reasonable opportunity to inspect the goods signifies to the seller that the goods are
conforming or that he will take or retain them in spite of their non-conformity; or
(b) fails to make an effective rejection (subsection (1) of Section 2-602), but such acceptance does not
occur until the buyer has had a reasonable opportunity to inspect them; or
(c) does any act inconsistent with the seller's ownership; but if such act is wrongful as against the
seller it is an acceptance only if ratified by him.
(2) Acceptance of a part of any commercial unit is acceptance of that entire unit.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 48, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten, the qualification in paragraph (c) and subsection (2) being new; otherwise the general policy of
the prior legislation is continued.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter: To make it clear that:
1. Under this Article "acceptance" as applied to goods means that the buyer, pursuant to the contract, takes
particular goods which have been appropriated to the contract as his own, whether or not he is obligated to do so,
and whether he does so by words, action, or silence when it is time to speak. If the goods conform to the contract,
acceptance amounts only to the performance by the buyer of one part of his legal obligation.
2. Under this Article acceptance of goods is always acceptance of identified goods which have been appropriated to
the contract or are appropriated by the contract. There is no provision for "acceptance of title" apart from
acceptance in general, since acceptance of title is not material under this Article to the detailed rights and duties of
the parties. (See Section 2-401). The refinements of the older law between acceptance of goods and of title
become unnecessary in view of the provisions of the sections on effect and revocation of acceptance, on effects of
identification and on risk of loss, and those sections which free the seller's and buyer's remedies from the
complications and confusions caused by the question of whether title has or has not passed to the buyer before
breach.
3. Under paragraph (a), payment made after tender is always one circumstance tending to signify acceptance of the
goods but in itself it can never be more than one circumstance and is not conclusive. Also, a conditional
communication of acceptance always remains subject to its expressed conditions.
§ 2-606. What Constitutes Acceptance of Goods.
Page 2 of 2
4. Under paragraph (c), any action taken by the buyer, which is inconsistent with his claim that he has rejected the
goods, constitutes an acceptance. However, the provisions of paragraph (c) are subject to the sections dealing with
rejection by the buyer which permit the buyer to take certain actions with respect to the goods pursuant to his
options and duties imposed by those sections, without effecting an acceptance of the goods. The second clause of
paragraph (c) modifies some of the prior case law and makes it clear that "acceptance" in law based on the
wrongful act of the acceptor is acceptance only as against the wrongdoer and then only at the option of the party
wronged.
In the same manner in which a buyer can bind himself, despite his insistence that he is rejecting or has rejected the
goods, by an act inconsistent with the seller's ownership under paragraph (c), he can obligate himself by a
communication of acceptance despite a prior rejection under paragraph (a). However, the sections on buyer's
rights on improper delivery and on the effect of rightful rejection, make it clear that after he once rejects a tender,
paragraph (a) does not operate in favor of the buyer unless the seller has re-tendered the goods or has taken
affirmative action indicating that he is holding the tender open. See also Comment 2 to Section 2-601.
5. Subsection (2) supplements the policy of the section on buyer's rights on improper delivery, recognizing the
validity of a partial acceptance but insisting that the buyer exercise this right only as to whole commercial units.
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 2-401, 2-509, 2-510, 2-607, 2-608 and Part 7.
Point 4: Sections 2-601 through 2-604.
Point 5: Section 2-601.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Commercial unit". Section 2-105.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-607
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-607. Effect of Acceptance; Notice of Breach; Burden of Establishing
Breach After Acceptance; Notice of Claim or Litigation to Person
Answerable Over.
(1) The buyer must pay at the contract rate for any goods accepted.
(2) Acceptance of goods by the buyer precludes rejection of the goods accepted and if made with
knowledge of a non-conformity cannot be revoked because of it unless the acceptance was on the
reasonable assumption that the non-conformity would be seasonably cured but acceptance does not of
itself impair any other remedy provided by this Article for non-conformity.
(3) Where a tender has been accepted
(a) the buyer must within a reasonable time after he discovers or should have discovered any breach
notify the seller of breach or be barred from any remedy; and
(b) if the claim is one for infringement or the like (subsection (3) of Section 2-312) and the buyer is
sued as a result of such a breach he must so notify the seller within a reasonable time after he receives
notice of the litigation or be barred from any remedy over for liability established by the litigation.
(4) The burden is on the buyer to establish any breach with respect to the goods accepted.
(5) Where the buyer is sued for breach of a warranty or other obligation for which his seller is answerable
over
(a) he may give his seller written notice of the litigation. If the notice states that the seller may come in
and defend and that if the seller does not do so he will be bound in any action against him by his buyer
by any determination of fact common to the two litigations, then unless the seller after seasonable
receipt of the notice does come in and defend he is so bound.
(b) if the claim is one for infringement or the like (subsection (3) of Section 2-312) the original seller
may demand in writing that his buyer turn over to him control of the litigation including settlement or
else be barred from any remedy over and if he also agrees to bear all expense and to satisfy any
adverse judgment, then unless the buyer after seasonable receipt of the demand does turn over control
the buyer is so barred.
(6) The provisions of subsections (3), (4) and (5) apply to any obligation of a buyer to hold the seller
harmless against infringement or the like (subsection (3) of Section 2-312).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsection (1)-Section 41, Uniform Sales Act; Subsections (2) and (3)-Sections
49 and 69, Uniform Sales Act.
§ 2-607. Effect of Acceptance; Notice of Breach; Burden of Establishing Breach After Acceptance; Notice of
Claim or Litigation to Person Answerable Over.
Page 2 of 3
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To continue the prior basic policies with respect to acceptance of goods while making a
number of minor though material changes in the interest of simplicity and commercial convenience so that:
1. Under subsection (1), once the buyer accepts a tender the seller acquires a right to its price on the contract
terms. In cases of partial acceptance, the price of any part accepted is, if possible, to be reasonably apportioned,
using the type of apportionment familiar to the courts in quantum valebant cases, to be determined in terms of "the
contract rate," which is the rate determined from the bargain in fact (the agreement) after the rules and policies of
this Article have been brought to bear.
2. Under subsection (2) acceptance of goods precludes their subsequent rejection. Any return of the goods
thereafter must be by way of revocation of acceptance under the next section. Revocation is unavailable for a nonconformity
known to the buyer at the time of acceptance, except where the buyer has accepted on the reasonable
assumption that the non-conformity would be seasonably cured.
3. All other remedies of the buyer remain unimpaired under subsection (2). This is intended to include the buyer's
full rights with respect to future installments despite his acceptance of any earlier non-conforming installment.
4. The time of notification is to be determined by applying commercial standards to a merchant buyer. "A
reasonable time" for notification from a retail consumer is to be judged by different standards so that in his case it
will be extended, for the rule of requiring notification is designed to defeat commercial bad faith, not to deprive a
good faith consumer of his remedy.
The content of the notification need merely be sufficient to let the seller know that the transaction is still troublesome
and must be watched. There is no reason to require that the notification which saves the buyer's rights under this
section must include a clear statement of all the objections that will be relied on by the buyer, as under the section
covering statements of defects upon rejection (Section 2-605). Nor is there reason for requiring the notification to
be a claim for damages or of any threatened litigation or other resort to a remedy. The notification which saves the
buyer's rights under this Article need only be such as informs the seller that the transaction is claimed to involve a
breach, and thus opens the way for normal settlement through negotiation.
5. Under this Article various beneficiaries are given rights for injuries sustained by them because of the seller's
breach of warranty. Such a beneficiary does not fall within the reason of the present section in regard to discovery
of defects and the giving of notice within a reasonable time after acceptance, since he has nothing to do with
acceptance. However, the reason of this section does extend to requiring the beneficiary to notify the seller that an
injury has occurred. What is said above, with regard to the extended time for reasonable notification from the lay
consumer after the injury is also applicable here; but even a beneficiary can be properly held to the use of good
faith in notifying, once he has had time to become aware of the legal situation.
6. Subsection (4) unambiguously places the burden of proof to establish breach on the buyer after acceptance.
However, this rule becomes one purely of procedure when the tender accepted was non-conforming and the buyer
has given the seller notice of breach under subsection (3). For subsection (2) makes it clear that acceptance
leaves unimpaired the buyer's right to be made whole, and that right can be exercised by the buyer not only by way
of cross-claim for damages, but also by way of recoupment in diminution or extinction of the price.
7. Subsections (3)(b) and (5)(b) give a warrantor against infringement an opportunity to defend or compromise thirdparty
claims or be relieved of his liability. Subsection (5)(a) codifies for all warranties the practice of voucher to
defend. Compare Section 3-803. Subsection (6) makes these provisions applicable to the buyer's liability for
infringement under Section 2-312.
8. All of the provisions of the present section are subject to any explicit reservation of rights.
Cross References:
§ 2-607. Effect of Acceptance; Notice of Breach; Burden of Establishing Breach After Acceptance; Notice of
Claim or Litigation to Person Answerable Over.
Page 3 of 3
Point 1: Section 1-201.
Point 2: Section 2-608.
Point 4: Sections 1-204 and 2-605.
Point 5: Section 2-318.
Point 6: Section 2-717.
Point 7: Sections 2-312 and 3-803.
Point 8: Section 1-207.
Definitional Cross References:
"Burden of establishing". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-608
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-608. Revocation of Acceptance in Whole or in Part.
(1) The buyer may revoke his acceptance of a lot or commercial unit whose non-conformity substantially
impairs its value to him if he has accepted it
(a) on the reasonable assumption that its non-conformity would be cured and it has not been
seasonably cured; or
(b) without discovery of such non-conformity if his acceptance was reasonably induced either by the
difficulty of discovery before acceptance or by the seller's assurances.
(2) Revocation of acceptance must occur within a reasonable time after the buyer discovers or should have
discovered the ground for it and before any substantial change in condition of the goods which is not
caused by their own defects. It is not effective until the buyer notifies the seller of it.
(3) A buyer who so revokes has the same rights and duties with regard to the goods involved as if he had
rejected them.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 69(1)(d), (3), (4) and (5), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. Although the prior basic policy is continued, the buyer is no longer required to elect between revocation of
acceptance and recovery of damages for breach. Both are now available to him. The non-alternative character of
the two remedies is stressed by the terms used in the present section. The section no longer speaks of
"rescission," a term capable of ambiguous application either to transfer of title to the goods or to the contract of sale
and susceptible also of confusion with cancellation for cause of an executed or executory portion of the contract.
The remedy under this section is instead referred to simply as "revocation of acceptance" of goods tendered under
a contract for sale and involves no suggestion of "election" of any sort.
2. Revocation of acceptance is possible only where the non-conformity substantially impairs the value of the goods
to the buyer. For this purpose the test is not what the seller had reason to know at the time of contracting; the
question is whether the non-conformity is such as will in fact cause a substantial impairment of value to the buyer
though the seller had no advance knowledge as to the buyer's particular circumstances.
3. "Assurances" by the seller under paragraph (b) of subsection (1) can rest as well in the circumstances or in the
contract as in explicit language used at the time of delivery. The reason for recognizing such assurances is that
they induce the buyer to delay discovery. These are the only assurances involved in paragraph (b). Explicit
§ 2-608. Revocation of Acceptance in Whole or in Part.
Page 2 of 3
assurances may be made either in good faith or bad faith. In either case any remedy accorded by this Article is
available to the buyer under the section on remedies for fraud.
4. Subsection (2) requires notification of revocation of acceptance within a reasonable time after discovery of the
grounds for such revocation. Since this remedy will be generally resorted to only after attempts at adjustment have
failed, the reasonable time period should extend in most cases beyond the time in which notification of breach must
be given, beyond the time for discovery of non-conformity after acceptance and beyond the time for rejection after
tender. The parties may by their agreement limit the time for notification under this section, but the same sanctions
and considerations apply to such agreements as are discussed in the comment on manner and effect of rightful
rejection.
5. The content of the notice under subsection (2) is to be determined in this case as in others by considerations of
good faith, prevention of surprise, and reasonable adjustment. More will generally be necessary than the mere
notification of breach required under the preceding section. On the other hand the requirements of the section on
waiver of buyer's objections do not apply here. The fact that quick notification of trouble is desirable affords good
ground for being slow to bind a buyer by his first statement. Following the general policy of this Article, the
requirements of the content of notification are less stringent in the case of a non-merchant buyer.
6. Under subsection (2) the prior policy is continued of seeking substantial justice in regard to the condition of goods
restored to the seller. Thus the buyer may not revoke his acceptance if the goods have materially deteriorated
except by reason of their own defects. Worthless goods, however, need not be offered back and minor defects in
the articles reoffered are to be disregarded.
7. The policy of the section allowing partial acceptance is carried over into the present section and the buyer may
revoke his acceptance, in appropriate cases, as to the entire lot or any commercial unit thereof.
Cross References:
Point 3: Section 2-721.
Point 4: Sections 1-204, 2-602 and 2-607.
Point 5: Sections 2-605 and 2-607.
Point 7: Section 2-601.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Commercial unit". Section 2-105.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Lot". Section 2-105.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
§ 2-608. Revocation of Acceptance in Whole or in Part.
Page 3 of 3
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-609
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-609. Right to Adequate Assurance of Performance.
(1) A contract for sale imposes an obligation on each party that the other's expectation of receiving due
performance will not be impaired. When reasonable grounds for insecurity arise with respect to the
performance of either party the other may in writing demand adequate assurance of due performance and
until he receives such assurance may if commercially reasonable suspend any performance for which he
has not already received the agreed return.
(2) Between merchants the reasonableness of grounds for insecurity and the adequacy of any assurance
offered shall be determined according to commercial standards.
(3) Acceptance of any improper delivery or payment does not prejudice the aggrieved party's right to
demand adequate assurance of future performance.
(4) After receipt of a justified demand failure to provide within a reasonable time not exceeding thirty days
such assurance of due performance as is adequate under the circumstances of the particular case is a
repudiation of the contract.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See Sections 53, 54(1)(b), 55 and 63(2), Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. The section rests on the recognition of the fact that the essential purpose of a contract between commercial men
is actual performance and they do not bargain merely for a promise, or for a promise plus the right to win a lawsuit
and that a continuing sense of reliance and security that the promised performance will be forthcoming when due, is
an important feature of the bargain. If either the willingness or the ability of a party to perform declines materially
between the time of contracting and the time for performance, the other party is threatened with the loss of a
substantial part of what he has bargained for. A seller needs protection not merely against having to deliver on
credit to a shaky buyer, but also against having to procure and manufacture the goods, perhaps turning down other
customers. Once he has been given reason to believe that the buyer's performance has become uncertain, it is an
undue hardship to force him to continue his own performance. Similarly, a buyer who believes that the seller's
deliveries have become uncertain cannot safely wait for the due date of performance when he has been buying to
assure himself of materials for his current manufacturing or to replenish his stock of merchandise.
2. Three measures have been adopted to meet the needs of commercial men in such situations. First, the
aggrieved party is permitted to suspend his own performance and any preparation therefor, with excuse for any
resulting necessary delay, until the situation has been clarified. "Suspend performance" under this section means
to hold up performance pending the outcome of the demand, and includes also the holding up of any preparatory
action. This is the same principle which governs the ancient law of stoppage and seller's lien, and also of excuse of
§ 2-609. Right to Adequate Assurance of Performance.
Page 2 of 4
a buyer from prepayment if the seller's actions manifest that he cannot or will not perform. (Original Act, Section
63(2).)
Secondly, the aggrieved party is given the right to require adequate assurance that the other party's performance
will be duly forthcoming. This principle is reflected in the familiar clauses permitting the seller to curtail deliveries if
the buyer's credit becomes impaired, which when held within the limits of reasonableness and good faith actually
express no more than the fair business meaning of any commercial contract.
Third, and finally, this section provides the means by which the aggrieved party may treat the contract as broken if
his reasonable grounds for insecurity are not cleared up within a reasonable time. This is the principle underlying
the law of anticipatory breach, whether by way of defective part performance or by repudiation. The present section
merges these three principles of law and commercial practice into a single theory of general application to all sales
agreements looking to future performance.
3. Subsection (2) of the present section requires that "reasonable" grounds and "adequate" assurance as used in
subsection (1) be defined by commercial rather than legal standards. The express reference to commercial
standards carries no connotation that the obligation of good faith is not equally applicable here.
Under commercial standards and in accord with commercial practice, a ground for insecurity need not arise from or
be directly related to the contract in question. The law as to "dependence" or "independence" of promises within a
single contract does not control the application of the present section.
Thus a buyer who falls behind in "his account" with the seller, even though the items involved have to do with
separate and legally distinct contracts, impairs the seller's expectation of due performance. Again, under the same
test, a buyer who requires precision parts which he intends to use immediately upon delivery, may have reasonable
grounds for insecurity if he discovers that his seller is making defective deliveries of such parts to other buyers with
similar needs. Thus, too, in a situation such as arose in Jay Dreher Corporation v. Delco Appliance Corporation, 93
F.2d 275 (C.C.A.2, 1937), where a manufacturer gave a dealer an exclusive franchise for the sale of his product but
on two or three occasions breached the exclusive dealing clause, although there was no default in orders, deliveries
or payments under the separate sales contract between the parties, the aggrieved dealer would be entitled to
suspend his performance of the contract for sale under the present section and to demand assurance that the
exclusive dealing contract would be lived up to. There is no need for an explicit clause tying the exclusive franchise
into the contract for the sale of goods since the situation itself ties the agreements together.
The nature of the sales contract enters also into the question of reasonableness. For example, a report from an
apparently trustworthy source that the seller had shipped defective goods or was planning to ship them would
normally give the buyer reasonable grounds for insecurity. But when the buyer has assumed the risk of payment
before inspection of the goods, as in a sales contract on C.I.F. or similar cash against documents terms, that risk is
not to be evaded by a demand for assurance. Therefore no ground for insecurity would exist under this section
unless the report went to a ground which would excuse payment by the buyer.
4. What constitutes "adequate" assurance of due performance is subject to the same test of factual conditions. For
example, where the buyer can make use of a defective delivery, a mere promise by a seller of good repute that he
is giving the matter his attention and that the defect will not be repeated, is normally sufficient. Under the same
circumstances, however, a similar statement by a known corner-cutter might well be considered insufficient without
the posting of a guaranty or, if so demanded by the buyer, a speedy replacement of the delivery involved. By the
same token where a delivery has defects, even though easily curable, which interfere with easy use by the buyer,
no verbal assurance can be deemed adequate which is not accompanied by replacement, repair, money-allowance,
or other commercially reasonable cure.
A fact situation such as arose in Corn Products Refining Co. v. Fasola, 94 N.J.L. 181, 109 A. 505 (1920) offers
illustration both of reasonable grounds for insecurity and "adequate" assurance. In that case a contract for the sale
of oils on 30 days' credit, 2% off for payment within 10 days, provided that credit was to be extended to the buyer
only if his financial responsibility was satisfactory to the seller. The buyer had been in the habit of taking advantage
§ 2-609. Right to Adequate Assurance of Performance.
Page 3 of 4
of the discount but at the same time that he failed to make his customary 10 day payment, the seller heard rumors,
in fact false, that the buyer's financial condition was shaky. Thereupon, the seller demanded cash before shipment
or security satisfactory to him. The buyer sent a good credit report from his banker, expressed willingness to make
payments when due on the 30 day terms and insisted on further deliveries under the contract. Under this Article the
rumors, although false, were enough to make the buyer's financial condition "unsatisfactory" to the seller under the
contract clause. Moreover, the buyer's practice of taking the cash discounts is enough, apart from the contract
clause, to lay a commercial foundation for suspicion when the practice is suddenly stopped. These matters,
however, go only to the justification of the seller's demand for security, or his "reasonable grounds for insecurity".
The adequacy of the assurance given is not measured as in the type of "satisfaction" situation affected with
intangibles, such as in personal service cases, cases involving a third party's judgment as final, or cases in which
the whole contract is dependent on one party's satisfaction, as in a sale on approval. Here, the seller must exercise
good faith and observe commercial standards. This Article thus approves the statement of the court in James B.
Berry's Sons Co. of Illinois v. Monark Gasoline & Oil Co., Inc., 32 F.2d 74 (C.C.A.8, 1929), that the seller's
satisfaction under such a clause must be based upon reason and must not be arbitrary or capricious; and rejects
the purely personal "good faith" test of the Corn Products Refining Co. case, which held that in the seller's sole
judgment, if for any reason he was dissatisfied, he was entitled to revoke the credit. In the absence of the buyer's
failure to take the 2% discount as was his custom, the banker's report given in that case would have been
"adequate" assurance under this Act, regardless of the language of the "satisfaction" clause. However, the seller is
reasonably entitled to feel insecure at a sudden expansion of the buyer's use of a credit term, and should be
entitled either to security or to a satisfactory explanation.
The entire foregoing discussion as to adequacy of assurance by way of explanation is subject to qualification when
repeated occasions for the application of this section arise. This Act recognizes that repeated delinquencies must
be viewed as cumulative. On the other hand, commercial sense also requires that if repeated claims for assurance
are made under this section, the basis for these claims must be increasingly obvious.
5. A failure to provide adequate assurance of performance and thereby to re-establish the security of expectation,
results in a breach only "by repudiation" under subsection (4). Therefore, the possibility is continued of retraction of
the repudiation under the section dealing with that problem, unless the aggrieved party has acted on the breach in
some manner.
The thirty day limit on the time to provide assurance is laid down to free the question of reasonable time from
uncertainty in later litigation.
6. Clauses seeking to give the protected party exceedingly wide powers to cancel or readjust the contract when
ground for insecurity arises must be read against the fact that good faith is a part of the obligation of the contract
and not subject to modification by agreement and includes, in the case of a merchant, the reasonable observance
of commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade. Such clauses can thus be effective to enlarge the protection
given by the present section to a certain extent, to fix the reasonable time within which requested assurance must
be given, or to define adequacy of the assurance in any commercially reasonable fashion. But any clause seeking
to set up arbitrary standards for action is ineffective under this Article. Acceleration clauses are treated similarly in
the Articles on Commercial Paper and Secured Transactions.
Cross References:
Point 3: Section 1-203.
Point 5: Section 2-611.
Point 6: Sections 1-203 and 1-208 and Articles 3 and 9.
Definitional Cross References:
§ 2-609. Right to Adequate Assurance of Performance.
Page 4 of 4
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
"Between merchants". Section 2-104.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Writing". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-610
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-610. Anticipatory Repudiation.
When either party repudiates the contract with respect to a performance not yet due the loss of which will
substantially impair the value of the contract to the other, the aggrieved party may
(a) for a commercially reasonable time await performance by the repudiating party; or
(b) resort to any remedy for breach ( Section 2-703 or Section 2-711), even though he has notified the
repudiating party that he would await the latter's performance and has urged retraction; and
(c) in either case suspend his own performance or proceed in accordance with the provisions of this
Article on the seller's right to identify goods to the contract notwithstanding breach or to salvage
unfinished goods ( Section 2-704).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See Sections 63(2) and 65, Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes: To make it clear that:
1. With the problem of insecurity taken care of by the preceding section and with provision being made in this Article
as to the effect of a defective delivery under an installment contract, anticipatory repudiation centers upon an overt
communication of intention or an action which renders performance impossible or demonstrates a clear
determination not to continue with performance.
Under the present section when such a repudiation substantially impairs the value of the contract, the aggrieved
party may at any time resort to his remedies for breach, or he may suspend his own performance while he
negotiates with, or awaits performance by, the other party. But if he awaits performance beyond a commercially
reasonable time he cannot recover resulting damages which he should have avoided.
2. It is not necessary for repudiation that performance be made literally and utterly impossible. Repudiation can
result from action which reasonably indicates a rejection of the continuing obligation. And, a repudiation
automatically results under the preceding section on insecurity when a party fails to provide adequate assurance of
due future performance within thirty days after a justifiable demand therefor has been made. Under the language of
this section, a demand by one or both parties for more than the contract calls for in the way of counter-performance
is not in itself a repudiation nor does it invalidate a plain expression of desire for future performance. However,
when under a fair reading it amounts to a statement of intention not to perform except on conditions which go
beyond the contract, it becomes a repudiation.
3. The test chosen to justify an aggrieved party's action under this section is the same as that in the section on
breach in installment contracts-namely the substantial value of the contract. The most useful test of substantial
§ 2-610. Anticipatory Repudiation.
Page 2 of 2
value is to determine whether material inconvenience or injustice will result if the aggrieved party is forced to wait
and receive an ultimate tender minus the part or aspect repudiated.
4. After repudiation, the aggrieved party may immediately resort to any remedy he chooses provided he moves in
good faith (see Section 1-203). Inaction and silence by the aggrieved party may leave the matter open but it cannot
be regarded as misleading the repudiating party. Therefore the aggrieved party is left free to proceed at any time
with his options under this section, unless he has taken some positive action which in good faith requires
notification to the other party before the remedy is pursued.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-609 and 2-612.
Point 2: Section 2-609.
Point 3: Section 2-612.
Point 4: Section 1-203.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-611
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-611. Retraction of Anticipatory Repudiation.
(1) Until the repudiating party's next performance is due he can retract his repudiation unless the aggrieved
party has since the repudiation cancelled or materially changed his position or otherwise indicated that he
considers the repudiation final.
(2) Retraction may be by any method which clearly indicates to the aggrieved party that the repudiating
party intends to perform, but must include any assurance justifiably demanded under the provisions of this
Article ( Section 2-609).
(3) Retraction reinstates the repudiating party's rights under the contract with due excuse and allowance to
the aggrieved party for any delay occasioned by the repudiation.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To make it clear that:
1. The repudiating party's right to reinstate the contract is entirely dependent upon the action taken by the
aggrieved party. If the latter has cancelled the contract or materially changed his position at any time after the
repudiation, there can be no retraction under this section.
2. Under subsection (2) an effective retraction must be accompanied by any assurances demanded under the
section dealing with right to adequate assurance. A repudiation is of course sufficient to give reasonable ground for
insecurity and to warrant a request for assurance as an essential condition of the retraction. However, after a timely
and unambiguous expression of retraction, a reasonable time for the assurance to be worked out should be allowed
by the aggrieved party before cancellation.
Cross Reference:
Point 2: Section 2-609.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
"Cancellation". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
§ 2-611. Retraction of Anticipatory Repudiation.
Page 2 of 2
"Rights". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-612
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-612. "Installment Contract"; Breach.
(1) An "installment contract" is one which requires or authorizes the delivery of goods in separate lots to be
separately accepted, even though the contract contains a clause "each delivery is a separate contract" or
its equivalent.
(2) The buyer may reject any installment which is non-conforming if the non-conformity substantially
impairs the value of that installment and cannot be cured or if the non-conformity is a defect in the required
documents; but if the non-conformity does not fall within subsection (3) and the seller gives adequate
assurance of its cure the buyer must accept that installment.
(3) Whenever non-conformity or default with respect to one or more installments substantially impairs the
value of the whole contract there is a breach of the whole. But the aggrieved party reinstates the contract if
he accepts a non-conforming installment without seasonably notifying of cancellation or if he brings an
action with respect only to past installments or demands performance as to future installments.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 45(2), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To continue prior law but to make explicit the more mercantile interpretation of many of the
rules involved, so that:
1. The definition of an installment contract is phrased more broadly in this Article so as to cover installment
deliveries tacitly authorized by the circumstances or by the option of either party.
2. In regard to the apportionment of the price for separate payment this Article applies the more liberal test of what
can be apportioned rather than the test of what is clearly apportioned by the agreement. This Article also
recognizes approximate calculation or apportionment of price subject to subsequent adjustment. A provision for
separate payment for each lot delivered ordinarily means that the price is at least roughly calculable by units of
quantity, but such a provision is not essential to an "installment contract." If separate acceptance of separate
deliveries is contemplated, no generalized contrast between wholly "entire" and wholly "divisible" contracts has any
standing under this Article.
3. This Article rejects any approach which gives clauses such as "each delivery is a separate contract" their
legalistically literal effect. Such contracts nonetheless call for installment deliveries. Even where a clause speaks
of "a separate contract for all purposes", a commercial reading of the language under the section on good faith and
commercial standards requires that the singleness of the document and the negotiation, together with the sense of
the situation, prevail over any uncommercial and legalistic interpretation.
§ 2-612. "Installment Contract"; Breach.
Page 2 of 3
4. One of the requirements for rejection under subsection (2) is non-conformity substantially impairing the value of
the installment in question. However, an installment agreement may require accurate conformity in quality as a
condition to the right to acceptance if the need for such conformity is made clear either by express provision or by
the circumstances. In such a case the effect of the agreement is to define explicitly what amounts to substantial
impairment of value impossible to cure. A clause requiring accurate compliance as a condition to the right to
acceptance must, however, have some basis in reason, must avoid imposing hardship by surprise and is subject to
waiver or to displacement by practical construction.
Substantial impairment of the value of an installment can turn not only on the quality of the goods but also on such
factors as time, quantity, assortment, and the like. It must be judged in terms of the normal or specifically known
purposes of the contract. The defect in required documents refers to such matters as the absence of insurance
documents under a C.I.F. contract, falsity of a bill of lading, or one failing to show shipment within the contract
period or to the contract destination. Even in such cases, however, the provisions on cure of tender apply if
appropriate documents are readily procurable.
5. Under subsection (2) an installment delivery must be accepted if the non-conformity is curable and the seller
gives adequate assurance of cure. Cure of non-conformity of an installment in the first instance can usually be
afforded by an allowance against the price, or in the case of reasonable discrepancies in quantity either by a further
delivery or a partial rejection. This Article requires reasonable action by a buyer in regard to discrepant delivery and
good faith requires that the buyer make any reasonable minor outlay of time or money necessary to cure an
overshipment by severing out an acceptable percentage thereof. The seller must take over a cure which involves
any material burden; the buyer's obligation reaches only to cooperation. Adequate assurance for purposes of
subsection (2) is measured by the same standards as under the section on right to adequate assurance of
performance.
6. Subsection (3) is designed to further the continuance of the contract in the absence of an overt cancellation. The
question arising when an action is brought as to a single installment only is resolved by making such action waive
the right to cancellation. This involves merely a defect in one or more installments, as contrasted with the situation
where there is a true repudiation within the section on anticipatory repudiation. Whether the non-conformity in any
given installment justifies cancellation as to the future depends, not on whether such non-conformity indicates an
intent or likelihood that the future deliveries will also be defective, but whether the non-conformity substantially
impairs the value of the whole contract. If only the seller's security in regard to future installments is impaired, he
has the right to demand adequate assurances of proper future performance but has not an immediate right to
cancel the entire contract. It is clear under this Article, however, that defects in prior installments are cumulative in
effect, so that acceptance does not wash out the defect "waived." Prior policy is continued, putting the rule as to
buyer's default on the same footing as that in regard to seller's default.
7. Under the requirement of seasonable notification of cancellation under subsection (3), a buyer who accepts a
non-conforming installment which substantially impairs the value of the entire contract should properly be permitted
to withhold his decision as to whether or not to cancel pending a response from the seller as to his claim for cure or
adjustment. Similarly, a seller may withhold a delivery pending payment for prior ones, at the same time delaying
his decision as to cancellation. A reasonable time for notifying of cancellation, judged by commercial standard
under the section on good faith, extends of course to include the time covered by any reasonable negotiation in
good faith. However, during this period the defaulting party is entitled, on request, to know whether the contract is
still in effect, before he can be required to perform further.
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 2-307 and 2-607.
Point 3: Section 1-203.
Point 5: Sections 2-208 and 2-609.
§ 2-612. "Installment Contract"; Breach.
Page 3 of 3
Point 6: Section 2-610.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201.
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Cancellation". Section 2-106.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Lot". Section 2-105.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Seasonably". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-613
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-613. Casualty to Identified Goods.
Where the contract requires for its performance goods identified when the contract is made, and the goods
suffer casualty without fault of either party before the risk of loss passes to the buyer, or in a proper case
under a "no arrival, no sale" term ( Section 2-324) then
(a) if the loss is total the contract is avoided; and
(b) if the loss is partial or the goods have so deteriorated as no longer to conform to the contract the
buyer may nevertheless demand inspection and at his option either treat the contract as avoided or
accept the goods with due allowance from the contract price for the deterioration or the deficiency in
quantity but without further right against the seller.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 7 and 8, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten, the basic policy being continued but the test of a "divisible" or "indivisible" sale or contract
being abandoned in favor of adjustment in business terms.
Purposes of Changes:
1. Where goods whose continued existence is presupposed by the agreement are destroyed without fault of either
party, the buyer is relieved from his obligation but may at his option take the surviving goods at a fair adjustment.
"Fault" is intended to include negligence and not merely wilful wrong. The buyer is expressly given the right to
inspect the goods in order to determine whether he wishes to avoid the contract entirely or to take the goods with a
price adjustment.
2. The section applies whether the goods were already destroyed at the time of contracting without the knowledge
of either party or whether they are destroyed subsequently but before the risk of loss passes to the buyer. Where
under the agreement, including of course usage of trade, the risk has passed to the buyer before the casualty, the
section has no application. Beyond this, the essential question in determining whether the rules of this section are
to be applied is whether the seller has or has not undertaken the responsibility for the continued existence of the
goods in proper condition through the time of agreed or expected delivery.
3. The section on the term "no arrival, no sale" makes clear that delay in arrival, quite as much as physical change
in the goods, gives the buyer the options set forth in this section.
Cross Reference:
Point 3: Section 2-324.
§ 2-613. Casualty to Identified Goods.
Page 2 of 2
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Fault". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-614
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-614. Substituted Performance.
(1) Where without fault of either party the agreed berthing, loading, or unloading facilities fail or an agreed
type of carrier becomes unavailable or the agreed manner of delivery otherwise becomes commercially
impracticable but a commercially reasonable substitute is available, such substitute performance must be
tendered and accepted.
(2) If the agreed means or manner of payment fails because of domestic or foreign governmental
regulation, the seller may withhold or stop delivery unless the buyer provides a means or manner of
payment which is commercially a substantial equivalent. If delivery has already been taken, payment by
the means or in the manner provided by the regulation discharges the buyer's obligation unless the
regulation is discriminatory, oppressive or predatory.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) requires the tender of a commercially reasonable substituted performance where agreed to
facilities have failed or become commercially impracticable. Under this Article, in the absence of specific
agreement, the normal or usual facilities enter into the agreement either through the circumstances, usage of trade
or prior course of dealing.
This section appears between Section 2-613 on casualty to identified goods and the next section on excuse by
failure of presupposed conditions, both of which deal with excuse and complete avoidance of the contract where the
occurrence or non-occurrence of a contingency which was a basic assumption of the contract makes the expected
performance impossible. The distinction between the present section and those sections lies in whether the failure
or impossibility of performance arises in connection with an incidental matter or goes to the very heart of the
agreement. The differing lines of solution are contrasted in a comparison of International Paper Co. v. Rockefeller,
161 App.Div. 180, 146 N.Y.S. 371 (1914) and Meyer v. Sullivan, 40 Cal.App. 723, 181 P. 847 (1919). In the former
case a contract for the sale of spruce to be cut from a particular tract of land was involved. When a fire destroyed
the trees growing on that tract the seller was held excused since performance was impossible. In the latter case
the contract called for delivery of wheat "f.o.b. Kosmos Steamer at Seattle." The war led to cancellation of that line's
sailing schedule after space had been duly engaged and the buyer was held entitled to demand substituted delivery
at the warehouse on the line's loading dock. Under this Article, of course, the seller would also be entitled, had the
market gone the other way, to make a substituted tender in that manner.
There must, however, be a true commercial impracticability to excuse the agreed to performance and justify a
substituted performance. When this is the case a reasonable substituted performance tendered by either party
should excuse him from strict compliance with contract terms which do not go to the essence of the agreement.
§ 2-614. Substituted Performance.
Page 2 of 2
2. The substitution provided in this section as between buyer and seller does not carry over into the obligation of a
financing agency under a letter of credit, since such an agency is entitled to performance which is plainly adequate
on its face and without need to look into commercial evidence outside of the documents. See Article 5, especially
Sections 5-102, 5-103, 5-109, 5-110, 5-114.
3. Under subsection (2) where the contract is still executory on both sides, the seller is permitted to withdraw unless
the buyer can provide him with a commercially equivalent return despite the governmental regulation. Where,
however, only the debt for the price remains, a larger leeway is permitted. The buyer may pay in the manner
provided by the regulation even though this may not be commercially equivalent provided that the regulation is not
"discriminatory, oppressive or predatory."
Cross Reference:
Point 2: Article 5.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Fault". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-615
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-615. Excuse by Failure of Presupposed Conditions.
Except so far as a seller may have assumed a greater obligation and subject to the preceding section on
substituted performance:
(a) Delay in delivery or non-delivery in whole or in part by a seller who complies with paragraphs (b)
and (c) is not a breach of his duty under a contract for sale if performance as agreed has been made
impracticable by the occurrence of a contingency the non-occurrence of which was a basic assumption
on which the contract was made or by compliance in good faith with any applicable foreign or domestic
governmental regulation or order whether or not it later proves to be invalid.
(b) Where the causes mentioned in paragraph (a) affect only a part of the seller's capacity to perform,
he must allocate production and deliveries among his customers but may at his option include regular
customers not then under contract as well as his own requirements for further manufacture. He may so
allocate in any manner which is fair and reasonable.
(c) The seller must notify the buyer seasonably that there will be delay or non-delivery and, when
allocation is required under paragraph (b), of the estimated quota thus made available for the buyer.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. This section excuses a seller from timely delivery of goods contracted for, where his performance has become
commercially impracticable because of unforeseen supervening circumstances not within the contemplation of the
parties at the time of contracting. The destruction of specific goods and the problem of the use of substituted
performance on points other than delay or quantity, treated elsewhere in this Article, must be distinguished from the
matter covered by this section.
2. The present section deliberately refrains from any effort at an exhaustive expression of contingencies and is to
be interpreted in all cases sought to be brought within its scope in terms of its underlying reason and purpose.
3. The first test for excuse under this Article in terms of basic assumption is a familiar one. The additional test of
commercial impracticability (as contrasted with "impossibility," "frustration of performance" or "frustration of the
venture") has been adopted in order to call attention to the commercial character of the criterion chosen by this
Article.
4. Increased cost alone does not excuse performance unless the rise in cost is due to some unforeseen
contingency which alters the essential nature of the performance. Neither is a rise or a collapse in the market in
itself a justification, for that is exactly the type of business risk which business contracts made at fixed prices are
§ 2-615. Excuse by Failure of Presupposed Conditions.
Page 2 of 4
intended to cover. But a severe shortage of raw materials or of supplies due to a contingency such as war,
embargo, local crop failure, unforeseen shutdown of major sources of supply or the like, which either causes a
marked increase in cost or altogether prevents the seller from securing supplies necessary to his performance, is
within the contemplation of this section. (See Ford & Sons, Ltd., v. Henry Leetham & Sons, Ltd., 21 Com.Cas. 55
(1915, K.B.D.).)
5. Where a particular source of supply is exclusive under the agreement and fails through casualty, the present
section applies rather than the provision on destruction or deterioration of specific goods. The same holds true
where a particular source of supply is shown by the circumstances to have been contemplated or assumed by the
parties at the time of contracting. (See Davis Co. v. Hoffmann-LaRoche Chemical Works, 178 App.Div. 855, 166
N.Y.S. 179 (1917) and International Paper Co. v. Rockefeller, 161 App.Div. 180, 146 N.Y.S. 371 (1914).) There is
no excuse under this section, however, unless the seller has employed all due measures to assure himself that his
source will not fail. (See Canadian Industrial Alcohol Co., Ltd., v. Dunbar Molasses Co., 258 N.Y. 194, 179 N.E.
383, 80 A.L.R. 1173 (1932) and Washington Mfg. Co. v. Midland Lumber Co., 113 Wash. 593, 194 P. 777 (1921).)
In the case of failure of production by an agreed source for causes beyond the seller's control, the seller should, if
possible, be excused since production by an agreed source is without more a basic assumption of the contract.
Such excuse should not result in relieving the defaulting supplier from liability nor in dropping into the seller's lap an
unearned bonus of damages over. The flexible adjustment machinery of this Article provides the solution under the
provision on the obligation of good faith. A condition to his making good the claim of excuse is the turning over to
the buyer of his rights against the defaulting source of supply to the extent of the buyer's contract in relation to
which excuse is being claimed.
6. In situations in which neither sense nor justice is served by either answer when the issue is posed in flat terms of
"excuse" or "no excuse," adjustment under the various provisions of this Article is necessary, especially the
sections on good faith, on insecurity and assurance and on the reading of all provisions in the light of their
purposes, and the general policy of this Act to use equitable principles in furtherance of commercial standards and
good faith.
7. The failure of conditions which go to convenience or collateral values rather than to the commercial practicability
of the main performance does not amount to a complete excuse. However, good faith and the reason of the
present section and of the preceding one may properly be held to justify and even to require any needed delay
involved in a good faith inquiry seeking a readjustment of the contract terms to meet the new conditions.
8. The provisions of this section are made subject to assumption of greater liability by agreement and such
agreement is to be found not only in the expressed terms of the contract but in the circumstances surrounding the
contracting, in trade usage and the like. Thus the exemptions of this section do not apply when the contingency in
question is sufficiently foreshadowed at the time of contracting to be included among the business risks which are
fairly to be regarded as part of the dickered terms, either consciously or as a matter of reasonable, commercial
interpretation from the circumstances. (See Madeirense Do Brasil, S.A. v. Stulman-Emrick Lumber Co., 147 F.2d
399 (C.C.A., 2 Cir., 1945).) The exemption otherwise present through usage of trade under the present section may
also be expressly negated by the language of the agreement. Generally, express agreements as to exemptions
designed to enlarge upon or supplant the provisions of this section are to be read in the light of mercantile sense
and reason, for this section itself sets up the commercial standard for normal and reasonable interpretation and
provides a minimum beyond which agreement may not go.
Agreement can also be made in regard to the consequences of exemption as laid down in paragraphs (b) and (c)
and the next section on procedure on notice claiming excuse.
9. The case of a farmer who has contracted to sell crops to be grown on designated land may be regarded as falling
either within the section on casualty to identified goods or this section, and he may be excused, when there is a
failure of the specific crop, either on the basis of the destruction of identified goods or because of the failure of a
basic assumption of the contract.
§ 2-615. Excuse by Failure of Presupposed Conditions.
Page 3 of 4
Exemption of the buyer in the case of a "requirements" contract is covered by the "Output and Requirements"
section both as to assumption and allocation of the relevant risks. But when a contract by a manufacturer to buy
fuel or raw material makes no specific reference to a particular venture and no such reference may be drawn from
the circumstances, commercial understanding views it as a general deal in the general market and not conditioned
on any assumption of the continuing operation of the buyer's plant. Even when notice is given by the buyer that the
supplies are needed to fill a specific contract of a normal commercial kind, commercial understanding does not see
such a supply contract as conditioned on the continuance of the buyer's further contract for outlet. On the other
hand, where the buyer's contract is in reasonable commercial understanding conditioned on a definite and specific
venture or assumption as, for instance, a war procurement subcontract known to be based on a prime contract
which is subject to termination, or a supply contract for a particular construction venture, the reason of the present
section may well apply and entitle the buyer to the exemption.
10. Following its basic policy of using commercial practicability as a test for excuse, this section recognizes as of
equal significance either a foreign or domestic regulation and disregards any technical distinctions between "law,"
"regulation," "order" and the like. Nor does it make the present action of the seller depend upon the eventual
judicial determination of the legality of the particular governmental action. The seller's good faith belief in the
validity of the regulation is the test under this Article and the best evidence of his good faith is the general
commercial acceptance of the regulation. However, governmental interference cannot excuse unless it truly
"supervenes" in such a manner as to be beyond the seller's assumption of risk. And any action by the party
claiming excuse which causes or colludes in inducing the governmental action preventing his performance would be
in breach of good faith and would destroy his exemption.
11. An excused seller must fulfill his contract to the extent which the supervening contingency permits, and if the
situation is such that his customers are generally affected he must take account of all in supplying one.
Subsections (a) and (b), therefore, explicitly permit in any proration a fair and reasonable attention to the needs of
regular customers who are probably relying on spot orders for supplies. Customers at different stages of the
manufacturing process may be fairly treated by including the seller's manufacturing requirements. A fortiori, the
seller may also take account of contracts later in date than the one in question. The fact that such spot orders may
be closed at an advanced price causes no difficulty, since any allocation which exceeds normal past requirements
will not be reasonable. However, good faith requires, when prices have advanced, that the seller exercise real care
in making his allocations, and in case of doubt his contract customers should be favored and supplies prorated
evenly among them regardless of price. Save for the extra care thus required by changes in the market, this
section seeks to leave every reasonable business leeway to the seller.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-613 and 2-614.
Point 2: Section 1-102.
Point 5: Sections 1-203 and 2-613.
Point 6: Sections 1-102, 1-203 and 2-609.
Point 7: Section 2-614.
Point 8: Sections 1-201, 2-302 and 2-616.
Point 9: Sections 1-102, 2-306 and 2-613.
Definitional Cross References:
"Between merchants". Section 2-104.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
§ 2-615. Excuse by Failure of Presupposed Conditions.
Page 4 of 4
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Good faith". Section 1-201.
"Merchant". Section 2-104.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Seasonably". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-616
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 6.
BREACH, REPUDIATION AND EXCUSE
§ 2-616. Procedure on Notice Claiming Excuse.
(1) Where the buyer receives notification of a material or indefinite delay or an allocation justified under the
preceding section he may by written notification to the seller as to any delivery concerned, and where the
prospective deficiency substantially impairs the value of the whole contract under the provisions of this
Article relating to breach of installment contracts ( Section 2-612), then also as to the whole,
(a) terminate and thereby discharge any unexecuted portion of the contract; or
(b) modify the contract by agreeing to take his available quota in substitution.
(2) If after receipt of such notification from the seller the buyer fails so to modify the contract within a
reasonable time not exceeding thirty days the contract lapses with respect to any deliveries affected.
(3) The provisions of this section may not be negated by agreement except in so far as the seller has
assumed a greater obligation under the preceding section.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
This section seeks to establish simple and workable machinery for providing certainty as to when a supervening
and excusing contingency "excuses" the delay, "discharges" the contract, or may result in a waiver of the delay by
the buyer. When the seller notifies, in accordance with the preceding section, claiming excuse, the buyer may
acquiesce, in which case the contract is so modified. No consideration is necessary in a case of this kind to support
such a modification. If the buyer does not elect so to modify the contract, he may terminate it and under subsection
(2) his silence after receiving the seller's claim of excuse operates as such a termination. Subsection (3) denies
effect to any contract clause made in advance of trouble which would require the buyer to stand ready to take
delivery whenever the seller is excused from delivery by unforeseen circumstances.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-209 and 2-615.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Installment contract". Section 2-612.
§ 2-616. Procedure on Notice Claiming Excuse.
Page 2 of 2
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Termination". Section 2-106.
"Written". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-701
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-701. Remedies for Breach of Collateral Contracts Not Impaired.
Remedies for breach of any obligation or promise collateral or ancillary to a contract for sale are not impaired by the
provisions of this Article.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
Whether a claim for breach of an obligation collateral to the contract for sale requires separate trial to avoid
confusion of issues is beyond the scope of this Article; but contractual arrangements which as a business matter
enter vitally into the contract should be considered a part thereof in so far as cross-claims or defenses are
concerned.
Definitional Cross References:
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-702
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-702. Seller's Remedies on Discovery of Buyer's Insolvency.
(1) Where the seller discovers the buyer to be insolvent he may refuse delivery except for cash including
payment for all goods theretofore delivered under the contract, and stop delivery under this Article ( Section
2-705).
(2) Where the seller discovers that the buyer has received goods on credit while insolvent he may reclaim
the goods upon demand made within ten days after the receipt, but if misrepresentation of solvency has
been made to the particular seller in writing within three months before delivery the ten day limitation does
not apply. Except as provided in this subsection the seller may not base a right to reclaim goods on the
buyer's fraudulent or innocent misrepresentation of solvency or of intent to pay.
(3) The seller's right to reclaim under subsection (2) is subject to the rights of a buyer in ordinary course or
other good faith purchaser under this Article ( Section 2-403). Successful reclamation of goods excludes all
other remedies with respect to them.
As amended in 1966.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Subsection (1)-Sections 53(1)(b), 54(1)(c) and 57, Uniform Sales Act; Subsection
(2)-none; Subsection (3)-Section 76(3), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten, the protection given to a seller who has sold on credit and has delivered goods to the buyer
immediately preceding his insolvency being extended.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter: To make it clear that:
1. The seller's right to withhold the goods or to stop delivery except for cash when he discovers the buyer's
insolvency is made explicit in subsection (1) regardless of the passage of title, and the concept of stoppage has
been extended to include goods in the possession of any bailee who has not yet attorned to the buyer.
2. Subsection (2) takes as its base line the proposition that any receipt of goods on credit by an insolvent buyer
amounts to a tacit business misrepresentation of solvency and therefore is fraudulent as against the particular
seller. This Article makes discovery of the buyer's insolvency and demand within a ten day period a condition of the
right to reclaim goods on this ground. The ten day limitation period operates from the time of receipt of the goods.
An exception to this time limitation is made when a written misrepresentation of solvency has been made to the
particular seller within three months prior to the delivery. To fall within the exception the statement of solvency must
be in writing, addressed to the particular seller and dated within three months of the delivery.
§ 2-702. Seller's Remedies on Discovery of Buyer's Insolvency.
Page 2 of 2
3. Because the right of the seller to reclaim goods under this section constitutes preferential treatment as against
the buyer's other creditors, subsection (3) provides that such reclamation bars all his other remedies as to the
goods involved. As amended 1966.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-401 and 2-705.
Compare Section 2-502.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Buyer in ordinary course of business". Section 1-201.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Good faith". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Insolvent". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Receipt" of goods. Section 2-103.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Writing". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-703
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-703. Seller's Remedies in General.
Where the buyer wrongfully rejects or revokes acceptance of goods or fails to make a payment due on or
before delivery or repudiates with respect to a part or the whole, then with respect to any goods directly
affected and, if the breach is of the whole contract ( Section 2-612), then also with respect to the whole
undelivered balance, the aggrieved seller may
(a) withhold delivery of such goods;
(b) stop delivery by any bailee as hereafter provided ( Section 2-705);
(c) proceed under the next section respecting goods still unidentified to the contract;
(d) resell and recover damages as hereafter provided ( Section 2-706);
(e) recover damages for non-acceptance ( Section 2-708) or in a proper case the price ( Section 2-
709);
(f) cancel.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: No comparable index section. See Section 53, Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. This section is an index section which gathers together in one convenient place all of the various remedies open
to a seller for any breach by the buyer. This Article rejects any doctrine of election of remedy as a fundamental
policy and thus the remedies are essentially cumulative in nature and include all of the available remedies for
breach. Whether the pursuit of one remedy bars another depends entirely on the facts of the individual case.
2. The buyer's breach which occasions the use of the remedies under this section may involve only one lot or
delivery of goods, or may involve all of the goods which are the subject matter of the particular contract. The right
of the seller to pursue a remedy as to all the goods when the breach is as to only one or more lots is covered by the
section on breach in installment contracts. The present section deals only with the remedies available after the
goods involved in the breach have been determined by that section.
3. In addition to the typical case of refusal to pay or default in payment, the language in the preamble, "fails to make
a payment due," is intended to cover the dishonor of a check on due presentment, or the non-acceptance of a draft,
and the failure to furnish an agreed letter of credit.
4. It should also be noted that this Act requires its remedies to be liberally administered and provides that any right
or obligation which it declares is enforceable by action unless a different effect is specifically prescribed (Section 1-
106).
§ 2-703. Seller's Remedies in General.
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Point 2: Section 2-612.
Point 3: Section 2-325.
Point 4: Section 1-106.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Cancellation". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-704
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-704. Seller's Right to Identify Goods to the Contract Notwithstanding
Breach or to Salvage Unfinished Goods.
(1) An aggrieved seller under the preceding section may
(a) identify to the contract conforming goods not already identified if at the time he learned of the
breach they are in his possession or control;
(b) treat as the subject of resale goods which have demonstrably been intended for the particular
contract even though those goods are unfinished.
(2) Where the goods are unfinished an aggrieved seller may in the exercise of reasonable commercial
judgment for the purposes of avoiding loss and of effective realization either complete the manufacture and
wholly identify the goods to the contract or cease manufacture and resell for scrap or salvage value or
proceed in any other reasonable manner.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 63(3) and 64(4), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten, the seller's rights being broadened.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section gives an aggrieved seller the right at the time of breach to identify to the contract any conforming
finished goods, regardless of their resalability, and to use reasonable judgment as to completing unfinished goods.
It thus makes the goods available for resale under the resale section, the seller's primary remedy, and in the special
case in which resale is not practicable, allows the action for the price which would then be necessary to give the
seller the value of his contract.
2. Under this Article the seller is given express power to complete manufacture or procurement of goods for the
contract unless the exercise of reasonable commercial judgment as to the facts as they appear at the time he
learns of the breach makes it clear that such action will result in a material increase in damages. The burden is on
the buyer to show the commercially unreasonable nature of the seller's action in completing manufacture.
Cross References:
Sections 2-703 and 2-706.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
§ 2-704. Seller's Right to Identify Goods to the Contract Notwithstanding Breach or to Salvage Unfinished
Goods.
Page 2 of 2
"Conforming". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-705
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-705. Seller's Stoppage of Delivery in Transit or Otherwise.
(1) The seller may stop delivery of goods in the possession of a carrier or other bailee when he discovers
the buyer to be insolvent ( Section 2-702) and may stop delivery of carload, truckload, planeload or larger
shipments of express or freight when the buyer repudiates or fails to make a payment due before delivery
or if for any other reason the seller has a right to withhold or reclaim the goods.
(2) As against such buyer the seller may stop delivery until
(a) receipt of the goods by the buyer; or
(b) acknowledgment to the buyer by any bailee of the goods except a carrier that the bailee holds the
goods for the buyer; or
(c) such acknowledgment to the buyer by a carrier by reshipment or as a warehouse; or
(d) negotiation to the buyer of any negotiable document of title covering the goods.
(3)
(a) To stop delivery the seller must so notify as to enable the bailee by reasonable diligence to prevent
delivery of the goods.
(b) After such notification the bailee must hold and deliver the goods according to the directions of the
seller but the seller is liable to the bailee for any ensuing charges or damages.
(c) If a negotiable document of title has been issued for goods the bailee is not obliged to obey a
notification to stop until surrender of possession or control of the document.
(d) A carrier who has issued a non-negotiable bill of lading is not obliged to obey a notification to stop
received from a person other than the consignor.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 57-59, Uniform Sales Act; see also Sections 12, 14 and 42, Uniform
Bills of Lading Act and Sections 9, 11 and 49, Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act.
Changes: This section continues and develops the above sections of the Uniform Sales Act in the light of the other
uniform statutory provisions noted.
Purposes: To make it clear that:
1. Subsection (1) applies the stoppage principle to other bailees as well as carriers.
It also expands the remedy to cover the situations, in addition to buyer's insolvency, specified in the subsection.
But since stoppage is a burden in any case to carriers, and might be a very heavy burden to them if it covered all
§ 2-705. Seller's Stoppage of Delivery in Transit or Otherwise.
Page 2 of 3
small shipments in all these situations, the right to stop for reasons other than insolvency is limited to carload,
truckload, planeload or larger shipments. The seller shipping to a buyer of doubtful credit can protect himself by
shipping C.O.D.
Where stoppage occurs for insecurity it is merely a suspension of performance, and if assurances are duly
forthcoming from the buyer the seller is not entitled to resell or divert.
Improper stoppage is a breach by the seller if it effectively interferes with the buyer's right to due tender under the
section on manner of tender of delivery. However, if the bailee obeys an unjustified order to stop he may also be
liable to the buyer. The measure of his obligation is dependent on the provisions of the Documents of Title Article
(Section 7-303). Subsection 3(b) therefore gives him a right of indemnity as against the seller in such a case.
2. "Receipt by the buyer" includes receipt by the buyer's designated representative, the subpurchaser, when
shipment is made direct to him and the buyer himself never receives the goods. It is entirely proper under this
Article that the seller, by making such direct shipment to the sub-purchaser, be regarded as acquiescing in the
latter's purchase and as thus barred from stoppage of the goods as against him.
As between the buyer and the seller, the latter's right to stop the goods at any time until they reach the place of final
delivery is recognized by this section.
Under subsection (3)(c) and (d), the carrier is under no duty to recognize the stop order of a person who is a
stranger to the carrier's contract. But the seller's right as against the buyer to stop delivery remains, whether or not
the carrier is obligated to recognize the stop order. If the carrier does obey it, the buyer cannot complain merely
because of that circumstance; and the seller becomes obligated under subsection (3)(b) to pay the carrier any
ensuing damages or charges.
3. A diversion of a shipment is not a "reshipment" under subsection (2)(c) when it is merely an incident to the
original contract of transportation. Nor is the procurement of "exchange bills" of lading which change only the name
of the consignee to that of the buyer's local agent but do not alter the destination of a reshipment.
Acknowledgment by the carrier as a "warehouse" within the meaning of this Article requires a contract of a truly
different character from the original shipment, a contract not in extension of transit but as a warehouse.
4. Subsection (3)(c) makes the bailee's obedience of a notification to stop conditional upon the surrender of
possession or control of any outstanding negotiable document.
5. Any charges or losses incurred by the carrier in following the seller's orders, whether or not he was obligated to
do so, fall to the seller's charge.
6. After an effective stoppage under this section the seller's rights in the goods are the same as if he had never
made a delivery.
Cross References:
Sections 2-702 and 2-703.
Point 1: Sections 2-503 and 2-609, and Article 7.
Point 2: Section 2-103 and Article 7.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
§ 2-705. Seller's Stoppage of Delivery in Transit or Otherwise.
Page 3 of 3
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Insolvent". Section 1-201.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Receipt" of goods. Section 2-103.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-706
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-706. Seller's Resale Including Contract for Resale.
(1) Under the conditions stated in Section 2-703 on seller's remedies, the seller may resell the goods
concerned or the undelivered balance thereof. Where the resale is made in good faith and in a
commercially reasonable manner the seller may recover the difference between the resale price and the
contract price together with any incidental damages allowed under the provisions of this Article ( Section 2-
710), but less expenses saved in consequence of the buyer's breach.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (3) or unless otherwise agreed resale may be at public or
private sale including sale by way of one or more contracts to sell or of identification to an existing contract
of the seller. Sale may be as a unit or in parcels and at any time and place and on any terms but every
aspect of the sale including the method, manner, time, place and terms must be commercially reasonable.
The resale must be reasonably identified as referring to the broken contract, but it is not necessary that the
goods be in existence or that any or all of them have been identified to the contract before the breach.
(3) Where the resale is at private sale the seller must give the buyer reasonable notification of his intention
to resell.
(4) Where the resale is at public sale
(a) only identified goods can be sold except where there is a recognized market for a public sale of
futures in goods of the kind; and
(b) it must be made at a usual place or market for public sale if one is reasonably available and except
in the case of goods which are perishable or threaten to decline in value speedily the seller must give
the buyer reasonable notice of the time and place of the resale; and
(c) if the goods are not to be within the view of those attending the sale the notification of sale must
state the place where the goods are located and provide for their reasonable inspection by prospective
bidders; and
(d) the seller may buy.
(5) A purchaser who buys in good faith at a resale takes the goods free of any rights of the original buyer
even though the seller fails to comply with one or more of the requirements of this section.
(6) The seller is not accountable to the buyer for any profit made on any resale. A person in the position of
a seller ( Section 2-707) or a buyer who has rightfully rejected or justifiably revoked acceptance must
account for any excess over the amount of his security interest, as hereinafter defined (subsection (3) of
Section 2-711).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 60, Uniform Sales Act.
§ 2-706. Seller's Resale Including Contract for Resale.
Page 2 of 4
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To simplify the prior statutory provision and to make it clear that:
1. The only condition precedent to the seller's right of resale under subsection (1) is a breach by the buyer within
the section on the seller's remedies in general or insolvency. Other meticulous conditions and restrictions of the
prior uniform statutory provision are disapproved by this Article and are replaced by standards of commercial
reasonableness. Under this section the seller may resell the goods after any breach by the buyer. Thus, an
anticipatory repudiation by the buyer gives rise to any of the seller's remedies for breach, and to the right of resale.
This principle is supplemented by subsection (2) which authorizes a resale of goods which are not in existence or
were not identified to the contract before the breach.
2. In order to recover the damages prescribed in subsection (1) the seller must act "in good faith and in a
commercially reasonable manner" in making the resale. This standard is intended to be more comprehensive than
that of "reasonable care and judgment" established by the prior uniform statutory provision. Failure to act properly
under this section deprives the seller of the measure of damages here provided and relegates him to that provided
in Section 2-708.
Under this Article the seller resells by authority of law, in his own behalf, for his own benefit and for the purpose of
fixing his damages. The theory of a seller's agency is thus rejected.
3. If the seller complies with the prescribed standard of duty in making the resale, he may recover from the buyer
the damages provided for in subsection (1). Evidence of market or current prices at any particular time or place is
relevant only on the question of whether the seller acted in a commercially reasonable manner in making the resale.
The distinction drawn by some courts between cases where the title had not passed to the buyer and the seller had
resold as owner, and cases where the title had passed and the seller had resold by virtue of his lien on the goods,
is rejected.
4. Subsection (2) frees the remedy of resale from legalistic restrictions and enables the seller to resell in
accordance with reasonable commercial practices so as to realize as high a price as possible in the circumstances.
By "public" sale is meant a sale by auction. A "private" sale may be effected by solicitation and negotiation
conducted either directly or through a broker. In choosing between a public and private sale the character of the
goods must be considered and relevant trade practices and usages must be observed.
5. Subsection (2) merely clarifies the common law rule that the time for resale is a reasonable time after the buyer's
breach, by using the language "commercially reasonable." What is such a reasonable time depends upon the
nature of the goods, the condition of the market and the other circumstances of the case; its length cannot be
measured by any legal yardstick or divided into degrees. Where a seller contemplating resale receives a demand
from the buyer for inspection under the section of preserving evidence of goods in dispute, the time for resale may
be appropriately lengthened.
On the question of the place for resale, subsection (2) goes to the ultimate test, the commercial reasonableness of
the seller's choice as to the place for an advantageous resale. This Article rejects the theory that the seller is
required to resell at the agreed place for delivery and that a resale elsewhere can be permitted only in exceptional
cases.
6. The purpose of subsection (2) being to enable the seller to dispose of the goods to the best advantage, he is
permitted in making the resale to depart from the terms and conditions of the original contract for sale to any extent
"commercially reasonable" in the circumstances.
7. The provision of subsection (2) that the goods need not be in existence to be resold applies when the buyer is
guilty of anticipatory repudiation of a contract for future goods, before the goods or some of them have come into
existence. In such a case the seller may exercise the right of resale and fix his damages by "one or more contracts
to sell" the quantity of conforming future goods affected by the repudiation. The companion provision of subsection
§ 2-706. Seller's Resale Including Contract for Resale.
Page 3 of 4
(2) that resale may be made although the goods were not identified to the contract prior to the buyer's breach,
likewise contemplates an anticipatory repudiation by the buyer but occurring after the goods are in existence. If the
goods so identified conform to the contract, their resale will fix the seller's damages quite as satisfactorily as if they
had been identified before the breach.
8. Where the resale is to be by private sale, subsection (3) requires that reasonable notification of the seller's
intention to resell must be given to the buyer. The length of notification of a private sale depends upon the urgency
of the matter. Notification of the time and place of this type of sale is not required.
Subsection (4)(b) requires that the seller give the buyer reasonable notice of the time and place of a public resale
so that he may have an opportunity to bid or to secure the attendance of other bidders. An exception is made in the
case of goods "which are perishable or threaten to decline speedily in value."
9. Since there would be no reasonable prospect of competitive bidding elsewhere, subsection (4) requires that a
public resale "must be made at a usual place or market for public sale if one is reasonably available;" i.e., a place or
market which prospective bidders may reasonably be expected to attend. Such a market may still be "reasonably
available" under this subsection, though at a considerable distance from the place where the goods are located. In
such a case the expense of transporting the goods for resale is recoverable from the buyer as part of the seller's
incidental damages under subsection (1). However, the question of availability is one of commercial
reasonableness in the circumstances and if such "usual" place or market is not reasonably available, a duly
advertised public resale may be held at another place if it is one which prospective bidders may reasonably be
expected to attend, as distinguished from a place where there is no demand whatsoever for goods of the kind.
Paragraph (a) of subsection (4) qualifies the last sentence of subsection (2) with respect to resales of unidentified
and future goods at public sale. If conforming goods are in existence the seller may identify them to the contract
after the buyer's breach and then resell them at public sale. If the goods have not been identified, however, he may
resell them at public sale only as "future" goods and only where there is a recognized market for public sale of
futures in goods of the kind.
The provisions of paragraph (c) of subsection (4) are intended to permit intelligent bidding.
The provision of paragraph (d) of subsection (4) permitting the seller to bid and, of course, to become the
purchaser, benefits the original buyer by tending to increase the resale price and thus decreasing the damages he
will have to pay.
10. This Article departs in subsection (5) from the prior uniform statutory provision in permitting a good faith
purchaser at resale to take a good title as against the buyer even though the seller fails to comply with the
requirements of this section.
11. Under subsection (6), the seller retains profit, if any, without distinction based on whether or not he had a lien
since this Article divorces the question of passage of title to the buyer from the seller's right of resale or the
consequences of its exercise. On the other hand, where "a person in the position of a seller" or a buyer acting
under the section on buyer's remedies, exercises his right of resale under the present section he does so only for
the limited purpose of obtaining cash for his "security interest" in the goods. Once that purpose has been
accomplished any excess in the resale price belongs to the seller to whom an accounting must be made as
provided in the last sentence of subsection (6).
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-610, 2-702 and 2-703.
Point 2: Section 1-201.
Point 3: Sections 2-708 and 2-710.
§ 2-706. Seller's Resale Including Contract for Resale.
Page 4 of 4
Point 4: Section 2-328.
Point 8: Section 2-104.
Point 9: Section 2-710.
Point 11: Sections 2-401, 2-707 and 2-711(3).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Good faith". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Merchant". Section 2-104.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Person in position of seller". Section 2-707.
"Purchase". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-707
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-707. "Person in the Position of a Seller".
(1) A "person in the position of a seller" includes as against a principal an agent who has paid or become
responsible for the price of goods on behalf of his principal or anyone who otherwise holds a security
interest or other right in goods similar to that of a seller.
(2) A person in the position of a seller may as provided in this Article withhold or stop delivery ( Section 2-
705) and resell ( Section 2-706) and recover incidental damages ( Section 2-710).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 52(2), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
In addition to following in general the prior uniform statutory provision, the case of a financing agency which has
acquired documents by honoring a letter of credit for the buyer or by discounting a draft for the seller has been
included in the term "a person in the position of a seller."
Cross Reference:
Article 5, Section 2-506.
Definitional Cross References:
"Consignee". Section 7-102.
"Consignor". Section 7-102.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-708
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-708. Seller's Damages for Non-acceptance or Repudiation.
(1) Subject to subsection (2) and to the provisions of this Article with respect to proof of market price (
Section 2-723), the measure of damages for non-acceptance or repudiation by the buyer is the difference
between the market price at the time and place for tender and the unpaid contract price together with any
incidental damages provided in this Article ( Section 2-710), but less expenses saved in consequence of
the buyer's breach.
(2) If the measure of damages provided in subsection (1) is inadequate to put the seller in as good a
position as performance would have done then the measure of damages is the profit (including reasonable
overhead) which the seller would have made from full performance by the buyer, together with any
incidental damages provided in this Article ( Section 2-710), due allowance for costs reasonably incurred
and due credit for payments or proceeds of resale.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 64, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. The prior uniform statutory provision is followed generally in setting the current market price at the time and place
for tender as the standard by which damages for non-acceptance are to be determined. The time and place of
tender is determined by reference to the section on manner of tender of delivery, and to the sections on the effect of
such terms as FOB, FAS, CIF, C & F, Ex Ship and No Arrival, No Sale.
In the event that there is no evidence available of the current market price at the time and place of tender, proof of a
substitute market may be made under the section on determination and proof of market price. Furthermore, the
section on the admissibility of market quotations is intended to ease materially the problem of providing competent
evidence.
2. The provision of this section permitting recovery of expected profit including reasonable overhead where the
standard measure of damages is inadequate, together with the new requirement that price actions may be
sustained only where resale is impractical, are designed to eliminate the unfair and economically wasteful results
arising under the older law when fixed price articles were involved. This section permits the recovery of lost profits
in all appropriate cases, which would include all standard priced goods. The normal measure there would be list
price less cost to the dealer or list price less manufacturing cost to the manufacturer. It is not necessary to a
recovery of "profit" to show a history of earnings, especially of a new venture is involved.
3. In all cases the seller may recover incidental damages.
§ 2-708. Seller's Damages for Non-acceptance or Repudiation.
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-319 through 2-324, 2-503, 2-723 and 2-724.
Point 2: Section 2-709.
Point 3: Section 2-710.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-709
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-709. Action for the Price.
(1) When the buyer fails to pay the price as it becomes due the seller may recover, together with any
incidental damages under the next section, the price
(a) of goods accepted or of conforming goods lost or damaged within a commercially reasonable time
after risk of their loss has passed to the buyer; and
(b) of goods identified to the contract if the seller is unable after reasonable effort to resell them at a
reasonable price or the circumstances reasonably indicate that such effort will be unavailing.
(2) Where the seller sues for the price he must hold for the buyer any goods which have been identified to
the contract and are still in his control except that if resale becomes possible he may resell them at any
time prior to the collection of the judgment. The net proceeds of any such resale must be credited to the
buyer and payment of the judgment entitles him to any goods not resold.
(3) After the buyer has wrongfully rejected or revoked acceptance of the goods or has failed to make a
payment due or has repudiated ( Section 2-610), a seller who is held not entitled to the price under this
section shall nevertheless be awarded damages for non-acceptance under the preceding section.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 63, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten, important commercially needed changes being incorporated.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. Neither the passing of title to the goods nor the appointment of a day certain for payment is now material to a
price action.
2. The action for the price is now generally limited to those cases where resale of the goods is impracticable except
where the buyer has accepted the goods or where they have been destroyed after risk of loss has passed to the
buyer.
3. This section substitutes an objective test by action for the former "not readily resalable" standard. An action for
the price under subsection (1)(b) can be sustained only after a "reasonable effort to resell" the goods "at reasonable
price" has actually been made or where the circumstances "reasonably indicate" that such an effort will be
unavailing.
4. If a buyer is in default not with respect to the price, but on an obligation to make an advance, the seller should
recover not under this section for the price as such, but for the default in the collateral (though coincident) obligation
to finance the seller. If the agreement between the parties contemplates that the buyer will acquire, on making the
§ 2-709. Action for the Price.
Page 2 of 2
advance, a security interest in the goods, the buyer on making the advance has such an interest as soon as the
seller has rights in the agreed collateral. See Section 9-204.
5. "Goods accepted" by the buyer under subsection (1)(a) include only goods as to which there has been no
justified revocation of acceptance, for such a revocation means that there has been a default by the seller which
bars his rights under this section. "Goods lost or damaged" are covered by the section on risk of loss. "Goods
identified to the contract" under subsection (1)(b) are covered by the section on identification and the section on
identification notwithstanding breach.
6. This section is intended to be exhaustive in its enumeration of cases where an action for the price lies.
7. If the action for the price fails, the seller may nonetheless have proved a case entitling him to damages for nonacceptance.
In such a situation, subsection (3) permits recovery of those damages in the same action.
Cross References:
Point 4: Section 1-106.
Point 5: Sections 2-501, 2-509, 2-510 and 2-704.
Point 7: Section 2-708.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conforming". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-710
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-710. Seller's Incidental Damages.
Incidental damages to an aggrieved seller include any commercially reasonable charges, expenses or commissions
incurred in stopping delivery, in the transportation, care and custody of goods after the buyer's breach, in
connection with return or resale of the goods or otherwise resulting from the breach.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See Sections 64 and 70, Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes: To authorize reimbursement of the seller for expenses reasonably incurred by him as a result of the
buyer's breach. The section sets forth the principal normal and necessary additional elements of damage flowing
from the breach but intends to allow all commercially reasonable expenditures made by the seller.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-711
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-711. Buyer's Remedies in General; Buyer's Security Interest in Rejected
Goods.
(1) Where the seller fails to make delivery or repudiates or the buyer rightfully rejects or justifiably revokes
acceptance then with respect to any goods involved, and with respect to the whole if the breach goes to the
whole contract ( Section 2-612), the buyer may cancel and whether or not he has done so may in addition
to recovering so much of the price as has been paid
(a) "cover" and have damages under the next section as to all the goods affected whether or not they
have been identified to the contract; or
(b) recover damages for non-delivery as provided in this Article ( Section 2-713).
(2) Where the seller fails to deliver or repudiates the buyer may also
(a) if the goods have been identified recover them as provided in this Article ( Section 2-502); or
(b) in a proper case obtain specific performance or replevy the goods as provided in this Article (
Section 2-716).
(3) On rightful rejection or justifiable revocation of acceptance a buyer has a security interest in goods in
his possession or control for any payments made on their price and any expenses reasonably incurred in
their inspection, receipt, transportation, care and custody and may hold such goods and resell them in like
manner as an aggrieved seller ( Section 2-706).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: No comparable index section; Subsection (3)-Section 69(5), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: The prior uniform statutory provision is generally continued and expanded in Subsection (3).
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. To index in this section the buyer's remedies, subsection (1) covering those remedies permitting the recovery of
money damages, and subsection (2) covering those which permit reaching the goods themselves. The remedies
listed here are those available to a buyer who has not accepted the goods or who has justifiably revoked his
acceptance. The remedies available to a buyer with regard to goods finally accepted appear in the section dealing
with breach in regard to accepted goods. The buyer's right to proceed as to all goods when the breach is as to only
some of the goods is determined by the section on breach in installment contracts and by the section on partial
acceptance.
Despite the seller's breach, proper retender of delivery under the section on cure of improper tender or replacement
can effectively preclude the buyer's remedies under this section, except for any delay involved.
§ 2-711. Buyer's Remedies in General; Buyer's Security Interest in Rejected Goods.
Page 2 of 2
2. To make it clear in subsection (3) that the buyer may hold and resell rejected goods if he has paid a part of the
price or incurred expenses of the type specified. "Paid" as used here includes acceptance of a draft or other time
negotiable instrument or the signing of a negotiable note. His freedom of resale is coextensive with that of a seller
under this Article except that the buyer may not keep any profit resulting from the resale and is limited to retaining
only the amount of the price paid and the costs involved in the inspection and handling of the goods. The buyer's
security interest in the goods is intended to be limited to the items listed in subsection (3), and the buyer is not
permitted to retain such funds as he might believe adequate for his damages. The buyer's right to cover, or to have
damages for non-delivery, is not impaired by his exercise of his right of resale.
3. It should also be noted that this Act requires its remedies to be liberally administered and provides that any right
or obligation which it declares is enforceable by action unless a different effect is specifically prescribed (Section 1-
106).
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-508, 2-601(c), 2-608, 2-612 and 2-714.
Point 2: Section 2-706.
Point 3: Section 1-106.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Cancellation". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Cover". Section 2-712.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Receipt" of goods. Section 2-103.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-712
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-712. "Cover"; Buyer's Procurement of Substitute Goods.
(1) After a breach within the preceding section the buyer may "cover" by making in good faith and without
unreasonable delay any reasonable purchase of or contract to purchase goods in substitution for those due
from the seller.
(2) The buyer may recover from the seller as damages the difference between the cost of cover and the
contract price together with any incidental or consequential damages as hereinafter defined ( Section 2-
715), but less expenses saved in consequence of the seller's breach.
(3) Failure of the buyer to effect cover within this section does not bar him from any other remedy.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. This section provides the buyer with a remedy aimed at enabling him to obtain the goods he needs thus meeting
his essential need. This remedy is the buyer's equivalent of the seller's right to resell.
2. The definition of "cover" under subsection (1) envisages a series of contracts or sales, as well as a single
contract or sale; goods not identical with those involved but commercially usable as reasonable substitutes under
the circumstances of the particular case; and contracts on credit or delivery terms differing from the contract in
breach, but again reasonable under the circumstances. The test of proper cover is whether at the time and place
the buyer acted in good faith and in a reasonable manner, and it is immaterial that hindsight may later prove that
the method of cover used was not the cheapest or most effective.
The requirement that the buyer must cover "without unreasonable delay" is not intended to limit the time necessary
for him to look around and decide as to how he may best effect cover. The test here is similar to that generally
used in this Article as to reasonable time and seasonable action.
3. Subsection (3) expresses the policy that cover is not a mandatory remedy for the buyer. The buyer is always
free to choose between cover and damages for non-delivery under the next section.
However, this subsection must be read in conjunction with the section which limits the recovery of consequential
damages to such as could not have been obviated by cover. Moreover, the operation of the section on specific
performance of contracts for "unique" goods must be considered in this connection for availability of the goods to
the particular buyer for his particular needs is the test for that remedy and inability to cover is made an express
condition to the right of the buyer to replevy the goods.
§ 2-712. "Cover"; Buyer's Procurement of Substitute Goods.
Page 2 of 2
4. This section does not limit cover to merchants, in the first instance. It is the vital and important remedy for the
consumer buyer as well. Both are free to use cover: the domestic or non-merchant consumer is required only to act
in normal good faith while the merchant buyer must also observe all reasonable commercial standards of fair
dealing in the trade, since this falls within the definition of good faith on his part.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-706.
Point 2: Section 1-204.
Point 3: Sections 2-713, 2-715 and 2-716.
Point 4: Section 1-203.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Good faith". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Purchase". Section 1-201.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-713
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-713. Buyer's Damages for Non-delivery or Repudiation.
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Article with respect to proof of market price ( Section 2-723), the
measure of damages for non-delivery or repudiation by the seller is the difference between the market price
at the time when the buyer learned of the breach and the contract price together with any incidental and
consequential damages provided in this Article ( Section 2-715), but less expenses saved in consequence
of the seller's breach.
(2) Market price is to be determined as of the place for tender or, in cases of rejection after arrival or
revocation of acceptance, as of the place of arrival.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 67(3), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes: To clarify the former rule so that:
1. The general baseline adopted in this section uses as a yardstick the market in which the buyer would have
obtained cover had he sought that relief. So the place for measuring damages is the place of tender (or the place
of arrival if the goods are rejected or their acceptance is revoked after reaching their destination) and the crucial
time is the time at which the buyer learns of the breach.
2. The market or current price to be used in comparison with the contract price under this section is the price for
goods of the same kind and in the same branch of trade.
3. When the current market price under this section is difficult to prove the section on determination and proof of
market price is available to permit a showing of a comparable market price or, where no market price is available,
evidence of spot sale prices is proper. Where the unavailability of a market price is caused by a scarcity of goods
of the type involved, a good case is normally made for specific performance under this Article. Such scarcity
conditions, moreover, indicate that the price has risen and under the section providing for liberal administration of
remedies, opinion evidence as to the value of the goods would be admissible in the absence of a market price and
a liberal construction of allowable consequential damages should also result.
4. This section carries forward the standard rule that the buyer must deduct from his damages any expenses saved
as a result of the breach.
5. The present section provides a remedy which is completely alternative to cover under the preceding section and
applies only when and to the extent that the buyer has not covered.
Cross References:
§ 2-713. Buyer's Damages for Non-delivery or Repudiation.
Page 2 of 2
Point 3: Sections 1-106, 2-716 and 2-723.
Point 5: Section 2-712.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-714
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-714. Buyer's Damages for Breach in Regard to Accepted Goods.
(1) Where the buyer has accepted goods and given notification (subsection (3) of Section 2-607) he may
recover as damages for any non-conformity of tender the loss resulting in the ordinary course of events
from the seller's breach as determined in any manner which is reasonable.
(2) The measure of damages for breach of warranty is the difference at the time and place of acceptance
between the value of the goods accepted and the value they would have had if they had been as
warranted, unless special circumstances show proximate damages of a different amount.
(3) In a proper case any incidental and consequential damages under the next section may also be
recovered.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 69(6) and (7), Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes:
1. This section deals with the remedies available to the buyer after the goods have been accepted and the time for
revocation of acceptance has gone by. In general this section adopts the rule of the prior uniform statutory
provision for measuring damages where there has been a breach of warranty as to goods accepted, but goes
further to lay down an explicit provision as to the time and place for determining the loss.
The section on deduction of damages from price provides an additional remedy for a buyer who still owes part of
the purchase price, and frequently the two remedies will be available concurrently. The buyer's failure to notify of
his claim under the section on effects of acceptance, however, operates to bar his remedies under either that
section or the present section.
2. The "non-conformity" referred to in subsection (1) includes not only breaches of warranties but also any failure of
the seller to perform according to his obligations under the contract. In the case of such non-conformity, the buyer
is permitted to recover for his loss "in any manner which is reasonable."
3. Subsection (2) describes the usual, standard and reasonable method of ascertaining damages in the case of
breach of warranty but it is not intended as an exclusive measure. It departs from the measure of damages for nondelivery
in utilizing the place of acceptance rather than the place of tender. In some cases the two may coincide, as
where the buyer signifies his acceptance upon the tender. If, however, the non-conformity is such as would justify
revocation of acceptance, the time and place of acceptance under this section is determined as of the buyer's
decision not to revoke.
§ 2-714. Buyer's Damages for Breach in Regard to Accepted Goods.
Page 2 of 2
4. The incidental and consequential damages referred to in subsection (3), which will usually accompany an action
brought under this section, are discussed in detail in the comment on the next section.
Cross References:
Point 1: Compare Section 2-711; Sections 2-607 and 2-717.
Point 2: Section 2-106.
Point 3: Sections 2-608 and 2-713.
Point 4: Section 2-715.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conform". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 1-201.
"Notification". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-715
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-715. Buyer's Incidental and Consequential Damages.
(1) Incidental damages resulting from the seller's breach include expenses reasonably incurred in
inspection, receipt, transportation and care and custody of goods rightfully rejected, any commercially
reasonable charges, expenses or commissions in connection with effecting cover and any other reasonable
expense incident to the delay or other breach.
(2) Consequential damages resulting from the seller's breach include
(a) any loss resulting from general or particular requirements and needs of which the seller at the time
of contracting had reason to know and which could not reasonably be prevented by cover or otherwise;
and
(b) injury to person or property proximately resulting from any breach of warranty.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provisions: Subsection (2)(b)-Sections 69(7) and 70, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rewritten.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. Subsection (1) is intended to provide reimbursement for the buyer who incurs reasonable expenses in connection
with the handling of rightfully rejected goods or goods whose acceptance may be justifiably revoked, or in
connection with effecting cover where the breach of the contract lies in non-conformity or non-delivery of the goods.
The incidental damages listed are not intended to be exhaustive but are merely illustrative of the typical kinds of
incidental damage.
2. Subsection (2) operates to allow the buyer, in an appropriate case, any consequential damages which are the
result of the seller's breach. The "tacit agreement" test for the recovery of consequential damages is rejected.
Although the older rule at common law which made the seller liable for all consequential damages of which he had
"reason to know" in advance is followed, the liberality of that rule is modified by refusing to permit recovery unless
the buyer could not reasonably have prevented the loss by cover or otherwise. Subparagraph (2) carries forward
the provisions of the prior uniform statutory provision as to consequential damages resulting from breach of
warranty, but modifies the rule by requiring first that the buyer attempt to minimize his damages in good faith, either
by cover or otherwise.
3. In the absence of excuse under the section on merchant's excuse by failure of presupposed conditions, the seller
is liable for consequential damages in all cases where he had reason to know of the buyer's general or particular
requirements at the time of contracting. It is not necessary that there be a conscious acceptance of an insurer's
§ 2-715. Buyer's Incidental and Consequential Damages.
Page 2 of 2
liability on the seller's part, nor is his obligation for consequential damages limited to cases in which he fails to use
due effort in good faith.
Particular needs of the buyer must generally be made known to the seller while general needs must rarely be made
known to charge the seller with knowledge.
Any seller who does not wish to take the risk of consequential damages has available the section on contractual
limitation of remedy.
4. The burden of proving the extent of loss incurred by way of consequential damage is on the buyer, but the
section on liberal administration of remedies rejects any doctrine of certainty which requires almost mathematical
precision in the proof of loss. Loss may be determined in any manner which is reasonable under the
circumstances.
5. Subsection (2)(b) states the usual rule as to breach of warranty, allowing recovery for injuries "proximately"
resulting from the breach. Where the injury involved follows the use of goods without discovery of the defect
causing the damage, the question of "proximate" cause turns on whether it was reasonable for the buyer to use the
goods without such inspection as would have revealed the defects. If it was not reasonable for him to do so, or if he
did in fact discover the defect prior to his use, the injury would not proximately result from the breach of warranty.
6. In the case of sale of wares to one in the business of reselling them, resale is one of the requirements of which
the seller has reason to know within the meaning of subsection (2)(a).
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-608.
Point 3: Sections 1-203, 2-615 and 2-719.
Point 4: Section 1-106.
Definitional Cross References:
"Cover". Section 2-712.
"Goods". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Receipt" of goods. Section 2-103.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-716
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-716. Buyer's Right to Specific Performance or Replevin.
(1) Specific performance may be decreed where the goods are unique or in other proper circumstances.
(2) The decree for specific performance may include such terms and conditions as to payment of the price,
damages, or other relief as the court may deem just.
(3) The buyer has a right of replevin for goods identified to the contract if after reasonable effort he is
unable to effect cover for such goods or the circumstances reasonably indicate that such effort will be
unavailing or if the goods have been shipped under reservation and satisfaction of the security interest in
them has been made or tendered. In the case of goods bought for personal, family, or household purposes,
the buyer's right of replevin vests upon acquisition of a special property, even if the seller had not then
repudiated or failed to deliver.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 68, Uniform Sales Act.
Changes: Rephrased.
Purposes of Changes: To make it clear that:
1. The present section continues in general prior policy as to specific performance and injunction against breach.
However, without intending to impair in any way the exercise of the court's sound discretion in the matter, this
Article seeks to further a more liberal attitude than some courts have shown in connection with the specific
performance of contracts of sale.
2. In view of this Article's emphasis on the commercial feasibility of replacement, a new concept of what are
"unique" goods is introduced under this section. Specific performance is no longer limited to goods which are
already specific or ascertained at the time of contracting. The test of uniqueness under this section must be made
in terms of the total situation which characterizes the contract. Output and requirements contracts involving a
particular or peculiarly available source or market present today the typical commercial specific performance
situation, as contrasted with contracts for the sale of heirlooms or priceless works of art which were usually involved
in the older cases. However, uniqueness is not the sole basis of the remedy under this section for the relief may
also be granted "in other proper circumstances" and inability to cover is strong evidence of "other proper
circumstances".
3. The legal remedy of replevin is given to the buyer in cases in which cover is reasonably unavailable and goods
have been identified to the contract. This is in addition to the buyer's right to recover identified goods under Section
2-502. For consumer goods, the buyer's right to replevin vests upon the buyer's acquisition of a special property,
which occurs upon identification of the goods to the contract. See Section 2-501. Inasmuch as a secured party
normally acquires no greater rights in its collateral that its debtor had or had power to convey, see Section 2-403(1)
§ 2-716. Buyer's Right to Specific Performance or Replevin.
Page 2 of 2
(first sentence), a buyer who acquires a right of replevin under subsection (3) will take free of a security interest
created by the seller if it attaches to the goods after the goods have been identified to the contract. The buyer will
take free, even if the buyer does not buy in ordinary course and even if the security interest is perfected. Of course,
to the extent that the buyer pays the price after the security interest attaches, the payments will constitute proceeds
of the security interest.
4. This section is intended to give the buyer rights to the goods comparable to the seller's rights to the price.
5. If a negotiable document of title is outstanding, the buyer's right of replevin relates of course to the document not
directly to the goods. See Article 7, especially Section 7-602.
Cross References:
Point 3: Section 2-502.
Point 4: Section 2-709.
Point 5: Article 7.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-717
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-717. Deduction of Damages From the Price.
The buyer on notifying the seller of his intention to do so may deduct all or any part of the damages resulting from
any breach of the contract from any part of the price still due under the same contract.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: See Section 69(1)(a), Uniform Sales Act.
Purposes:
1. This section permits the buyer to deduct from the price damages resulting from any breach by the seller and
does not limit the relief to cases of breach of warranty as did the prior uniform statutory provision. To bring this
provision into application the breach involved must be of the same contract under which the price in question is
claimed to have been earned.
2. The buyer, however, must give notice of his intention to withhold all or part of the price if he wishes to avoid a
default within the meaning of the section on insecurity and right to assurances. In conformity with the general
policies of this Article, no formality of notice is required and any language which reasonably indicates the buyer's
reason for holding up his payment is sufficient.
Cross Reference:
Point 2: Section 2-609.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-718
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-718. Liquidation or Limitation of Damages; Deposits.
(1) Damages for breach by either party may be liquidated in the agreement but only at an amount which is
reasonable in the light of the anticipated or actual harm caused by the breach, the difficulties of proof of
loss, and the inconvenience or nonfeasibility of otherwise obtaining an adequate remedy. A term fixing
unreasonably large liquidated damages is void as a penalty.
(2) Where the seller justifiably withholds delivery of goods because of the buyer's breach, the buyer is
entitled to restitution of any amount by which the sum of his payments exceeds
(a) the amount to which the seller is entitled by virtue of terms liquidating the seller's damages in
accordance with subsection (1), or
(b) in the absence of such terms, twenty per cent of the value of the total performance for which the
buyer is obligated under the contract or $500, whichever is smaller.
(3) The buyer's right to restitution under subsection (2) is subject to offset to the extent that the seller
establishes
(a) a right to recover damages under the provisions of this Article other than subsection (1), and
(b) the amount or value of any benefits received by the buyer directly or indirectly by reason of the
contract.
(4) Where a seller has received payment in goods their reasonable value or the proceeds of their resale
shall be treated as payments for the purposes of subsection (2); but if the seller has notice of the buyer's
breach before reselling goods received in part performance, his resale is subject to the conditions laid down
in this Article on resale by an aggrieved seller ( Section 2-706).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Under subsection (1) liquidated damage clauses are allowed where the amount involved is reasonable in the light
of the circumstances of the case. The subsection sets forth explicitly the elements to be considered in determining
the reasonableness of a liquidated damage clause. A term fixing unreasonably large liquidated damages is
expressly made void as a penalty. An unreasonably small amount would be subject to similar criticism and might
be stricken under the section on unconscionable contracts or clauses.
2. Subsection (2) refuses to recognize a forfeiture unless the amount of the payment so forfeited represents a
reasonable liquidation of damages as determined under subsection (1). A special exception is made in the case of
small amounts (20% of the price or $500, whichever is smaller) deposited as security. No distinction is made
§ 2-718. Liquidation or Limitation of Damages; Deposits.
Page 2 of 2
between cases in which the payment is to be applied on the price and those in which it is intended as security for
performance. Subsection (2) is applicable to any deposit or down or part payment. In the case of a deposit or turn
in of goods resold before the breach, the amount actually received on the resale is to be viewed as the deposit
rather than the amount allowed the buyer for the trade in. However, if the seller knows of the breach prior to the
resale of the goods turned in, he must make reasonable efforts to realize their true value, and this is assured by
requiring him to comply with the conditions laid down in the section on resale by an aggrieved seller.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-302.
Point 2: Section 2-706.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Notice". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-719
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-719. Contractual Modification or Limitation of Remedy.
(1) Subject to the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section and of the preceding section on
liquidation and limitation of damages,
(a) the agreement may provide for remedies in addition to or in substitution for those provided in this
Article and may limit or alter the measure of damages recoverable under this Article, as by limiting the
buyer's remedies to return of the goods and repayment of the price or to repair and replacement of nonconforming
goods or parts; and
(b) resort to a remedy as provided is optional unless the remedy is expressly agreed to be exclusive, in
which case it is the sole remedy.
(2) Where circumstances cause an exclusive or limited remedy to fail of its essential purpose, remedy may
be had as provided in this Act.
(3) Consequential damages may be limited or excluded unless the limitation or exclusion is
unconscionable. Limitation of consequential damages for injury to the person in the case of consumer
goods is prima facie unconscionable but limitation of damages where the loss is commercial is not.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. Under this section parties are left free to shape their remedies to their particular requirements and reasonable
agreements limiting or modifying remedies are to be given effect.
However, it is of the very essence of a sales contract that at least minimum adequate remedies be available. If the
parties intend to conclude a contract for sale within this Article they must accept the legal consequence that there
be at least a fair quantum of remedy for breach of the obligations or duties outlined in the contract. Thus any clause
purporting to modify or limit the remedial provisions of this Article in an unconscionable manner is subject to
deletion and in that event the remedies made available by this Article are applicable as if the stricken clause had
never existed. Similarly, under subsection (2), where an apparently fair and reasonable clause because of
circumstances fails in its purpose or operates to deprive either party of the substantial value of the bargain, it must
give way to the general remedy provisions of this Article.
2. Subsection (1)(b) creates a presumption that clauses prescribing remedies are cumulative rather than exclusive.
If the parties intend the term to describe the sole remedy under the contract, this must be clearly expressed.
3. Subsection (3) recognizes the validity of clauses limiting or excluding consequential damages but makes it clear
that they may not operate in an unconscionable manner. Actually such terms are merely an allocation of unknown
§ 2-719. Contractual Modification or Limitation of Remedy.
Page 2 of 2
or undeterminable risks. The seller in all cases is free to disclaim warranties in the manner provided in Section 2-
316.
Cross References:
Point 1: Section 2-302.
Point 3: Section 2-316.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Conforming". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-720
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-720. Effect of "Cancellation" or "Rescission" on Claims for Antecedent
Breach.
Unless the contrary intention clearly appears, expressions of "cancellation" or "rescission" of the contract or the like
shall not be construed as a renunciation or discharge of any claim in damages for an antecedent breach.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purpose:
This section is designed to safeguard a person holding a right of action from any unintentional loss of rights by the
ill-advised use of such terms as "cancellation", "rescission", or the like. Once a party's rights have accrued they are
not to be lightly impaired by concessions made in business decency and without intention to forego them.
Therefore, unless the cancellation of a contract expressly declares that it is "without reservation of rights", or the
like, it cannot be considered to be a renunciation under this section.
Cross Reference:
Section 1-107.
Definitional Cross References:
"Cancellation". Section 2-106.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-721
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-721. Remedies for Fraud.
Remedies for material misrepresentation or fraud include all remedies available under this Article for non-fraudulent
breach. Neither rescission or a claim for rescission of the contract for sale nor rejection or return of the goods shall
bar or be deemed inconsistent with a claim for damages or other remedy.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To correct the situation by which remedies for fraud have been more circumscribed than the more
modern and mercantile remedies for breach of warranty. Thus the remedies for fraud are extended by this section
to coincide in scope with those for non-fraudulent breach. This section thus makes it clear that neither rescission of
the contract for fraud nor rejection of the goods bars other remedies unless the circumstances of the case make the
remedies incompatible.
Definitional Cross References:
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 1-201.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-722
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-722. Who Can Sue Third Parties for Injury to Goods.
Where a third party so deals with goods which have been identified to a contract for sale as to cause
actionable injury to a party to that contract
(a) a right of action against the third party is in either party to the contract for sale who has title to or a
security interest or a special property or an insurable interest in the goods; and if the goods have been
destroyed or converted a right of action is also in the party who either bore the risk of loss under the
contract for sale or has since the injury assumed that risk as against the other;
(b) if at the time of the injury the party plaintiff did not bear the risk of loss as against the other party to
the contract for sale and there is no arrangement between them for disposition of the recovery, his suit
or settlement is, subject to his own interest, as a fiduciary for the other party to the contract;
(c) either party may with the consent of the other sue for the benefit of whom it may concern.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To adopt and extend somewhat the principle of the statutes which provide for suit by the real party in
interest. The provisions of this section apply only after identification of the goods. Prior to that time only the seller
has a right of action. During the period between identification and final acceptance (except in the case of
revocation of acceptance) it is possible for both parties to have the right of action. Even after final acceptance both
parties may have the right of action if the seller retains possession or otherwise retains an interest.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 2-722. Who Can Sue Third Parties for Injury to Goods.
Page 2 of 2
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-723
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-723. Proof of Market Price: Time and Place.
(1) If an action based on anticipatory repudiation comes to trial before the time for performance with
respect to some or all of the goods, any damages based on market price ( Section 2-708 or Section 2-713)
shall be determined according to the price of such goods prevailing at the time when the aggrieved party
learned of the repudiation.
(2) If evidence of a price prevailing at the times or places described in this Article is not readily available
the price prevailing within any reasonable time before or after the time described or at any other place
which in commercial judgment or under usage of trade would serve as a reasonable substitute for the one
described may be used, making any proper allowance for the cost of transporting the goods to or from such
other place.
(3) Evidence of a relevant price prevailing at a time or place other than the one described in this Article
offered by one party is not admissible unless and until he has given the other party such notice as the court
finds sufficient to prevent unfair surprise.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To eliminate the most obvious difficulties arising in connection with the determination of market price,
when that is stipulated as a measure of damages by some provision of this Article. Where the appropriate market
price is not readily available the court is here granted reasonable leeway in receiving evidence of prices current in
other comparable markets or at other times comparable to the one in question. In accordance with the general
principle of this Article against surprise, however, a party intending to offer evidence of such a substitute price must
give suitable notice to the other party.
This section is not intended to exclude the use of any other reasonable method of determining market price or of
measuring damages if the circumstances of the case make this necessary.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201.
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Notifies". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
§ 2-723. Proof of Market Price: Time and Place.
Page 2 of 2
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Usage of trade". Section 1-205.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-724
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-724. Admissibility of Market Quotations.
Whenever the prevailing price or value of any goods regularly bought and sold in any established commodity
market is in issue, reports in official publications or trade journals or in newspapers or periodicals of general
circulation published as the reports of such market shall be admissible in evidence. The circumstances of the
preparation of such a report may be shown to affect its weight but not its admissibility.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To make market quotations admissible in evidence while providing for a challenge of the material by
showing the circumstances of its preparation.
No explicit provision as to the weight to be given to market quotations is contained in this section, but such
quotations, in the absence of compelling challenge, offer an adequate basis for a verdict.
Market quotations are made admissible when the price or value of goods traded "in any established market" is in
issue. The reason of the section does not require that the market be closely organized in the manner of a produce
exchange. It is sufficient if transactions in the commodity are frequent and open enough to make a market
established by usage in which one price can be expected to affect another and in which an informed report of the
range and trend of prices can be assumed to be reasonably accurate.
This section does not in any way intend to limit or negate the application of similar rules of admissibility to other
material, whether by action of the courts or by statute. The purpose of the present section is to assure a minimum
of mercantile administration in this important situation and not to limit any liberalizing trend in modern law.
Definitional Cross Reference:
"Goods". Section 2-105.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2-725
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2. SALES > PART 7.
REMEDIES
§ 2-725. Statute of Limitations in Contracts for Sale.
(1) An action for breach of any contract for sale must be commenced within four years after the cause of
action has accrued. By the original agreement the parties may reduce the period of limitation to not less
than one year but may not extend it.
(2) A cause of action accrues when the breach occurs, regardless of the aggrieved party's lack of
knowledge of the breach. A breach of warranty occurs when tender of delivery is made, except that where
a warranty explicitly extends to future performance of the goods and discovery of the breach must await the
time of such performance the cause of action accrues when the breach is or should have been discovered.
(3) Where an action commenced within the time limited by subsection (1) is so terminated as to leave
available a remedy by another action for the same breach such other action may be commenced after the
expiration of the time limited and within six months after the termination of the first action unless the
termination resulted from voluntary discontinuance or from dismissal for failure or neglect to prosecute.
(4) This section does not alter the law on tolling of the statute of limitations nor does it apply to causes of
action which have accrued before this Act becomes effective.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes: To introduce a uniform statute of limitations for sales contracts, thus eliminating the jurisdictional
variations and providing needed relief for concerns doing business on a nationwide scale whose contracts have
heretofore been governed by several different periods of limitation depending upon the state in which the
transaction occurred. This Article takes sales contracts out of the general laws limiting the time for commencing
contractual actions and selects a four year period as the most appropriate to modern business practice. This is
within the normal commercial record keeping period.
Subsection (1) permits the parties to reduce the period of limitation. The minimum period is set at one year. The
parties may not, however, extend the statutory period.
Subsection (2), providing that the cause of action accrues when the breach occurs, states an exception where the
warranty extends to future performance.
Subsection (3) states the saving provision included in many state statutes and permits an additional short period for
bringing new actions, where suits begun within the four year period have been terminated so as to leave a remedy
still available for the same breach.
Subsection (4) makes it clear that this Article does not purport to alter or modify in any respect the law on tolling of
the Statute of Limitations as it now prevails in the various jurisdictions.
§ 2-725. Statute of Limitations in Contracts for Sale.
Page 2 of 2
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201.
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201.
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Goods". Section 2-105.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Remedy". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Termination". Section 2-106.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2A-101. Short Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the Uniform Commercial Code-Leases.
See Appendix VI [following Amendment 24 therein] for material relating to changes in the Official Comment to
conform to the 1990 amendments to various sections of Article 2A.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Rationale for Codification:
There are several reasons for codifying the law with respect to leases of goods. An analysis of the case law as it
applies to leases of goods suggests at least three significant issues to be resolved by codification. First, what is a
lease? It is necessary to define lease to determine whether a transaction creates a lease or a security interest
disguised as a lease. If the transaction creates a security interest disguised as a lease, the lessor will be required
to file a financing statement or take other action to perfect its interest in the goods against third parties. There is no
such requirement with respect to leases. Yet the distinction between a lease and a security interest disguised as a
lease is not clear. Second, will the lessor be deemed to have made warranties to the lessee? If the transaction is a
sale the express and implied warranties of Article 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code apply. However, the warranty
law with respect to leases is uncertain. Third, what remedies are available to the lessor upon the lessee's default?
If the transaction is a security interest disguised as a lease, the answer is stated in Part 5 of the Article on Secured
Transactions (Article 9). There is no clear answer with respect to leases.
There are reasons to codify the law with respect to leases of goods in addition to those suggested by a review of
the reported cases. The answer to this important question should not be limited to the issues raised in these cases.
Is it not also proper to determine the remedies available to the lessee upon the lessor's default? It is, but that issue
is not reached through a review of the reported cases. This is only one of the many issues presented in structuring,
negotiating and documenting a lease of goods.
Statutory Analogue:
After it was decided to proceed with the codification project, the drafting committee of the National Conference of
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws looked for a statutory analogue, gradually narrowing the focus to the Article
on Sales (Article 2) and the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9). A review of the literature with respect to the
sale of goods reveals that Article 2 is predicated upon certain assumptions: Parties to the sales transaction
frequently are without counsel; the agreement of the parties often is oral or evidenced by scant writings; obligations
between the parties are bilateral; applicable law is influenced by the need to preserve freedom of contract. A
review of the literature with respect to personal property security law reveals that Article 9 is predicated upon very
different assumptions: Parties to a secured transaction regularly are represented by counsel; the agreement of the
parties frequently is reduced to a writing, extensive in scope; the obligations between the parties are essentially
unilateral; and applicable law seriously limits freedom of contract.
§ 2A-101. Short Title.
Page 2 of 4
The lease is closer in spirit and form to the sale of goods than to the creation of a security interest. While parties to
a lease are sometimes represented by counsel and their agreement is often reduced to a writing, the obligations of
the parties are bilateral and the common law of leasing is dominated by the need to preserve freedom of contract.
Thus the drafting committee concluded that Article 2 was the appropriate statutory analogue.
Issues: The drafting committee then identified and resolved several issues critical to codification:
Scope: The scope of the Article was limited to leases (Section 2A-102). There was no need to include leases
intended as security, i.e., security interests disguised as leases, as they are adequately treated in Article 9. Further,
even if leases intended as security were included, the need to preserve the distinction would remain, as policy
suggests treatment significantly different from that accorded leases.
Definition of Lease: Lease was defined to exclude leases intended as security (Section 2A-103(1)(j)). Given the
litigation to date a revised definition of security interest was suggested for inclusion in the Act. (Section 1-201(37)).
This revision sharpens the distinction between leases and security interests disguised as leases.
Filing: The lessor was not required to file a financing statement against the lessee or take any other action to
protect the lessor's interest in the goods (Section 2A-301). The refined definition of security interest will more
clearly signal the need to file to potential lessors of goods. Those lessors who are concerned will file a protective
financing statement (Section 9-408).
Warranties: All of the express and implied warranties of the Article on Sales (Article 2) were included (Sections 2A-
210 through 2A-216), revised to reflect differences in lease transactions. The lease of goods is sufficiently similar to
the sale of goods to justify this decision. Further, many courts have reached the same decision.
Certificate of Title Laws: Many leasing transactions involve goods subject to certificate of title statutes. To avoid
conflict with those statutes, this Article is subject to them (Section 2A-104(1)(a)).
Consumer Leases: Many leasing transactions involve parties subject to consumer protection statutes or decisions.
To avoid conflict with those laws this Article is subject to them to the extent provided in (Section 2A-104(1)(c) and
(2)). Further, certain consumer protections have been incorporated in the Article.
Finance Leases: Certain leasing transactions substitute the supplier of the goods for the lessor as the party
responsible to the lessee with respect to warranties and the like. The definition of finance lease (Section 2A-
103(1)(g)) was developed to describe these transactions. Various sections of the Article implement the substitution
of the supplier for the lessor, including Sections 2A-209 and 2A-407. No attempt was made to fashion a special
rule where the finance lessor is an affiliate of the supplier of goods; this is to be developed by the courts, case by
case.
Sale and Leaseback: Sale and leaseback transactions are becoming increasingly common. A number of state
statutes treat transactions where possession is retained by the seller as fraudulent per se or prima facie fraudulent.
That position is not in accord with modern practice and thus is changed by the Article "if the buyer bought for value
and in good faith" (Section 2A-308(3)).
Remedies: The Article has not only provided for lessor's remedies upon default by the lessee (Sections 2A-523
through 2A-531), but also for lessee's remedies upon default by the lessor (Sections 2A-508 through 2A-522). This
is a significant departure from Article 9, which provides remedies only for the secured party upon default by the
debtor. This difference is compelled by the bilateral nature of the obligations between the parties to a lease.
Damages: Many leasing transactions are predicated on the parties' ability to stipulate an appropriate measure of
damages in the event of default. The rule with respect to sales of goods (Section 2-718) is not sufficiently flexible to
accommodate this practice. Consistent with the common law emphasis upon freedom to contract, the Article has
created a revised rule that allows greater flexibility with respect to leases of goods (Section 2A-504(1)).
§ 2A-101. Short Title.
Page 3 of 4
History:
This Article is a revision of the Uniform Personal Property Leasing Act, which was approved by the National
Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws in August, 1985. However, it was believed that the subject
matter of the Uniform Personal Property Leasing Act would be better treated as an article of this Act. Thus,
although the Conference promulgated the Uniform Personal Property Leasing Act as a Uniform Law, activity was
held in abeyance to allow time to restate the Uniform Personal Property Leasing Act as Article 2A.
In August, 1986 the Conference approved and recommended this Article (including conforming amendments to
Article 1 and Article 9) for promulgation as an amendment to this Act. In December, 1986 the Council of the
American Law Institute approved and recommended this Article (including conforming amendments to Article 1 and
Article 9), with official comments, for promulgation as an amendment to this Act. In March, 1987 the Permanent
Editorial Board for the Uniform Commercial Code approved and recommended this Article (including conforming
amendments to Article 1 and Article 9), with official comments, for promulgation as an amendment to this Act. In
May, 1987 the American Law Institute approved and recommended this Article (including conforming amendments
to Article 1 and Article 9), with official comments, for promulgation as an amendment to this Act. In August, 1987
the Conference confirmed its approval of the final text of this Article.
Upon its initial promulgation, Article 2A was rapidly enacted in several states, was introduced in a number of other
states, and underwent bar association, law revision commission and legislative study in still further states. In that
process debate emerged, principally sparked by the study of Article 2A by the California Bar Association,
California's non-uniform amendments to Article 2A, and articles appearing in a symposium on Article 2A published
after its promulgation in the Alabama Law Review. The debate chiefly centered on whether Article 2A had struck
the proper balance or was clear enough concerning the ability of a lessor to grant a security interest in its leasehold
interest and in the residual, priority between a secured party and the lessee, and the lessor's remedy structure
under Article 2A.
This debate over issues on which reasonable minds could and did differ began to affect the enactment effort for
Article 2A in a deleterious manner. Consequently, the Standby Committee for Article 2A, composed predominantly
of the former members of the drafting committee, reviewed the legislative actions and studies in the various states,
and opened a dialogue with the principal proponents of the non-uniform amendments. Negotiations were
conducted in conjunction with, and were facilitated by, a study of the uniform Article and the non-uniform
Amendments by the New York Law Revision Commission. Ultimately, a consensus was reached, which has been
approved by the membership of the Conference, the Permanent Editorial Board, and the Council of the Institute.
Rapid and uniform enactment of Article 2A is expected as a result of the completed amendments. The Article 2A
experience reaffirms the essential viability of the procedures of the Conference and the Institute for creating and
updating uniform state law in the commercial law area.
Relationship of Article 2A to Other Articles:
The Article on Sales provided a useful point of reference for codifying the law of leases. Many of the provisions of
that Article were carried over, changed to reflect differences in style, leasing terminology or leasing practices. Thus,
the official comments to those sections of Article 2 whose provisions were carried over are incorporated by
reference in Article 2A, as well; further, any case law interpreting those provisions should be viewed as persuasive
but not binding on a court when deciding a similar issue with respect to leases. Any change in the sequence that
has been made when carrying over a provision from Article 2 should be viewed as a matter of style, not substance.
This is not to suggest that in other instances Article 2A did not also incorporate substantially revised provisions of
Article 2, Article 9 or otherwise where the revision was driven by a concern over the substance; but for the lack of a
mandate, the drafting committee might well have made the same or a similar change in the statutory analogue.
Those sections in Article 2A include Sections 2A-104, 2A-105, 2A-106, 2A-108(2) and (4), 2A-109(2), 2A-208, 2A-
214(2) and (3)(a), 2A-216, 2A-303, 2A-306, 2A-503, 2A-504(3)(b), 2A-506(2), and 2A-515. For lack of relevance or
significance not all of the provisions of Article 2 were incorporated in Article 2A.
§ 2A-101. Short Title.
Page 4 of 4
This codification was greatly influenced by the fundamental tenet of the common law as it has developed with
respect to leases of goods: freedom of the parties to contract. Note that, like all other Articles of this Act, the
principles of construction and interpretation contained in Article 1 are applicable throughout Article 2A (Section 2A-
103(4)). These principles include the ability of the parties to vary the effect of the provisions of Article 2A, subject to
certain limitations including those that relate to the obligations of good faith, diligence, reasonableness and care
(Section 1-102(3)). Consistent with those principles no negative inference is to be drawn by the episodic use of the
phrase "unless otherwise agreed" in certain provisions of Article 2A. Section 1-102(4). Indeed, the contrary is true,
as the general rule in the Act, including this Article, is that the effect of the Act's provisions may be varied by
agreement. Section 1-102(3). This conclusion follows even where the statutory analogue contains the phrase and
the correlative provision in Article 2A does not.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2A-102. Scope.
This Article applies to any transaction, regardless of form, that creates a lease.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 9-102(1). Throughout this Article, unless otherwise stated, references to
"Section" are to other sections of this Act.
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes: This Article governs transactions as diverse as the lease of a hand tool to an individual for a few hours
and the leveraged lease of a complex line of industrial equipment to a multi-national organization for a number of
years.
To achieve that end it was necessary to provide that this Article applies to any transaction, regardless of form, that
creates a lease. Since lease is defined as a transfer of an interest in goods (Section 2A-103(1)(j)) and goods is
defined to include fixtures (Section 2A-103(1)(h)), application is limited to the extent the transaction relates to
goods, including fixtures. Further, since the definition of lease does not include a sale (Section 2-106(1)) or
retention or creation of a security interest (Section 1-201(37)), application is further limited; sales and security
interests are governed by other Articles of this Act.
Finally, in recognition of the diversity of the transactions to be governed, the sophistication of many of the parties to
these transactions, and the common law tradition as it applies to the bailment for hire or lease, freedom of contract
has been preserved. DeKoven, Proceedings After Default by the Lessee Under a True Lease of Equipment, in 1C
P. Coogan, W. Hogan, D. Vagts, Secured Transactions Under the Uniform Commercial Code, § 29B.02[2] (1986).
Thus, despite the extensive regulatory scheme established by this Article, the parties to a lease will be able to
create private rules to govern their transaction. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-102(3). However, there are special rules
in this Article governing consumer leases, as well as other state and federal statutes, that may further limit freedom
of contract with respect to consumer leases.
A court may apply this Article by analogy to any transaction, regardless of form, that creates a lease of personal
property other than goods, taking into account the expressed intentions of the parties to the transaction and any
differences between a lease of goods and a lease of other property. Such application has precedent as the
provisions of the Article on Sales (Article 2) have been applied by analogy to leases of goods. E.g., Hawkland, The
Impact of the Uniform Commercial Code on Equipment Leasing, 1972 Ill.L.F. 446; Murray, Under the Spreading
Analogy of Article 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code, 39 Fordham L.Rev. 447 (1971). Whether such application
would be appropriate for other bailments of personal property, gratuitous or for hire, should be determined by the
facts of each case. See Mieske v. Bartell Drug Co., 92 Wash.2d 40, 46-48, 593 P.2d 1308, 1312 (1979).
§ 2A-102. Scope.
Page 2 of 2
Further, parties to a transaction creating a lease of personal property other than goods, or a bailment of personal
property may provide by agreement that this Article applies. Upholding the parties' choice is consistent with the
spirit of this Article.
Cross References:
Sections 1-102(3), 1-201(37), Article 2, esp. Section 2-106(1), and Sections 2A-103(1)(h), 2A-103(1)(j) and 2A-
103(4).
Definitional Cross Reference:
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2A-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
(1) In this Article unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Buyer in ordinary course of business" means a person who in good faith and without knowledge
that the sale to him [or her] is in violation of the ownership rights or security interest or leasehold
interest of a third party in the goods buys in ordinary course from a person in the business of selling
goods of that kind but does not include a pawnbroker. "Buying" may be for cash or by exchange of
other property or on secured or unsecured credit and includes acquiring goods or documents of title
under a pre-existing contract for sale but does not include a transfer in bulk or as security for or in total
or partial satisfaction of a money debt.
(b) "Cancellation" occurs when either party puts an end to the lease contract for default by the other
party.
(c) "Commercial unit" means such a unit of goods as by commercial usage is a single whole for
purposes of lease and division of which materially impairs its character or value on the market or in use.
A commercial unit may be a single article, as a machine, or a set of articles, as a suite of furniture or a
line of machinery, or a quantity, as a gross or carload, or any other unit treated in use or in the relevant
market as a single whole.
(d) "Conforming" goods or performance under a lease contract means goods or performance that are
in accordance with the obligations under the lease contract.
(e) "Consumer lease" means a lease that a lessor regularly engaged in the business of leasing or
selling makes to a lessee who is an individual and who takes under the lease primarily for a personal,
family, or household purpose [, if the total payments to be made under the lease contract, excluding
payments for options to renew or buy, do not exceed $.......].
(f) "Fault" means wrongful act, omission, breach, or default.
(g) "Finance lease" means a lease with respect to which:
(i) the lessor does not select, manufacture, or supply the goods;
(ii) the lessor acquires the goods or the right to possession and use of the goods in connection
with the lease; and
(iii) one of the following occurs:
(A) the lessee receives a copy of the contract by which the lessor acquired the goods or the
right to possession and use of the goods before signing the lease contract;
(B) the lessee's approval of the contract by which the lessor acquired the goods or the right to
possession and use of the goods is a condition to effectiveness of the lease contract;
(C) the lessee, before signing the lease contract, receives an accurate and complete
statement designating the promises and warranties, and any disclaimers of warranties,
limitations or modifications of remedies, or liquidated damages, including those of a third party,
such as the manufacturer of the goods, provided to the lessor by the person supplying the
goods in connection with or as part of the contract by which the lessor acquired the goods or
the right to possession and use of the goods; or
§ 2A-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
Page 2 of 8
(D) if the lease is not a consumer lease, the lessor, before the lessee signs the lease contract,
informs the lessee in writing (a) of the identity of the person supplying the goods to the lessor,
unless the lessee has selected that person and directed the lessor to acquire the goods or the
right to possession and use of the goods from that person, (b) that the lessee is entitled under
this Article to the promises and warranties, including those of any third party, provided to the
lessor by the person supplying the goods in connection with or as part of the contract by which
the lessor acquired the goods or the right to possession and use of the goods, and (c) that the
lessee may communicate with the person supplying the goods to the lessor and receive an
accurate and complete statement of those promises and warranties, including any disclaimers
and limitations of them or of remedies.
(h) "Goods" means all things that are movable at the time of identification to the lease contract, or are
fixtures ( Section 2A-309), but the term does not include money, documents, instruments, accounts,
chattel paper, general intangibles, or minerals or the like, including oil and gas, before extraction. The
term also includes the unborn young of animals.
(i) "Installment lease contract" means a lease contract that authorizes or requires the delivery of goods
in separate lots to be separately accepted, even though the lease contract contains a clause "each
delivery is a separate lease" or its equivalent.
(j) "Lease" means a transfer of the right to possession and use of goods for a term in return for
consideration, but a sale, including a sale on approval or a sale or return, or retention or creation of a
security interest is not a lease. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the term includes a
sublease.
(k) "Lease agreement" means the bargain, with respect to the lease, of the lessor and the lessee in
fact as found in their language or by implication from other circumstances including course of dealing or
usage of trade or course of performance as provided in this Article. Unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the term includes a sublease agreement.
(l) "Lease contract" means the total legal obligation that results from the lease agreement as affected
by this Article and any other applicable rules of law. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
term includes a sublease contract.
(m) "Leasehold interest" means the interest of the lessor or the lessee under a lease contract.
(n) "Lessee" means a person who acquires the right to possession and use of goods under a lease.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the term includes a sublessee.
(o) "Lessee in ordinary course of business" means a person who in good faith and without knowledge
that the lease to him [or her] is in violation of the ownership rights or security interest or leasehold
interest of a third party in the goods, leases in ordinary course from a person in the business of selling
or leasing goods of that kind but does not include a pawnbroker. "Leasing" may be for cash or by
exchange of other property or on secured or unsecured credit and includes acquiring goods or
documents of title under a pre-existing lease contract but does not include a transfer in bulk or as
security for or in total or partial satisfaction of a money debt.
(p) "Lessor" means a person who transfers the right to possession and use of goods under a lease.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the term includes a sublessor.
(q) "Lessor's residual interest" means the lessor's interest in the goods after expiration, termination, or
cancellation of the lease contract.
(r) "Lien" means a charge against or interest in goods to secure payment of a debt or performance of
an obligation, but the term does not include a security interest.
(s) "Lot" means a parcel or a single article that is the subject matter of a separate lease or delivery,
whether or not it is sufficient to perform the lease contract.
§ 2A-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
Page 3 of 8
(t) "Merchant lessee" means a lessee that is a merchant with respect to goods of the kind subject to
the lease.
[Notice: subsection (u) text prior to deletion in 2001 to conform to 2001 Revision of Article I]
(u) "Present value" means the amount as of a date certain of one or more sums payable in the future,
discounted to the date certain. The discount is determined by the interest rate specified by the parties
if the rate was not manifestly unreasonable at the time the transaction was entered into; otherwise, the
discount is determined by a commercially reasonable rate that takes into account the facts and
circumstances of each case at the time the transaction was entered into.
(v) "Purchase" includes taking by sale, lease, mortgage, security interest, pledge, gift, or any other
voluntary transaction creating an interest in goods.
(w) "Sublease" means a lease of goods the right to possession and use of which was acquired by the
lessor as a lessee under an existing lease.
(x) "Supplier" means a person from whom a lessor buys or leases goods to be leased under a finance
lease.
(y) "Supply contract" means a contract under which a lessor buys or leases goods to be leased.
(z) "Termination" occurs when either party pursuant to a power created by agreement or law puts an
end to the lease contract otherwise than for default.
(2) Other definitions applying to this Article and the sections in which they appear are:
"Accessions". Section 2A-310(1).
"Construction mortgage". Section 2A-309(1)(d).
"Encumbrance". Section 2A-309(1)(e).
"Fixtures". Section 2A-309(1)(a).
"Fixture filing". Section 2A-309(1)(b).
"Purchase money lease". Section 2A-309(1)(c).
(3) The following definitions in other Articles apply to this Article:
"Account". Section 9-102(a)(2).
"Between merchants". Section 2-104(3).
"Buyer". Section 2-103(1)(a).
"Chattel paper". Section 9-102(a)(11).
"Consumer goods". Section 9-102(a)(23).
"Document". Section 9-102(a)(30).
"Entrusting". Section 2-403(3).
"General intangible". Section 9-102(a)(42).
"Good faith". Section 2-103(1)(b).
"Instrument". Section 9-102(a)(47).
"Merchant". Section 2-104(1).
"Mortgage". Section 9-102(a)(55).
"Pursuant to commitment". Section 9-102(a)(69).
"Receipt". Section 2-103(1)(c).
"Sale". Section 2-106(1).
"Sale on approval". Section 2-326.
"Sale or return". Section 2-326.
"Seller". Section 2-103(1)(d).
(4) In addition Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation
applicable throughout this Article.
As amended in 1990.
§ 2A-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
Page 4 of 8
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
(a) "Buyer in ordinary course of business". Section 1-201(9).
(b) "Cancellation". Section 2-106(4). The effect of a cancellation is provided in Section 2A-505(1).
(c) "Commercial unit". Section 2-105(6).
(d) "Conforming". Section 2-106(2).
(e) "Consumer lease". New. This Article includes a subset of rules that applies only to consumer leases. Sections
2A-106, 2A-108(2), 2A-108(4), 2A-109(2), 2A-221, 2A-309, 2A-406, 2A-407, 2A-504(3)(b), and 2A-516(3)(b).
For a transaction to qualify as a consumer lease it must first qualify as a lease. Section 2A-103(1)(j). Note that this
Article regulates the transactional elements of a lease, including a consumer lease; consumer protection statutes,
present and future, and existing consumer protection decisions are unaffected by this Article. Section 2A-104(1)(c)
and (2). Of course, Article 2A as state law also is subject to federal consumer protection law.
This definition is modeled after the definition of consumer lease in the Consumer Leasing Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1667
(1982), and in the Unif. Consumer Credit Code § 1.301(14), 7A U.L.A. 43 (1974). However, this definition of
consumer lease differs from its models in several respects: the lessor can be a person regularly engaged either in
the business of leasing or of selling goods, the lease need not be for a term exceeding four months, a lease
primarily for an agricultural purpose is not covered, and whether there should be a limitation by dollar amount and
its amount is left up to the individual states.
This definition focuses on the parties as well as the transaction. If a lease is within this definition, the lessor must
be regularly engaged in the business of leasing or selling, and the lessee must be an individual, not an
organization; note that a lease to two or more individuals having a common interest through marriage or the like is
not excluded as a lease to an organization under Section 1-201(28). The lessee must take the interest primarily for
a personal, family or household purpose. If required by the enacting state, total payments under the lease contract,
excluding payments for options to renew or buy, cannot exceed the figure designated.
(f) "Fault". Section 1-201(16).
(g) "Finance Lease". New. This Article includes a subset of rules that applies only to finance leases. Sections 2A-
209, 2A-211(2), 2A-212(1), 2A-213, 2A-219(1), 2A-220(1)(a), 2A-221, 2A-405(c), 2A-407, 2A-516(2) and 2A-
517(1)(a) and (2).
For a transaction to qualify as a finance lease it must first qualify as a lease. Section 2A-103(1)(j). Unless the
lessor is comfortable that the transaction will qualify as a finance lease, the lease agreement should include
provisions giving the lessor the benefits created by the subset of rules applicable to the transaction that qualifies as
a finance lease under this Article.
A finance lease is the product of a three party transaction. The supplier manufactures or supplies the goods
pursuant to the lessee's specification, perhaps even pursuant to a purchase order, sales agreement or lease
agreement between the supplier and the lessee. After the prospective finance lease is negotiated, a purchase
order, sales agreement, or lease agreement is entered into by the lessor (as buyer or prime lessee) or an existing
§ 2A-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
Page 5 of 8
order, agreement or lease is assigned by the lessee to the lessor, and the lessor and the lessee then enter into a
lease or sublease of the goods. Due to the limited function usually performed by the lessor, the lessee looks almost
entirely to the supplier for representations, covenants and warranties. If a manufacturer's warranty carries through,
the lessee may also look to that. Yet, this definition does not restrict the lessor's function solely to the supply of
funds; if the lessor undertakes or performs other functions, express warranties, covenants and the common law will
protect the lessee.
This definition focuses on the transaction, not the status of the parties; to avoid confusion it is important to note that
in other contexts, e.g., tax and accounting, the term finance lease has been used to connote different types of lease
transactions, including leases that are disguised secured transactions. M. Rice, Equipment Financing, 62-71
(1981). A lessor who is a merchant with respect to goods of the kind subject to the lease may be a lessor under a
finance lease. Many leases that are leases back to the seller of goods (Section 2A-308(3)) will be finance leases.
This conclusion is easily demonstrated by a hypothetical. Assume that B has bought goods from C pursuant to a
sales contract. After delivery to and acceptance of the goods by B, B negotiates to sell the goods to A and
simultaneously to lease the goods back from A, on terms and conditions that, we assume, will qualify the
transaction as a lease. Section 2A-103(1)(j). In documenting the sale and lease back, B assigns the original sales
contract between B, as buyer, and C, as seller, to A. A review of these facts leads to the conclusion that the lease
from A to B qualifies as a finance lease, as all three conditions of the definition are satisfied. Subparagraph (i) is
satisfied as A, the lessor, had nothing to do with the selection, manufacture, or supply of the equipment.
Subparagraph (ii) is satisfied as A, the lessor, bought the equipment at the same time that A leased the equipment
to B, which certainly is in connection with the lease. Finally, subparagraph (iii)(A) is satisfied as A entered into the
sales contract with B at the same time that A leased the equipment back to B. B, the lessee, will have received a
copy of the sales contract in a timely fashion.
Subsection (i) requires the lessor to remain outside the selection, manufacture and supply of the goods; that is the
rationale for releasing the lessor from most of its traditional liability. The lessor is not prohibited from possession,
maintenance or operation of the goods, as policy does not require such prohibition. To insure the lessee's reliance
on the supplier, and not on the lessor, subsection (ii) requires that the goods (where the lessor is the buyer of the
goods) or that the right to possession and use of the goods (where the lessor is the prime lessee and the sublessor
of the goods) be acquired in connection with the lease (or sublease) to qualify as a finance lease. The scope of the
phrase "in connection with" is to be developed by the courts, case by case. Finally, as the lessee generally relies
almost entirely upon the supplier for representations and covenants, and upon the supplier or a manufacturer, or
both, for warranties with respect to the goods, subsection (iii) requires that one of the following occur: (A) the lessee
receive a copy of the supply contract before signing the lease contract; (B) the lessee's approval of the supply
contract is a condition to the effectiveness of the lease contract; (C) the lessee receive a statement describing the
promises and warranties and any limitations relevant to the lessee before signing the lease contract; or (D) before
signing the lease contract and except in a consumer lease, the lessee receive a writing identifying the supplier
(unless the supplier was selected and required by the lessee) and the rights of the lessee under Section 2A-209,
and advising the lessee a statement of promises and warranties is available from the supplier. Thus, even where
oral supply orders or computer placed supply orders are compelled by custom and usage the transaction may still
qualify as a finance lease if the lessee approves the supply contract before the lease contract is effective and such
approval was a condition to the effectiveness of the lease contract. Moreover, where the lessor does not want the
lessee to see the entire supply contract, including price information, the lessee may be provided with a separate
statement of the terms of the supply contract relevant to the lessee; promises between the supplier and the lessor
that do not affect the lessee need not be included. The statement can be a restatement of those terms or a copy of
portions of the supply contract with the relevant terms clearly designated. Any implied warranties need not be
designated, but a disclaimer or modification of remedy must be designated. A copy of any manufacturer's warranty
is sufficient if that is the warranty provided. However, a copy of any Regulation M disclosure given pursuant to 12
C.F.R. § 213.4(g) concerning warranties in itself is not sufficient since those disclosures need only briefly identify
express warranties and need not include any disclaimer of warranty.
If a transaction does not qualify as a finance lease, the parties may achieve the same result by agreement; no
negative implications are to be drawn if the transaction does not qualify. Further, absent the application of special
§ 2A-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
Page 6 of 8
rules (fraud, duress, and the like), a lease that qualifies as a finance lease and is assigned by the lessor or the
lessee to a third party does not lose its status as a finance lease under this Article. Finally, this Article creates no
special rule where the lessor is an affiliate of the supplier; whether the transaction qualifies as a finance lease will
be determined by the facts of each case.
(h) "Goods". Section 9-105(1)(h). See Section 2A-103(3) for reference to the definition of "Account", "Chattel
paper", "Document", "General intangibles" and "Instrument". See Section 2A-217 for determination of the time and
manner of identification.
(i) "Installment lease contract". Section 2-612(1).
(j) "Lease". New. There are several reasons to codify the law with respect to leases of goods. An analysis of the
case law as it applies to leases of goods suggests at least several significant issues to be resolved by codification.
First and foremost is the definition of a lease. It is necessary to define lease to determine whether a transaction
creates a lease or a security interest disguised as a lease. If the transaction creates a security interest disguised as
a lease, the transaction will be governed by the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9) and the lessor will be
required to file a financing statement or take other action to perfect its interest in the goods against third parties.
There is no such requirement with respect to leases under the common law and, except with respect to leases of
fixtures (Section 2A-309), this Article imposes no such requirement. Yet the distinction between a lease and a
security interest disguised as a lease is not clear from the case law at the time of the promulgation of this Article.
DeKoven, Leases of Equipment: Puritan Leasing Company v. August, A Dangerous Decision, 12 U.S.F. L.Rev. 257
(1978).
At common law a lease of personal property is a bailment for hire. While there are several definitions of bailment
for hire, all require a thing to be let and a price for the letting. Thus, in modern terms and as provided in this
definition, a lease is created when the lessee agrees to furnish consideration for the right to the possession and use
of goods over a specified period of time. Mooney, Personal Property Leasing: A Challenge, 36 Bus.Law. 1605,
1607 (1981). Further, a lease is neither a sale (Section 2-106(1)) nor a retention or creation of a security interest
(Section 1-201(37)). Due to extensive litigation to distinguish true leases from security interests, an amendment to
Section 1-201(37) has been promulgated with this Article to create a sharper distinction.
This section as well as Section 1-201(37) must be examined to determine whether the transaction in question
creates a lease or a security interest. The following hypotheticals indicate the perimeters of the issue. Assume that
A has purchased a number of copying machines, new, for $1,000 each; the machines have an estimated useful
economic life of three years. A advertises that the machines are available to rent for a minimum of one month and
that the monthly rental is $100.00. A intends to enter into leases where A provides all maintenance, without charge
to the lessee. Further, the lessee will rent the machine, month to month, with no obligation to renew. At the end of
the lease term the lessee will be obligated to return the machine to A's place of business. This transaction qualifies
as a lease under the first half of the definition, for the transaction includes a transfer by A to a prospective lessee of
possession and use of the machine for a stated term, month to month. The machines are goods (Section 2A-
103(1)(h)). The lessee is obligated to pay consideration in return, $100.00 for each month of the term.
However, the second half of the definition provides that a sale or a security interest is not a lease. Since there is no
passing of title, there is no sale. Sections 2A-103(3) and 2-106(1). Under pre-Act security law this transaction
would have created a bailment for hire or a true lease and not a conditional sale. Da Rocha v. Macomber, 330
Mass. 611, 614-15, 116 N.E.2d 139, 142 (1953). Under Section 1-201(37), as amended with the promulgation of
this Article, the same result would follow. While the lessee is obligated to pay rent for the one month term of the
lease, one of the other four conditions of the second paragraph of Section 1-201(37) must be met and none is. The
term of the lease is one month and the economic life of the machine is 36 months; thus, subparagraph (a) of
Section 1-201(37) is not now satisfied. Considering the amount of the monthly rent, absent economic duress or
coercion, the lessee is not bound either to renew the lease for the remaining economic life of the goods or to
become the owner. If the lessee did lease the machine for 36 months, the lessee would have paid the lessor
$3,600 for a machine that could have been purchased for $1,000; thus, subparagraph (b) of Section 1-201(37) is
§ 2A-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
Page 7 of 8
not satisfied. Finally, there are no options; thus, subparagraphs (c) and (d) of Section 1-201(37) are not satisfied.
This transaction creates a lease, not a security interest. However, with each renewal of the lease the facts and
circumstances at the time of each renewal must be examined to determine if that conclusion remains accurate, as it
is possible that a transaction that first creates a lease, later creates a security interest.
Assume that the facts are changed and that A requires each lessee to lease the goods for 36 months, with no right
to terminate. Under pre-Act security law this transaction would have created a conditional sale, and not a bailment
for hire or true lease. Hervey v. Rhode Island Locomotive Works, 93 U.S. 664, 672-73 (1876). Under this
subsection, and Section 1-201(37), as amended with the inclusion of this Article in the Act, the same result would
follow. The lessee's obligation for the term is not subject to termination by the lessee and the term is equal to the
economic life of the machine.
Between these extremes there are many transactions that can be created. Some of the transactions have not been
properly categorized by the courts in applying the 1978 and earlier Official Texts of Section 1-201(37). This
subsection, together with Section 1-201(37), as amended with the promulgation of this Article, draws a brighter line,
which should create a clearer signal to the professional lessor and lessee.
(k) "Lease agreement". This definition is derived from the first sentence of Section 1-201(3). Because the definition
of lease is broad enough to cover future transfers, lease agreement includes an agreement contemplating a current
or subsequent transfer. Thus it was not necessary to make an express reference to an agreement for the future
lease of goods (Section 2-106(1)). This concept is also incorporated in the definition of lease contract. Note that
the definition of lease does not include transactions in ordinary building materials that are incorporated into an
improvement on land. Section 2A-309(2).
The provisions of this Article, if applicable, determine whether a lease agreement has legal consequences;
otherwise the law of bailments and other applicable law determine the same. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-103.
(l) "Lease contract". This definition is derived from the definition of contract in Section 1-201(11). Note that a lease
contract may be for the future lease of goods, since this notion is included in the definition of lease.
(m) "Leasehold interest". New.
(n) "Lessee". New.
(o) "Lessee in ordinary course of business". Section 1-201(9).
(p) "Lessor". New.
(q) "Lessor's residual interest". New.
(r) "Lien". New. This term is used in Section 2A-307 (Priority of Liens Arising by Attachment or Levy on, Security
Interests in, and Other Claims to Goods).
(s) "Lot". Section 2-105(5).
(t) "Merchant lessee". New. This term is used in Section 2A-511 (Merchant Lessee's Duties as to Rightfully
Rejected Goods). A person may satisfy the requirement of dealing in goods of the kind subject to the lease as
lessor, lessee, seller, or buyer.
(u) "Present value". New. Authorities agree that present value should be used to determine fairly the damages
payable by the lessor or the lessee on default. E.g., Taylor v. Commercial Credit Equip. Corp., 170 Ga.App. 322,
316 S.E.2d 788 (1984). Present value is defined to mean an amount that represents the discounted value as of a
date certain of one or more sums payable in the future. This is a function of the economic principle that a dollar
today is more valuable to the holder than a dollar payable in two years. While there is no question as to the
principle, reasonable people would differ as to the rate of discount to apply in determining the value of that future
§ 2A-103. Definitions and Index of Definitions.
Page 8 of 8
dollar today. To minimize litigation, this Article allows the parties to specify the discount or interest rate, if the rate
was not manifestly unreasonable at the time the transaction was entered into. In all other cases, the interest rate
will be a commercially reasonable rate that takes into account the facts and circumstances of each case, as of the
time the transaction was entered into.
(v) "Purchase". Section 1-201(32). This definition omits the reference to lien contained in the definition of purchase
in Article 1 (Section 1-201(32)). This should not be construed to exclude consensual liens from the definition of
purchase in this Article; the exclusion was mandated by the scope of the definition of lien in Section 2A-103(1)(r).
Further, the definition of purchaser in this Article adds a reference to lease; as purchase is defined in Section 1-
201(32) to include any other voluntary transaction creating an interest in property, this addition is not substantive.
(w) "Sublease". New.
(x) "Supplier". New.
(y) "Supply contract". New.
(z) "Termination". Section 2-106(3). The effect of a termination is provided in Section 2A-505(2).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2A-104. Leases Subject to Other Law.
(1) A lease, although subject to this Article, is also subject to any applicable:
(a) certificate of title statute of this State: (list any certificate of title statutes covering automobiles,
trailers, mobile homes, boats, farm tractors, and the like);
(b) certificate of title statute of another jurisdiction ( Section 2A-105); or
(c) consumer protection statute of this State, or final consumer protection decision of a court of this
State existing on the effective date of this Article.
(2) In case of conflict between this Article, other than Sections 2A-105, 2A-304(3), and 2A-305(3), and a
statute or decision referred to in subsection (1), the statute or decision controls.
(3) Failure to comply with an applicable law has only the effect specified therein.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 9-203(4) and 9-302(3)(b) and (c).
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
1. This Article creates a comprehensive scheme for the regulation of transactions that create leases. Section 2A-
102. Thus, the Article supersedes all prior legislation dealing with leases, except to the extent set forth in this
Section.
2. Subsection (1) states the general rule that a lease, although governed by the scheme of this Article, also may be
governed by certain other applicable laws. This may occur in the case of a consumer lease. Section 2A-103(1)(e).
Those laws may be state statutes existing prior to enactment of Article 2A or passed afterward. In this case, it is
desirable for this Article to specify which statute controls. Or the law may be a pre-existing consumer protection
decision. This Article preserves such decisions. Or the law may be a statute of the United States. Such a law
controls without any statement in this Article under applicable principles of preemption.
An illustration of a statute of the United States that governs consumer leases is the Consumer Leasing Act, 15
U.S.C. §§ 1667-1667(e) (1982) and its implementing regulation, Regulation M, 12 C.F.R. § 213 (1986); the statute
mandates disclosures of certain lease terms, delimits the liability of a lessee in leasing personal property, and
regulates the advertising of lease terms. An illustration of a state statute that governs consumer leases and which if
adopted in the enacting state prevails over this Article is the Unif. Consumer Credit Code, which includes many
§ 2A-104. Leases Subject to Other Law.
Page 2 of 2
provisions similar to those of the Consumer Leasing Act, e.g. Unif. Consumer Credit Code §§ 3.202, 3.209, 3.401,
7A U.L.A. 108-09, 115, 125 (1974), as well as provisions in addition to those of the Consumer Leasing Act, e.g.,
Unif. Consumer Credit Code §§ 5.109-.111, 7A U.L.A. 171-76 (1974) (the right to cure a default). Such statutes
may define consumer lease so as to govern transactions within and without the definition of consumer lease under
this Article.
3. Under subsection (2), subject to certain limited exclusions, in case of conflict a statute or a decision described in
subsection (1) prevails over this Article. For example, a provision like Unif. Consumer Credit Code § 5.112, 7A
U.L.A. 176 (1974), limiting self-help repossession, prevails over Section 2A-525(3). A consumer protection decision
rendered after the effective date of this Article may supplement its provisions. For example, in relation to Article 9 a
court might conclude that an acceleration clause may not be enforced against an individual debtor after late
payments have been accepted unless a prior notice of default is given. To the extent the decision establishes a
general principle applicable to transactions other than secured transactions, it may supplement Section 2A-502.
4. Consumer protection in lease transactions is primarily left to other law. However, several provisions of this
Article do contain special rules that may not be varied by agreement in the case of a consumer lease. E.g.,
Sections 2A-106, 2A-108, and 2A-109(2). Were that not so, the ability of the parties to govern their relationship by
agreement together with the position of the lessor in a consumer lease too often could result in a one-sided lease
agreement.
5. In construing this provision the reference to statute should be deemed to include applicable regulations. A
consumer protection decision is "final" on the effective date of this Article if it is not subject to appeal on that date or,
if subject to appeal, is not later reversed on appeal. Of course, such a decision can be overruled by a later decision
or superseded by a later statute.
Cross References:
Sections 2A-103(1)(e), 2A-106, 2A-108, 2A-109(2) and 2A-525(3).
Definitional Cross Reference:
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2A-105. Territorial Application of Article to Goods Covered by Certificate of
Title.
Subject to the provisions of Sections 2A-304(3) and 2A-305(3), with respect to goods covered by a certificate of title
issued under a statute of this State or of another jurisdiction, compliance and the effect of compliance or
noncompliance with a certificate of title statute are governed by the law (including the conflict of laws rules) of the
jurisdiction issuing the certificate until the earlier of (a) surrender of the certificate, or (b) four months after the goods
are removed from that jurisdiction and thereafter until a new certificate of title is issued by another jurisdiction.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 9-103(2)(a) and (b).
Changes: Substantially revised. The provisions of the last sentence of Section 9-103(2)(b) have not been
incorporated as it is superfluous in this context. The provisions of Section 9-103(2)(d) have not been incorporated
because the problems dealt with are adequately addressed by this section and Sections 2A-304(3) and 305(3).
Purposes: The new certificate referred to in (b) must be permanent, not temporary. Generally, the lessor or creditor
whose interest is indicated on the most recently issued certificate of title will prevail over interests indicated on
certificates issued previously by other jurisdictions. This provision reflects a policy that it is reasonable to require
holders of interests in goods covered by a certificate of title to police the goods or risk losing their interests when a
new certificate of title is issued by another jurisdiction.
Cross References:
Sections 2A-304(3), 2A-305(3), 9-103(2)(b) and 9-103(2)(d).
Definitional Cross Reference:
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2A-106. Limitation on Power of Parties to Consumer Lease to Choose
Applicable Law and Judicial Forum.
(1) If the law chosen by the parties to a consumer lease is that of a jurisdiction other than a jurisdiction in
which the lessee resides at the time the lease agreement becomes enforceable or within 30 days thereafter
or in which the goods are to be used, the choice is not enforceable.
(2) If the judicial forum chosen by the parties to a consumer lease is a forum that would not otherwise have
jurisdiction over the lessee, the choice is not enforceable.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Unif. Consumer Credit Code § 1.201(8), 7A U.L.A. 36 (1974).
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes: There is a real danger that a lessor may induce a consumer lessee to agree that the applicable law will
be a jurisdiction that has little effective consumer protection, or to agree that the applicable forum will be a forum
that is inconvenient for the lessee in the event of litigation. As a result, this section invalidates these choice of law
or forum clauses, except where the law chosen is that of the state of the consumer's residence or where the goods
will be kept, or the forum chosen is one that otherwise would have jurisdiction over the lessee.
Subsection (1) limits potentially abusive choice of law clauses in consumer leases. The 30-day rule in subsection
(1) was suggested by Section 9-103(1)(c). This section has no effect on choice of law clauses in leases that are not
consumer leases. Such clauses would be governed by other law.
Subsection (2) prevents enforcement of potentially abusive jurisdictional consent clauses in consumer leases. By
using the term judicial forum, this section does not limit selection of a nonjudicial forum, such as arbitration. This
section has no effect on choice of forum clauses in leases that are not consumer leases; such clauses are, as a
matter of current law, "prima facie valid". The Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Co., 407 U.S. 1, 10 (1972). Such
clauses would be governed by other law, including the Model Choice of Forum Act (1968).
Cross Reference:
Section 9-103(1)(c).
Definitional Cross References:
"Consumer lease". Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
§ 2A-106. Limitation on Power of Parties to Consumer Lease to Choose Applicable Law and Judicial Forum.
Page 2 of 2
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2A-107. Waiver or Renunciation of Claim or Right After Default.
Any claim or right arising out of an alleged default or breach of warranty may be discharged in whole or in part
without consideration by a written waiver or renunciation signed and delivered by the aggrieved party.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 1-107.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology. This clause is used throughout the official
comments to this Article to indicate the scope of change in the provisions of the Uniform Statutory Source included
in the section; these changes range from one extreme, e.g., a significant difference in practice (a warranty as to
merchantability is not implied in a finance lease (Section 2A-212)) to the other extreme, e.g., a modest difference in
style or terminology (the transaction governed is a lease not a sale (Section 2A-203 2A-103 *)).
Cross References:
Sections 2A-203 2A-103 * and 2A-212.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201(2).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Signed". Section 1-201(39).
"Written". Section 1-201(46).
* Previous incorrect cross reference corrected by Permanent Editorial Board action November 1992.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-108
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2A-108. Unconscionability.
(1) If the court as a matter of law finds a lease contract or any clause of a lease contract to have been
unconscionable at the time it was made the court may refuse to enforce the lease contract, or it may
enforce the remainder of the lease contract without the unconscionable clause, or it may so limit the
application of any unconscionable clause as to avoid any unconscionable result.
(2) With respect to a consumer lease, if the court as a matter of law finds that a lease contract or any
clause of a lease contract has been induced by unconscionable conduct or that unconscionable conduct
has occurred in the collection of a claim arising from a lease contract, the court may grant appropriate relief.
(3) Before making a finding of unconscionability under subsection (1) or (2), the court, on its own motion or
that of a party, shall afford the parties a reasonable opportunity to present evidence as to the setting,
purpose, and effect of the lease contract or clause thereof, or of the conduct.
(4) In an action in which the lessee claims unconscionability with respect to a consumer lease:
(a) If the court finds unconscionability under subsection (1) or (2), the court shall award reasonable
attorney's fees to the lessee.
(b) If the court does not find unconscionability and the lessee claiming unconscionability has brought
or maintained an action he [or she] knew to be groundless, the court shall award reasonable attorney's
fees to the party against whom the claim is made.
(c) In determining attorney's fees, the amount of the recovery on behalf of the claimant under
subsections (1) and (2) is not controlling.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-302 and Unif. Consumer Credit Code § 5.108, 7A U.L.A. 167-69 (1974).
Changes: Subsection (1) is taken almost verbatim from the provisions of Section 2-302(1). Subsection (2) is
suggested by the provisions of Unif. Consumer Credit Code § 5.108(1), (2), 7A U.L.A. 167 (1974). Subsection (3),
taken from the provisions of Section 2-302(2), has been expanded to cover unconscionable conduct. Unif.
Consumer Credit Code § 5.108(3), 7A U.L.A. 167 (1974). The provision for the award of attorney's fees to
consumers, subsection (4), covers unconscionability under subsection (1) as well as (2). Subsection (4) is modeled
on the provisions of Unif. Consumer Credit Code § 5.108(6), 7A U.L.A. 169 (1974).
Purposes: Subsections (1) and (3) of this section apply the concept of unconscionability reflected in the provisions
of Section 2-302 to leases. See Dillman & Assocs. v. Capitol Leasing Co., 110 Ill.App.3d 335, 342, 442 N.E.2d 311,
316 (App.Ct.1982). Subsection (3) omits the adjective "commercial" found in subsection 2-302(2) because
subsection (3) is concerned with all leases and the relevant standard of conduct is determined by the context.
§ 2A-108. Unconscionability.
Page 2 of 2
The balance of the section is modeled on the provisions of Unif. Consumer Credit Code § 5.108, 7A U.L.A. 167-69
(1974). Thus subsection (2) recognizes that a consumer lease or a clause in a consumer lease may not itself be
unconscionable but that the agreement would never have been entered into if unconscionable means had not been
employed to induce the consumer to agree. To make a statement to induce the consumer to lease the goods, in
the expectation of invoking an integration clause in the lease to exclude the statement's admissibility in a
subsequent dispute, may be unconscionable. Subsection (2) also provides a consumer remedy for unconscionable
conduct, such as using or threatening to use force or violence, in the collection of a claim arising from a lease
contract. These provisions are not exclusive. The remedies of this section are in addition to remedies otherwise
available for the same conduct under other law, for example, an action in tort for abusive debt collection or under
another statute of this State for such conduct. The reference to appropriate relief in subsection (2) is intended to
foster liberal administration of this remedy. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-106(1).
Subsection (4) authorizes an award of reasonable attorney's fees if the court finds unconscionability with respect to
a consumer lease under subsection (1) or (2). Provision is also made for recovery by the party against whom the
claim was made if the court does not find unconscionability and does find that the consumer knew the action to be
groundless. Further, subsection (4)(b) is independent of, and thus will not override, a term in the lease agreement
that provides for the payment of attorney's fees.
Cross References:
Sections 1-106(1), 2-302 and 2A-103(4).
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
"Consumer lease". Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-109
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2A-109. Option to Accelerate at Will.
(1) A term providing that one party or his [or her] successor in interest may accelerate payment or
performance or require collateral or additional collateral "at will" or "when he [or she] deems himself [or
herself] insecure" or in words of similar import must be construed to mean that he [or she] has power to do
so only if he [or she] in good faith believes that the prospect of payment or performance is impaired.
(2) With respect to a consumer lease, the burden of establishing good faith under subsection (1) is on the
party who exercised the power; otherwise the burden of establishing lack of good faith is on the party
against whom the power has been exercised.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 1-208 and Unif. Consumer Credit Code § 5.109(2), 7A U.L.A. 171 (1974).
Purposes: Subsection (1) reflects modest changes in style to the provisions of the first sentence of Section 1-208.
Subsection (2), however, reflects a significant change in the provisions of the second sentence of Section 1-208 by
creating a new rule with respect to a consumer lease. A lease provision allowing acceleration at the will of the
lessor or when the lessor deems itself insecure is of critical importance to the lessee. In a consumer lease it is a
provision that is not usually agreed to by the parties but is usually mandated by the lessor. Therefore, where its
invocation depends not on specific criteria but on the discretion of the lessor, its use should be regulated to prevent
abuse. Subsection (1) imposes a duty of good faith upon its exercise. Subsection (2) shifts the burden of
establishing good faith to the lessor in the case of a consumer lease, but not otherwise.
Cross Reference:
Section 1-208.
Definitional Cross References:
"Burden of establishing". Section 1-201(8).
"Consumer lease". Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Good faith". Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 2A-109. Option to Accelerate at Will.
Page 2 of 2
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-201
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-201. Statute of Frauds.
(1) A lease contract is not enforceable by way of action or defense unless:
(a) the total payments to be made under the lease contract, excluding payments for options to renew
or buy, are less than $1,000; or
(b) there is a writing, signed by the party against whom enforcement is sought or by that party's
authorized agent, sufficient to indicate that a lease contract has been made between the parties and to
describe the goods leased and the lease term.
(2) Any description of leased goods or of the lease term is sufficient and satisfies subsection (1)(b),
whether or not it is specific, if it reasonably identifies what is described.
(3) A writing is not insufficient because it omits or incorrectly states a term agreed upon, but the lease
contract is not enforceable under subsection (1)(b) beyond the lease term and the quantity of goods shown
in the writing.
(4) A lease contract that does not satisfy the requirements of subsection (1), but which is valid in other
respects, is enforceable:
(a) if the goods are to be specially manufactured or obtained for the lessee and are not suitable for
lease or sale to others in the ordinary course of the lessor's business, and the lessor, before notice of
repudiation is received and under circumstances that reasonably indicate that the goods are for the
lessee, has made either a substantial beginning of their manufacture or commitments for their
procurement;
(b) if the party against whom enforcement is sought admits in that party's pleading, testimony or
otherwise in court that a lease contract was made, but the lease contract is not enforceable under this
provision beyond the quantity of goods admitted; or
(c) with respect to goods that have been received and accepted by the lessee.
(5) The lease term under a lease contract referred to in subsection (4) is:
(a) if there is a writing signed by the party against whom enforcement is sought or by that party's
authorized agent specifying the lease term, the term so specified;
(b) if the party against whom enforcement is sought admits in that party's pleading, testimony, or
otherwise in court a lease term, the term so admitted; or
(c) a reasonable lease term.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-201, 9-203(1) and 9-110.
§ 2A-201. Statute of Frauds.
Page 2 of 2
Changes: This section is modeled on Section 2-201, with changes to reflect the differences between a lease
contract and a contract for the sale of goods. In particular, subsection (1)(b) adds a requirement that the writing
"describe the goods leased and the lease term", borrowing that concept, with revisions, from the provisions of
Section 9-203(1)(a). Subsection (2), relying on the statutory analogue in Section 9-110, sets forth the minimum
criterion for satisfying that requirement.
Purposes: The changes in this section conform the provisions of Section 2-201 to custom and usage in lease
transactions. Section 2-201(2), stating a special rule between merchants, was not included in this section as the
number of such transactions involving leases, as opposed to sales, was thought to be modest. Subsection (4)
creates no exception for transactions where payment has been made and accepted. This represents a departure
from the analogue, Section 2-201(3)(c). The rationale for the departure is grounded in the distinction between sales
and leases. Unlike a buyer in a sales transaction, the lessee does not tender payment in full for goods delivered,
but only payment of rent for one or more months. It was decided that, as a matter of policy, this act of payment is
not a sufficient substitute for the required memorandum. Subsection (5) was needed to establish the criteria for
supplying the lease term if it is omitted, as the lease contract may still be enforceable under subsection (4).
Cross References:
Sections 2-201, 9-110 and 9-203(1)(a).
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
"Agreed". Section 1-201(3).
"Buying". Section 2A-103(1)(a).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notice". Section 1-201(25).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Sale". Section 2-106(1).
"Signed". Section 1-201(39).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-202
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-202. Final Written Expression: Parol or Extrinsic Evidence.
Terms with respect to which the confirmatory memoranda of the parties agree or which are otherwise set
forth in a writing intended by the parties as a final expression of their agreement with respect to such terms
as are included therein may not be contradicted by evidence of any prior agreement or of a
contemporaneous oral agreement but may be explained or supplemented:
(a) by course of dealing or usage of trade or by course of performance; and
(b) by evidence of consistent additional terms unless the court finds the writing to have been intended
also as a complete and exclusive statement of the terms of the agreement.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-202.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201(3).
"Course of dealing". Section 1-205.
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
"Usage of trade". Section 1-205.
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-203
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-203. Seals Inoperative.
The affixing of a seal to a writing evidencing a lease contract or an offer to enter into a lease contract does not
render the writing a sealed instrument and the law with respect to sealed instruments does not apply to the lease
contract or offer.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-203.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-204
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-204. Formation in General.
(1) A lease contract may be made in any manner sufficient to show agreement, including conduct by both
parties which recognizes the existence of a lease contract.
(2) An agreement sufficient to constitute a lease contract may be found although the moment of its making
is undetermined.
(3) Although one or more terms are left open, a lease contract does not fail for indefiniteness if the parties
have intended to make a lease contract and there is a reasonably certain basis for giving an appropriate
remedy.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-204.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201(3).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-205
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-205. Firm Offers.
An offer by a merchant to lease goods to or from another person in a signed writing that by its terms gives
assurance it will be held open is not revocable, for lack of consideration, during the time stated or, if no time is
stated, for a reasonable time, but in no event may the period of irrevocability exceed 3 months. Any such term of
assurance on a form supplied by the offeree must be separately signed by the offeror.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-205.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Merchant". Section 2-104(1).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Signed". Section 1-201(39).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-206
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-206. Offer and Acceptance in Formation of Lease Contract.
(1) Unless otherwise unambiguously indicated by the language or circumstances, an offer to make a lease
contract must be construed as inviting acceptance in any manner and by any medium reasonable in the
circumstances.
(2) If the beginning of a requested performance is a reasonable mode of acceptance, an offeror who is not
notified of acceptance within a reasonable time may treat the offer as having lapsed before acceptance.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-206(1)(a) and (2).
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Notifies". Section 1-201(26).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-207
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-207. Course of Performance or Practical Construction.
(1) If a lease contract involves repeated occasions for performance by either party with knowledge of the
nature of the performance and opportunity for objection to it by the other, any course of performance
accepted or acquiesced in without objection is relevant to determine the meaning of the lease agreement.
(2) The express terms of a lease agreement and any course of performance, as well as any course of
dealing and usage of trade, must be construed whenever reasonable as consistent with each other; but if
that construction is unreasonable, express terms control course of performance, course of performance
controls both course of dealing and usage of trade, and course of dealing controls usage of trade.
(3) Subject to the provisions of Section 2A-208 on modification and waiver, course of performance is
relevant to show a waiver or modification of any term inconsistent with the course of performance.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-208 and 1-205(4).
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology, except that subsection (2) was further revised to
make the subsection parallel the provisions of Section 1-205(4) by adding that course of dealing controls usage of
trade.
Purposes: The section should be read in conjunction with Section 2A-208. In particular, although a specific term
may control over course of performance as a matter of lease construction under subsection (2), subsection (3)
allows the same course of dealing to show a waiver or modification, if Section 2A-208 is satisfied.
Cross References:
Sections 1-205(4), 2-208 and 2A-208.
Definitional Cross References:
"Course of dealing". Section 1-205.
"Knowledge". Section 1-201(25).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
§ 2A-207. Course of Performance or Practical Construction.
Page 2 of 2
"Usage of trade". Section 1-205.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-208
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-208. Modification, Rescission and Waiver.
(1) An agreement modifying a lease contract needs no consideration to be binding.
(2) A signed lease agreement that excludes modification or rescission except by a signed writing may not
be otherwise modified or rescinded, but, except as between merchants, such a requirement on a form
supplied by a merchant must be separately signed by the other party.
(3) Although an attempt at modification or rescission does not satisfy the requirements of subsection (2), it
may operate as a waiver.
(4) A party who has made a waiver affecting an executory portion of a lease contract may retract the
waiver by reasonable notification received by the other party that strict performance will be required of any
term waived, unless the retraction would be unjust in view of a material change of position in reliance on the
waiver.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-209.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology, except that the provisions of subsection 2-209(3)
were omitted.
Purposes: Section 2-209(3) provides that "the requirements of the statute of frauds section of this Article (Section 2-
201) must be satisfied if the contract as modified is within its provisions." This provision was not incorporated as it is
unfair to allow an oral modification to make the entire lease contract unenforceable, e.g. if the modification takes it a
few dollars over the dollar limit. At the same time, the problem could not be solved by providing that the lease
contract would still be enforceable in its pre-modification state (if it then satisfied the statute of frauds) since in some
cases that might be worse than no enforcement at all. Resolution of the issue is left to the courts based on the
facts of each case.
Cross References:
Sections 2-201 and 2-209.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201(3).
"Between merchants". Section 2-104(3).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
§ 2A-208. Modification, Rescission and Waiver.
Page 2 of 2
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Merchant". Section 2-104(1).
"Notification". Section 1-201(26).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Signed". Section 1-201(39).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-209
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-209. Lessee Under Finance Lease as Beneficiary of Supply Contract.
(1) The benefit of a supplier's promises to the lessor under the supply contract and of all warranties,
whether express or implied, including those of any third party provided in connection with or as part of the
supply contract, extends to the lessee to the extent of the lessee's leasehold interest under a finance lease
related to the supply contract, but is subject to the terms of the warranty and of the supply contract and all
defenses or claims arising therefrom.
(2) The extension of the benefit of a supplier's promises and of warranties to the lessee ( Section 2A-
209(1)) does not: (i) modify the rights and obligations of the parties to the supply contract, whether arising
therefrom or otherwise, or (ii) impose any duty or liability under the supply contract on the lessee.
(3) Any modification or rescission of the supply contract by the supplier and the lessor is effective between
the supplier and the lessee unless, before the modification or rescission, the supplier has received notice
that the lessee has entered into a finance lease related to the supply contract. If the modification or
rescission is effective between the supplier and the lessee, the lessor is deemed to have assumed, in
addition to the obligations of the lessor to the lessee under the lease contract, promises of the supplier to
the lessor and warranties that were so modified or rescinded as they existed and were available to the
lessee before modification or rescission.
(4) In addition to the extension of the benefit of the supplier's promises and of warranties to the lessee
under subsection (1), the lessee retains all rights that the lessee may have against the supplier which arise
from an agreement between the lessee and the supplier or under other law.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: None.
Changes: This section is modeled on Section 9-318, the Restatement (Second) of Contracts §§ 302-315 (1981),
and leasing practices. See Earman Oil Co. v. Burroughs Corp., 625 F.2d 1291, 1296-97 (5th Cir.1980).
Purposes:
1. The function performed by the lessor in a finance lease is extremely limited. Section 2A-103(1)(g). The lessee
looks to the supplier of the goods for warranties and the like or, in some cases as to warranties, to the manufacturer
if a warranty made by that person is passed on. That expectation is reflected in subsection (1), which is selfexecuting.
As a matter of policy, the operation of this provision may not be excluded, modified or limited; however,
an exclusion, modification, or limitation of any term of the supply contract or warranty, including any with respect to
rights and remedies, and any defense or claim such as a statute of limitations, effective against the lessor as the
§ 2A-209. Lessee Under Finance Lease as Beneficiary of Supply Contract.
Page 2 of 3
acquiring party under the supply contract, is also effective against the lessee as the beneficiary designated under
this provision. For example, the supplier is not precluded from excluding or modifying an express or implied
warranty under a supply contract. Sections 2-312(2) and 2-316, or Section 2A-214. Further, the supplier is not
precluded from limiting the rights and remedies of the lessor and from liquidating damages. Sections 2-718 and 2-
719 or Sections 2A-503 and 2A-504. If the supply contract excludes or modifies warranties, limits remedies, or
liquidates damages with respect to the lessor, such provisions are enforceable against the lessee as beneficiary.
Thus, only selective discrimination against the beneficiaries designated under this section is precluded, i.e.,
exclusion of the supplier's liability to the lessee with respect to warranties made to the lessor. This section does not
affect the development of other law with respect to products liability.
2. Enforcement of this benefit is by action. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-106(2).
3. The benefit extended by these provisions is not without a price, as this Article also provides in the case of a
finance lease that is not a consumer lease that the lessee's promises to the lessor under the lease contract become
irrevocable and independent upon the lessee's acceptance of the goods. Section 2A-407.
4. Subsection (2) limits the effect of subsection (1) on the supplier and the lessor by preserving, notwithstanding the
transfer of the benefits of the supply contract to the lessee, all of the supplier's and the lessor's rights and
obligations with respect to each other and others; it further absolves the lessee of any duties with respect to the
supply contract that might have been inferred from the extension of the benefits thereof.
5. Subsections (2) and (3) also deal with difficult issues related to modification or rescission of the supply contract.
Subsection (2) states a rule that determines the impact of the statutory extension of benefit contained in subsection
(1) upon the relationship of the parties to the supply contract and, in a limited respect, upon the lessee. This
statutory extension of benefit, like that contained in Sections 2A-216 and 2-318, is not a modification of the supply
contract by the parties. Thus, subsection (3) states the rules that apply to a modification or rescission of the supply
contract by the parties. Subsection (3) provides that a modification or rescission is not effective between the
supplier and the lessee if, before the modification or rescission occurs, the supplier received notice that the lessee
has entered into the finance lease. On the other hand, if the modification or rescission is effective, then to the
extent of the modification or rescission of the benefit or warranty, the lessor by statutory dictate assumes an
obligation to provide to the lessee that which the lessee would otherwise lose. For example, assume a reduction in
an express warranty from four years to one year. No prejudice to the lessee may occur if the goods perform as
agreed. If, however, there is a breach of the express warranty after one year and before four years pass, the lessor
is liable. A remedy for any prejudice to the lessee because of the bifurcation of the lessee's recourse resulting from
the action of the supplier and the lessor is left to resolution by the courts based on the facts of each case.
6. Subsection (4) makes it clear that the rights granted to the lessee by this section do not displace any rights the
lessee otherwise may have against the supplier.
Cross References:
Sections 2A-103(1)(g), 2A-407 and 9-318.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Leasehold interest". Section 2A-103(1)(m).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
§ 2A-209. Lessee Under Finance Lease as Beneficiary of Supply Contract.
Page 3 of 3
"Notice". Section 1-201(25).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
"Supply contract". Section 2A-103(1)(y).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-210
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-210. Express Warranties.
(1) Express warranties by the lessor are created as follows:
(a) Any affirmation of fact or promise made by the lessor to the lessee which relates to the goods and
becomes part of the basis of the bargain creates an express warranty that the goods will conform to the
affirmation or promise.
(b) Any description of the goods which is made part of the basis of the bargain creates an express
warranty that the goods will conform to the description.
(c) Any sample or model that is made part of the basis of the bargain creates an express warranty that
the whole of the goods will conform to the sample or model.
(2) It is not necessary to the creation of an express warranty that the lessor use formal words, such as
"warrant" or "guarantee," or that the lessor have a specific intention to make a warranty, but an affirmation
merely of the value of the goods or a statement purporting to be merely the lessor's opinion or
commendation of the goods does not create a warranty.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-313.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Purposes: All of the express and implied warranties of the Article on Sales (Article 2) are included in this Article,
revised to reflect the differences between a sale of goods and a lease of goods. Sections 2A-210 through 2A-216.
The lease of goods is sufficiently similar to the sale of goods to justify this decision. Hawkland, The Impact of the
Uniform Commercial Code on Equipment Leasing, 1972 Ill.L.F. 446, 459-60. Many state and federal courts have
reached the same conclusion.
Value of the goods, as used in subsection (2), includes rental value.
Cross References:
Article 2, esp. Section 2-313, and Sections 2A-210 through 2A-216.
Definitional Cross References:
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
§ 2A-210. Express Warranties.
Page 2 of 2
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-211
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-211. Warranties Against Interference and Against Infringement;
Lessee's Obligation Against Infringement.
(1) There is in a lease contract a warranty that for the lease term no person holds a claim to or interest in
the goods that arose from an act or omission of the lessor, other than a claim by way of infringement or the
like, which will interfere with the lessee's enjoyment of its leasehold interest.
(2) Except in a finance lease there is in a lease contract by a lessor who is a merchant regularly dealing in
goods of the kind a warranty that the goods are delivered free of the rightful claim of any person by way of
infringement or the like.
(3) A lessee who furnishes specifications to a lessor or a supplier shall hold the lessor and the supplier
harmless against any claim by way of infringement or the like that arises out of compliance with the
specifications.
See Appendix VI [following Amendment 24 therein] for material relating to changes in the Official Comment
to conform to the 1990 amendments to various sections of Article 2A.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-312.
Changes: This section is modeled on the provisions of Section 2-312, with modifications to reflect the limited
interest transferred by a lease contract and the total interest transferred by a sale. Section 2-312(2), which is
omitted here, is incorporated in Section 2A-214. The warranty of quiet possession was abolished with respect to
sales of goods. Section 2-312 official comment 1. Section 2A-211(1) reinstates the warranty of quiet possession
with respect to leases. Inherent in the nature of the limited interest transferred by the lease-the right to possession
and use of the goods-is the need of the lessee for protection greater than that afforded to the buyer. Since the
scope of the protection is limited to claims or interests that arose from acts or omissions of the lessor, the lessor will
be in position to evaluate the potential cost, certainly a far better position than that enjoyed by the lessee. Further,
to the extent the market will allow, the lessor can attempt to pass on the anticipated additional cost to the lessee in
the guise of higher rent.
Purposes: General language was chosen for subsection (1) that expresses the essence of the lessee's expectation:
with an exception for infringement and the like, no person holding a claim or interest that arose from an act or
omission of the lessor will be able to interfere with the lessee's use and enjoyment of the goods for the lease term.
Subsection (2), like other similar provisions in later sections, excludes the finance lessor from extending this
warranty; with few exceptions (Sections 2A-210 and 2A-211(1)), the lessee under a finance lease is to look to the
supplier for warranties and the like or, in some cases as to warranties, to the manufacturer if a warranty made by
that person is passed on. Subsections (2) and (3) are derived from Section 2-312(3). These subsections, as well
as the analogue, should be construed so that applicable principles of law and equity supplement their provisions.
Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-103.
§ 2A-211. Warranties Against Interference and Against Infringement; Lessee's Obligation Against Infringement.
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Sections 2-312, 2-312(1), 2-312(2), 2-312 official comment 1, 2A-210, 2A-211(1) and 2A-214.
Definitional Cross References:
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Leasehold interest". Section 2A-103(1)(m).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Merchant". Section 2-104(1).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-212
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-212. Implied Warranty of Merchantability.
(1) Except in a finance lease, a warranty that the goods will be merchantable is implied in a lease contract
if the lessor is a merchant with respect to goods of that kind.
(2) Goods to be merchantable must be at least such as
(a) pass without objection in the trade under the description in the lease agreement;
(b) in the case of fungible goods, are of fair average quality within the description;
(c) are fit for the ordinary purposes for which goods of that type are used;
(d) run, within the variation permitted by the lease agreement, of even kind, quality, and quantity within
each unit and among all units involved;
(e) are adequately contained, packaged, and labeled as the lease agreement may require; and
(f) conform to any promises or affirmations of fact made on the container or label.
(3) Other implied warranties may arise from course of dealing or usage of trade.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-314.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology. E.g., Glenn Dick Equip. Co. v. Galey Constr., Inc.,
97 Idaho 216, 225, 541 P.2d 1184, 1193 (1975) (implied warranty of merchantability (Article 2) extends to lease
transactions).
Definitional Cross References:
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Course of dealing". Section 1-205.
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Fungible". Section 1-201(17).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
§ 2A-212. Implied Warranty of Merchantability.
Page 2 of 2
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Merchant". Section 2-104(1).
"Usage of trade". Section 1-205.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-213
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-213. Implied Warranty of Fitness for Particular Purpose.
Except in a finance lease, if the lessor at the time the lease contract is made has reason to know of any particular
purpose for which the goods are required and that the lessee is relying on the lessor's skill or judgment to select or
furnish suitable goods, there is in the lease contract an implied warranty that the goods will be fit for that purpose.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-315.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology. E.g., All- States Leasing Co. v. Bass, 96 Idaho 873,
879, 538 P.2d 1177, 1183 (1975) (implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose (Article 2) extends to lease
transactions).
Definitional Cross References:
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Knows". Section 1-201(25).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-214
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-214. Exclusion or Modification of Warranties.
(1) Words or conduct relevant to the creation of an express warranty and words or conduct tending to
negate or limit a warranty must be construed wherever reasonable as consistent with each other; but,
subject to the provisions of Section 2A-202 on parol or extrinsic evidence, negation or limitation is
inoperative to the extent that the construction is unreasonable.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), to exclude or modify the implied warranty of merchantability or any part of it
the language must mention "merchantability", be by a writing, and be conspicuous. Subject to subsection
(3), to exclude or modify any implied warranty of fitness the exclusion must be by a writing and be
conspicuous. Language to exclude all implied warranties of fitness is sufficient if it is in writing, is
conspicuous and states, for example, "There is no warranty that the goods will be fit for a particular
purpose".
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), but subject to subsection (4),
(a) unless the circumstances indicate otherwise, all implied warranties are excluded by expressions
like "as is," or "with all faults," or by other language that in common understanding calls the lessee's
attention to the exclusion of warranties and makes plain that there is no implied warranty, if in writing
and conspicuous;
(b) if the lessee before entering into the lease contract has examined the goods or the sample or
model as fully as desired or has refused to examine the goods, there is no implied warranty with regard
to defects that an examination ought in the circumstances to have revealed; and
(c) an implied warranty may also be excluded or modified by course of dealing, course of performance,
or usage of trade.
(4) To exclude or modify a warranty against interference or against infringement ( Section 2A-211) or any
part of it, the language must be specific, be by a writing, and be conspicuous, unless the circumstances,
including course of performance, course of dealing, or usage of trade, give the lessee reason to know that
the goods are being leased subject to a claim or interest of any person.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-316 and 2-312(2).
Changes: Subsection (2) requires that a disclaimer of the warranty of merchantability be conspicuous and in writing
as is the case for a disclaimer of the warranty of fitness; this is contrary to the rule stated in Section 2-316(2) with
respect to the disclaimer of the warranty of merchantability. This section also provides that to exclude or modify the
implied warranty of merchantability, fitness or against interference or infringement the language must be in writing
and conspicuous. There are, however, exceptions to the rule. E.g., course of dealing, course of performance, or
usage of trade may exclude or modify an implied warranty. Section 2A-214(3)(c). The analogue of Section 2-
§ 2A-214. Exclusion or Modification of Warranties.
Page 2 of 2
312(2) has been moved to subsection (4) of this section for a more unified treatment of disclaimers; there is no
policy with respect to leases of goods that would justify continuing certain distinctions found in the Article on Sales
(Article 2) regarding the treatment of the disclaimer of various warranties. Compare Sections 2-312(2) and 2-
316(2). Finally, the example of a disclaimer of the implied warranty of fitness stated in subsection (2) differs from
the analogue stated in Section 2-316(2); this example should promote a better understanding of the effect of the
disclaimer.
Purposes: These changes were made to reflect leasing practices. E.g., FMC Finance Corp. v. Murphree, 632 F.2d
413, 418 (5th Cir.1980) (disclaimer of implied warranty under lease transactions must be conspicuous and in
writing). The omission of the provisions of Section 2-316(4) was not substantive. Sections 2A-503 and 2A-504.
Cross References:
Article 2, esp. Sections 2-312(2) and 2-316, and Sections 2A-503 and 2A-504.
Definitional Cross References:
"Conspicuous". Section 1-201(10).
"Course of dealing". Section 1-205.
"Fault". Section 2A-103(1)(f).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Knows". Section 1-201(25).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
"Usage of trade". Section 1-205.
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-215
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-215. Cumulation and Conflict of Warranties Express or Implied.
Warranties, whether express or implied, must be construed as consistent with each other and as
cumulative, but if that construction is unreasonable, the intention of the parties determines which warranty
is dominant. In ascertaining that intention the following rules apply:
(a) Exact or technical specifications displace an inconsistent sample or model or general language of
description.
(b) A sample from an existing bulk displaces inconsistent general language of description.
(c) Express warranties displace inconsistent implied warranties other than an implied warranty of
fitness for a particular purpose.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-317.
Definitional Cross Reference:
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-216
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-216. Third-Party Beneficiaries of Express and Implied Warranties.
ALTERNATIVE A
A warranty to or for the benefit of a lessee under this Article, whether express or implied, extends to any natural
person who is in the family or household of the lessee or who is a guest in the lessee's home if it is reasonable to
expect that such person may use, consume, or be affected by the goods and who is injured in person by breach of
the warranty. This section does not displace principles of law and equity that extend a warranty to or for the benefit
of a lessee to other persons. The operation of this section may not be excluded, modified, or limited, but an
exclusion, modification, or limitation of the warranty, including any with respect to rights and remedies, effective
against the lessee is also effective against any beneficiary designated under this section.
ALTERNATIVE B
A warranty to or for the benefit of a lessee under this Article, whether express or implied, extends to any natural
person who may reasonably be expected to use, consume, or be affected by the goods and who is injured in
person by breach of the warranty. This section does not displace principles of law and equity that extend a
warranty to or for the benefit of a lessee to other persons. The operation of this section may not be excluded,
modified, or limited, but an exclusion, modification, or limitation of the warranty, including any with respect to rights
and remedies, effective against the lessee is also effective against the beneficiary designated under this section.
ALTERNATIVE C
A warranty to or for the benefit of a lessee under this Article, whether express or implied, extends to any person
who may reasonably be expected to use, consume, or be affected by the goods and who is injured by breach of the
warranty. The operation of this section may not be excluded, modified, or limited with respect to injury to the person
of an individual to whom the warranty extends, but an exclusion, modification, or limitation of the warranty, including
any with respect to rights and remedies, effective against the lessee is also effective against the beneficiary
designated under this section.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-318.
Changes: The provisions of Section 2-318 have been included in this section, modified in two respects: first, to
reflect leasing practice, including the special practices of the lessor under a finance lease; second, to reflect and
thus codify elements of the official comment to Section 2-318 with respect to the effect of disclaimers and limitations
of remedies against third parties.
Purposes: Alternative A is based on the 1962 version of Section 2-318 and is least favorable to the injured person
as the doctrine of privity imposed by other law is abrogated to only a limited extent. Alternatives B and C are based
§ 2A-216. Third-Party Beneficiaries of Express and Implied Warranties.
Page 2 of 2
on later additions to Section 2-318 and are more favorable to the injured person. In determining which alternative to
select, the state legislature should consider making its choice parallel to the choice it made with respect to Section
2-318, as interpreted by the courts.
The last sentence of each of Alternatives A, B and C does not preclude the lessor from excluding or modifying an
express or implied warranty under a lease. Section 2A-214. Further, that sentence does not preclude the lessor
from limiting the rights and remedies of the lessee and from liquidating damages. Sections 2A-503 and 2A-504. If
the lease excludes or modifies warranties, limits remedies for breach, or liquidates damages with respect to the
lessee, such provisions are enforceable against the beneficiaries designated under this section. However, this last
sentence forbids selective discrimination against the beneficiaries designated under this section, i.e., exclusion of
the lessor's liability to the beneficiaries with respect to warranties made by the lessor to the lessee.
Other law, including the Article on Sales (Article 2), may apply in determining the extent to which a warranty to or for
the benefit of the lessor extends to the lessee and third parties. This is in part a function of whether the lessor has
bought or leased the goods.
This Article does not purport to change the development of the relationship of the common law, with respect to
products liability, including strict liability in tort (as restated in Restatement (Second) of Torts, § 402A (1965)), to the
provisions of this Act. Compare Cline v. Prowler Indus. of Maryland, 418 A.2d 968 (Del.1980) and Hawkins Constr.
Co. v. Matthews Co., 190 Neb. 546, 209 N.W.2d 643 (1973) with Dippel v. Sciano, 37 Wis.2d 443, 155 N.W.2d 55
(1967).
Cross References:
Article 2, esp. Section 2-318, and Sections 2A-214, 2A-503 and 2A-504.
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-217
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-217. Identification.
Identification of goods as goods to which a lease contract refers may be made at any time and in any
manner explicitly agreed to by the parties. In the absence of explicit agreement, identification occurs:
(a) when the lease contract is made if the lease contract is for a lease of goods that are existing and
identified;
(b) when the goods are shipped, marked, or otherwise designated by the lessor as goods to which the
lease contract refers, if the lease contract is for a lease of goods that are not existing and identified; or
(c) when the young are conceived, if the lease contract is for a lease of unborn young of animals.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-501.
Changes: This section, together with Section 2A-218, is derived from the provisions of Section 2-501, with changes
to reflect lease terminology; however, this section omits as irrelevant to leasing practice the treatment of special
property.
Purposes: With respect to subsection (b) there is a certain amount of ambiguity in the reference to when goods are
designated, e.g., when the lessor is both selling and leasing goods to the same lessee/buyer and has marked
goods for delivery but has not distinguished between those related to the lease contract and those related to the
sales contract. As in Section 2-501(1)(b), this issue has been left to be resolved by the courts, case by case.
Cross References:
Sections 2-501 and 2A-218.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201(3).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
§ 2A-217. Identification.
Page 2 of 2
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-218
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-218. Insurance and Proceeds.
(1) A lessee obtains an insurable interest when existing goods are identified to the lease contract even
though the goods identified are nonconforming and the lessee has an option to reject them.
(2) If a lessee has an insurable interest only by reason of the lessor's identification of the goods, the lessor,
until default or insolvency or notification to the lessee that identification is final, may substitute other goods
for those identified.
(3) Notwithstanding a lessee's insurable interest under subsections (1) and (2), the lessor retains an
insurable interest until an option to buy has been exercised by the lessee and risk of loss has passed to the
lessee.
(4) Nothing in this section impairs any insurable interest recognized under any other statute or rule of law.
(5) The parties by agreement may determine that one or more parties have an obligation to obtain and pay
for insurance covering the goods and by agreement may determine the beneficiary of the proceeds of the
insurance.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-501.
Changes: This section, together with Section 2A-217, is derived from the provisions of Section 2-501, with changes
and additions to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Purposes: Subsection (2) states a rule allowing substitution of goods by the lessor under certain circumstances,
until default or insolvency of the lessor, or until notification to the lessee that identification is final. Subsection (3)
states a rule regarding the lessor's insurable interest that, by virtue of the difference between a sale and a lease,
necessarily is different from the rule stated in Section 2-501(2) regarding the seller's insurable interest. For this
purpose the option to buy shall be deemed to have been exercised by the lessee when the resulting sale is closed,
not when the lessee gives notice to the lessor. Further, subsection (5) is new and reflects the common practice of
shifting the responsibility and cost of insuring the goods between the parties to the lease transaction.
Cross References:
Sections 2-501, 2-501(2) and 2A-217.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201(3).
"Buying". Section 2A-103(1)(a).
§ 2A-218. Insurance and Proceeds.
Page 2 of 2
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Insolvent". Section 1-201(23).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notification". Section 1-201(26).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-219
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-219. Risk of Loss.
(1) Except in the case of a finance lease, risk of loss is retained by the lessor and does not pass to the
lessee. In the case of a finance lease, risk of loss passes to the lessee.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Article on the effect of default on risk of loss ( Section 2A-220), if risk of
loss is to pass to the lessee and the time of passage is not stated, the following rules apply:
(a) If the lease contract requires or authorizes the goods to be shipped by carrier
(i) and it does not require delivery at a particular destination, the risk of loss passes to the lessee
when the goods are duly delivered to the carrier; but
(ii) if it does require delivery at a particular destination and the goods are there duly tendered while
in the possession of the carrier, the risk of loss passes to the lessee when the goods are there duly
so tendered as to enable the lessee to take delivery.
(b) If the goods are held by a bailee to be delivered without being moved, the risk of loss passes to the
lessee on acknowledgment by the bailee of the lessee's right to possession of the goods.
(c) In any case not within subsection (a) or (b), the risk of loss passes to the lessee on the lessee's
receipt of the goods if the lessor, or, in the case of a finance lease, the supplier, is a merchant;
otherwise the risk passes to the lessee on tender of delivery.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-509(1) through (3).
Changes: Subsection (1) is new. The introduction to subsection (2) is new, but subparagraph (a) incorporates the
provisions of Section 2-509(1); subparagraph (b) incorporates the provisions of Section 2-509(2) only in part,
reflecting current practice in lease transactions.
Purposes: Subsection (1) states rules related to retention or passage of risk of loss consistent with current practice
in lease transactions. The provisions of subsection (4) of Section 2-509 are not incorporated as they are not
necessary. This section does not deal with responsibility for loss caused by the wrongful act of either the lessor or
the lessee.
Cross References:
Sections 2-509(1), 2-509(2) and 2-509(4).
Definitional Cross References:
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
§ 2A-219. Risk of Loss.
Page 2 of 2
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Merchant". Section 2-104(1).
"Receipt". Section 2-103(1)(c).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-220
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-220. Effect of Default on Risk of Loss.
(1) Where risk of loss is to pass to the lessee and the time of passage is not stated:
(a) If a tender or delivery of goods so fails to conform to the lease contract as to give a right of
rejection, the risk of their loss remains with the lessor, or, in the case of a finance lease, the supplier,
until cure or acceptance.
(b) If the lessee rightfully revokes acceptance, he [or she], to the extent of any deficiency in his [or her]
effective insurance coverage, may treat the risk of loss as having remained with the lessor from the
beginning.
(2) Whether or not risk of loss is to pass to the lessee, if the lessee as to conforming goods already
identified to a lease contract repudiates or is otherwise in default under the lease contract, the lessor, or, in
the case of a finance lease, the supplier, to the extent of any deficiency in his [or her] effective insurance
coverage may treat the risk of loss as resting on the lessee for a commercially reasonable time.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-510.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology. The rule in Section (1)(b) does not allow the lessee
under a finance lease to treat the risk of loss as having remained with the supplier from the beginning. This is
appropriate given the limited circumstances under which the lessee under a finance lease is allowed to revoke
acceptance. Section 2A-517 and Section 2A-516 official comment.
Definitional Cross References:
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
§ 2A-220. Effect of Default on Risk of Loss.
Page 2 of 2
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-221
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
2. FORMATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-221. Casualty to Identified Goods.
If a lease contract requires goods identified when the lease contract is made, and the goods suffer casualty
without fault of the lessee, the lessor or the supplier before delivery, or the goods suffer casualty before risk
of loss passes to the lessee pursuant to the lease agreement or Section 2A-219, then:
(a) if the loss is total, the lease contract is avoided; and
(b) if the loss is partial or the goods have so deteriorated as to no longer conform to the lease contract,
the lessee may nevertheless demand inspection and at his [or her] option either treat the lease contract
as avoided or, except in a finance lease that is not a consumer lease, accept the goods with due
allowance from the rent payable for the balance of the lease term for the deterioration or the deficiency
in quantity but without further right against the lessor.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-613.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Purpose: Due to the vagaries of determining the amount of due allowance (Section 2-613(b)), no attempt was made
in subsection (b) to treat a problem unique to lease contracts and installment sales contracts: determining how to
recapture the allowance, e.g., application to the first or last rent payments or allocation, pro rata, to all rent
payments.
Cross References:
Section 2-613.
Definitional Cross References:
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Consumer lease". Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Fault". Section 2A-103(1)(f).
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
§ 2A-221. Casualty to Identified Goods.
Page 2 of 2
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-301
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-301. Enforceability of Lease Contract.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, a lease contract is effective and enforceable according to its terms
between the parties, against purchasers of the goods and against creditors of the parties.
See Appendix VI [following Amendment 24 therein] for material relating to changes in the Official Comment to
conform to the 1990 amendments to various sections of Article 2A.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 9-201.
Changes: The first sentence of Section 9-201 was incorporated, modified to reflect leasing terminology. The
second sentence of Section 9-201 was eliminated as not relevant to leasing practices.
Purposes:
1. This section establishes a general rule regarding the validity and enforceability of a lease contract. The lease
contract is effective and enforceable between the parties and against third parties. Exceptions to this general rule
arise where there is a specific rule to the contrary in this Article. Enforceability is, thus, dependent upon the lease
contract meeting the requirements of the Statute of Frauds provisions of Section 2A-201. Enforceability is also a
function of the lease contract conforming to the principles of construction and interpretation contained in the Article
on General Provisions (Article 1). Section 2A-103(4).
2. The effectiveness or enforceability of the lease contract is not dependent upon the lease contract or any
financing statement or the like being filed or recorded; however, the priority of the interest of a lessor of fixtures with
respect to the interests of certain third parties in such fixtures is subject to the provisions of the Article on Secured
Transactions (Article 9). Section 2A-309. Prior to the adoption of this Article filing or recording was not required
with respect to leases, only leases intended as security. The definition of security interest, as amended
concurrently with the adoption of this Article, more clearly delineates leases and leases intended as security and
thus signals the need to file. Section 1-201(37). Those lessors who are concerned about whether the transaction
creates a lease or a security interest will continue to file a protective financing statement. Section 9-408. Coogan,
Leasing and the Uniform Commercial Code, in Equipment Leasing-Leveraged Leasing 681, 744-46 (2d ed. 1980).
3. Hypothetical:
(a) In construing this section it is important to recognize its relationship to other sections in this Article. This is best
demonstrated by reference to a hypothetical. Assume that on February 1 A, a manufacturer of combines and other
farm equipment, leased a fleet of six combines to B, a corporation engaged in the business of farming, for a 12
month term. Under the lease agreement between A and B, A agreed to defer B's payment of the first two months'
§ 2A-301. Enforceability of Lease Contract.
Page 2 of 4
rent to April 1. On March 1 B recognized that it would need only four combines and thus subleased two combines
to C for an 11 month term.
(b) This hypothetical raises a number of issues that are answered by the sections contained in this part. Since
lease is defined to include sublease (Section 2A-103(1)(j) and (w)), this section provides that the prime lease
between A and B and the sublease between B and C are enforceable in accordance with their terms, except as
otherwise provided in this Article; that exception, in this case, is one of considerable scope.
(c) The separation of ownership, which is in A, and possession, which is in B with respect to four combines and
which is in C with respect to two combines, is not relevant. Section 2A-302. A's interest in the six combines cannot
be challenged simply because A parted with possession to B, who in turn parted with possession of some of the
combines to C. Yet it is important to note that by the terms of Section 2A-302 this conclusion is subject to change if
otherwise provided in this Article.
(d) B's entering the sublease with C raises an issue that is treated by this part. In a dispute over the leased
combines A may challenge B's right to sublease. The rule is permissive as to transfers of interests under a lease
contract, including subleases. Section 2A-303(2). However, the rule has two significant qualifications. If the prime
lease contract between A and B prohibits B from subleasing the combines, or makes such a sublease an event of
default, Section 2A-303(2) applies; thus, while B's interest under the prime lease may be transferred under the
sublease to C, A may have a remedy pursuant to Section 2A-303(5). Absent a prohibition or default provision in the
prime lease contract A might be able to argue that the sublease to C materially increases A's risk; thus, while B's
interest under the prime lease may be transferred under the sublease to C, A may have a remedy pursuant to
Section 2A-303(5). Section 2A-303(5)(b)(ii).
(e) Resolution of this issue is also a function of the section dealing with the sublease of goods by a prime lessee
(Section 2A-305). Subsection (1) of Section 2A-305, which is subject to the rules of Section 2A-303 stated above,
provides that C takes subject to the interest of A under the prime lease between A and B. However, there are two
exceptions. First, if B is a merchant (Sections 2A-103(3) and 2-104(1)) dealing in goods of that kind and C is a
sublessee in the ordinary course of business (Sections 2A-103(1)(o) and 2A-103(1)(n)), C takes free of the prime
lease between A and B. Second, if B has rejected the six combines under the prime lease with A, and B disposes
of the goods by sublease to C, C takes free of the prime lease if C can establish good faith. Section 2A-511(4).
(f) If the facts of this hypothetical are expanded and we assume that the prime lease obligated B to maintain the
combines, an additional issue may be presented. Prior to entering the sublease, B, in satisfaction of its
maintenance covenant, brought the two combines that it desired to sublease to a local independent dealer of A's.
The dealer did the requested work for B. C inspected the combines on the dealer's lot after the work was
completed. C signed the sublease with B two days later. C, however, was prevented from taking delivery of the
two combines as B refused to pay the dealer's invoice for the repairs. The dealer furnished the repair service to B
in the ordinary course of the dealer's business. If under applicable law the dealer has a lien on repaired goods in
the dealer's possession, the dealer's lien will take priority over B's and C's interests and also should take priority
over A's interest, depending upon the terms of the lease contract and the applicable law. Section 2A-306.
(g) Now assume that C is in financial straits and one of C's creditors obtains a judgment against C. If the creditor
levies on C's subleasehold interest in the two combines, who will prevail? Unless the levying creditor also holds a
lien covered by Section 2A-306, discussed above, the judgment creditor will take its interest subject to B's rights
under the sublease and A's rights under the prime lease. Section 2A-307(1). The hypothetical becomes more
complicated if we assume that B is in financial straits and B's creditor holds the judgment. Here the judgment
creditor takes subject to the sublease unless the lien attached to the two combines before the sublease contract
became enforceable. Section 2A-307(2)(a). However, B's judgment creditor cannot prime A's interest in the goods
because, with respect to A, the judgment creditor is a creditor of B in its capacity as lessee under the prime lease
between A and B. Thus, here the judgment creditor's interest is subject to the lease between A and B. Section 2A-
307(1).
§ 2A-301. Enforceability of Lease Contract.
Page 3 of 4
(h) Finally, assume that on April 1 B is unable to pay A the deferred rent then due under the prime lease, but that C
is current in its payments under the sublease from B. What effect will B's default under the prime lease between A
and B have on C's rights under the sublease between B and C? Section 2A-301 provides that a lease contract is
effective against the creditors of either party. Since a lease contract includes a sublease contract (Section 2A-
103(1)(l )), the sublease contract between B and C arguably could be enforceable against A, a prime lessor who
has extended unsecured credit to B, the prime lessee/sublessor, if the sublease contract meets the requirements of
Section 2A-201. However, the rule stated in Section 2A-301 is subject to other provisions in this Article. Under
Section 2A-305, C, as sublessee, would take subject to the prime lease contract in most cases. Thus, B's default
under the prime lease will in most cases lead to A's recovery of the goods from C. Section 2A-523. A and C could
provide otherwise by agreement. Section 2A-311. C's recourse will be to assert a claim for damages against B.
Sections 2A-211(1) and 2A-508.
4. Relationship Between Sections:
(a) As the analysis of the hypothetical demonstrates, Part 3 of the Article focuses on issues that relate to the
enforceability of the lease contract (Sections 2A-301, 2A-302 and 2A-303) and to the priority of various claims to the
goods subject to the lease contract (Sections 2A-304, 2A-305, 2A-306, 2A-307, 2A-308, 2A-309, 2A-310, and 2A-
311).
(b) This section states a general rule of enforceability, which is subject to specific rules to the contrary stated
elsewhere in the Article. Section 2A-302 negates any notion that the separation of title and possession is fraudulent
as a rule of law. Finally, Section 2A-303 states rules with respect to the transfer of the lessor's interest (as well as
the residual interest in the goods) or the lessee's interest under the lease contract. Qualifications are imposed as a
function of various issues, including whether the transfer is the creation or enforcement of a security interest or one
that is material to the other party to the lease contract. In addition, a system of rules is created to deal with the
rights and duties among assignor, assignee and the other party to the lease contract.
(c) Sections 2A-304 and 2A-305 are twins that deal with good faith transferees of goods subject to the lease
contract. Section 2A-304 creates a set of rules with respect to transfers by the lessor of goods subject to a lease
contract; the transferee considered is a subsequent lessee of the goods. The priority dispute covered here is
between the subsequent lessee and the original lessee of the goods (or persons claiming through the original
lessee). Section 2A-305 creates a set of rules with respect to transfers by the lessee of goods subject to a lease
contract; the transferees considered are buyers of the goods or sublessees of the goods. The priority dispute
covered here is between the transferee and the lessor of the goods (or persons claiming through the lessor).
(d) Section 2A-306 creates a rule with respect to priority disputes between holders of liens for services or materials
furnished with respect to goods subject to a lease contract and the lessor or the lessee under that contract. Section
2A-307 creates a rule with respect to priority disputes between the lessee and creditors of the lessor and priority
disputes between the lessor and creditors of the lessee.
(e) Section 2A-308 creates a series of rules relating to allegedly fraudulent transfers and preferences. The most
significant rule is that set forth in subsection (3) which validates sale-leaseback transactions if the buyer-lessor can
establish that he or she bought for value and in good faith.
(f) Sections 2A-309 and 2A-310 create a series of rules with respect to priority disputes between various third
parties and a lessor of fixtures or accessions, respectively, with respect thereto.
(g) Finally, Section 2A-311 allows parties to alter the statutory priorities by agreement.
Cross References:
Article 1, especially Section 1-201(37), and Sections 2-104(1), 2A-103(1)(j), 2A-103(1)(l), 2A-103(1)(n), 2A-
103(1)(o) and 2A-103(1)(w), 2A-103(3), 2A-103(4), 2A-201, 2A-301 through 2A-303, 2A-303(2), 2A-303(5), 2A-304
§ 2A-301. Enforceability of Lease Contract.
Page 4 of 4
through 2A-307, 2A-307(1), 2A-307(2)(a), 2A-308 through 2A-311, 2A-508, 2A-511(4), 2A-523, Article 9, especially
Sections 9-201 and 9-408.
Definitional Cross References:
"Creditor". Section 1-201(12).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Purchaser". Section 1-201(33).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-302
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-302. Title to and Possession of Goods.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, each provision of this Article applies whether the lessor or a third party
has title to the goods, and whether the lessor, the lessee, or a third party has possession of the goods,
notwithstanding any statute or rule of law that possession or the absence of possession is fraudulent.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 9-202.
Changes: Section 9-202 was modified to reflect leasing terminology and to clarify the law of leases with respect to
fraudulent conveyances or transfers.
Purposes: The separation of ownership and possession of goods between the lessor and the lessee (or a third
party) has created problems under certain fraudulent conveyance statutes. See, e.g., In re Ludlum Enters., 510
F.2d 996 (5th Cir. 1975); Suburbia Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n v. Bel-Air Conditioning Co., 385 So.2d 1151
(Fla.Dist.Ct.App.1980). This section provides, among other things, that separation of ownership and possession per
se does not affect the enforceability of the lease contract. Sections 2A-301 and 2A-308.
Cross References:
Sections 2A-301, 2A-308 and 9-202.
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-303
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-303. Alienability of Party's Interest Under Lease Contract or of Lessor's
Residual Interest in Goods; Delegation of Performance; Transfer of Rights.
(1) As used in this section, "creation of a security interest" includes the sale of a lease contract that is
subject to Article 9, Secured Transactions, by reason of Section 9-109(a)(3).
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3) and Section 9-407, a provision in a lease agreement which (i)
prohibits the voluntary or involuntary transfer, including a transfer by sale, sublease, creation or
enforcement of a security interest, or attachment, levy, or other judicial process, of an interest of a party
under the lease contract or of the lessor's residual interest in the goods, or (ii) makes such a transfer an
event of default, gives rise to the rights and remedies provided in subsection (4), but a transfer that is
prohibited or is an event of default under the lease agreement is otherwise effective.
(3) A provision in a lease agreement which (i) prohibits a transfer of a right to damages for default with
respect to the whole lease contract or of a right to payment arising out of the transferor's due performance
of the transferor's entire obligation, or (ii) makes such a transfer an event of default, is not enforceable, and
such a transfer is not a transfer that materially impairs the prospect of obtaining return performance by,
materially changes the duty of, or materially increases the burden or risk imposed on, the other party to the
lease contract within the purview of subsection (4).
(4) Subject to subsection (3) and Section 9-407:
(a) if a transfer is made which is made an event of default under a lease agreement, the party to the
lease contract not making the transfer, unless that party waives the default or otherwise agrees, has
the rights and remedies described in Section 2A-501(2);
(b) if paragraph (a) is not applicable and if a transfer is made that (i) is prohibited under a lease
agreement or (ii) materially impairs the prospect of obtaining return performance by, materially changes
the duty of, or materially increases the burden or risk imposed on, the other party to the lease contract,
unless the party not making the transfer agrees at any time to the transfer in the lease contract or
otherwise, then, except as limited by contract, (i) the transferor is liable to the party not making the
transfer for damages caused by the transfer to the extent that the damages could not reasonably be
prevented by the party not making the transfer and (ii) a court having jurisdiction may grant other
appropriate relief, including cancellation of the lease contract or an injunction against the transfer.
(5) A transfer of "the lease" or of "all my rights under the lease", or a transfer in similar general terms, is a
transfer of rights and, unless the language or the circumstances, as in a transfer for security, indicate the
contrary, the transfer is a delegation of duties by the transferor to the transferee. Acceptance by the
transferee constitutes a promise by the transferee to perform those duties. The promise is enforceable by
either the transferor or the other party to the lease contract.
(6) Unless otherwise agreed by the lessor and the lessee, a delegation of performance does not relieve the
transferor as against the other party of any duty to perform or of any liability for default.
(7) In a consumer lease, to prohibit the transfer of an interest of a party under the lease contract or to make
a transfer an event of default, the language must be specific, by a writing, and conspicuous.
As amended in 1990.
§ 2A-303. Alienability of Party's Interest Under Lease Contract or of Lessor's Residual Interest in Goods;
Delegation of Performance; Transfer of Rights.
Page 2 of 4
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-210 and 9-311.
Changes: The provisions of Sections 2-210 and 9-311 were incorporated in this section, with substantial
modifications to reflect leasing terminology and practice and to harmonize the principles of the respective
provisions, i.e. limitations on delegation of performance on the one hand and alienability of rights on the other. In
addition, unlike Section 2-210 which deals only with voluntary transfers, this section deals with involuntary as well
as voluntary transfers. Moreover, the principle of Section 9-318(4) denying effectiveness to contractual terms
prohibiting assignments of receivables due and to become due also is implemented.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (2) states a rule, consistent with Section 9-401(b), that voluntary and involuntary transfers of an
interest of a party under the lease contract or of the lessor's residual interest, including by way of the creation or
enforcement of a security interest, are effective, notwithstanding a provision in the lease agreement prohibiting the
transfer or making the transfer an event of default. Although the transfers are effective, the provision in the lease
agreement is nevertheless enforceable, but only as provided in subsection (4). Under subsection (4) the prejudiced
party is limited to the remedies on "default under the lease contract" in this Article and, except as limited by this
Article, as provided in the lease agreement, if the transfer has been made an event of default. Section 2A-501(2).
Usually, there will be a specific provision to this effect or a general provision making a breach of a covenant an
event of default. In those cases where the transfer is prohibited, but not made an event of default, the prejudiced
party may recover damages; or, if the damage remedy would be ineffective adequately to protect that party, the
court can order cancellation of the lease contract or enjoin the transfer. This rule that such provisions generally are
enforceable is subject to subsection (3) and Section 9-407, which make such provisions unenforceable in certain
instances.
2. Under Section 9-407, a provision in a lease agreement which prohibits the creation or enforcement of a security
interest, including sales of lease contracts subject to Article 9 (Section 9-109(a)(3)), or makes it an event of default
is generally not enforceable, reflecting the policy of Section 9-406 and former Section 9-318(4).
3. Subsection (3) is based upon Section 2-210(2) and Section 9-406. It makes unenforceable a prohibition against
transfers of certain rights to payment or a provision making the transfer an event of default. It also provides that
such transfers do not materially impair the prospect of obtaining return performance by, materially change the duty
of, or materially increase the burden or risk imposed on, the other party to the lease contract so as to give rise to
the rights and remedies stated in subsection (4). Accordingly, a transfer of a right to payment cannot be prohibited
or made an event of default, or be one that materially impairs performance, changes duties or increases risk, if the
right is already due or will become due without further performance being required by the party to receive payment.
Thus, a lessor can transfer the right to future payments under the lease contract, including by way of a grant of a
security interest, and the transfer will not give rise to the rights and remedies stated in subsection (4) if the lessor
has no remaining performance under the lease contract. The mere fact that the lessor is obligated to allow the
lessee to remain in possession and to use the goods as long as the lessee is not in default does not mean that
there is remaining performance on the part of the lessor. Likewise, the fact that the lessor has potential liability
under a "non-operating" lease contract for breaches of warranty does not mean that there is remaining
performance. In contrast, the lessor would have remaining performance under a lease contract requiring the lessor
to regularly maintain and service the goods or to provide "upgrades" of the equipment on a periodic basis in order to
avoid obsolescence. The basic distinction is between a mere potential duty to respond which is not remaining
performance, and an affirmative duty to render stipulated performance. Although the distinction may be difficult to
§ 2A-303. Alienability of Party's Interest Under Lease Contract or of Lessor's Residual Interest in Goods;
Delegation of Performance; Transfer of Rights.
Page 3 of 4
draw in some cases, it is instructive to focus on the difference between "operating" and "non-operating" leases as
generally understood in the marketplace. Even if there is remaining performance under a lease contract, a transfer
for security of a right to payment that is made an event of default or that is in violation of a prohibition against
transfer does not give rise to the rights and remedies under subsection (4) if it does not constitute an actual
delegation of a material performance under Section 9-407.
4. The application of either the rule of Section 9-407 or the rule of subsection (3) to the grant by the lessor of a
security interest in the lessor's right to future payment under the lease contract may produce the same result. Both
provisions generally protect security transfers by the lessor in particular because the creation by the lessor of a
security interest or the enforcement of that interest generally will not prejudice the lessee's rights if it does not result
in a delegation of the lessor's duties. To the contrary, the receipt of loan proceeds or relief from the enforcement of
an antecedent debt normally should enhance the lessor's ability to perform its duties under the lease contract.
Nevertheless, there are circumstances where relief might be justified. For example, if ownership of the goods is
transferred pursuant to enforcement of a security interest to a party whose ownership would prevent the lessee
from continuing to possess the goods, relief might be warranted. See 49 U.S.C. § 1401(a) and (b) which places
limitations on the operation of aircraft in the United States based on the citizenship or corporate qualification of the
registrant.
5. Relief on the ground of material prejudice when the lease agreement does not prohibit the transfer or make it
an event of default should be afforded only in extreme circumstances, considering the fact that the party asserting
material prejudice did not insist upon a provision in the lease agreement that would protect against such a transfer.
6. Subsection (4) implements the rule of subsection (2). Subsection (2) provides that, even though a transfer is
effective, a provision in the lease agreement prohibiting it or making it an event of default may be enforceable as
provided in subsection (4). See Brummond v. First National Bank of Clovis, 656 P.2d 884, 35 U.C.C.Rep.Serv.
(Callaghan) 1311 (N.Mex.1983), stating the analogous rule for Section 9-311. If the transfer prohibited by the lease
agreement is made an event of default, then, under subsection (4)(a), unless the default is waived or there is an
agreement otherwise, the aggrieved party has the rights and remedies referred to in Section 2A-501(2), viz. those in
this Article and, except as limited in the Article, those provided in the lease agreement. In the unlikely circumstance
that the lease agreement prohibits the transfer without making a violation of the prohibition an event of default or,
even if there is no prohibition against the transfer, and the transfer is one that materially impairs performance,
changes duties, or increases risk (for example, a sublease or assignment to a party using the goods improperly or
for an illegal purpose), then subsection (4)(b) is applicable. In that circumstance, unless the party aggrieved by the
transfer has otherwise agreed in the lease contract, such as by assenting to a particular transfer or to transfers in
general, or agrees in some other manner, the aggrieved party has the right to recover damages from the transferor
and a court may, in appropriate circumstances, grant other relief, such as cancellation of the lease contract or an
injunction against the transfer.
7. If a transfer gives rise to the rights and remedies provided in subsection (4), the transferee as an alternative
may propose, and the other party may accept, adequate cure or compensation for past defaults and adequate
assurance of future due performance under the lease contract. Subsection (4) does not preclude any other relief
that may be available to a party to the lease contract aggrieved by a transfer subject to an enforceable prohibition,
such as an action for interference with contractual relations.
8. Subsection (7) requires that a provision in a consumer lease prohibiing a transfer, or making it an event of
default, must be specific, written and conspicuous. See Section 1-201(10). This assists in protecting a consumer
lessee against surprise assertions of default.
9. Subsection (5) is taken almost verbatim from the provisions of Section 2-210(5). The subsection states a rule of
construction that distinguishes a commercial assignment, which substitutes the assignee for the assignor as to
rights and duties, and an assignment for security or financing assignment, which substitutes the assignee for the
assignor only as to rights. Note that the assignment for security or financing assignment is a subset of all security
interests. Security interest is defined to include "any interest of a buyer of … chattel paper". Section 1-201(37).
Chattel paper is defined to include a lease. Section 9-102. Thus, a buyer of leases is the holder of a security
interest in the leases. That conclusion should not influence this issue, as the policy is quite different. Whether a
§ 2A-303. Alienability of Party's Interest Under Lease Contract or of Lessor's Residual Interest in Goods;
Delegation of Performance; Transfer of Rights.
Page 4 of 4
buyer of leases is the holder of a commercial assignment, or an assignment for security or financing assignment
should be determined by the language of the assignment or the circumstances of the assignment.
Cross References:
Sections 1-201(11), 1-201(37), 2-210, 2A-401, 9-102(1)(b), 9-104(f), 9-105(1)(a), 9-206, and 9-318.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed" and "Agreement". Section 1-201(3).
"Conspicuous". Section 1-201(10).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Lessor's residual interest". Section 2A-103(1)(q).
"Notice". Section 1-201(25).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-304
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-304. Subsequent Lease of Goods by Lessor.
(1) Subject to Section 2A-303, a subsequent lessee from a lessor of goods under an existing lease
contract obtains, to the extent of the leasehold interest transferred, the leasehold interest in the goods that
the lessor had or had power to transfer, and except as provided in subsection (2) and Section 2A-527(4),
takes subject to the existing lease contract. A lessor with voidable title has power to transfer a good
leasehold interest to a good faith subsequent lessee for value, but only to the extent set forth in the
preceding sentence. If goods have been delivered under a transaction of purchase, the lessor has that
power even though:
(a) the lessor's transferor was deceived as to the identity of the lessor;
(b) the delivery was in exchange for a check which is later dishonored;
(c) it was agreed that the transaction was to be a "cash sale"; or
(d) the delivery was procured through fraud punishable as larcenous under the criminal law.
(2) A subsequent lessee in the ordinary course of business from a lessor who is a merchant dealing in
goods of that kind to whom the goods were entrusted by the existing lessee of that lessor before the
interest of the subsequent lessee became enforceable against that lessor obtains, to the extent of the
leasehold interest transferred, all of that lessor's and the existing lessee's rights to the goods, and takes
free of the existing lease contract.
(3) A subsequent lessee from the lessor of goods that are subject to an existing lease contract and are
covered by a certificate of title issued under a statute of this State or of another jurisdiction takes no greater
rights than those provided both by this section and by the certificate of title statute.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-403.
Changes: While Section 2-403 was used as a model for this section, the provisions of Section 2-403 were
significantly revised to reflect leasing practices and to integrate this Article with certificate of title statutes.
Purposes:
1. This section must be read in conjunction with, as it is subject to, the provisions of Section 2A-303, which govern
voluntary and involuntary transfers of rights and duties under a lease contract, including the lessor's residual
interest in the goods.
§ 2A-304. Subsequent Lease of Goods by Lessor.
Page 2 of 3
2. This section must also be read in conjunction with Section 2-403. This section and Section 2A-305 are derived
from Section 2-403, which states a unified policy on good faith purchases of goods. Given the scope of the
definition of purchaser (Section 1-201(33)), a person who bought goods to lease as well as a person who bought
goods subject to an existing lease from a lessor will take pursuant to Section 2-403. Further, a person who leases
such goods from the person who bought them should also be protected under Section 2-403, first because the
lessee's rights are derivative and second because the definition of purchaser should be interpreted to include one
who takes by lease; no negative implication should be drawn from the inclusion of lease in the definition of
purchase in this Article. Section 2A-103(1)(v).
3. There are hypotheticals that relate to an entrustee's unauthorized lease of entrusted goods to a third party that
are outside the provisions of Sections 2-403, 2A-304 and 2A-305. Consider a sale of goods by M, a merchant, to B,
a buyer. After paying for the goods B allows M to retain possession of the goods as B is short of storage. Before B
calls for the goods M leases the goods to L, a lessee. This transaction is not governed by Section 2-403(2) as L is
not a buyer in the ordinary course of business. Section 1-201(9). Further, this transaction is not governed by
Section 2A-304(2) as B is not an existing lessee. Finally, this transaction is not governed by Section 2A-305(2) as
B is not M's lessor. Section 2A-307(2) resolves the potential dispute between B, M and L. By virtue of B's
entrustment of the goods to M and M's lease of the goods to L, B has a cause of action against M under the
common law. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-103. See, e.g., Restatement (Second) of Torts §§ 222A-243. Thus, B is a
creditor of M. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-201(12). Section 2A-307(2) provides that B, as M's creditor, takes subject
to M's lease to L. Thus, if L does not default under the lease, L's enjoyment and possession of the goods should be
undisturbed. However, B is not without recourse. B's action should result in a judgment against M providing,
among other things, a turnover of all proceeds arising from M's lease to L, as well as a transfer of all of M's right,
title and interest as lessor under M's lease to L, including M's residual interest in the goods. Section 2A-103(1)(q).
4. Subsection (1) states a rule with respect to the leasehold interest obtained by a subsequent lessee from a lessor
of goods under an existing lease contract. The interest will include such leasehold interest as the lessor has in the
goods as well as the leasehold interest that the lessor had the power to transfer. Thus, the subsequent lessee
obtains unimpaired all rights acquired under the law of agency, apparent agency, ownership or other estoppel,
whether based upon statutory provisions or upon case law principles. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-103. In general,
the subsequent lessee takes subject to the existing lease contract, including the existing lessee's rights thereunder.
Furthermore, the subsequent lease contract is, of course, limited by its own terms, and the subsequent lessee takes
only to the extent of the leasehold interest transferred thereunder.
5. Subsection (1) further provides that a lessor with voidable title has power to transfer a good leasehold interest to
a good faith subsequent lessee for value. In addition, subsections (1)(a) through (d) provide specifically for the
protection of the good faith subsequent lessee for value in a number of specific situations which have been
troublesome under prior law.
6. The position of an existing lessee who entrusts leased goods to its lessor is not distinguishable from the position
of other entrusters. Thus, subsection (2) provides that the subsequent lessee in the ordinary course of business
takes free of the existing lease contract between the lessor entrustee and the lessee entruster, if the lessor is a
merchant dealing in goods of that kind. Further, the subsequent lessee obtains all of the lessor entrustee's and the
lessee entruster's rights to the goods, but only to the extent of the leasehold interest transferred by the lessor
entrustee. Thus, the lessor entrustee retains the residual interest in the goods. Section 2A-103(1)(q). However,
entrustment by the existing lessee must have occurred before the interest of the subsequent lessee became
enforceable against the lessor. Entrusting is defined in Section 2-403(3) and that definition applies here. Section
2A-103(3).
7. Subsection (3) states a rule with respect to a transfer of goods from a lessor to a subsequent lessee where the
goods are subject to an existing lease and covered by a certificate of title. The subsequent lessee's rights are no
greater than those provided by this section and the applicable certificate of title statute, including any applicable
case law construing such statute. Where the relationship between the certificate of title statute and Section 2-403,
the statutory analogue to this section, has been construed by a court, that construction is incorporated here.
§ 2A-304. Subsequent Lease of Goods by Lessor.
Page 3 of 3
Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-102(1) and (2). The better rule is that the certificate of title statutes are in harmony with
Section 2-403 and thus would be in harmony with this section. E.g., Atwood Chevrolet-Olds v. Aberdeen Mun.
School Dist., 431 So.2d 926, 928 (Miss.1983); Godfrey v. Gilsdorf, 476 P.2d 3, 6, 86 Nev. 714, 718 (1970); Martin
v. Nager, 192 N.J.Super. 189, 197-98, 469 A.2d 519, 523 (Super.Ct.Ch.Div.1983). Where the certificate of title
statute is silent on this issue of transfer, this section will control.
Cross References:
Sections 1-102, 1-103, 1-201(33), 2-403, 2A-103(1)(v), 2A-103(3), 2A-103(4), 2A-303 and 2A-305.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed". Section 1-201(3).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Entrusting". Section 2-403(3).
"Good faith". Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Leasehold interest". Section 2A-103(1)(m).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessee in the ordinary course of business". Section 2A-103(1)(o).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Merchant". Section 2-104(1).
"Purchase". Section 2A-103(1)(v).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-305
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-305. Sale or Sublease of Goods by Lessee.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Section 2A-303, a buyer or sublessee from the lessee of goods under an
existing lease contract obtains, to the extent of the interest transferred, the leasehold interest in the goods
that the lessee had or had power to transfer, and except as provided in subsection (2) and Section 2A-
511(4), takes subject to the existing lease contract. A lessee with a voidable leasehold interest has power
to transfer a good leasehold interest to a good faith buyer for value or a good faith sublessee for value, but
only to the extent set forth in the preceding sentence. When goods have been delivered under a
transaction of lease the lessee has that power even though:
(a) the lessor was deceived as to the identity of the lessee;
(b) the delivery was in exchange for a check which is later dishonored; or
(c) the delivery was procured through fraud punishable as larcenous under the criminal law.
(2) A buyer in the ordinary course of business or a sublessee in the ordinary course of business from a
lessee who is a merchant dealing in goods of that kind to whom the goods were entrusted by the lessor
obtains, to the extent of the interest transferred, all of the lessor's and lessee's rights to the goods, and
takes free of the existing lease contract.
(3) A buyer or sublessee from the lessee of goods that are subject to an existing lease contract and are
covered by a certificate of title issued under a statute of this State or of another jurisdiction takes no greater
rights than those provided both by this section and by the certificate of title statute.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-403.
Changes: While Section 2-403 was used as a model for this section, the provisions of Section 2-403 were
significantly revised to reflect leasing practice and to integrate this Article with certificate of title statutes.
Purposes: This section, a companion to Section 2A-304, states the rule with respect to the leasehold interest
obtained by a buyer or sublessee from a lessee of goods under an existing lease contract. Cf. Section 2A-304
official comment. Note that this provision is consistent with existing case law, which prohibits the bailee's transfer of
title to a good faith purchaser for value under Section 2-403(1). Rohweder v. Aberdeen Product. Credit Ass'n, 765
F.2d 109 (8th Cir. 1985).
Subsection (2) is also consistent with existing case law. American Standard Credit, Inc. v. National Cement Co.,
643 F.2d 248, 269-70 (5th Cir. 1981); but cf. Exxon Co., U.S.A. v. TLW Computer Indus., 37 U.C.C.Rep.Serv.
(Callaghan) 1052, 1057-58 (D.Mass.1983). Unlike Section 2A-304(2), this subsection does not contain any
requirement with respect to the time that the goods were entrusted to the merchant. In Section 2A-304(2) the
competition is between two customers of the merchant lessor; the time of entrusting was added as a criterion to
§ 2A-305. Sale or Sublease of Goods by Lessee.
Page 2 of 2
create additional protection to the customer who was first in time: the existing lessee. In subsection (2) the equities
between the competing interests were viewed as balanced.
There appears to be some overlap between Section 2-403(2) and Section 2A-305(2) with respect to a buyer in the
ordinary course of business. However, an examination of this Article's definition of buyer in the ordinary course of
business (Section 2A-103(1)(a)) makes clear that this reference was necessary to treat entrusting in the context of
a lease.
Subsection (3) states a rule of construction with respect to a transfer of goods from a lessee to a buyer or
sublessee, where the goods are subject to an existing lease and covered by a certificate of title. Cf. Section 2A-304
official comment.
Cross References:
Sections 2-403, 2A-103(1)(a), 2A-304 and 2A-305(2).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103(1)(a).
"Buyer in the ordinary course of business". Section 2A-103(1)(a).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Entrusting". Section 2-403(3).
"Good faith". Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Leasehold interest." Section 2A-103(1)(m).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessee in the ordinary course of business". Section 2A-103(1)(o).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Merchant". Section 2-104(1).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Sale". Section 2-106(1).
"Sublease". Section 2A-103(1)(w).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-306
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-306. Priority of Certain Liens Arising by Operation of Law.
If a person in the ordinary course of his [or her] business furnishes services or materials with respect to goods
subject to a lease contract, a lien upon those goods in the possession of that person given by statute or rule of law
for those materials or services takes priority over any interest of the lessor or lessee under the lease contract or this
Article unless the lien is created by statute and the statute provides otherwise or unless the lien is created by rule of
law and the rule of law provides otherwise.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 9-310.
Changes: The approach reflected in the provisions of Section 9-310 was included, but revised to conform to leasing
terminology and to expand the exception to the special priority granted to protected liens to cover liens created by
rule of law as well as those created by statute.
Purposes: This section should be interpreted to allow a qualified lessor or a qualified lessee to be the competing
lienholder if the statute or rule of law so provides. The reference to statute includes applicable regulations and
cases; these sources must be reviewed in resolving a priority dispute under this section.
Cross Reference:
Section 9-310.
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Lien". Section 2A-103(1)(r).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 2A-306. Priority of Certain Liens Arising by Operation of Law.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-307
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-307. Priority of Liens Arising by Attachment or Levy on, Security
Interests in, and Other Claims to Goods.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in Section 2A-306, a creditor of a lessee takes subject to the lease
contract.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (3) and in Sections 2A-306 and 2A-308, a creditor of a
lessor takes subject to the lease contract unless
the creditor holds a lien that attached to the goods before the lease contract became enforceable.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in Sections 9-317, 9-321, and 9-323, a lessee takes a leasehold interest
subject to a security interest held by a creditor of the lessor.
As amended in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: None for subsection (1). Subsection (2) is derived from Section 9-301, and subsections
(3) and (4) are derived from Section 9-307(1) and (3), respectively.
Changes: The provisions of Sections 9-301 and 9-307(1) and (3) were incorporated, and modified to reflect leasing
terminology and the basic concepts reflected in this Article.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) states a general rule of priority that a creditor of the lessee takes subject to the lease contract.
The term lessee (Section 2A-103(1)(n)) includes sublessee. Therefore, this subsection not only covers disputes
between the prime lessor and a creditor of the prime lessee but also disputes between the prime lessor, or the
sublessor, and a creditor of the sublessee. Section 2A-301 official comment 3(g). Further, by using the term
creditor (Section 1-201(12)), this subsection will cover disputes with a general creditor, a secured creditor, a lien
creditor and any representative of creditors. Section 2A-103(4).
2. Subsection (2) states a general rule of priority that a creditor of a lessor takes subject to the lease contract. Note
the discussion above with regard to the scope of these rules. Section 2A-301 official comment 3(g). Thus, the
section will not only cover disputes between the prime lessee and a creditor of the prime lessor but also disputes
between the prime lessee, or the sublessee, and a creditor of the sublessor.
3. To take priority over the lease contract, and the interests derived therefrom, the creditor must come within the
exception stated in subsection (2) or within one of the provisions of Article 9 mentioned in subsection (3).
Subsection (2) provides that where the creditor holds a lien (Section 2A-103(1)(r)) that attached before the lease
contract became enforceable (Section 2A-301), the creditor does not take subject to the lease. Subsection (3)
§ 2A-307. Priority of Liens Arising by Attachment or Levy on, Security Interests in, and Other Claims to Goods.
Page 2 of 2
provides that a lessee takes its leasehold interest subject to a security interest except as otherwise provided in
Sections 9-317, 9-321, or 9-323.
4. The rules of this section operate in favor of whichever party to the lease contract may enforce it, even if one party
perhaps may not, e.g., under Section 2A-201(1)(b).
Cross References:
Sections 1-201(12), 1-201(25), 1-201(37), 1-201(44), 2A-103(1)(n), 2A-103(1)(o), 2A-103(1)(r), 2A-103(4), 2A-
201(1)(b), 2A-301 official comment 3(g), Article 9, especially Sections 9-301, 9-307(1) and 9-307(3).
Definitional Cross References:
"Creditor". Section 1-201(12).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Knowledge" and "Knows". Section 1-201(25).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Leasehold interest". Section 2A-103(1)(m).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessee in the ordinary course of business". Section 2A-103(1)(o).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Lien". Section 2A-103(1)(r).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Pursuant to commitment". Section 2A-103(3).
"Security interest". Section 1-201(37).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-308
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-308. Special Rights of Creditors.
(1) A creditor of a lessor in possession of goods subject to a lease contract may treat the lease contract as
void if as against the creditor retention of possession by the lessor is fraudulent under any statute or rule of
law, but retention of possession in good faith and current course of trade by the lessor for a commercially
reasonable time after the lease contract becomes enforceable is not fraudulent.
(2) Nothing in this Article impairs the rights of creditors of a lessor if the lease contract (a) becomes
enforceable, not in current course of trade but in satisfaction of or as security for a pre-existing claim for
money, security, or the like, and (b) is made under circumstances which under any statute or rule of law
apart from this Article would constitute the transaction a fraudulent transfer or voidable preference.
(3) A creditor of a seller may treat a sale or an identification of goods to a contract for sale as void if as
against the creditor retention of possession by the seller is fraudulent under any statute or rule of law, but
retention of possession of the goods pursuant to a lease contract entered into by the seller as lessee and
the buyer as lessor in connection with the sale or identification of the goods is not fraudulent if the buyer
bought for value and in good faith.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-402(2) and (3)(b).
Changes: Rephrased and new material added to conform to leasing terminology and practice.
Purposes: Subsection (1) states a general rule of avoidance where the lessor has retained possession of goods if
such retention is fraudulent under any statute or rule of law. However, the subsection creates an exception under
certain circumstances for retention of possession of goods for a commercially reasonable time after the lease
contract becomes enforceable.
Subsection (2) also preserves the possibility of an attack on the lease by creditors of the lessor if the lease was
made in satisfaction of or as security for a pre-existing claim, and would constitute a fraudulent transfer or voidable
preference under other law.
Finally, subsection (3) states a new rule with respect to sale-leaseback transactions, i.e., transactions where the
seller sells goods to a buyer but possession of the goods is retained by the seller pursuant to a lease contract
between the buyer as lessor and the seller as lessee. Notwithstanding any statute or rule of law that would treat
such retention as fraud, whether per se, prima facie, or otherwise, the retention is not fraudulent if the buyer bought
for value (Section 1-201(44)) and in good faith (Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b)). Section 2A-103(3) and (4).
This provision overrides Section 2-402(2) to the extent it would otherwise apply to a sale-leaseback transaction.
Cross References:
§ 2A-308. Special Rights of Creditors.
Page 2 of 2
Sections 1-201(19), 1-201(44), 2-402(2) and 2A-103(4).
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103(1)(a).
"Contract". Section 1-201(11).
"Creditor". Section 1-201(12).
"Good faith". Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Money". Section 1-201(24).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Sale". Section 2-106(1).
"Seller". Section 2-103(1)(d).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-309
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-309. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Fixtures.
(1) In this section:
(a) goods are "fixtures" when they become so related to particular real estate that an interest in them
arises under real estate law;
(b) a "fixture filing" is the filing, in the office where a record of a mortgage on the real estate would be
filed or recorded, of a financing statement covering goods that are or are to become fixtures and
conforming to the requirements of Section 9-502(a) and (b);
(c) a lease is a "purchase money lease" unless the lessee has possession or use of the goods or the
right to possession or use of the goods before the lease agreement is enforceable;
(d) a mortgage is a "construction mortgage" to the extent it secures an obligation incurred for the
construction of an improvement on land including the acquisition cost of the land, if the recorded writing
so indicates; and
(e) "encumbrance" includes real estate mortgages and other liens on real estate and all other rights in
real estate that are not ownership interests.
(2) Under this Article a lease may be of goods that are fixtures or may continue in goods that become
fixtures, but no lease exists under this Article of ordinary building materials incorporated into an
improvement on land.
(3) This Article does not prevent creation of a lease of fixtures pursuant to real estate law.
(4) The perfected interest of a lessor of fixtures has priority over a conflicting interest of an encumbrancer
or owner of the real estate if:
(a) the lease is a purchase money lease, the conflicting interest of the encumbrancer or owner arises
before the goods become fixtures, the interest of the lessor is perfected by a fixture filing before the
goods become fixtures or within ten days thereafter, and the lessee has an interest of record in the real
estate or is in possession of the real estate; or
(b) the interest of the lessor is perfected by a fixture filing before the interest of the encumbrancer or
owner is of record, the lessor's interest has priority over any conflicting interest of a predecessor in title
of the encumbrancer or owner, and the lessee has an interest of record in the real estate or is in
possession of the real estate.
(5) The interest of a lessor of fixtures, whether or not perfected, has priority over the conflicting interest of
an encumbrancer or owner of the real estate if:
(a) the fixtures are readily removable factory or office machines, readily removable equipment that is
not primarily used or leased for use in the operation of the real estate, or readily removable
replacements of domestic appliances that are goods subject to a consumer lease, and before the
goods become fixtures the lease contract is enforceable; or
(b) the conflicting interest is a lien on the real estate obtained by legal or equitable proceedings after
the lease contract is enforceable; or
§ 2A-309. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Fixtures.
Page 2 of 4
(c) the encumbrancer or owner has consented in writing to the lease or has disclaimed an interest in
the goods as fixtures; or
(d) the lessee has a right to remove the goods as against the encumbrancer or owner. If the lessee's
right to remove terminates, the priority of the interest of the lessor continues for a reasonable time.
(6) Notwithstanding subsection (4)(a) but otherwise subject to subsections (4) and (5), the interest of a
lessor of fixtures, including the lessor's residual interest, is subordinate to the conflicting interest of an
encumbrancer of the real estate under a construction mortgage recorded before the goods become fixtures
if the goods become fixtures before the completion of the construction. To the extent given to refinance a
construction mortgage, the conflicting interest of an encumbrancer of the real estate under a mortgage has
this priority to the same extent as the encumbrancer of the real estate under the construction mortgage.
(7) In cases not within the preceding subsections, priority between the interest of a lessor of fixtures,
including the lessor's residual interest, and the conflicting interest of an encumbrancer or owner of the real
estate who is not the lessee is determined by the priority rules governing conflicting interests in real estate.
(8) If the interest of a lessor of fixtures, including the lessor's residual interest, has priority over all
conflicting interests of all owners and encumbrancers of the real estate, the lessor or the lessee may (i) on
default, expiration, termination, or cancellation of the lease agreement but subject to the agreement and
this Article, or (ii) if necessary to enforce other rights and remedies of the lessor or lessee under this Article,
remove the goods from the real estate, free and clear of all conflicting interests of all owners and
encumbrancers of the real estate, but the lessor or lessee must reimburse any encumbrancer or owner of
the real estate who is not the lessee and who has not otherwise agreed for the cost of repair of any physical
injury, but not for any diminution in value of the real estate caused by the absence of the goods removed or
by any necessity of replacing them. A person entitled to reimbursement may refuse permission to remove
until the party seeking removal gives adequate security for the performance of this obligation.
(9) Even though the lease agreement does not create a security interest, the interest of a lessor of fixtures,
including the lessor's residual interest, is perfected by filing a financing statement as a fixture filing for
leased goods that are or are to become fixtures in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Article on
Secured Transactions (Article 9).
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 9-313.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing terminology and to add new material.
Purposes:
1. While Section 9-313 provided a model for this section, certain provisions were substantially revised.
2. Section 2A-309(1)(c), which is new, defines purchase money lease to exclude leases where the lessee had
possession or use of the goods or the right thereof before the lease agreement became enforceable. This term is
used in subsection (4)(a) as one of the conditions that must be satisfied to obtain priority over the conflicting interest
of an encumbrancer or owner of the real estate.
§ 2A-309. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Fixtures.
Page 3 of 4
3. Section 2A-309(4), which states one of several priority rules found in this section, deletes reference to office
machines and the like (Section 9-313(4)(c)) as well as certain liens (Section 9-313(4)(d)). However, these items are
included in subsection (5), another priority rule that is more permissive than the rule found in subsection (4) as it
applies whether or not the interest of the lessor is perfected. In addition, subsection (5)(a) expands the scope of the
provisions of Section 9-313(4)(c) to include readily removable equipment not primarily used or leased for use in the
operation of real estate; the qualifier is intended to exclude from the expanded rule equipment integral to the
operation of real estate, e.g., heating and air conditioning equipment.
4. The rule stated in subsection (7) is more liberal than the rule stated in Section 9-313(7) in that issues of priority
not otherwise resolved in this subsection are left for resolution by the priority rules governing conflicting interests in
real estate, as opposed to the Section 9-313(7) automatic subordination of the security interest in fixtures. Note
that, for the purpose of this section, where the interest of an encumbrancer or owner of the real estate is paramount
to the interest of the lessor, the latter term includes the residual interest of the lessor.
5. The rule stated in subsection (8) is more liberal than the rule stated in Section 9-313(8) in that the right of
removal is extended to both the lessor and the lessee and the occasion for removal includes expiration, termination
or cancellation of the lease agreement, and enforcement of rights and remedies under this Article, as well as
default. The new language also provides that upon removal the goods are free and clear of conflicting interests of
owners and encumbrancers of the real estate.
6. Finally, subsection (9) provides a mechanism for the lessor of fixtures to perfect its interest by filing a financing
statement under the provisions of the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9), even though the lease agreement
does not create a security interest. Section 1-201(37). The relevant provisions of Article 9 must be interpreted
permissively to give effect to this mechanism as it implicitly expands the scope of Article 9 so that its filing
provisions apply to transactions that create a lease of fixtures, even though the lease agreement does not create a
security interest. This mechanism is similar to that provided in Section 2-326(3)(c) for the seller of goods on
consignment, even though the consignment is not "intended as security". Section 1-201(37). Given the lack of
litigation with respect to the mechanism created for consignment sales, this new mechanism should prove effective.
Cross References:
Sections 1-201(37), 2A-309(1)(c), 2A-309(4), Article 9, especially Sections 9-313, 9-313(4)(c), 9-313(4)(d), 9-
313(7), 9-313(8) and 9-408.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed". Section 1-201(3).
"Cancellation". Section 2A-103(1)(b).
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Consumer lease". Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
§ 2A-309. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Fixtures.
Page 4 of 4
"Lien". Section 2A-103(1)(r).
"Mortgage". Section 9-105(1)(j).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Security interest". Section 1-201(37).
"Termination". Section 2A-103(1)(z).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-310
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-310. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Accessions.
(1) Goods are "accessions" when they are installed in or affixed to other goods.
(2) The interest of a lessor or a lessee under a lease contract entered into before the goods became
accessions is superior to all interests in the whole except as stated in subsection (4).
(3) The interest of a lessor or a lessee under a lease contract entered into at the time or after the goods
became accessions is superior to all subsequently acquired interests in the whole except as stated in
subsection (4) but is subordinate to interests in the whole existing at the time the lease contract was made
unless the holders of such interests in the whole have in writing consented to the lease or disclaimed an
interest in the goods as part of the whole.
(4) The interest of a lessor or a lessee under a lease contract described in subsection (2) or (3) is
subordinate to the interest of
(a) a buyer in the ordinary course of business or a lessee in the ordinary course of business of any
interest in the whole acquired after the goods became accessions; or
(b) a creditor with a security interest in the whole perfected before the lease contract was made to the
extent that the creditor makes subsequent advances without knowledge of the lease contract.
(5) When under subsections (2) or (3) and (4) a lessor or a lessee of accessions holds an interest that is
superior to all interests in the whole, the lessor or the lessee may (a) on default, expiration, termination, or
cancellation of the lease contract by the other party but subject to the provisions of the lease contract and
this Article, or (b) if necessary to enforce his [or her] other rights and remedies under this Article, remove
the goods from the whole, free and clear of all interests in the whole, but he [or she] must reimburse any
holder of an interest in the whole who is not the lessee and who has not otherwise agreed for the cost of
repair of any physical injury but not for any diminution in value of the whole caused by the absence of the
goods removed or by any necessity for replacing them. A person entitled to reimbursement may refuse
permission to remove until the party seeking removal gives adequate security for the performance of this
obligation.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 9-314.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing terminology and to add new material.
Purposes: Subsections (1) and (2) restate the provisions of subsection (1) of Section 9-314 to clarify the definition
of accession and to add leasing terminology to the priority rule that applies when the lease is entered into before the
goods become accessions. Subsection (3) restates the provisions of subsection (2) of Section 9-314 to add leasing
§ 2A-310. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Accessions.
Page 2 of 3
terminology to the priority rule that applies when the lease is entered into on or after the goods become accessions.
Unlike the rule with respect to security interests, the lease is merely subordinate, not invalid.
Subsection (4) creates two exceptions to the priority rules stated in subsections (2) and (3). Subsection (4) deletes
the special priority rule found in the provisions of Section 9-314(3)(b) as the interests of the lessor and lessee are
entitled to greater protection.
Finally, subsection (5) is modeled on the provisions of Section 9-314(4) with respect to removal of accessions,
restated to reflect the parallel changes in Section 2A-309(8).
Neither this section nor Section 9-314 governs where the accession to the goods is not subject to the interest of a
lessor or a lessee under a lease contract and is not subject to the interest of a secured party under a security
agreement. This issue is to be resolved by the courts, case by case.
Cross References:
Sections 2A-309(8), 9-314(1), 9-314(2), 9-314(3)(b), 9-314(4).
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed". Section 1-201(3).
"Buyer in the ordinary course of business". Section 2A-103(1)(a).
"Cancellation". Section 2A-103(1)(b).
"Creditor". Section 1-201(12).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Holder". Section 1-201(20).
"Knowledge". Section 1-201(25).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessee in the ordinary course of business". Section 2A-103(1)(o).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Security interest". Section 1-201(37).
"Termination". Section 2A-103(1)(z).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
§ 2A-310. Lessor's and Lessee's Rights When Goods Become Accessions.
Page 3 of 3
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-311
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
3. EFFECT OF LEASE CONTRACT
§ 2A-311. Priority Subject to Subordination.
Nothing in this Article prevents subordination by agreement by any person entitled to priority.
As added in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to the adoption of section in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 9-316.
Purposes: The several preceding sections deal with questions of priority. This section is inserted to make it entirely
clear that a person entitled to priority may effectively agree to subordinate the claim. Only the person entitled to
priority may make such an agreement: the rights of such a person cannot be adversely affected by an agreement to
which that person is not a party.
Cross References:
Sections 1-102 and 2A-304 through 2A-310.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201(3).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-401
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
4. PERFORMANCE OF LEASE CONTRACT: REPUDIATED, SUBSTITUTED AND EXCUSED
§ 2A-401. Insecurity: Adequate Assurance of Performance.
(1) A lease contract imposes an obligation on each party that the other's expectation of receiving due
performance will not be impaired.
(2) If reasonable grounds for insecurity arise with respect to the performance of either party, the insecure
party may demand in writing adequate assurance of due performance. Until the insecure party receives
that assurance, if commercially reasonable the insecure party may suspend any performance for which he
[or she] has not already received the agreed return.
(3) A repudiation of the lease contract occurs if assurance of due performance adequate under the
circumstances of the particular case is not provided to the insecure party within a reasonable time, not to
exceed 30 days after receipt of a demand by the other party.
(4) Between merchants, the reasonableness of grounds for insecurity and the adequacy of any assurance
offered must be determined according to commercial standards.
(5) Acceptance of any nonconforming delivery or payment does not prejudice the aggrieved party's right to
demand adequate assurance of future performance.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-609.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology. Note that in the analogue to subsection (3) (Section
2-609(4)), the adjective "justified" modifies demand. The adjective was deleted here as unnecessary, implying no
substantive change.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201(2).
"Agreed". Section 1-201(3).
"Between merchants". Section 2-104(3).
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
§ 2A-401. Insecurity: Adequate Assurance of Performance.
Page 2 of 2
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Receipt". Section 2-103(1)(c).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-402
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
4. PERFORMANCE OF LEASE CONTRACT: REPUDIATED, SUBSTITUTED AND EXCUSED
§ 2A-402. Anticipatory Repudiation.
If either party repudiates a lease contract with respect to a performance not yet due under the lease
contract, the loss of which performance will substantially impair the value of the lease contract to the other,
the aggrieved party may:
(a) for a commercially reasonable time, await retraction of repudiation and performance by the
repudiating party;
(b) make demand pursuant to Section 2A-401 and await assurance of future performance adequate
under the circumstances of the particular case; or
(c) resort to any right or remedy upon default under the lease contract or this Article, even though the
aggrieved party has notified the repudiating party that the aggrieved party would await the repudiating
party's performance and assurance and has urged retraction. In addition, whether or not the aggrieved
party is pursuing one of the foregoing remedies, the aggrieved party may suspend performance or, if
the aggrieved party is the lessor, proceed in accordance with the provisions of this Article on the
lessor's right to identify goods to the lease contract notwithstanding default or to salvage unfinished
goods ( Section 2A-524).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-610.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201(2).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notifies". Section 1-201(26).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
§ 2A-402. Anticipatory Repudiation.
Page 2 of 2
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-403
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
4. PERFORMANCE OF LEASE CONTRACT: REPUDIATED, SUBSTITUTED AND EXCUSED
§ 2A-403. Retraction of Anticipatory Repudiation.
(1) Until the repudiating party's next performance is due, the repudiating party can retract the repudiation
unless, since the repudiation, the aggrieved party has cancelled the lease contract or materially changed
the aggrieved party's position or otherwise indicated that the aggrieved party considers the repudiation
final.
(2) Retraction may be by any method that clearly indicates to the aggrieved party that the repudiating party
intends to perform under the lease contract and includes any assurance demanded under Section 2A-401.
(3) Retraction reinstates a repudiating party's rights under a lease contract with due excuse and allowance
to the aggrieved party for any delay occasioned by the repudiation.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-611.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology. Note that in the analogue to subsection (2) (Section
2-611(2)) the adjective "justifiably" modifies demanded. The adjective was deleted here (as it was in Section 2A-
401) as unnecessary, implying no substantive change.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201(2).
"Cancellation". Section 2A-103(1)(b).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-404
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
4. PERFORMANCE OF LEASE CONTRACT: REPUDIATED, SUBSTITUTED AND EXCUSED
§ 2A-404. Substituted Performance.
(1) If without fault of the lessee, the lessor and the supplier, the agreed berthing, loading, or unloading
facilities fail or the agreed type of carrier becomes unavailable or the agreed manner of delivery otherwise
becomes commercially impracticable, but a commercially reasonable substitute is available, the substitute
performance must be tendered and accepted.
(2) If the agreed means or manner of payment fails because of domestic or foreign governmental
regulation:
(a) the lessor may withhold or stop delivery or cause the supplier to withhold or stop delivery unless the
lessee provides a means or manner of payment that is commercially a substantial equivalent; and
(b) if delivery has already been taken, payment by the means or in the manner provided by the
regulation discharges the lessee's obligation unless the regulation is discriminatory, oppressive, or
predatory.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-614.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed". Section 1-201(3).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Fault". Section 2A-103(1)(f).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-405
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
4. PERFORMANCE OF LEASE CONTRACT: REPUDIATED, SUBSTITUTED AND EXCUSED
§ 2A-405. Excused Performance.
Subject to Section 2A-404 on substituted performance, the following rules apply:
(a) Delay in delivery or nondelivery in whole or in part by a lessor or a supplier who complies with
paragraphs (b) and (c) is not a default under the lease contract if performance as agreed has been
made impracticable by the occurrence of a contingency the nonoccurrence of which was a basic
assumption on which the lease contract was made or by compliance in good faith with any applicable
foreign or domestic governmental regulation or order, whether or not the regulation or order later
proves to be invalid.
(b) If the causes mentioned in paragraph (a) affect only part of the lessor's or the supplier's capacity to
perform, he [or she] shall allocate production and deliveries among his [or her] customers but at his [or
her] option may include regular customers not then under contract for sale or lease as well as his [or
her] own requirements for further manufacture. He [or she] may so allocate in any manner that is fair
and reasonable.
(c) The lessor seasonably shall notify the lessee and in the case of a finance lease the supplier
seasonably shall notify the lessor and the lessee, if known, that there will be delay or nondelivery and, if
allocation is required under paragraph (b), of the estimated quota thus made available for the lessee.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-615.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed". Section 1-201(3).
"Contract". Section 1-201(11).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Good faith". Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b).
"Knows". Section 1-201(25).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
§ 2A-405. Excused Performance.
Page 2 of 2
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notifies". Section 1-201(26).
"Sale". Section 2-106(1).
"Seasonably". Section 1-204(3).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-406
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
4. PERFORMANCE OF LEASE CONTRACT: REPUDIATED, SUBSTITUTED AND EXCUSED
§ 2A-406. Procedure on Excused Performance.
(1) If the lessee receives notification of a material or indefinite delay or an allocation justified under Section
2A-405, the lessee may by written notification to the lessor as to any goods involved, and with respect to all
of the goods if under an installment lease contract the value of the whole lease contract is substantially
impaired ( Section 2A-510):
(a) terminate the lease contract ( Section 2A-505(2)); or
(b) except in a finance lease that is not a consumer lease, modify the lease contract by accepting the
available quota in substitution, with due allowance from the rent payable for the balance of the lease
term for the deficiency but without further right against the lessor.
(2) If, after receipt of a notification from the lessor under Section 2A-405, the lessee fails so to modify the
lease agreement within a reasonable time not exceeding 30 days, the lease contract lapses with respect to
any deliveries affected.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-616(1) and (2).
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology. Note that subsection 1(a) allows the lessee under a
lease, including a finance lease, the right to terminate the lease for excused performance (Sections 2A-404 and 2A-
405). However, subsection 1(b), which allows the lessee the right to modify the lease for excused performance,
excludes a finance lease that is not a consumer lease. This exclusion is compelled by the same policy that led to
codification of provisions with respect to irrevocable promises. Section 2A-407.
Definitional Cross References:
"Consumer lease". Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Installment lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(i).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
§ 2A-406. Procedure on Excused Performance.
Page 2 of 2
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notice". Section 1-201(25).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Receipt". Section 2-103(1)(c).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Termination". Section 2A-103(1)(z).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
"Written". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-407
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
4. PERFORMANCE OF LEASE CONTRACT: REPUDIATED, SUBSTITUTED AND EXCUSED
§ 2A-407. Irrevocable Promises: Finance Leases.
(1) In the case of a finance lease that is not a consumer lease the lessee's promises under the lease
contract become irrevocable and independent upon the lessee's acceptance of the goods.
(2) A promise that has become irrevocable and independent under subsection (1):
(a) is effective and enforceable between the parties, and by or against third parties including assignees
of the parties; and
(b) is not subject to cancellation, termination, modification, repudiation, excuse, or substitution without
the consent of the party to whom the promise runs.
(3) This section does not affect the validity under any other law of a covenant in any lease contract making
the lessee's promises irrevocable and independent upon the lessee's acceptance of the goods.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: None.
Purposes:
1. This section extends the benefits of the classic "hell or high water" clause to a finance lease that is not a
consumer lease. This section is self-executing; no special provision need be added to the contract. This section
makes covenants in a finance lease irrevocable and independent due to the function of the finance lessor in a three
party relationship: the lessee is looking to the supplier to perform the essential covenants and warranties. Section
2A-209. Thus, upon the lessee's acceptance of the goods the lessee's promises to the lessor under the lease
contract become irrevocable and independent. The provisions of this section remain subject to the obligation of
good faith (Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-203), and the lessee's revocation of acceptance (Section 2A-517).
2. The section requires the lessee to perform even if the lessor's performance after the lessee's acceptance is not in
accordance with the lease contract; the lessee may, however, have and pursue a cause of action against the
lessor, e.g., breach of certain limited warranties (Sections 2A-210 and 2A-211(1)). This is appropriate because the
benefit of the supplier's promises and warranties to the lessor under the supply contract and, in some cases, the
warranty of a manufacturer who is not the supplier, is extended to the lessee under the finance lease. Section 2A-
209. Despite this balance, this section excludes a finance lease that is a consumer lease. That a consumer be
obligated to pay notwithstanding defective goods or the like is a principle that is not tenable under case law ( Unico
v. Owen, 50 N.J. 101, 232 A.2d 405 (1967)), state statute (Unif.Consumer Credit Code §§ 3.403-.405, 7A U.L.A.
126-31 (1974), or federal statute (15 U.S.C. § 1666i (1982)).
§ 2A-407. Irrevocable Promises: Finance Leases.
Page 2 of 3
3. The relationship of the three parties to a transaction that qualifies as a finance lease is best demonstrated by a
hypothetical. A, the potential lessor, has been contacted by B, the potential lessee, to discuss the lease of an
expensive line of equipment that B has recently placed an order for with C, the manufacturer of such goods. The
negotiation is completed and A, as lessor, and B, as lessee, sign a lease of the line of equipment for a 60-month
term. B, as buyer, assigns the purchase order with C to A. If this transaction creates a lease (Section 2A-
103(1)(j)), this transaction should qualify as a finance lease. Section 2A-103(1)(g).
4. The line of equipment is delivered by C to B's place of business. After installation by C and testing by B, B
accepts the goods by signing a certificate of delivery and acceptance, a copy of which is sent by B to A and C. One
year later the line of equipment malfunctions and B falls behind in its manufacturing schedule.
5. Under this Article, because the lease is a finance lease, no warranty of fitness or merchantability is extended by
A to B. Sections 2A-212(1) and 2A-213. Absent an express provision in the lease agreement, application of
Section 2A-210 or Section 2A-211(1), or application of the principles of law and equity, including the law with
respect to fraud, duress, or the like (Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-103), B has no claim against A. B's obligation to pay
rent to A continues as the obligation became irrevocable and independent when B accepted the line of equipment
(Section 2A-407(1)). B has no right of set-off with respect to any part of the rent still due under the lease. Section
2A-508(6). However, B may have another remedy. Despite the lack of privity between B and C (the purchase
order with C having been assigned by B to A), B may have a claim against C. Section 2A-209(1).
6. This section does not address whether a "hell or high water" clause, i.e., a clause that is to the effect of this
section, is enforceable if included in a finance lease that is a consumer lease or a lease that is not a finance lease.
That issue will continue to be determined by the facts of each case and other law which this section does not affect.
Sections 2A-104, 2A-103(4), 9-206 and 9-318. However, with respect to finance leases that are not consumer
leases courts have enforced "hell or high water" clauses. In re O.P.M. Leasing Servs., 21 Bankr. 993, 1006
(Bankr.S.D.N.Y.1982).
7. Subsection (2) further provides that a promise that has become irrevocable and independent under subsection
(1) is enforceable not only between the parties but also against third parties. Thus, the finance lease can be
transferred or assigned without disturbing enforceability. Further, subsection (2) also provides that the promise
cannot, among other things, be cancelled or terminated without the consent of the lessor.
Cross References:
Sections 1-103, 1-203, 2A-103(1)(g), 2A-103(1)(j), 2A-103(4), 2A-104, 2A-209, 2A-209(1), 2A-210, 2A-211(1), 2A-
212(1), 2A-213, 2A-517(1)(b), 9-206 and 9-318.
Definitional Cross References:
"Cancellation". Section 2A-103(1)(b).
"Consumer lease". Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Termination". Section 2A-103(1)(z).
§ 2A-407. Irrevocable Promises: Finance Leases.
Page 3 of 3
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-501
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > A. IN GENERAL
§ 2A-501. Default: Procedure.
(1) Whether the lessor or the lessee is in default under a lease contract is determined by the lease
agreement and this Article.
(2) If the lessor or the lessee is in default under the lease contract, the party seeking enforcement has
rights and remedies as provided in this Article and, except as limited by this Article, as provided in the lease
agreement.
(3) If the lessor or the lessee is in default under the lease contract, the party seeking enforcement may
reduce the party's claim to judgment, or otherwise enforce the lease contract by self-help or any available
judicial procedure or nonjudicial procedure, including administrative proceeding, arbitration, or the like, in
accordance with this Article.
(4) Except as otherwise provided in Section 1-106(1) or this Article or the lease agreement, the rights and
remedies referred to in subsections (2) and (3) are cumulative.
(5) If the lease agreement covers both real property and goods, the party seeking enforcement may
proceed under this Part as to the goods, or under other applicable law as to both the real property and the
goods in accordance with that party's rights and remedies in respect of the real property, in which case this
Part does not apply.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 9-501.
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) is new and represents a departure from the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9) as the
subsection makes clear that whether a party to the lease agreement is in default is determined by this Article as
well as the agreement. Sections 2A-508 and 2A-523. It further departs from Article 9 in recognizing the potential
default of either party, a function of the bilateral nature of the obligations between the parties to the lease contract.
2. Subsection (2) is a version of the first sentence of Section 9-501(1), revised to reflect leasing terminology.
3. Subsection (3), an expansive version of the second sentence of Section 9-501(1), lists the procedures that may
be followed by the party seeking enforcement; in effect, the scope of the procedures listed in subsection (3) is
consistent with the scope of the procedures available to the foreclosing secured party.
§ 2A-501. Default: Procedure.
Page 2 of 2
4. Subsection (4) establishes that the parties' rights and remedies are cumulative. DeKoven, Leases of Equipment:
Puritan Leasing Company v. August, A Dangerous Decision, 12 U.S.F.L.Rev. 257, 276-80 (1978). Cumulation, and
largely unrestricted selection, of remedies is allowed in furtherance of the general policy of the Commercial Code,
stated in Section 1-106, that remedies be liberally administered to put the aggrieved party in as good a position as if
the other party had fully performed. Therefore, cumulation of, or selection among, remedies is available to the
extent necessary to put the aggrieved party in as good a position as it would have been in had there been full
performance. However, cumulation of, or selection among, remedies is not available to the extent that the
cumulation or selection would put the aggrieved party in a better position than it would have been in had there been
full performance by the other party.
5. Section 9-501(3), which, among other things, states that certain rules, to the extent they give rights to the debtor
and impose duties on the secured party, may not be waived or varied, was not incorporated in this Article. Given
the significance of freedom of contract in the development of the common law as it applies to bailments for hire and
the lessee's lack of an equity of redemption, there was no reason to impose that restraint.
Cross References:
Sections 1-106, 2A-508, 2A-523, Article 9, especially Sections 9-501(1) and 9-501(3).
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-502
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > A. IN GENERAL
§ 2A-502. Notice After Default.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article or the lease agreement, the lessor or lessee in default under the lease
contract is not entitled to notice of default or notice of enforcement from the other party to the lease agreement.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: None.
Purposes: This section makes clear that absent agreement to the contrary or provision in this Article to the contrary,
e.g., Section 2A-516(3)(a), the party in default is not entitled to notice of default or enforcement. While a review of
Part 5 of Article 9 leads to the same conclusion with respect to giving notice of default to the debtor, it is never
stated. Although Article 9 requires notice of disposition and strict foreclosure, the different scheme of lessors' and
lessees' rights and remedies developed under the common law, and codified by this Article, generally does not
require notice of enforcement; furthermore, such notice is not mandated by due process requirements. However,
certain sections of this Article do require notice. E.g., Section 2A-517(2) 2A-517(4) *.
Cross References:
Sections 2A-516(3)(a), 2A-517(2) 2A-517(4) *, and Article 9, esp. Part 5.
Definitional Cross References:
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notice". Section 1-201(25).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
* Previous incorrect cross reference corrected by Permanent Editorial Board action, November 1992.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-503
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > A. IN GENERAL
§ 2A-503. Modification or Impairment of Rights and Remedies.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the lease agreement may include rights and remedies for
default in addition to or in substitution for those provided in this Article and may limit or alter the measure of
damages recoverable under this Article.
(2) Resort to a remedy provided under this Article or in the lease agreement is optional unless the remedy
is expressly agreed to be exclusive. If circumstances cause an exclusive or limited remedy to fail of its
essential purpose, or provision for an exclusive remedy is unconscionable, remedy may be had as provided
in this Article.
(3) Consequential damages may be liquidated under Section 2A-504, or may otherwise be limited, altered,
or excluded unless the limitation, alteration, or exclusion is unconscionable. Limitation, alteration, or
exclusion of consequential damages for injury to the person in the case of consumer goods is prima facie
unconscionable but limitation, alteration, or exclusion of damages where the loss is commercial is not prima
facie unconscionable.
(4) Rights and remedies on default by the lessor or the lessee with respect to any obligation or promise
collateral or ancillary to the lease contract are not impaired by this Article.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-719 and 2-701.
Changes: Rewritten to reflect lease terminology and to clarify the relationship between this section and Section 2A-
504.
Purposes:
1. A significant purpose of this Part is to provide rights and remedies for those parties to a lease who fail to provide
them by agreement or whose rights and remedies fail of their essential purpose or are unenforceable. However, it
is important to note that this implies no restriction on freedom to contract. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-102(3). Thus,
subsection (1), a revised version of the provisions of Section 2-719(1), allows the parties to the lease agreement
freedom to provide for rights and remedies in addition to or in substitution for those provided in this Article and to
alter or limit the measure of damages recoverable under this Article. Except to the extent otherwise provided in this
Article (e.g., Sections 2A-105, 106 and 108(1) and (2)), this Part shall be construed neither to restrict the parties'
ability to provide for rights and remedies or to limit or alter the measure of damages by agreement, nor to imply
disapproval of rights and remedy schemes other than those set forth in this Part.
§ 2A-503. Modification or Impairment of Rights and Remedies.
Page 2 of 2
2. Subsection (2) makes explicit with respect to this Article what is implicit in Section 2-719 with respect to the
Article on Sales (Article 2): if an exclusive remedy is held to be unconscionable, remedies under this Article are
available. Section 2-719 official comment 1.
3. Subsection (3), a revision of Section 2-719(3), makes clear that consequential damages may also be liquidated.
Section 2A-504(1).
4. Subsection (4) is a revision of the provisions of Section 2-701. This subsection leaves the treatment of default
with respect to obligations or promises collateral or ancillary to the lease contract to other law. Sections 2A-103(4)
and 1-103. An example of such an obligation would be that of the lessor to the secured creditor which has provided
the funds to leverage the lessor's lease transaction; an example of such a promise would be that of the lessee, as
seller, to the lessor, as buyer, in a sale-leaseback transaction.
Cross References:
Sections 1-102(3), 1-103, Article 2, especially Sections 2-701, 2-719, 2-719(1), 2-719(3), 2-719 official comment 1,
and Sections 2A-103(4), 2A-105, 2A-106, 2A-108(1), 2A-108(2), and 2A-504.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreed". Section 1-201(3).
"Consumer goods". Section 9-109(1).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-504
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > A. IN GENERAL
§ 2A-504. Liquidation of Damages.
(1) Damages payable by either party for default, or any other act or omission, including indemnity for loss
or diminution of anticipated tax benefits or loss or damage to lessor's residual interest, may be liquidated in
the lease agreement but only at an amount or by a formula that is reasonable in light of the then anticipated
harm caused by the default or other act or omission.
(2) If the lease agreement provides for liquidation of damages, and such provision does not comply with
subsection (1), or such provision is an exclusive or limited remedy that circumstances cause to fail of its
essential purpose, remedy may be had as provided in this Article.
(3) If the lessor justifiably withholds or stops delivery of goods because of the lessee's default or insolvency
( Section 2A-525 or 2A-526), the lessee is entitled to restitution of any amount by which the sum of his [or
her] payments exceeds:
(a) the amount to which the lessor is entitled by virtue of terms liquidating the lessor's damages in
accordance with subsection (1); or
(b) in the absence of those terms, 20 percent of the then present value of the total rent the lessee was
obligated to pay for the balance of the lease term, or, in the case of a consumer lease, the lesser of
such amount or $500.
(4) A lessee's right to restitution under subsection (3) is subject to offset to the extent the lessor
establishes:
(a) a right to recover damages under the provisions of this Article other than subsection (1); and
(b) the amount or value of any benefits received by the lessee directly or indirectly by reason of the
lease contract.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-718(1), (2), (3) and 2-719(2).
Changes: Substantially rewritten.
Purposes: Many leasing transactions are predicated on the parties' ability to agree to an appropriate amount of
damages or formula for damages in the event of default or other act or omission. The rule with respect to sales of
goods (Section 2-718) may not be sufficiently flexible to accommodate this practice. Thus, consistent with the
common law emphasis upon freedom to contract with respect to bailments for hire, this section has created a
revised rule that allows greater flexibility with respect to leases of goods.
Subsection (1), a significantly modified version of the provisions of Section 2-718(1), provides for liquidation of
damages in the lease agreement at an amount or by a formula. Section 2-718(1) does not by its express terms
§ 2A-504. Liquidation of Damages.
Page 2 of 3
include liquidation by a formula; this change was compelled by modern leasing practice. Subsection (1), in a further
expansion of Section 2-718(1), provides for liquidation of damages for default as well as any other act or omission.
A liquidated damages formula that is common in leasing practice provides that the sum of lease payments past due,
accelerated future lease payments, and the lessor's estimated residual interest, less the net proceeds of disposition
(whether by sale or re-lease) of the leased goods is the lessor's damages. Tax indemnities, costs, interest and
attorney's fees are also added to determine the lessor's damages. Another common liquidated damages formula
utilizes a periodic depreciation allocation as a credit to the aforesaid amount in mitigation of a lessor's damages. A
third formula provides for a fixed number of periodic payments as a means of liquidating damages. Stipulated loss
or stipulated damage schedules are also common. Whether these formulae are enforceable will be determined in
the context of each case by applying a standard of reasonableness in light of the harm anticipated when the formula
was agreed to. Whether the inclusion of these formulae will affect the classification of the transaction as a lease or
a security interest is to be determined by the facts of each case. Section 1-201(37). E.g., In re Noack, 44 Bankr.
172, 174-75 (Bankr.E.D.Wis.1984).
This section does not incorporate two other tests that under sales law determine enforceability of liquidated
damages, i.e., difficulties of proof of loss and inconvenience or nonfeasibility of otherwise obtaining an adequate
remedy. The ability to liquidate damages is critical to modern leasing practice; given the parties' freedom to
contract at common law, the policy behind retaining these two additional requirements here was thought to be
outweighed. Further, given the expansion of subsection (1) to enable the parties to liquidate the amount payable
with respect to an indemnity for loss or diminution of anticipated tax benefits resulted in another change: the last
sentence of Section 2-718(1), providing that a term fixing unreasonably large liquidated damages is void as a
penalty, was also not incorporated. The impact of local, state and federal tax laws on a leasing transaction can
result in an amount payable with respect to the tax indemnity many times greater than the original purchase price of
the goods. By deleting the reference to unreasonably large liquidated damages the parties are free to negotiate a
formula, restrained by the rule of reasonableness in this section. These changes should invite the parties to
liquidate damages. Peters, Remedies for Breach of Contracts Relating to the Sale of Goods Under the Uniform
Commercial Code: A Roadmap for Article Two, 73 Yale L.J. 199, 278 (1963).
Subsection (2), a revised version of Section 2-719(2), provides that if the liquidated damages provision is not
enforceable or fails of its essential purpose, remedy may be had as provided in this Article.
Subsection (3)(b) of this section differs from subsection (2)(b) of Section 2-718; in the absence of a valid liquidated
damages amount or formula the lessor is permitted to retain 20 percent of the present value of the total rent
payable under the lease. The alternative limitation of $500 contained in Section 2-718 is deleted as unrealistically
low with respect to a lease other than a consumer lease.
Cross References:
Sections 1-201(37), 2-718, 2-718(1), 2-718(2)(b) and 2-719(2).
Definitional Cross References:
"Consumer lease". Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Insolvent". Section 1-201(23).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
§ 2A-504. Liquidation of Damages.
Page 3 of 3
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Lessor's residual interest". Section 2A-103(1)(q).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Present value". Section 2A-103(1)(u).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-505
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > A. IN GENERAL
§ 2A-505. Cancellation and Termination and Effect of Cancellation,
Termination, Rescission, or Fraud on Rights and Remedies.
(1) On cancellation of the lease contract, all obligations that are still executory on both sides are
discharged, but any right based on prior default or performance survives, and the cancelling party also
retains any remedy for default of the whole lease contract or any unperformed balance.
(2) On termination of the lease contract, all obligations that are still executory on both sides are discharged
but any right based on prior default or performance survives.
(3) Unless the contrary intention clearly appears, expressions of "cancellation," "rescission," or the like of
the lease contract may not be construed as a renunciation or discharge of any claim in damages for an
antecedent default.
(4) Rights and remedies for material misrepresentation or fraud include all rights and remedies available
under this Article for default.
(5) Neither rescission nor a claim for rescission of the lease contract nor rejection or return of the goods
may bar or be deemed inconsistent with a claim for damages or other right or remedy.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-106(3) and (4), 2-720 and 2-721.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Cancellation". Section 2A-103(1)(b).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Termination". Section 2A-103(1)(z).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 2A-505. Cancellation and Termination and Effect of Cancellation, Termination, Rescission, or Fraud on
Rights and Remedies.
Page 2 of 2
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-506
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > A. IN GENERAL
§ 2A-506. Statute of Limitations.
(1) An action for default under a lease contract, including breach of warranty or indemnity, must be
commenced within 4 years after the cause of action accrued. By the original lease contract the parties may
reduce the period of limitation to not less than one year.
(2) A cause of action for default accrues when the act or omission on which the default or breach of
warranty is based is or should have been discovered by the aggrieved party, or when the default occurs,
whichever is later. A cause of action for indemnity accrues when the act or omission on which the claim for
indemnity is based is or should have been discovered by the indemnified party, whichever is later.
(3) If an action commenced within the time limited by subsection (1) is so terminated as to leave available
a remedy by another action for the same default or breach of warranty or indemnity, the other action may
be commenced after the expiration of the time limited and within 6 months after the termination of the first
action unless the termination resulted from voluntary discontinuance or from dismissal for failure or neglect
to prosecute.
(4) This section does not alter the law on tolling of the statute of limitations nor does it apply to causes of
action that have accrued before this Article becomes effective.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-725.
Changes: Substantially rewritten.
Purposes: Subsection (1) does not incorporate the limitation found in Section 2-725(1) prohibiting the parties from
extending the period of limitation. Breach of warranty and indemnity claims often arise in a lease transaction; with
the passage of time such claims often diminish or are eliminated. To encourage the parties to commence litigation
under these circumstances makes little sense.
Subsection (2) states two rules for determining when a cause of action accrues. With respect to default, the rule of
Section 2-725(2) is not incorporated in favor of a more liberal rule of the later of the date when the default occurs or
when the act or omission on which it is based is or should have been discovered. With respect to indemnity, a
similarly liberal rule is adopted.
Cross References:
Sections 2-725(1) and 2-725(2).
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
§ 2A-506. Statute of Limitations.
Page 2 of 2
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201(2).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Termination". Section 2A-103(1)(z).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-507
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > A. IN GENERAL
§ 2A-507. Proof of Market Rent: Time and Place.
(1) Damages based on market rent ( Section 2A-519 or 2A-528) are determined according to the rent for
the use of the goods concerned for a lease term identical to the remaining lease term of the original lease
agreement and prevailing at the times specified in Sections 2A-519 and 2A-528.
(2) If evidence of rent for the use of the goods concerned for a lease term identical to the remaining lease
term of the original lease agreement and prevailing at the times or places described in this Article is not
readily available, the rent prevailing within any reasonable time before or after the time described or at any
other place or for a different lease term which in commercial judgment or under usage of trade would serve
as a reasonable substitute for the one described may be used, making any proper allowance for the
difference, including the cost of transporting the goods to or from the other place.
(3) Evidence of a relevant rent prevailing at a time or place or for a lease term other than the one described
in this Article offered by one party is not admissible unless and until he [or she] has given the other party
notice the court finds sufficient to prevent unfair surprise.
(4) If the prevailing rent or value of any goods regularly leased in any established market is in issue,
reports in official publications or trade journals or in newspapers or periodicals of general circulation
published as the reports of that market are admissible in evidence. The circumstances of the preparation of
the report may be shown to affect its weight but not its admissibility.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-723 and 2-724.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology. Sections 2A-519 and 2A-528 specify the times as of
which market rent is to be determined.
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Notice". Section 1-201(25).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
§ 2A-507. Proof of Market Rent: Time and Place.
Page 2 of 2
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Usage of trade". Section 1-205.
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-508
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-508. Lessee's Remedies.
(1) If a lessor fails to deliver the goods in conformity to the lease contract ( Section 2A-509) or repudiates
the lease contract ( Section 2A-402), or a lessee rightfully rejects the goods ( Section 2A-509) or justifiably
revokes acceptance of the goods ( Section 2A-517), then with respect to any goods involved, and with
respect to all of the goods if under an installment lease contract the value of the whole lease contract is
substantially impaired ( Section 2A-510), the lessor is in default under the lease contract and the lessee
may:
(a) cancel the lease contract ( Section 2A-505(1));
(b) recover so much of the rent and security as has been paid and is just under the circumstances;
(c) cover and recover damages as to all goods affected whether or not they have been identified to the
lease contract ( Sections 2A-518 and 2A-520), or recover damages for nondelivery ( Sections 2A-519
and 2A-520);
(d) exercise any other rights or pursue any other remedies provided in the lease contract.
(2) If a lessor fails to deliver the goods in conformity to the lease contract or repudiates the lease contract,
the lessee may also:
(a) if the goods have been identified, recover them ( Section 2A-522); or
(b) in a proper case, obtain specific performance or replevy the goods ( Section 2A-521).
(3) If a lessor is otherwise in default under a lease contract, the lessee may exercise the rights and pursue
the remedies provided in the lease contract, which may include a right to cancel the lease, and in Section
2A-519(3).
(4) If a lessor has breached a warranty, whether express or implied, the lessee may recover damages (
Section 2A-519(4)).
(5) On rightful rejection or justifiable revocation of acceptance, a lessee has a security interest in goods in
the lessee's possession or control for any rent and security that has been paid and any expenses
reasonably incurred in their inspection, receipt, transportation, and care and custody and may hold those
goods and dispose of them in good faith and in a commercially reasonable manner, subject to Section 2A-
527(5).
(6) Subject to the provisions of Section 2A-407, a lessee, on notifying the lessor of the lessee's intention to
do so, may deduct all or any part of the damages resulting from any default under the lease contract from
any part of the rent still due under the same lease contract.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 2A-508. Lessee's Remedies.
Page 2 of 4
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-711 and 2-717.
Changes: Substantially rewritten.
Purposes:
1. This section is an index to Sections 2A-509 through 522 which set out the lessee's rights and remedies after the
lessor's default. The lessor and the lessee can agree to modify the rights and remedies available under this Article;
they can, among other things, provide that for defaults other than those specified in subsection (1) the lessee can
exercise the rights and remedies referred to in subsection (1); and they can create a new scheme of rights and
remedies triggered by the occurrence of the default. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-102(3).
2. Subsection (1), a substantially rewritten version of the provisions of Section 2-711(1), lists three cumulative
remedies of the lessee where the lessor has failed to deliver conforming goods or has repudiated the contract, or
the lessee has rightfully rejected or justifiably revoked. Sections 2A-501(2) and (4). Subsection (1) also allows the
lessee to exercise any contractual remedy. This Article rejects any general doctrine of election of remedy. To
determine if one remedy bars another in a particular case is a function of whether the lessee has been put in as
good a position as if the lessor had fully performed the lease agreement. Use of multiple remedies is barred only if
the effect is to put the lessee in a better position than it would have been in had the lessor fully performed under the
lease. Sections 2A-103(4), 2A-501(4), and 1-106(1). Subsection (1)(b), in recognition that no bright line can be
created that would operate fairly in all installment lease cases and in recognition of the fact that a lessee may be
able to cancel the lease (revoke acceptance of the goods) after the goods have been in use for some period of
time, does not require that all lease payments made by the lessee under the lease be returned upon cancellation.
Rather, only such portion as is just of the rent and security payments made may be recovered. If a defect in the
goods is discovered immediately upon tender to the lessee and the goods are rejected immediately, then the lessee
should recover all payments made. If, however, for example, a 36-month equipment lease is terminated in the 12th
month because the lessor has materially breached the contract by failing to perform its maintenance obligations, it
may be just to return only a small part or none of the rental payments already made.
3. Subsection (2), a version of the provisions of Section 2-711(2) revised to reflect leasing terminology, lists two
alternative remedies for the recovery of the goods by the lessee; however, each of these remedies is cumulative
with respect to those listed in subsection (1).
4. Subsection (3) is new. It covers defaults which do not deprive the lessee of the goods and which are not so
serious as to justify rejection or revocation of acceptance under subsection (1). It also covers defaults for which the
lessee could have rejected or revoked acceptance of the goods but elects not to do so and retains the goods. In
either case, a lessee which retains the goods is entitled to recover damages as stated in Section 2A-519(3). That
measure of damages is "the loss resulting in the ordinary course of events from the lessor's default as determined
in any manner that is reasonable together with incidental and consequential damages, less expenses saved in
consequence of the lessor's breach."
5. Subsection (1)(d) and subsection (3) recognize that the lease agreement may provide rights and remedies in
addition to or different from those which Article 2A provides. In particular, subsection (3) provides that the lease
agreement may give the remedy of cancellation of the lease for defaults by the lessor that would not otherwise be
material defaults which would justify cancellation under subsection (1). If there is a right to cancel, there is, of
course, a right to reject or revoke acceptance of the goods.
6. Subsection (4) is new and merely adds to the completeness of the index by including a reference to the lessee's
recovery of damages upon the lessor's breach of warranty; such breach may not rise to the level of a default by the
lessor justifying revocation of acceptance. If the lessee properly rejects or revokes acceptance of the goods
because of a breach of warranty, the rights and remedies are those provided in subsection (1) rather than those in
Section 2A-519(4).
§ 2A-508. Lessee's Remedies.
Page 3 of 4
7. Subsection (5), a revised version of the provisions of Section 2-711(3), recognizes, on rightful rejection or
justifiable revocation, the lessee's security interest in goods in its possession and control. Section 9-113, which
recognized security interests arising under the Article on Sales (Article 2), was amended with the adoption of this
Article to reflect the security interests arising under this Article. Pursuant to Section 2A-511(4), a purchaser who
purchases goods from the lessee in good faith takes free of any rights of the lessor, or in the case of a finance
lease, the supplier. Such goods, however, must have been rightfully rejected and disposed of pursuant to Section
2A-511 or 2A-512. However, Section 2A-517(5) provides that the lessee will have the same rights and duties with
respect to goods where acceptance has been revoked as with respect to goods rejected. Thus, Section 2A-511(4)
will apply to the lessee's disposition of such goods.
8. Pursuant to Section 2A-527(5), the lessee must account to the lessor for the excess proceeds of such
disposition, after satisfaction of the claim secured by the lessee's security interest.
9. Subsection (6), a slightly revised version of the provisions of Section 2-717, sanctions a right of set-off by the
lessee, subject to the rule of Section 2A-407 with respect to irrevocable promises in a finance lease that is not a
consumer lease, and further subject to an enforceable "hell or high water" clause in the lease agreement. Section
2A-407 official comment. No attempt is made to state how the set-off should occur; this is to be determined by the
facts of each case.
10. There is no special treatment of the finance lease in this section. Absent supplemental principles of law and
equity to the contrary, in the case of most finance leases, following the lessee's acceptance of the goods, the
lessee will have no rights or remedies against the lessor, because the lessor's obligations to the lessee are minimal.
Sections 2A-210 and 2A-211(1). Since the lessee will look to the supplier for performance, this is appropriate.
Section 2A-209.
Cross References:
Sections 1-102(3), 1-103, 1-106(1), Article 2, especially Sections 2-711, 2-717 and Sections 2A-103(4), 2A-209, 2A-
210, 2A-211(1), 2A-407, 2A-501(2), 2A-501(4), 2A-509 through 2A-522, 2A-511(3), 2A-517(5), 2A-527(5) and
Section 9-113.
Definitional Cross References:
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Good faith". Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Installment lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(i).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notifies". Section 1-201(26).
"Receipt". Section 2-103(1)(c).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
§ 2A-508. Lessee's Remedies.
Page 4 of 4
"Security interest". Section 1-201(37).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-509
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-509. Lessee's Rights on Improper Delivery; Rightful Rejection.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Section 2A-510 on default in installment lease contracts, if the goods or the
tender or delivery fail in any respect to conform to the lease contract, the lessee may reject or accept the
goods or accept any commercial unit or units and reject the rest of the goods.
(2) Rejection of goods is ineffective unless it is within a reasonable time after tender or delivery of the
goods and the lessee seasonably notifies the lessor.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-601 and 2-602(1).
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Commercial unit". Section 2A-103(1)(c).
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Installment lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(i).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notifies". Section 1-201(26).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Seasonably". Section 1-204(3).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 2A-509. Lessee's Rights on Improper Delivery; Rightful Rejection.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-510
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-510. Installment Lease Contracts: Rejection and Default.
(1) Under an installment lease contract a lessee may reject any delivery that is nonconforming if the
nonconformity substantially impairs the value of that delivery and cannot be cured or the nonconformity is a
defect in the required documents; but if the nonconformity does not fall within subsection (2) and the lessor
or the supplier gives adequate assurance of its cure, the lessee must accept that delivery.
(2) Whenever nonconformity or default with respect to one or more deliveries substantially impairs the
value of the installment lease contract as a whole there is a default with respect to the whole. But, the
aggrieved party reinstates the installment lease contract as a whole if the aggrieved party accepts a
nonconforming delivery without seasonably notifying of cancellation or brings an action with respect only to
past deliveries or demands performance as to future deliveries.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-612.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201(2).
"Cancellation". Section 2A-103(1)(b).
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Installment lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(i).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notifies". Section 1-201(26).
"Seasonably". Section 1-204(3).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
§ 2A-510. Installment Lease Contracts: Rejection and Default.
Page 2 of 2
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-511
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-511. Merchant Lessee's Duties as to Rightfully Rejected Goods.
(1) Subject to any security interest of a lessee ( Section 2A-508(5)), if a lessor or a supplier has no agent
or place of business at the market of rejection, a merchant lessee, after rejection of goods in his [or her]
possession or control, shall follow any reasonable instructions received from the lessor or the supplier with
respect to the goods. In the absence of those instructions, a merchant lessee shall make reasonable
efforts to sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of the goods for the lessor's account if they threaten to decline in
value speedily. Instructions are not reasonable if on demand indemnity for expenses is not forthcoming.
(2) If a merchant lessee (subsection (1)) or any other lessee ( Section 2A-512) disposes of goods, he [or
she] is entitled to reimbursement either from the lessor or the supplier or out of the proceeds for reasonable
expenses of caring for and disposing of the goods and, if the expenses include no disposition commission,
to such commission as is usual in the trade, or if there is none, to a reasonable sum not exceeding 10
percent of the gross proceeds.
(3) In complying with this section or Section 2A-512, the lessee is held only to good faith. Good faith
conduct hereunder is neither acceptance or conversion nor the basis of an action for damages.
(4) A purchaser who purchases in good faith from a lessee pursuant to this section or Section 2A-512
takes the goods free of any rights of the lessor and the supplier even though the lessee fails to comply with
one or more of the requirements of this Article.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-603 and 2-706(5).
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology. This section, by its terms, applies to merchants as
well as others. Thus, in construing the section it is important to note that under this Act the term good faith is
defined differently for merchants (Section 2-103(1)(b)) than for others (Section 1-201(19)). Section 2A-103(3) and
(4).
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
"Good faith". Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
§ 2A-511. Merchant Lessee's Duties as to Rightfully Rejected Goods.
Page 2 of 2
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Merchant lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(t).
"Purchaser". Section 1-201(33).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Security interest". Section 1-201(37).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-512
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-512. Lessee's Duties as to Rightfully Rejected Goods.
(1) Except as otherwise provided with respect to goods that threaten to decline in value speedily ( Section
2A-511) and subject to any security interest of a lessee ( Section 2A-508(5)):
(a) the lessee, after rejection of goods in the lessee's possession, shall hold them with reasonable care
at the lessor's or the supplier's disposition for a reasonable time after the lessee's seasonable
notification of rejection;
(b) if the lessor or the supplier gives no instructions within a reasonable time after notification of
rejection, the lessee may store the rejected goods for the lessor's or the supplier's account or ship them
to the lessor or the supplier or dispose of them for the lessor's or the supplier's account with
reimbursement in the manner provided in Section 2A-511; but
(c) the lessee has no further obligations with regard to goods rightfully rejected.
(2) Action by the lessee pursuant to subsection (1) is not acceptance or conversion.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-602(2)(b) and (c) and 2-604.
Changes: Substantially rewritten.
Purposes: The introduction to subsection (1) references goods that threaten to decline in value speedily and not
perishables, the reference in Section 2-604, the statutory analogue. This is a change in style, not substance, as the
first phrase includes the second. Subparagraphs (a) and (c) are revised versions of the provisions of Section 2-
602(2)(b) and (c). Subparagraph (a) states the rule with respect to the lessee's treatment of goods in its
possession following rejection; subparagraph (b) states the rule regarding such goods if the lessor or supplier then
fails to give instructions to the lessee. If the lessee performs in a fashion consistent with subparagraphs (a) and (b),
subparagraph (c) exonerates the lessee.
Cross References:
Sections 2-602(2)(b), 2-602(2)(c) and 2-604.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
§ 2A-512. Lessee's Duties as to Rightfully Rejected Goods.
Page 2 of 2
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notification". Section 1-201(26).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Seasonably". Section 1-204(3).
"Security interest". Section 1-201(37).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-513
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-513. Cure by Lessor of Improper Tender or Delivery; Replacement.
(1) If any tender or delivery by the lessor or the supplier is rejected because nonconforming and the time
for performance has not yet expired, the lessor or the supplier may seasonably notify the lessee of the
lessor's or the supplier's intention to cure and may then make a conforming delivery within the time
provided in the lease contract.
(2) If the lessee rejects a nonconforming tender that the lessor or the supplier had reasonable grounds to
believe would be acceptable with or without money allowance, the lessor or the supplier may have a further
reasonable time to substitute a conforming tender if he [or she] seasonably notifies the lessee.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-508.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Money". Section 1-201(24).
"Notifies". Section 1-201(26).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Seasonably". Section 1-204(3).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 2A-513. Cure by Lessor of Improper Tender or Delivery; Replacement.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-514
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-514. Waiver of Lessee's Objections.
(1) In rejecting goods, a lessee's failure to state a particular defect that is ascertainable by reasonable
inspection precludes the lessee from relying on the defect to justify rejection or to establish default:
(a) if, stated seasonably, the lessor or the supplier could have cured it ( Section 2A-513); or
(b) between merchants if the lessor or the supplier after rejection has made a request in writing for a
full and final written statement of all defects on which the lessee proposes to rely.
(2) A lessee's failure to reserve rights when paying rent or other consideration against documents
precludes recovery of the payment for defects apparent in the documents.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-605.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Purposes: The principles applicable to the commercial practice of payment against documents (subsection 2) are
explained in official comment 4 to Section 2-605, the statutory analogue to this section.
Cross Reference:
Section 2-605 official comment 4.
Definitional Cross References:
"Between merchants". Section 2-104(3).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Seasonably". Section 1-204(3).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
"Writing". Section 1-201(46).
§ 2A-514. Waiver of Lessee's Objections.
Page 2 of 2
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-515
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-515. Acceptance of Goods.
(1) Acceptance of goods occurs after the lessee has had a reasonable opportunity to inspect the goods
and
(a) the lessee signifies or acts with respect to the goods in a manner that signifies to the lessor or the
supplier that the goods are conforming or that the lessee will take or retain them in spite of their
nonconformity; or
(b) the lessee fails to make an effective rejection of the goods ( Section 2A-509(2)).
(2) Acceptance of a part of any commercial unit is acceptance of that entire unit.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-606.
Changes: The provisions of Section 2-606(1)(a) were substantially rewritten to provide that the lessee's conduct
may signify acceptance. Further, the provisions of Section 2-606(1)(c) were not incorporated as irrelevant given the
lessee's possession and use of the leased goods.
Cross References:
Sections 2-606(1)(a) and 2-606(1)(c).
Definitional Cross References:
"Commercial unit". Section 2A-103(1)(c).
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-516
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-516. Effect of Acceptance of Goods; Notice of Default; Burden of
Establishing Default After Acceptance; Notice of Claim or Litigation to
Person Answerable Over.
(1) A lessee must pay rent for any goods accepted in accordance with the lease contract, with due
allowance for goods rightfully rejected or not delivered.
(2) A lessee's acceptance of goods precludes rejection of the goods accepted. In the case of a finance
lease, if made with knowledge of a nonconformity, acceptance cannot be revoked because of it. In any
other case, if made with knowledge of a nonconformity, acceptance cannot be revoked because of it unless
the acceptance was on the reasonable assumption that the nonconformity would be seasonably cured.
Acceptance does not of itself impair any other remedy provided by this Article or the lease agreement for
nonconformity.
(3) If a tender has been accepted:
(a) within a reasonable time after the lessee discovers or should have discovered any default, the
lessee shall notify the lessor and the supplier, if any, or be barred from any remedy against the party
not notified;
(b) except in the case of a consumer lease, within a reasonable time after the lessee receives notice of
litigation for infringement or the like ( Section 2A-211) the lessee shall notify the lessor or be barred
from any remedy over for liability established by the litigation; and
(c) the burden is on the lessee to establish any default.
(4) If a lessee is sued for breach of a warranty or other obligation for which a lessor or a supplier is
answerable over the following apply:
(a) The lessee may give the lessor or the supplier, or both, written notice of the litigation. If the notice
states that the person notified may come in and defend and that if the person notified does not do so
that person will be bound in any action against that person by the lessee by any determination of fact
common to the two litigations, then unless the person notified after seasonable receipt of the notice
does come in and defend that person is so bound.
(b) The lessor or the supplier may demand in writing that the lessee turn over control of the litigation
including settlement if the claim is one for infringement or the like ( Section 2A-211) or else be barred
from any remedy over. If the demand states that the lessor or the supplier agrees to bear all expense
and to satisfy any adverse judgment, then unless the lessee after seasonable receipt of the demand
does turn over control the lessee is so barred.
(5) Subsections (3) and (4) apply to any obligation of a lessee to hold the lessor or the supplier harmless
against infringement or the like ( Section 2A-211).
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
§ 2A-516. Effect of Acceptance of Goods; Notice of Default; Burden of Establishing Default After Acceptance;
Notice of Claim or Litigation to Person Answerable....
Page 2 of 3
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-607.
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (2) creates a special rule for finance leases, precluding revocation if acceptance is made with
knowledge of nonconformity with respect to the lease agreement, as opposed to the supply agreement; this is not
inequitable as the lessee has a direct claim against the supplier. Section 2A-209(1). Revocation of acceptance of a
finance lease is permitted if the lessee's acceptance was without discovery of the nonconformity (with respect to the
lease agreement, not the supply agreement) and was reasonably induced by the lessor's assurances. Section 2A-
517(1)(b). Absent exclusion or modification, the lessor under a finance lease makes certain warranties to the
lessee. Sections 2A-210 and 2A-211(1). Revocation of acceptance is not prohibited even after the lessee's
promise has become irrevocable and independent. Section 2A-407 official comment. Where the finance lease
creates a security interest, the rule may be to the contrary. General Elec. Credit Corp. of Tennessee v. Ger-Beck
Mach. Co., 806 F.2d 1207 (3rd Cir. 1986).
2. Subsection (3)(a) requires the lessee to give notice of default, within a reasonable time after the lessee
discovered or should have discovered the default. In a finance lease, notice may be given either to the supplier, the
lessor, or both, but remedy is barred against the party not notified. In a finance lease, the lessor is usually not liable
for defects in the goods and the essential notice is to the supplier. While notice to the finance lessor will often not
give any additional rights to the lessee, it would be good practice to give the notice since the finance lessor has an
interest in the goods. Subsection (3)(a) does not use the term finance lease, but the definition of supplier is a
person from whom a lessor buys or leases goods to be leased under a finance lease. Section 2A-103(1)(x).
Therefore, there can be a "supplier" only in a finance lease. Subsection (4) applies similar notice rules as to lessors
and suppliers if a lessee is sued for a breach of warranty or other obligation for which a lessor or supplier is
answerable over.
3. Subsection (3)(b) requires the lessee to give the lessor notice of litigation for infringement or the like. There is an
exception created in the case of a consumer lease. While such an exception was considered for a finance lease, it
was not created because it was not necessary-the lessor in a finance lease does not give a warranty against
infringement. Section 2A-211(2). Even though not required under subsection (3)(b), the lessee who takes under a
finance lease should consider giving notice of litigation for infringement or the like to the supplier, because the
lessee obtains the benefit of the suppliers' promises subject to the suppliers' defenses or claims. Sections 2A-
209(1) and 2-607(3)(b).
Cross References:
Sections 2-607(3)(b), 2A-103(1)(x), 2A-209(1), 2A-210, 2A-211(1), 2A-211(2), 2A-407 official comment and 2A-
517(1)(b).
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
"Agreement". Section 1-201(3).
"Burden of establishing". Section 1-201(8).
§ 2A-516. Effect of Acceptance of Goods; Notice of Default; Burden of Establishing Default After Acceptance;
Notice of Claim or Litigation to Person Answerable....
Page 3 of 3
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Consumer lease". Section 2A-103(1)(e).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Discover". Section 1-201(25).
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Knowledge". Section 1-201(25).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notice". Section 1-201(25).
"Notifies". Section 1-201(26).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Receipt". Section 2-103(1)(c).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Seasonably". Section 1-204(3).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
"Written". Section 1-201(46).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-517
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-517. Revocation of Acceptance of Goods.
(1) A lessee may revoke acceptance of a lot or commercial unit whose nonconformity substantially impairs
its value to the lessee if the lessee has accepted it:
(a) except in the case of a finance lease, on the reasonable assumption that its nonconformity would
be cured and it has not been seasonably cured; or
(b) without discovery of the nonconformity if the lessee's acceptance was reasonably induced either by
the lessor's assurances or, except in the case of a finance lease, by the difficulty of discovery before
acceptance.
(2) Except in the case of a finance lease that is not a consumer lease, a lessee may revoke acceptance of
a lot or commercial unit if the lessor defaults under the lease contract and the default substantially impairs
the value of that lot or commercial unit to the lessee.
(3) If the lease agreement so provides, the lessee may revoke acceptance of a lot or commercial unit
because of other defaults by the lessor.
(4) Revocation of acceptance must occur within a reasonable time after the lessee discovers or should
have discovered the ground for it and before any substantial change in condition of the goods which is not
caused by the nonconformity. Revocation is not effective until the lessee notifies the lessor.
(5) A lessee who so revokes has the same rights and duties with regard to the goods involved as if the
lessee had rejected them.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-608.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology. Note that in the case of a finance lease the lessee
retains a limited right to revoke acceptance. Sections 2A-517(1)(b) and 2A-516 official comment. New subsections
(2) and (3) added.
Purposes:
1. The section states the situations under which the lessee may return the goods to the lessor and cancel the lease.
Subsection (2) recognizes that the lessor may have continuing obligations under the lease and that a default as to
those obligations may be sufficiently material to justify revocation of acceptance of the leased items and
cancellation of the lease by the lessee. For example, a failure by the lessor to fulfill its obligation to maintain leased
§ 2A-517. Revocation of Acceptance of Goods.
Page 2 of 2
equipment or to supply other goods which are necessary for the operation of the leased equipment may justify
revocation of acceptance and cancellation of the lease.
2. Subsection (3) specifically provides that the lease agreement may provide that the lessee can revoke acceptance
for defaults by the lessor which in the absence of such an agreement might not be considered sufficiently serious to
justify revocation. That is, the parties are free to contract on the question of what defaults are so material that the
lessee can cancel the lease.
Cross Reference:
Section 2A-516 official comment.
Definitional Cross References:
"Commercial unit". Section 2A-103(1)(c).
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Discover". Section 1-201(25).
"Finance lease". Section 2A-103(1)(g).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Lot". Section 2A-103(1)(s).
"Notifies". Section 1-201(26).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Seasonably". Section 1-204(3).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-518
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-518. Cover; Substitute Goods.
(1) After a default by a lessor under the lease contract of the type described in Section 2A-508(1), or, if
agreed, after other default by the lessor, the lessee may cover by making any purchase or lease of or
contract to purchase or lease goods in substitution for those due from the lessor.
(2) Except as otherwise provided with respect to damages liquidated in the lease agreement ( Section 2A-
504) or otherwise determined pursuant to agreement of the parties ( Sections 1-102(3) and 2A-503), if a
lessee's cover is by a lease agreement substantially similar to the original lease agreement and the new
lease agreement is made in good faith and in a commercially reasonable manner, the lessee may recover
from the lessor as damages (i) the present value, as of the date of the commencement of the term of the
new lease agreement, of the rent under the new lease agreement applicable to that period of the new lease
term which is comparable to the then remaining term of the original lease agreement minus the present
value as of the same date of the total rent for the then remaining lease term of the original lease
agreement, and (ii) any incidental or consequential damages, less expenses saved in consequence of the
lessor's default.
(3) If a lessee's cover is by lease agreement that for any reason does not qualify for treatment under
subsection (2), or is by purchase or otherwise, the lessee may recover from the lessor as if the lessee had
elected not to cover and Section 2A-519 governs.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-712.
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1) allows the lessee to take action to fix its damages after default by the lessor. Such action may
consist of the lease of goods. The decision to cover is a function of commercial judgment, not a statutory mandate
replete with sanctions for failure to comply. Cf. Section 9-507.
2. Subsection (2) states a rule for determining the amount of lessee's damages provided that there is no agreement
to the contrary. The lessee's damages will be established using the new lease agreement as a measure if the
following three criteria are met: (i) the lessee's cover is by lease agreement, (ii) the lease agreement is substantially
similar to the original lease agreement, and (iii) such cover was effected in good faith, and in a commercially
reasonable manner. Thus, the lessee will be entitled to recover from the lessor the present value, as of the date of
commencement of the term of the new lease agreement, of the rent under the new lease agreement applicable to
§ 2A-518. Cover; Substitute Goods.
Page 2 of 3
that period which is comparable to the then remaining term of the original lease agreement less the present value of
the rent reserved for the remaining term under the original lease, together with incidental or consequential damages
less expenses saved in consequence of the lessor's default. Consequential damages may include loss suffered by
the lessee because of deprivation of the use of the goods during the period between the default and the acquisition
of the goods under the new lease agreement. If the lessee's cover does not satisfy the criteria of subsection (2),
Section 2A-519 governs.
3. Two of the three criteria to be met by the lessee are familiar, but the concept of the new lease agreement being
substantially similar to the original lease agreement is not. Given the many variables facing a party who intends to
lease goods and the rapidity of change in the market place, the policy decision was made not to draft with
specificity. It was thought unwise to seek to establish certainty at the cost of fairness. Thus, the decision of
whether the new lease agreement is substantially similar to the original will be determined case by case.
4. While the section does not draw a bright line, it is possible to describe some of the factors that should be
considered in finding that a new lease agreement is substantially similar to the original. First, the goods subject to
the new lease agreement should be examined. For example, in a lease of computer equipment the new lease
might be for more modern equipment. However, it may be that at the time of the lessor's breach it was not possible
to obtain the same type of goods in the market place. Because the lessee's remedy under Section 2A-519 is
intended to place the lessee in essentially the same position as if he had covered, if goods similar to those to have
been delivered under the original lease are not available, then the computer equipment in this hypothetical should
qualify as a commercially reasonable substitute. See Section 2-712(1).
5. Second, the various elements of the new lease agreement should also be examined. Those elements include
the presence or absence of options to purchase or release; the lessor's representations, warranties and covenants
to the lessee, as well as those to be provided by the lessee to the lessor; and the services, if any, to be provided by
the lessor or by the lessee. All of these factors allocate cost and risk between the lessor and the lessee and thus
affect the amount of rent to be paid. If the differences between the original lease and the new lease can be easily
valued, it would be appropriate for a court to adjust the difference in rental to take account of the difference between
the two leases, find that the new lease is substantially similar to the old lease, and award cover damages under this
section. If, for example, the new lease requires the lessor to insure the goods in the hands of the lessee, while the
original lease required the lessee to insure, the usual cost of such insurance could be deducted from the rent due
under the new lease before determining the difference in rental between the two leases.
6. Having examined the goods and the agreement, the test to be applied is whether, in light of these comparisons,
the new lease agreement is substantially similar to the original lease agreement. These findings should not be
made with scientific precision, as they are a function of economics, nor should they be made independently with
respect to the goods and each element of the agreement, as it is important that a sense of commercial judgment
pervade the finding. To establish the new lease as a proper measure of damage under subsection (2), these
factors, taken as a whole, must result in a finding that the new lease agreement is substantially similar to the
original.
7. A new lease can be substantially similar to the original lease even though its term extends beyond the remaining
term of the original lease, so long as both (a) the lease terms are commercially comparable (e.g., it is highly unlikely
that a one-month rental and a five-year lease would reflect similar commercial realities), and (b) the court can fairly
apportion a part of the rental payments under the new lease to that part of the term of the new lease which is
comparable to the remaining lease term under the original lease. Also, the lease term of the new lease may be
comparable to the term of the original lease even though the beginning and ending dates of the two leases are not
the same. For example, a two-month lease of agricultural equipment for the months of August and September may
be comparable to a two-month lease running from the 15th of August to the 15th of October if in the particular
location two-month leases beginning on August 15th are basically interchangeable with two-month leases beginning
August 1st. Similarly, the term of a one-year truck lease beginning on the 15th of January may be comparable to
the term of a one-year truck lease beginning January 2d. If the lease terms are found to be comparable, the court
may base cover damages on the entire difference between the costs under the two leases.
§ 2A-518. Cover; Substitute Goods.
Page 3 of 3
Cross References:
Sections 2-712(1), 2A-519 and 9-507.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201(3).
"Contract". Section 1-201(11).
"Good faith". Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Present value". Section 2A-103(1)(u).
"Purchase". Section 2A-103(1)(v).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-519
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-519. Lessee's Damages for Non-delivery, Repudiation, Default, and
Breach of Warranty in Regard to Accepted Goods.
(1) Except as otherwise provided with respect to damages liquidated in the lease agreement ( Section 2A-
504) or otherwise determined pursuant to agreement of the parties ( Sections 1-102(3) and 2A-503), if a
lessee elects not to cover or a lessee elects to cover and the cover is by lease agreement that for any
reason does not qualify for treatment under Section 2A-518(2), or is by purchase or otherwise, the measure
of damages for non-delivery or repudiation by the lessor or for rejection or revocation of acceptance by the
lessee is the present value, as of the date of the default, of the then market rent minus the present value as
of the same date of the original rent, computed for the remaining lease term of the original lease
agreement, together with incidental and consequential damages, less expenses saved in consequence of
the lessor's default.
(2) Market rent is to be determined as of the place for tender or, in cases of rejection after arrival or
revocation of acceptance, as of the place of arrival.
(3) Except as otherwise agreed, if the lessee has accepted goods and given notification ( Section 2A-
516(3)), the measure of damages for non-conforming tender or delivery or other default by a lessor is the
loss resulting in the ordinary course of events from the lessor's default as determined in any manner that is
reasonable together with incidental and consequential damages, less expenses saved in consequence of
the lessor's default.
(4) Except as otherwise agreed, the measure of damages for breach of warranty is the present value at the
time and place of acceptance of the difference between the value of the use of the goods accepted and the
value if they had been as warranted for the lease term, unless special circumstances show proximate
damages of a different amount, together with incidental and consequential damages, less expenses saved
in consequence of the lessor's default or breach of warranty.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-713 and 2-714.
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1), a revised version of the provisions of Section 2-713(1), states the basic rule governing the
measure of lessee's damages for non-delivery or repudiation by the lessor or for rightful rejection or revocation of
§ 2A-519. Lessee's Damages for Non-delivery, Repudiation, Default, and Breach of Warranty in Regard to
Accepted Goods.
Page 2 of 3
acceptance by the lessee. This measure will apply, absent agreement to the contrary, if the lessee does not cover
or if the cover does not qualify under Section 2A-518. There is no sanction for cover that does not qualify.
2. The measure of damage is the present value, as of the date of default, of the market rent for the remaining term
of the lease less the present value of the original rent for the remaining term of the lease, plus incidental and
consequential damages less expenses saved in consequence of the default. Note that the reference in Section 2A-
519(1) is to the date of default not to the date of an event of default. An event of default under a lease agreement
becomes a default under a lease agreement only after the expiration of any relevant period of grace and
compliance with any notice requirements under this Article and the lease agreement. American Bar Foundation,
Commentaries on Indentures, § 5-1, at 216-217 (1971). Section 2A-501(1). This conclusion is also a function of
whether, as a matter of fact or law, the event of default has been waived, suspended or cured. Sections 2A-103(4)
and 1-103.
3. Subsection (2), a revised version of the provisions of Section 2-713(2), states the rule with respect to determining
market rent.
4. Subsection (3), a revised version of the provisions of Section 2-714(1) and (3), states the measure of damages
where goods have been accepted and acceptance is not revoked. The subsection applies both to defaults which
occur at the inception of the lease and to defaults which occur subsequently, such as failure to comply with an
obligation to maintain the leased goods. The measure in essence is the loss, in the ordinary course of events,
flowing from the default.
5. Subsection (4), a revised version of the provisions of Section 2-714(2), states the measure of damages for
breach of warranty. The measure in essence is the present value of the difference between the value of the goods
accepted and of the goods if they had been as warranted.
6. Subsections (1), (3) and (4) specifically state that the parties may by contract vary the damages rules stated in
those subsections.
Cross References:
Sections 2-713(1), 2-713(2), 2-714 and Section 2A-518.
Definitional Cross References:
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notification". Section 1-201(26).
"Present value". Section 2A-103(1)(u).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
§ 2A-519. Lessee's Damages for Non-delivery, Repudiation, Default, and Breach of Warranty in Regard to
Accepted Goods.
Page 3 of 3
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-520
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-520. Lessee's Incidental and Consequential Damages.
(1) Incidental damages resulting from a lessor's default include expenses reasonably incurred in
inspection, receipt, transportation, and care and custody of goods rightfully rejected or goods the
acceptance of which is justifiably revoked, any commercially reasonable charges, expenses or
commissions in connection with effecting cover, and any other reasonable expense incident to the default.
(2) Consequential damages resulting from a lessor's default include:
(a) any loss resulting from general or particular requirements and needs of which the lessor at the time
of contracting had reason to know and which could not reasonably be prevented by cover or otherwise;
and
(b) injury to person or property proximately resulting from any breach of warranty.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-715.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing terminology and practices.
Purposes: Subsection (1), a revised version of the provisions of Section 2-715(1), lists some examples of incidental
damages resulting from a lessor's default; the list is not exhaustive. Subsection (1) makes clear that it applies not
only to rightful rejection, but also to justifiable revocation.
Subsection (2), a revised version of the provisions of Section 2-715(2), lists some examples of consequential
damages resulting from a lessor's default; the list is not exhaustive.
Cross References:
Section 2-715.
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Knows". Section 1-201(25).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
§ 2A-520. Lessee's Incidental and Consequential Damages.
Page 2 of 2
"Receipt". Section 2-103(1)(c).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-521
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-521. Lessee's Right to Specific Performance or Replevin.
(1) Specific performance may be decreed if the goods are unique or in other proper circumstances.
(2) A decree for specific performance may include any terms and conditions as to payment of the rent,
damages, or other relief that the court deems just.
(3) A lessee has a right of replevin, detinue, sequestration, claim and delivery, or the like for goods
identified to the lease contract if after reasonable effort the lessee is unable to effect cover for those goods
or the circumstances reasonably indicate that the effort will be unavailing.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-716.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology, and to expand the reference to the right of replevin
in subsection (3) to include other similar rights of the lessee.
Definitional Cross References:
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Term". Section 1-201(42).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-522
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > B. DEFAULT BY LESSOR
§ 2A-522. Lessee's Right to Goods on Lessor's Insolvency.
(1) Subject to subsection (2) and even though the goods have not been shipped, a lessee who has paid a
part or all of the rent and security for goods identified to a lease contract ( Section 2A-217) on making and
keeping good a tender of any unpaid portion of the rent and security due under the lease contract may
recover the goods identified from the lessor if the lessor becomes insolvent within 10 days after receipt of
the first installment of rent and security.
(2) A lessee acquires the right to recover goods identified to a lease contract only if they conform to the
lease contract.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-502.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Insolvent". Section 1-201(23).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Receipt". Section 2-103(1)(c).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-523
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > C. DEFAULT BY LESSEE
§ 2A-523. Lessor's Remedies.
(1) If a lessee wrongfully rejects or revokes acceptance of goods or fails to make a payment when due or
repudiates with respect to a part or the whole, then, with respect to any goods involved, and with respect to
all of the goods if under an installment lease contract the value of the whole lease contract is substantially
impaired ( Section 2A-510), the lessee is in default under the lease contract and the lessor may:
(a) cancel the lease contract ( Section 2A-505(1));
(b) proceed respecting goods not identified to the lease contract ( Section 2A-524);
(c) withhold delivery of the goods and take possession of goods previously delivered ( Section 2A-
525);
(d) stop delivery of the goods by any bailee ( Section 2A-526);
(e) dispose of the goods and recover damages ( Section 2A-527), or retain the goods and recover
damages ( Section 2A-528), or in a proper case recover rent ( Section 2A-529);
(f) exercise any other rights or pursue any other remedies provided in the lease contract.
(2) If a lessor does not fully exercise a right or obtain a remedy to which the lessor is entitled under
subsection (1), the lessor may recover the loss resulting in the ordinary course of events from the lessee's
default as determined in any reasonable manner, together with incidental damages, less expenses saved in
consequence of the lessee's default.
(3) If a lessee is otherwise in default under a lease contract, the lessor may exercise the rights and pursue
the remedies provided in the lease contract, which may include a right to cancel the lease. In addition,
unless otherwise provided in the lease contract:
(a) if the default substantially impairs the value of the lease contract to the lessor, the lessor may
exercise the rights and pursue the remedies provided in subsections (1) or (2); or
(b) if the default does not substantially impair the value of the lease contract to the lessor, the lessor
may recover as provided in subsection (2).
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-703.
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
§ 2A-523. Lessor's Remedies.
Page 2 of 5
1. Subsection (1) is an index to Sections 2A-524 through 2A-531 and states that the remedies provided in those
sections are available for the defaults referred to in subsection (1): wrongful rejection or revocation of acceptance,
failure to make a payment when due, or repudiation. In addition, remedies provided in the lease contract are
available. Subsection (2) sets out a remedy if the lessor does not pursue to completion a right or actually obtain a
remedy available under subsection (1), and subsection (3) sets out statutory remedies for defaults not specifically
referred to in subsection (1). Subsection (3) provides that, if any default by the lessee other than those specifically
referred to in subsection (1) is material, the lessor can exercise the remedies provided in subsection (1) or (2);
otherwise the available remedy is as provided in subsection (3). A lessor who has brought an action seeking or has
nonjudicially pursued one or more of the remedies available under subsection (1) may amend so as to claim or may
nonjudicially pursue a remedy under subsection (2) unless the right or remedy first chosen has been pursued to an
extent actually inconsistent with the new course of action. The intent of the provision is to reject the doctrine of
election of remedies and to permit an alteration of course by the lessor unless such alteration would actually have
an effect on the lessee that would be unreasonable under the circumstances. Further, the lessor may pursue
remedies under both subsections (1) and (2) unless doing so would put the lessor in a better position than it would
have been in had the lessee fully performed.
2. The lessor and the lessee can agree to modify the rights and remedies available under the Article; they can,
among other things, provide that for defaults other than those specified in subsection (1) the lessor can exercise the
rights and remedies referred to in subsection (1), whether or not the default would otherwise be held to substantially
impair the value of the lease contract to the lessor; they can also create a new scheme of rights and remedies
triggered by the occurrence of the default. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-102(3).
3. Subsection (1), a substantially rewritten version of Section 2-703, lists various cumulative remedies of the lessor
where the lessee wrongfully rejects or revokes acceptance, fails to make a payment when due, or repudiates.
Section 2A-501(2) and (4). The subsection also allows the lessor to exercise any contractual remedy.
4. This Article rejects any general doctrine of election of remedy. Whether, in a particular case, one remedy bars
another, is a function of whether lessor has been put in as good a position as if the lessee had fully performed the
lease contract. Multiple remedies are barred only if the effect is to put the lessor in a better position than it would
have been in had the lessee fully performed under the lease. Sections 2A-103(4), 2A-501(4), and 1-106(1).
5. Hypothetical: To better understand the application of subparagraphs (a) through (e), it is useful to review a
hypothetical. Assume that A is a merchant in the business of selling and leasing new bicycles of various types. B
is about to engage in the business of subleasing bicycles to summer residents of and visitors to an island resort. A,
as lessor, has agreed to lease 60 bicycles to B. While there is one master lease, deliveries and terms are
staggered. 20 bicycles are to be delivered by A to B's island location on June 1; the term of the lease of these
bicycles is four months. 20 bicycles are to be delivered by A to B's island location on July 1; the term of the lease of
these bicycles is three months. Finally, 20 bicycles are to be delivered by A to B's island location on August 1; the
term of the lease of these bicycles is two months. B is obligated to pay rent to A on the 15th day of each month
during the term for the lease. Rent is $50 per month, per bicycle. B has no option to purchase or release and must
return the bicycles to A at the end of the term, in good condition, reasonable wear and tear excepted. Since the
retail price of each bicycle is $400 and bicycles used in the retail rental business have a useful economic life of 36
months, this transaction creates a lease. Sections 2A-103(1)(j) and 1-201(37).
6. A's current inventory of bicycles is not large. Thus, upon signing the lease with B in February, A agreed to
purchase 60 new bicycles from A's principal manufacturer, with special instructions to drop ship the bicycles to B's
island location in accordance with the delivery schedule set forth in the lease.
7. The first shipment of 20 bicycles was received by B on May 21. B inspected the bicycles, accepted the same as
conforming to the lease and signed a receipt of delivery and acceptance. However, due to poor weather that
summer, business was terrible and B was unable to pay the rent due on June 15. Pursuant to the lease A sent B
notice of default and proceeded to enforce his rights and remedies against B.
§ 2A-523. Lessor's Remedies.
Page 3 of 5
8. A's counsel first advised A that under Section 2A-510(2) and the terms of the lease B's failure to pay was a
default with respect to the whole. Thus, to minimize A's continued exposure, A was advised to take possession of
the bicycles. If A had possession of the goods A could refuse to deliver. Section 2A-525(1). However, the facts
here are different. With respect to the bicycles in B's possession, A has the right to take possession of the bicycles,
without breach of the peace. Section 2A-525(2). If B refuses to allow A access to the bicycles, A can proceed by
action, including replevin or injunctive relief.
9. With respect to the 40 bicycles that have not been delivered, this Article provides various alternatives. First,
assume that 20 of the remaining 40 bicycles have been manufactured and delivered by the manufacturer to a
carrier for shipment to B. Given the size of the shipment, the carrier was using a small truck for the delivery and the
truck had not yet reached the island ferry when the manufacturer (at the request of A) instructed the carrier to divert
the shipment to A's place of business. A's right to stop delivery is recognized under these circumstances. Section
2A-526(1). Second, assume that the 20 remaining bicycles were in the process of manufacture when B defaulted.
A retains the right (as between A as lessor and B as lessee) to exercise reasonable commercial judgment whether
to complete manufacture or to dispose of the unfinished goods for scrap. Since A is not the manufacturer and A
has a binding contract to buy the bicycles, A elected to allow the manufacturer to complete the manufacture of the
bicycles, but instructed the manufacturer to deliver the completed bicycles to A's place of business. Section 2A-
524(2).
10. Thus, so far A has elected to exercise the remedies referred to in subparagraphs (b) through (d) in subsection
(1). None of these remedies bars any of the others because A's election and enforcement merely resulted in A's
possession of the bicycles. Had B performed A would have recovered possession of the bicycles. Thus A is in the
process of obtaining the benefit of his bargain. Note that A could exercise any other rights or pursue any other
remedies provided in the lease contract (Section 2A-523(1)(f)), or elect to recover his loss due to the lessee's
default under Section 2A-523(2).
11. A's counsel next would determine what action, if any, should be taken with respect to the goods. As stated in
subparagraph (e) and as discussed fully in Section 2A-527(1) the lessor may, but has no obligation to, dispose of
the goods by a substantially similar lease (indeed, the lessor has no obligation whatsoever to dispose of the goods
at all) and recover damages based on that action, but lessor will not be able to recover damages which put it in a
better position than performance would have done, nor will it be able to recover damages for losses which it could
have reasonably avoided. In this case, since A is in the business of leasing and selling bicycles, A will probably
inventory the 60 bicycles for its retail trade.
12. A's counsel then will determine which of the various means of ascertaining A's damages against B are
available. Subparagraph (e) catalogues each relevant section. First, under Section 2A-527(2) the amount of A's
claim is computed by comparing the original lease between A and B with any subsequent lease of the bicycles but
only if the subsequent lease is substantially similar to the original lease contract. While the section does not define
this term, the official comment does establish some parameters. If, however, A elects to lease the bicycles to his
retail trade, it is unlikely that the resulting lease will be substantially similar to the original, as leases to retail
customers are considerably different from leases to wholesale customers like B. If, however, the leases were
substantially similar, the damage claim is for accrued and unpaid rent to the beginning of the new lease, plus the
present value as of the same date, of the rent reserved under the original lease for the balance of its term less the
present value as of the same date of the rent reserved under the replacement lease for a term comparable to the
balance of the term of the original lease, together with incidental damages less expenses saved in consequence of
the lessee's default.
13. If the new lease is not substantially similar or if A elects to sell the bicycles or to hold the bicycles, damages are
computed under Section 2A-528 or 2A-529.
14. If A elects to pursue his claim under Section 2A-528(1) the damage rule is the same as that stated in Section
2A-528(2) except that damages are measured from default if the lessee never took possession of the goods or from
the time when the lessor did or could have regained possession and that the standard of comparison is not the rent
§ 2A-523. Lessor's Remedies.
Page 4 of 5
reserved under a substantially similar lease entered into by the lessor but a market rent, as defined in Section 2A-
507. Further, if the facts of this hypothetical were more elaborate A may be able to establish that the measure of
damage under subsection (1) is inadequate to put him in the same position that B's performance would have, in
which case A can claim the present value of his lost profits.
15. Yet another alternative for computing A's damage claim against B which will be available in some situations is
recovery of the present value, as of entry of judgment, of the rent for the then remaining lease term under Section
2A-529. However, this formulation is not available if the goods have been repossessed or tendered back to A. For
the 20 bicycles repossessed and the remaining 40 bicycles, A will be able to recover the present value of the rent
only if A is unable to dispose of them, or circumstances indicate the effort will be unavailing. If A has prevailed in an
action for the rent, at any time up to collection of a judgment by A against B, A might dispose of the bicycles. In
such case A's claim for damages against B is governed by Section 2A-527 or 2A-528. Section 2A-529(3). The
resulting recalculation of claim should reduce the amount recoverable by A against B and the lessor is required to
cause an appropriate credit to be entered against the earlier judgment. However, the nature of the post-judgment
proceedings to resolve this issue, and the sanctions for a failure to comply, if any, will be determined by other law.
16. Finally, if the lease agreement had so provided pursuant to subparagraph (f), A's claim against B would not be
determined under any of these statutory formulae, but pursuant to a liquidated damages clause. Section 2A-504(1).
17. These various methods of computing A's damage claim against B are alternatives subject to Section 2A-501(4).
However, the pursuit of any one of these alternatives is not a bar to, nor has it been barred by, A's earlier action to
obtain possession of the 60 bicycles. These formulae, which vary as a function of an overt or implied mitigation of
damage theory, focus on allowing A a recovery of the benefit of his bargain with B. Had B performed, A would have
received the rent as well as the return of the 60 bicycles at the end of the term.
18. Finally, A's counsel should also advise A of his right to cancel the lease contract under subparagraph (a).
Section 2A-505(1). Cancellation will discharge all existing obligations but preserve A's rights and remedies.
19. Subsection (2) recognizes that a lessor who is entitled to exercise the rights or to obtain a remedy granted by
subsection (1) may choose not to do so. In such cases, the lessor can recover damages as provided in subsection
(2). For example, for non-payment of rent, the lessor may decide not to take possession of the goods and cancel
the lease, but rather to merely sue for the unpaid rent as it comes due plus lost interest or other damages
"determined in any reasonable manner." Subsection (2) also negates any loss of alternative rights and remedies by
reason of having invoked or commenced the exercise or pursuit of any one or more rights or remedies.
20. Subsection (3) allows the lessor access to a remedy scheme provided in this Article as well as that contained in
the lease contract if the lessee is in default for reasons other than those stated in subsection (1). Note that the
reference to this Article includes supplementary principles of law and equity, e.g., fraud, misrepresentation and
duress. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-103.
21. There is no special treatment of the finance lease in this section. Absent supplementary principles of law to the
contrary, in most cases the supplier will have no rights or remedies against the defaulting lessee. Section 2A-
209(2)(ii). Given that the supplier will look to the lessor for payment, this is appropriate. However, there is a
specific exception to this rule with respect to the right to identify goods to the lease contract. Section 2A-524(2).
The parties are free to create a different result in a particular case. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-102(3).
Cross References:
Sections 1-102(3), 1-103, 1-106(1), 1-201(37), 2-703, 2A-103(1)(j), 2A-103(4), 2A-209(2)(ii), 2A-501(4), 2A-504(1),
2A-505(1), 2A-507, 2A-510(2), 2A-524 through 2A-531, 2A-524(2), 2A-525(1), 2A-525(2), 2A-526(1), 2A-527(1),
2A-527(2), 2A-528(1) and 2A-529(3).
Definitional Cross References:
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
§ 2A-523. Lessor's Remedies.
Page 5 of 5
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Installment lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(i).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-524
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > C. DEFAULT BY LESSEE
§ 2A-524. Lessor's Right to Identify Goods to Lease Contract.
(1) After default by the lessee under the lease contract of the type described in Section 2A-523(1) or 2A-
523(3)(a) or, if agreed, after other default by the lessee, the lessor may:
(a) identify to the lease contract conforming goods not already identified if at the time the lessor
learned of the default they were in the lessor's or the supplier's possession or control; and
(b) dispose of goods ( Section 2A-527(1)) that demonstrably have been intended for the particular
lease contract even though those goods are unfinished.
(2) If the goods are unfinished, in the exercise of reasonable commercial judgment for the purposes of
avoiding loss and of effective realization, an aggrieved lessor or the supplier may either complete
manufacture and wholly identify the goods to the lease contract or cease manufacture and lease, sell, or
otherwise dispose of the goods for scrap or salvage value or proceed in any other reasonable manner.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-704.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Purposes: The remedies provided by this section are available to the lessor (i) if there has been a default by the
lessee which falls within Section 2A-523(1) or 2A-523(3)(a), or (ii) if there has been any other default for which the
lease contract gives the lessor the remedies provided by this section. Under "(ii)", the lease contract may give the
lessor the remedies of identification and disposition provided by this section in various ways. For example, a lease
provision might specifically refer to the remedies of identification and disposition, or it might refer to this section by
number (i.e., 2A-524), or it might do so by a more general reference such as "all rights and remedies provided by
Article 2A for default by the lessee."
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201(2).
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Learn". Section 1-201(25).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
§ 2A-524. Lessor's Right to Identify Goods to Lease Contract.
Page 2 of 2
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Supplier". Section 2A-103(1)(x).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-525
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > C. DEFAULT BY LESSEE
§ 2A-525. Lessor's Right to Possession of Goods.
(1) If a lessor discovers the lessee to be insolvent, the lessor may refuse to deliver the goods.
(2) After a default by the lessee under the lease contract of the type described in Section 2A-523(1) or 2A-
523(3)(a) or, if agreed, after other default by the lessee, the lessor has the right to take possession of the
goods. If the lease contract so provides, the lessor may require the lessee to assemble the goods and
make them available to the lessor at a place to be designated by the lessor which is reasonably convenient
to both parties. Without removal, the lessor may render unusable any goods employed in trade or
business, and may dispose of goods on the lessee's premises ( Section 2A-527).
(3) The lessor may proceed under subsection (2) without judicial process if it can be done without breach
of the peace or the lessor may proceed by action.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Sections 2-702(1) and 9-503.
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1), a revised version of the provisions of Section 2-702(1), allows the lessor to refuse to deliver
goods if the lessee is insolvent. Note that the provisions of Section 2-702(2), granting the unpaid seller certain
rights of reclamation, were not incorporated in this section. Subsection (2) made this unnecessary.
2. Subsection (2), a revised version of the provisions of Section 9-503, allows the lessor, on a Section 2A-523(1) or
2A-523(3)(a) default by the lessee, the right to take possession of or reclaim the goods. Also, the lessor can
contract for the right to take possession of the goods for other defaults by the lessee. Therefore, since the lessee's
insolvency is an event of default in a standard lease agreement, subsection (2) is the functional equivalent of
Section 2-702(2). Further, subsection (2) sanctions the classic crate and delivery clause obligating the lessee to
assemble the goods and to make them available to the lessor. Finally, the lessor may leave the goods in place,
render them unusable (if they are goods employed in trade or business), and dispose of them on the lessee's
premises.
3. Subsection (3), a revised version of the provisions of Section 9-503, allows the lessor to proceed under
subsection (2) without judicial process, absent breach of the peace, or by action. Sections 2A-501(3), 2A-103(4)
and 1-201(1). In the appropriate case action includes injunctive relief. Clark Equip. Co. v. Armstrong Equip. Co.,
431 F.2d 54 (5th Cir.1970), cert. denied, 402 U.S. 909 (1971). This Section, as well as a number of other Sections
§ 2A-525. Lessor's Right to Possession of Goods.
Page 2 of 2
in this Part, are included in the Article to codify the lessor's common law right to protect the lessor's reversionary
interest in the goods. Section 2A-103(1)(q). These Sections are intended to supplement and not displace
principles of law and equity with respect to the protection of such interest. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-103. Such
principles apply in many instances, e.g., loss or damage to goods if risk of loss passes to the lessee, failure of the
lessee to return goods to the lessor in the condition stipulated in the lease, and refusal of the lessee to return goods
to the lessor after termination or cancellation of the lease. See also Section 2A-532.
Cross References:
Sections 1-106(2), 2-702(1), 2-702(2), 2A-103(4), 2A-501(3), 2A-532 and 9-503.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Discover". Section 1-201(25).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Insolvent". Section 1-201(23).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-526
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > C. DEFAULT BY LESSEE
§ 2A-526. Lessor's Stoppage of Delivery in Transit or Otherwise.
(1) A lessor may stop delivery of goods in the possession of a carrier or other bailee if the lessor discovers
the lessee to be insolvent and may stop delivery of carload, truckload, planeload, or larger shipments of
express or freight if the lessee repudiates or fails to make a payment due before delivery, whether for rent,
security or otherwise under the lease contract, or for any other reason the lessor has a right to withhold or
take possession of the goods.
(2) In pursuing its remedies under subsection (1), the lessor may stop delivery until
(a) receipt of the goods by the lessee;
(b) acknowledgment to the lessee by any bailee of the goods, except a carrier, that the bailee holds
the goods for the lessee; or
(c) such an acknowledgment to the lessee by a carrier via reshipment or as warehouse.
(3)
(a) To stop delivery, a lessor shall so notify as to enable the bailee by reasonable diligence to prevent
delivery of the goods.
(b) After notification, the bailee shall hold and deliver the goods according to the directions of the
lessor, but the lessor is liable to the bailee for any ensuing charges or damages.
(c) A carrier who has issued a nonnegotiable bill of lading is not obliged to obey a notification to stop
received from a person other than the consignor.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-705.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201(6).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Discover". Section 1-201(25).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Insolvent". Section 1-201(23).
§ 2A-526. Lessor's Stoppage of Delivery in Transit or Otherwise.
Page 2 of 2
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Notifies" and "Notification". Section 1-201(26).
"Person". Section 1-201(30).
"Receipt". Section 2-103(1)(c).
"Remedy". Section 1-201(34).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-527
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > C. DEFAULT BY LESSEE
§ 2A-527. Lessor's Rights to Dispose of Goods.
(1) After a default by a lessee under the lease contract of the type described in Section 2A-523(1) or 2A-
523(3)(a) or after the lessor refuses to deliver or takes possession of goods ( Section 2A-525 or 2A-526),
or, if agreed, after other default by a lessee, the lessor may dispose of the goods concerned or the
undelivered balance thereof by lease, sale, or otherwise.
(2) Except as otherwise provided with respect to damages liquidated in the lease agreement ( Section 2A-
504) or otherwise determined pursuant to agreement of the parties ( Sections 1-102(3) and 2A-503), if the
disposition is by lease agreement substantially similar to the original lease agreement and the new lease
agreement is made in good faith and in a commercially reasonable manner, the lessor may recover from
the lessee as damages (i) accrued and unpaid rent as of the date of the commencement of the term of the
new lease agreement, (ii) the present value, as of the same date, of the total rent for the then remaining
lease term of the original lease agreement minus the present value, as of the same date, of the rent under
the new lease agreement applicable to that period of the new lease term which is comparable to the then
remaining term of the original lease agreement, and (iii) any incidental damages allowed under Section 2A-
530, less expenses saved in consequence of the lessee's default.
(3) If the lessor's disposition is by lease agreement that for any reason does not qualify for treatment under
subsection (2), or is by sale or otherwise, the lessor may recover from the lessee as if the lessor had
elected not to dispose of the goods and Section 2A-528 governs.
(4) A subsequent buyer or lessee who buys or leases from the lessor in good faith for value as a result of a
disposition under this section takes the goods free of the original lease contract and any rights of the
original lessee even though the lessor fails to comply with one or more of the requirements of this Article.
(5) The lessor is not accountable to the lessee for any profit made on any disposition. A lessee who has
rightfully rejected or justifiably revoked acceptance shall account to the lessor for any excess over the
amount of the lessee's security interest ( Section 2A-508(5)).
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-706(1), (5) and (6).
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1), a revised version of the first sentence of subsection 2-706(1), allows the lessor the right to
dispose of goods after a statutory or other material default by the lessee (even if the goods remain in the lessee's
§ 2A-527. Lessor's Rights to Dispose of Goods.
Page 2 of 4
possession-Section 2A-525(2)), after the lessor refuses to deliver or takes possession of the goods, or, if agreed,
after other contractual default. The lessor's decision to exercise this right is a function of a commercial judgment,
not a statutory mandate replete with sanctions for failure to comply. Cf. Section 9-507. As the owner of the goods,
in the case of a lessor, or as the prime lessee of the goods, in the case of a sublessor, compulsory disposition of
the goods is inconsistent with the nature of the interest held by the lessor or the sublessor and is not necessary
because the interest held by the lessee or the sublessee is not protected by a right of redemption under the
common law or this Article. Subsection 2A-527(5).
2. The rule for determining the measure of damages recoverable by the lessor against the lessee is a function of
several variables. If the lessor has elected to effect disposition under subsection (1) and such disposition is by
lease that qualifies under subsection (2), the measure of damages set forth in subsection (2) will apply, absent
agreement to the contrary. Sections 2A-504, 2A-103(4) and 1-102(3).
3. The lessor's damages will be established using the new lease agreement as a measure if the following three
criteria are satisfied: (i) the lessor disposed of the goods by lease, (ii) the lease agreement is substantially similar to
the original lease agreement, and (iii) such disposition was in good faith, and in a commercially reasonable manner.
Thus, the lessor will be entitled to recover from the lessee the accrued and unpaid rent as of the date of
commencement of the term of the new lease, and the present value, as of the same date, of the rent, under the
original lease for the then remaining term less the present value as of the same date of the rent under the new
lease agreement applicable to the period of the new lease comparable to the remaining term under the original
lease, together with incidental damages less expenses saved in consequence of the lessee's default. If the lessor's
disposition does not satisfy the criteria of subsection (2), the lessor may calculate its claim against the lessee
pursuant to Section 2A-528. Section 2A-523(1)(e).
4. Two of the three criteria to be met by the lessor are familiar, but the concept of the new lease agreement that is
substantially similar to the original lease agreement is not. Given the many variables facing a party who intends to
lease goods and the rapidity of change in the market place, the policy decision was made not to draft with
specificity. It was thought unwise to seek to establish certainty at the cost of fairness. The decision of whether the
new lease agreement is substantially similar to the original will be determined case by case.
5. While the section does not draw a bright line, it is possible to describe some of the factors that should be
considered in a finding that a new lease agreement is substantially similar to the original. The various elements of
the new lease agreement should be examined. Those elements include the options to purchase or release; the
lessor's representations, warranties and covenants to the lessee as well as those to be provided by the lessee to
the lessor; and the services, if any, to be provided by the lessor or by the lessee. All of these factors allocate cost
and risk between the lessor and the lessee and thus affect the amount of rent to be paid. These findings should not
be made with scientific precision, as they are a function of economics, nor should they be made independently, as it
is important that a sense of commercial judgment pervade the finding. See Section 2A-507(2). To establish the
new lease as a proper measure of damage under subsection (2), these various factors, taken as a whole, must
result in a finding that the new lease agreement is substantially similar to the original. If the differences between the
original lease and the new lease can be easily valued, it would be appropriate for a court to find that the new lease
is substantially similar to the old lease, adjust the difference in the rent between the two leases to take account of
the differences, and award damages under this section. If, for example, the new lease requires the lessor to insure
the goods in the hands of the lessee, while the original lease required the lessee to insure, the usual cost of such
insurance could be deducted from rent due under the new lease before the difference in rental between the two
leases is determined.
6. The following hypothetical illustrates the difficulty of providing a bright line. Assume that A buys a jumbo tractor
for $1 million and then leases the tractor to B for a term of 36 months. The tractor is delivered to and is accepted by
B on May 1. On June 1 B fails to pay the monthly rent to A. B returns the tractor to A, who immediately releases
the tractor to C for a term identical to the term remaining under the lease between A and B. All terms and
conditions under the lease between A and C are identical to those under the original lease between A and B, except
that C does not provide any property damage or other insurance coverage, and B agreed to provide complete
§ 2A-527. Lessor's Rights to Dispose of Goods.
Page 3 of 4
coverage. Coverage is expensive and difficult to obtain. It is a question of fact whether it is so difficult to adjust the
recovery to take account of the difference between the two leases as to insurance that the second lease is not
substantially similar to the original.
7. A new lease can be substantially similar to the original lease even though its term extends beyond the remaining
term of the original lease, so long as both (a) the lease terms are commercially comparable (e.g., it is highly unlikely
that a one-month rental and a five-year lease would reflect similar realities), and (b) the court can fairly apportion a
part of the rental payments under the new lease to that part of the term of the new lease which is comparable to the
remaining lease term under the original lease. Also, the lease term of the new lease may be comparable to the
remaining term of the original lease even though the beginning and ending dates of the two leases are not the
same. For example, a two-month lease of agricultural equipment for the months of August and September may be
comparable to a two-month lease running from the 15th of August to the 15th of October if in the particular location
two-month leases beginning on August 15th are basically interchangeable with two-month leases beginning August
1st. Similarly, the term of a one-year truck lease beginning on the 15th of January may be comparable to the term
of a one-year truck lease beginning January 2d. If the lease terms are found to be comparable, the court may base
cover damages on the entire difference between the costs under the two leases.
8. Subsection (3), which is new, provides that if the lessor's disposition is by lease that does not qualify under
subsection (2), or is by sale or otherwise, Section 2A-528 governs.
9. Subsection (4), a revised version of subsection 2-706(5), applies to protect a subsequent buyer or lessee who
buys or leases from the lessor in good faith and for value, pursuant to a disposition under this section. Note that by
its terms, the rule in subsection 2A-304(1), which provides that the subsequent lessee takes subject to the original
lease contract, is controlled by the rule stated in this subsection.
10. Subsection (5), a revised version of subsection 2-706(6), provides that the lessor is not accountable to the
lessee for any profit made by the lessor on a disposition. This rule follows from the fundamental premise of the
bailment for hire that the lessee under a lease of goods has no equity of redemption to protect.
Cross References:
Sections 1-102(3), 2-706(1), 2-706(5), 2-706(6), 2A-103(4), 2A-304(1), 2A-504, 2A-507(2), 2A-523(1)(e), 2A-525(2),
2A-527(5), 2A-528 and 9-507.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer" and "Buying". Section 2-103(1)(a).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Good faith". Sections 1-201(19) and 2-103(1)(b).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Present value". Section 2A-103(1)(u).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
§ 2A-527. Lessor's Rights to Dispose of Goods.
Page 4 of 4
"Sale". Section 2-106(1).
"Security interest". Section 1-201(37).
"Value". Section 1-201(44).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-528
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > C. DEFAULT BY LESSEE
§ 2A-528. Lessor's Damages for Non-acceptance, Failure to Pay,
Repudiation, or Other Default.
(1) Except as otherwise provided with respect to damages liquidated in the lease agreement ( Section 2A-
504) or otherwise determined pursuant to agreement of the parties ( Sections 1-102(3) and 2A-503), if a
lessor elects to retain the goods or a lessor elects to dispose of the goods and the disposition is by lease
agreement that for any reason does not qualify for treatment under Section 2A-527(2), or is by sale or
otherwise, the lessor may recover from the lessee as damages for a default of the type described in Section
2A-523(1) or 2A-523(3)(a), or, if agreed, for other default of the lessee, (i) accrued and unpaid rent as of the
date of default if the lessee has never taken possession of the goods, or, if the lessee has taken
possession of the goods, as of the date the lessor repossesses the goods or an earlier date on which the
lessee makes a tender of the goods to the lessor, (ii) the present value as of the date determined under
clause (i) of the total rent for the then remaining lease term of the original lease agreement minus the
present value as of the same date of the market rent at the place where the goods are located computed
for the same lease term, and (iii) any incidental damages allowed under Section 2A-530, less expenses
saved in consequence of the lessee's default.
(2) If the measure of damages provided in subsection (1) is inadequate to put a lessor in as good a
position as performance would have, the measure of damages is the present value of the profit, including
reasonable overhead, the lessor would have made from full performance by the lessee, together with any
incidental damages allowed under Section 2A-530, due allowance for costs reasonably incurred and due
credit for payments or proceeds of disposition.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-708.
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (1), a substantially revised version of Section 2-708(1), states the basic rule governing the measure
of lessor's damages for a default described in Section 2A-523(1) or (3)(a), and, if agreed, for a contractual default.
This measure will apply if the lessor elects to retain the goods (whether undelivered, returned by the lessee, or
repossessed by the lessor after acceptance and default by the lessee) or if the lessor's disposition does not qualify
under subsection 2A-527(2). Section 2A-527(3). Note that under some of these conditions, the lessor may recover
damages from the lessee pursuant to the rule set forth in Section 2A-529. There is no sanction for disposition that
§ 2A-528. Lessor's Damages for Non-acceptance, Failure to Pay, Repudiation, or Other Default.
Page 2 of 3
does not qualify under subsection 2A-527(2). Application of the rule set forth in this section is subject to agreement
to the contrary. Sections 2A-504, 2A-103(4) and 1-102(3).
2. If the lessee has never taken possession of the goods, the measure of damage is the accrued and unpaid rent as
of the date of default together with the present value, as of the date of default, of the original rent for the remaining
term of the lease less the present value as of the same date of market rent, and incidental damages, less expenses
saved in consequence of the default. Note that the reference in Section 2A-528(1)(i) and (ii) is to the date of default
not to the date of an event of default. An event of default under a lease agreement becomes a default under a
lease agreement only after the expiration of any relevant period of grace and compliance with any notice
requirements under this Article and the lease agreement. American Bar Foundation, Commentaries on Indentures,
§ 5-1, at 216-217 (1971). Section 2A-501(1). This conclusion is also a function of whether, as a matter of fact or
law, the event of default has been waived, suspended or cured. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-103. If the lessee has
taken possession of the goods, the measure of damages is the accrued and unpaid rent as of the earlier of the time
the lessor repossesses the goods or the time the lessee tenders the goods to the lessor plus the difference
between the present value, as of the same time, of the rent under the lease for the remaining lease term and the
present value, as of the same time, of the market rent.
3. Market rent will be computed pursuant to Section 2A-507.
4. Subsection (2), a somewhat revised version of the provisions of subsection 2-708(2), states a measure of
damages which applies if the measure of damages in subsection (1) is inadequate to put the lessor in as good a
position as performance would have. The measure of damage is the lessor's profit, including overhead, together
with incidental damages, with allowance for costs reasonably incurred and credit for payments or proceeds of
disposition. In determining the amount of due credit with respect to proceeds of disposition a proper value should
be attributed to the lessor's residual interest in the goods. Sections 2A-103(1)(q) and 2A-507(4).
5. In calculating profit, a court should include any expected appreciation of the goods, e.g. the foal of a leased
brood mare. Because this subsection is intended to give the lessor the benefit of the bargain, a court should
consider any reasonable benefit or profit expected by the lessor from the performance of the lease agreement. See
Honeywell, Inc. v. Lithonia Lighting, Inc., 317 F.Supp. 406, 413 (N.D.Ga.1970); Locks v. Wade, 36 N.J.Super. 128,
131, 114 A.2d 875, 877 (Super.Ct.App.Div.1955). Further, in calculating profit the concept of present value must be
given effect. Taylor v. Commercial Credit Equip. Corp., 170 Ga.App. 322, 316 S.E.2d 788 (Ct.App.1984). See
generally Section 2A-103(1)(u).
Cross References:
Sections 1-102(3), 2-708, 2A-103(1)(u), 2A-402, 2A-504, 2A-507, 2A-527(2) and 2A-529.
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201(3).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Present value". Section 2A-103(1)(u).
§ 2A-528. Lessor's Damages for Non-acceptance, Failure to Pay, Repudiation, or Other Default.
Page 3 of 3
"Sale". Section 2-106(1).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-529
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > C. DEFAULT BY LESSEE
§ 2A-529. Lessor's Action for the Rent.
(1) After default by the lessee under the lease contract of the type described in Section 2A-523(1) or 2A-
523(3)(a) or, if agreed, after other default by the lessee, if the lessor complies with subsection (2), the
lessor may recover from the lessee as damages:
(a) for goods accepted by the lessee and not repossessed by or tendered to the lessor, and for
conforming goods lost or damaged within a commercially reasonable time after risk of loss passes to
the lessee ( Section 2A-219), (i) accrued and unpaid rent as of the date of entry of judgment in favor of
the lessor, (ii) the present value as of the same date of the rent for the then remaining lease term of the
lease agreement, and (iii) any incidental damages allowed under Section 2A-530, less expenses saved
in consequence of the lessee's default; and
(b) for goods identified to the lease contract if the lessor is unable after reasonable effort to dispose of
them at a reasonable price or the circumstances reasonably indicate that effort will be unavailing, (i)
accrued and unpaid rent as of the date of entry of judgment in favor of the lessor, (ii) the present value
as of the same date of the rent for the then remaining lease term of the lease agreement, and (iii) any
incidental damages allowed under Section 2A-530, less expenses saved in consequence of the
lessee's default.
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3), the lessor shall hold for the lessee for the remaining lease term of
the lease agreement any goods that have been identified to the lease contract and are in the lessor's
control.
(3) The lessor may dispose of the goods at any time before collection of the judgment for damages
obtained pursuant to subsection (1). If the disposition is before the end of the remaining lease term of the
lease agreement, the lessor's recovery against the lessee for damages is governed by Section 2A-527 or
Section 2A-528, and the lessor will cause an appropriate credit to be provided against a judgment for
damages to the extent that the amount of the judgment exceeds the recovery available pursuant to Section
2A-527 or 2A-528.
(4) Payment of the judgment for damages obtained pursuant to subsection (1) entitles the lessee to the
use and possession of the goods not then disposed of for the remaining lease term of and in accordance
with the lease agreement.
(5) After default by the lessee under the lease contract of the type described in Section 2A-523(1) or
Section 2A-523(3)(a) or, if agreed, after other default by the lessee, a lessor who is held not entitled to rent
under this section must nevertheless be awarded damages for non-acceptance under Section 2A-527 or
Section 2A-528.
As amended in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to changes made in text in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 2A-529. Lessor's Action for the Rent.
Page 2 of 3
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-709.
Changes: Substantially revised.
Purposes:
1. Absent a lease contract provision to the contrary, an action for the full unpaid rent (discounted to present value
as of the time of entry of judgment as to rent due after that time) is available as to goods not lost or damaged only if
the lessee retains possession of the goods or the lessor is or apparently will be unable to dispose of them at a
reasonable price after reasonable effort. There is no general right in a lessor to recover the full rent from the lessee
upon holding the goods for the lessee. If the lessee tenders goods back to the lessor, and the lessor refuses to
accept the tender, the lessor will be limited to the damages it would have suffered had it taken back the goods. The
rule in Article 2 that the seller can recover the price of accepted goods is rejected here. In a lease, the lessor
always has a residual interest in the goods which the lessor usually realizes upon at the end of a lease term by
either sale or a new lease. Therefore, it is not a substantial imposition on the lessor to require it to take back and
dispose of the goods if the lessee chooses to tender them back before the end of the lease term: the lessor will
merely do earlier what it would have done anyway, sell or relet the goods. Further, the lessee will frequently
encounter substantial difficulties if the lessee attempts to sublet the goods for the remainder of the lease term. In
contrast to the buyer who owns the entire interest in goods and can easily dispose of them, the lessee is selling
only the right to use the goods under the terms of the lease and the sublessee must assume a relationship with the
lessor. In that situation, it is usually more efficient to eliminate the original lessee as a middleman by allowing the
lessee to return the goods to the lessor who can then redispose of them.
2. In some situations even where possession of the goods is reacquired, a lessor will be able to recover as
damages the present value of the full rent due, not under this section, but under 2A-528(2) which allows a lost profit
recovery if necessary to put the lessor in the position it would have been in had the lessee performed. Following is
an example of such a case. A is a lessor of construction equipment and maintains a substantial inventory. B
leases from A a backhoe for a period of two weeks at a rental of $1,000. After three days, B returns the backhoe
and refuses to pay the rent. A has five backhoes in inventory, including the one returned by B. During the next 11
days after the return by B of the backhoe, A rents no more than three backhoes at any one time and, therefore,
always has two on hand. If B had kept the backhoe for the full rental period, A would have earned the full rental on
that backhoe, plus the rental on the other backhoes it actually did rent during that period. Getting this backhoe back
before the end of the lease term did not enable A to make any leases it would not otherwise have made. The only
way to put A in the position it would have been in had the lessee fully performed is to give the lessor the full rentals.
A realized no savings at all because the backhoe was returned early and might even have incurred additional
expense if it was paying for parking space for equipment in inventory. A has no obligation to relet the backhoe for
the benefit of B rather than leasing that backhoe or any other in inventory for its own benefit. Further, it is probably
not reasonable to expect A to dispose of the backhoe by sale when it is returned in an effort to reduce damages
suffered by B. Ordinarily, the loss of a two-week rental would not require A to reduce the size of its backhoe
inventory. Whether A would similarly be entitled to full rentals as lost profit in a one-year lease of a backhoe is a
question of fact: in any event the lessor, subject to mitigation of damages rules, is entitled to be put in as good a
position as it would have been had the lessee fully performed the lease contract.
3. Under subsection (2) a lessor who is able and elects to sue for the rent due under a lease must hold goods not
lost or damaged for the lessee. Subsection (3) creates an exception to the subsection (2) requirement. If the lessor
disposes of those goods prior to collection of the judgment (whether as a matter of law or agreement), the lessor's
recovery is governed by the measure of damages in Section 2A-527 if the disposition is by lease that is
substantially similar to the original lease, or otherwise by the measure of damages in Section 2A-528. Section 2A-
523 official comment.
4. Subsection (4), which is new, further reinforces the requisites of Subsection (2). In the event the judgment for
damages obtained by the lessor against the lessee pursuant to subsection (1) is satisfied, the lessee regains the
§ 2A-529. Lessor's Action for the Rent.
Page 3 of 3
right to use and possession of the remaining goods for the balance of the original lease term; a partial satisfaction
of the judgment creates no right in the lessee to use and possession of the goods.
5. The relationship between subsections (2) and (4) is important to understand. Subsection (2) requires the lessor
to hold for the lessee identified goods in the lessor's possession. Absent agreement to the contrary, whether in the
lease or otherwise, under most circumstances the requirement that the lessor hold the goods for the lessee for the
term will mean that the lessor is not allowed to use them. Sections 2A-103(4) and 1-203. Further, the lessor's use
of the goods could be viewed as a disposition of the goods that would bar the lessor from recovery under this
section, remitting the lessor to the two preceding sections for a determination of the lessor's claim for damages
against the lessee.
6. Subsection (5), the analogue of subsection 2-709(3), further reinforces the thrust of subsection (3) by stating that
a lessor who is held not entitled to rent under this section has not elected a remedy; the lessor must be awarded
damages under Sections 2A-527 and 2A-528. This is a function of two significant policies of this Article-that resort
to a remedy is optional, unless expressly agreed to be exclusive (Section 2A-503(2)) and that rights and remedies
provided in this Article generally are cumulative. (Section 2A-501(2) and (4)).
Cross References:
Sections 1-203, 2-709, 2-709(3), 2A-103(4), 2A-501(2), 2A-501(4), 2A-503(2), 2A-504, 2A-523(1)(e), 2A-525(2),
2A-527, 2A-528 and 2A-529(2).
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
"Conforming". Section 2A-103(1)(d).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease". Section 2A-103(1)(j).
"Lease agreement". Section 2A-103(1)(k).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Present value". Section 2A-103(1)(u).
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204(1) and (2).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-530
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > C. DEFAULT BY LESSEE
§ 2A-530. Lessor's Incidental Damages.
Incidental damages to an aggrieved lessor include any commercially reasonable charges, expenses, or
commissions incurred in stopping delivery, in the transportation, care and custody of goods after the lessee's
default, in connection with return or disposition of the goods, or otherwise resulting from the default.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-710.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Aggrieved party". Section 1-201(2).
"Delivery". Section 1-201(14).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-531
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > C. DEFAULT BY LESSEE
§ 2A-531. Standing to Sue Third Parties for Injury to Goods.
(1) If a third party so deals with goods that have been identified to a lease contract as to cause actionable
injury to a party to the lease contract (a) the lessor has a right of action against the third party, and (b) the
lessee also has a right of action against the third party if the lessee:
(i) has a security interest in the goods;
(ii) has an insurable interest in the goods; or
(iii) bears the risk of loss under the lease contract or has since the injury assumed that risk as against
the lessor and the goods have been converted or destroyed.
(2) If at the time of the injury the party plaintiff did not bear the risk of loss as against the other party to the
lease contract and there is no arrangement between them for disposition of the recovery, his [or her] suit or
settlement, subject to his [or her] own interest, is as a fiduciary for the other party to the lease contract.
(3) Either party with the consent of the other may sue for the benefit of whom it may concern.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: Section 2-722.
Changes: Revised to reflect leasing practices and terminology.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201(1).
"Goods". Section 2A-103(1)(h).
"Lease contract". Section 2A-103(1)(l ).
"Lessee". Section 2A-103(1)(n).
"Lessor". Section 2A-103(1)(p).
"Party". Section 1-201(29).
"Rights". Section 1-201(36).
"Security interest". Section 1-201(37).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 2A-531. Standing to Sue Third Parties for Injury to Goods.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 2A-532
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES > PART
5. DEFAULT > C. DEFAULT BY LESSEE
§ 2A-532. Lessor's Rights to Residual Interest.
In addition to any other recovery permitted by this Article or other law, the lessor may recover from the lessee an
amount that will fully compensate the lessor for any loss of or damage to the lessor's residual interest in the goods
caused by the default of the lessee.
As added in 1990.
See Appendix VI for material relating to adoption of section in 1990.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Uniform Statutory Source: None.
Purposes: This section recognizes the right of the lessor to recover under this Article (as well as under other law)
from the lessee for failure to comply with the lease obligations as to the condition of leased goods when returned to
the lessor, for failure to return the goods at the end of the lease, or for any other default which causes loss or injury
to the lessor's residual interest in the goods.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 6 § 3
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE A [Including repeal of Article 6]
Notice
Deleted: Red text with a strikethrough
§ 3. AMENDMENT.
Section 2-403(4) of the Uniform Commercial Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
(4) The rights of other purchasers of goods and of lien creditors are governed by the Articles on
Secured Transactions (Article 9), Bulk Transfers (Article 6) and Documents of Title (Article 7).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-101. SHORT TITLE
This Article may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code--Negotiable Instruments.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-102. SUBJECT MATTER
(a) This Article applies to negotiable instruments. It does not apply to money, to payment orders governed
by Article 4A, or to securities governed by Article 8.
(b) If there is conflict between this Article and Article 4 or 9, Articles 4 and 9 govern.
(c) Regulations of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and operating circulars of the
Federal Reserve Banks supersede any inconsistent provision of this Article to the extent of the
inconsistency.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Former Article 3 had no provision affirmatively stating its scope. Former Section 3-103 was a limitation on
scope. In revised Article 3, Section 3-102 states that Article 3 applies to "negotiable instruments," defined in Section
3-104. Section 3-104(b) also defines the term "instrument" as a synonym for "negotiable instrument." In most places
Article 3 uses the shorter term "instrument." This follows the convention used in former Article 3.
2. The reference in former Section 3-103(1) to "documents of title" is omitted as superfluous because these
documents contain no promise to pay money. The definition of "payment order" in Section 4A-103(a)(1)(iii) excludes
drafts which are governed by Article 3. Section 3-102(a) makes clear that a payment order governed by Article 4A is
not governed by Article 3. Thus, Article 3 and Article 4A are mutually exclusive.
Article 8 states in Section 8-103(d) that "A writing that is a security certificate is governed by this Article and not
by Article 3, even though it also meets the requirements of that Article." Section 3-102(a) conforms to this provision.
With respect to some promises or orders to pay money, there may be a question whether the promise or order is an
instrument under Section 3-104(a) or a certificated security under Section 8-102(a)(4) and (15). Whether a writing is
covered by Article 3 or Article 8 has important consequences. Among other things, under Section 8-207, the issuer
of a certificated security may treat the registered owner as the owner for all purposes until the presentment for
registration of a transfer. The issuer of a negotiable instrument, on the other hand, may discharge its obligation to
pay the instrument only by paying a person entitled to enforce under Section 3-301. There are also important
consequences to an indorser. An indorser of a security does not undertake the issuer's obligation or make any
warranty that the issuer will honor the underlying obligation, while an indorser of a negotiable instrument becomes
secondarily liable on the underlying obligation. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for
Uniform Commercial Code November 4, 1995.
Ordinarily the distinction between instruments and certificated securities in non-bearer form should be relatively
clear. A certificated security under Article 8 must be in registered form (Section 8-102(a)(13)) so that it can be
registered on the issuer's records. By contrast, registration plays no part in Article 3. The distinction between an
instrument and a certificated security in bearer form may be somewhat more difficult and will generally lie in the
economic functions of the two writings. Ordinarily, negotiable instruments under Article 3 will be separate and
distinct instruments, while certificated securities under Article 8 will be either one of a class or series or by their
§ 3-102. SUBJECT MATTER
Page 2 of 2
terms divisible into a class or series (Section 8-102(a)(15)(ii)). Thus, a promissory note in bearer form could come
under either Article 3 if it were simply an individual note, or under Article 8 if it were one of a series of notes or
divisible into a series. An additional distinction is whether the instrument is of the type commonly dealt in on
securities exchanges or markets or commonly recognized as a medium for investment (Section 8-102(a)(15)(iii)).
Thus, a check written in bearer form (i.e., a check made payable to "cash") would not be a certificated security
within Article 8 of the Uniform Commercial Code. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for
Uniform Commercial Code November 4, 1995.
Occasionally, a particular writing may fit the definition of both a negotiable instrument under Article 3 and of an
investment security under Article 8. In such cases, the instrument is subject exclusively to the requirements of
Article 8. Section 8-103(d) and Section 3-102(a). Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for
Uniform Commercial Code November 4, 1995.
3. Although the terms of Article 3 apply to transactions by Federal Reserve Banks, federal preemption would
make ineffective any Article 3 provision that conflicts with federal law. The activities of the Federal Reserve Banks
are governed by regulations of the Federal Reserve Board and by operating circulars issued by the Reserve Banks
themselves. In some instances, the operating circulars are issued pursuant to a Federal Reserve Board regulation.
In other cases, the Reserve Bank issues the operating circular under its own authority under the Federal Reserve
Act, subject to review by the Federal Reserve Board. Section 3-102(c) states that Federal Reserve Board
regulations and operating circulars of the Federal Reserve Banks supersede any inconsistent provision of Article 3
to the extent of the inconsistency. Federal Reserve Board regulations, being valid exercises of regulatory authority
pursuant to a federal statute, take precedence over state law if there is an inconsistency. Childs v. Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, 719 F.2d 812 (5th Cir.1983), reh. den. 724 F.2d 127 (5th Cir. 1984). Section 3-102(c) treats
operating circulars as having the same effect whether issued under the Reserve Bank's own authority or under a
Federal Reserve Board regulation. Federal statutes may also preempt Article 3. For example, the Expedited Funds
Availability Act, 12 U.S.C. § 4001 et seq., provides that the Act and the regulations issued pursuant to the Act
supersede any inconsistent provisions of the UCC. 12 U.S.C. § 4007(b).
4. In Clearfield Trust Co. v. United States, 318 U.S. 363 (1943), the Court held that if the United States is a party
to an instrument, its rights and duties are governed by federal common law in the absence of a specific federal
statute or regulation. In United States v. Kimbell Foods, Inc., 440 U.S. 715 (1979), the Court stated a three-pronged
test to ascertain whether the federal common-law rule should follow the state rule. In most instances courts under
the Kimbell test have shown a willingness to adopt UCC rules in formulating federal common law on the subject. In
Kimbell the Court adopted the priorities rules of Article 9.
5. In 1989 the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law completed a Convention on International
Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes. If the United States becomes a party to this Convention, the
Convention will preempt state law with respect to international bills and notes governed by the Convention. Thus,
an international bill of exchange or promissory note that meets the definition of instrument in Section 3-104 will not
be governed by Article 3 if it is governed by the Convention. That Convention applies only to bills and notes that
indicate on their face that they involve cross-border transactions. It does not apply at all to checks. Convention
Articles 1(3), 2(1), 2(2). Moreover, because it applies only if the bill or note specifically calls for application of the
Convention, Convention Article 1, there is little chance that the Convention will apply accidentally to a transaction
that the parties intended to be governed by this Article. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board
for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-103. DEFINITIONS
(a) In this Article:
(1) "Acceptor" means a drawee who has accepted a draft.
(2) "Consumer account" means an account established by an individual primarily for personal, family,
or household purposes.
(3) "Consumer transaction" means a transaction in which an individual incurs an obligation primarily for
personal, family, or household purposes.
(4) "Drawee" means a person ordered in a draft to make payment.
(5) "Drawer" means a person who signs or is identified in a draft as a person ordering payment.
(6) ["Good faith" means honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair
dealing.]
(7) "Maker" means a person who signs or is identified in a note as a person undertaking to pay.
(8) "Order" means a written instruction to pay money signed by the person giving the instruction. The
instruction may be addressed to any person, including the person giving the instruction, or to one or
more persons jointly or in the alternative but not in succession. An authorization to pay is not an order
unless the person authorized to pay is also instructed to pay.
(9) "Ordinary care" in the case of a person engaged in business means observance of reasonable
commercial standards, prevailing in the area in which the person is located, with respect to the
business in which the person is engaged. In the case of a bank that takes an instrument for processing
for collection or payment by automated means, reasonable commercial standards do not require the
bank to examine the instrument if the failure to examine does not violate the bank's prescribed
procedures and the bank's procedures do not vary unreasonably from general banking usage not
disapproved by this Article or Article 4.
(10) "Party" means a party to an instrument.
(11) "Principal obligor," with respect to an instrument, means the accommodated party or any other
party to the instrument against whom a secondary obligor has recourse under this article.
(12) "Promise" means a written undertaking to pay money signed by the person undertaking to pay. An
acknowledgment of an obligation by the obligor is not a promise unless the obligor also undertakes to
pay the obligation.
(13) "Prove" with respect to a fact means to meet the burden of establishing the fact ( Section 1-
201(8)).
(14) ["Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an
electroinic or other medium and is retrieveable in perceivable form.]
(15) "Remitter" means a person who purchases an instrument from its issuer if the instrument is
payable to an identified person other than the purchaser.
§ 3-103. DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 4
(16) "Remotely-created consumer item" means an item drawn on a consumer account, which is not
created by the payor bank and does not bear a handwritten signature purporting to be the signature of
the drawer.
(17) "Secondary obligor," with respect to an instrument, means (a) an indorser or an accommodation
party, (b) a drawer having the obligation described in Section 3-414(d), or (c) any other party to the
instrument that has recourse against another party to the instrument pursuant to Section 3-116(b).
(b) Other definitions applying to this Article and the sections in which they appear are:
"Acceptance" Section 3-409
"Accommodated party" Section 3-419
"Accommodation party" Section 3-419
"Account" Section 4-104
"Alteration" Section 3-407
"Anomalous indorsement" Section 3-205
"Blank indorsement" Section 3-205
"Cashier's check" Section 3-104
"Certificate of deposit" Section 3-104
"Certified check" Section 3-409
"Check" Section 3-104
"Consideration" Section 3-303
"Draft" Section 3-104
"Holder in due course" Section 3-302
"Incomplete instrument" Section 3-115
"Indorsement" Section 3-204
"Indorser" Section 3-204
"Instrument" Section 3-104
"Issue" Section 3-105
"Issuer" Section 3-105
"Negotiable instrument" Section 3-104
"Negotiation" Section 3-201
"Note" Section 3-104
"Payable at a definite time" Section 3-108
"Payable on demand" Section 3-108
"Payable to bearer" Section 3-109
"Payable to order" Section 3-109
"Payment" Section 3-602
"Person entitled to enforce" Section 3-301
"Presentment" Section 3-501
"Reacquisition" Section 3-207
"Special indorsement" Section 3-205
"Teller's check" Section 3-104
"Transfer of instrument" Section 3-203
"Traveler's check" Section 3-104
"Value" Section 3-303
(c) The following definitions in other Articles apply to this Article:
"Banking day" Section 4-104
"Clearing house" Section 4-104
"Collecting bank" Section 4-105
"Depositary bank" Section 4-105
"Documentary draft" Section 4-104
"Intermediary bank" Section 4-105
"Item" Section 4-104
"Payor bank" Section 4-105
§ 3-103. DEFINITIONS
Page 3 of 4
"Suspends payments" Section 4-104
(d) In addition, Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation
applicable throughout this Article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note. A jurisdiction that enacts this statute that has not yet enacted the revised version of UCC Article
1 should add to Section 3-103 the definition of "good faith" that appears in the official version of Section 1-
201(b)(20) and the definition of "record" that appears in the official version of Section 1-201(b)(31). Sections 3-
103(a)(6) and (14) are reserved for that purpose. A jurisdiction that already has adopted or simultaneously adopts
the revised Article 1 should not add those definitions, but should leave those numbers "reserved." If jurisdictions
follow the numbering suggested here, the subsections will have the same numbering in all jurisdictions that have
adopted these amendments (whether they have or have not adopted the revised version of UCC Article 1).
1. Subsection (a) defines some common terms used throughout the Article that were not defined by former Article
3 and adds the definitions of "order" and "promise" found in former Section 3-102(1)(b) and (c).
2. The definition of "order" includes an instruction given by the signer to itself. The most common example of this
kind of order is a cashier's check: a draft with respect to which the drawer and drawee are the same bank or
branches of the same bank. Former Section 3-118(a) treated a cashier's check as a note. It stated "a draft drawn on
the drawer is effective as a note." Although it is technically more correct to treat a cashier's check as a promise by
the issuing bank to pay rather than an order to pay, a cashier's check is in the form of a check and it is normally
referred to as a check. Thus, revised Article 3 follows banking practice in referring to a cashier's check as both a
draft and a check rather than a note. Some insurance companies also follow the practice of issuing drafts in which
the drawer draws on itself and makes the draft payable at or through a bank. These instruments are also treated as
drafts. The obligation of the drawer of a cashier's check or other draft drawn on the drawer is stated in Section 3-
412.
An order may be addressed to more than one person as drawee either jointly or in the alternative. The
authorization of alternative drawees follows former Section 3-102(1)(b) and recognizes the practice of drawers,
such as corporations issuing dividend checks, who for commercial convenience name a number of drawees,
usually in different parts of the country. Section 3-501(b)(1) provides that presentment may be made to any one of
multiple drawees. Drawees in succession are not permitted because the holder should not be required to make
more than one presentment. Dishonor by any drawee named in the draft entitles the holder to rights of recourse
against the drawer or indorsers.
3. The last sentence of subsection (a)(9) is intended to make it clear that an I.O.U. or other written
acknowledgment of indebtedness is not a note unless there is also an undertaking to pay the obligation.
4. This Article now uses the broadened definition of good faith in revised Article 1. The definition requires not only
honesty in fact but also "observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing." Although fair dealing is a
broad term that must be defined in context, it is clear that it is concerned with the fairness of conduct rather than the
care with which an act is performed. Failure to exercise ordinary care in conducting a transaction is an entirely
different concept than failure to deal fairly in conducting the transaction. Both fair dealing and ordinary care, which
is defined in Section 3-103(a)(7), are to be judged in the light of reasonable commercial standards, but those
standards in each case are directed to different aspects of commercial conduct.
5. Subsection (a)(7) is a definition of ordinary care which is applicable not only to Article 3 but to Article 4 as well.
See Section 4-104(c). The general rule is stated in the first sentence of subsection (a)(7) and it applies both to
banks and to persons engaged in businesses other than banking. Ordinary care means observance of reasonable
§ 3-103. DEFINITIONS
Page 4 of 4
commercial standards of the relevant businesses prevailing in the area in which the person is located. The second
sentence of subsection (a)(7) is a particular rule limited to the duty of a bank to examine an instrument taken by a
bank for processing for collection or payment by automated means. This particular rule applies primarily to Section
4-406 and it is discussed in Comment 4 to that section. Nothing in Section 3-103(a)(7) is intended to prevent a
customer from proving that the procedures followed by a bank are unreasonable, arbitrary, or unfair.
6. The definition of consumer account includes a joint account established by more than one individual. See
Section 1-106(1).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-104. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT
(a) Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d), "negotiable instrument" means an unconditional promise
or order to pay a fixed amount of money, with or without interest or other charges described in the promise
or order, if it:
(1) is payable to bearer or to order at the time it is issued or first comes into possession of a holder;
(2) is payable on demand or at a definite time; and
(3) does not state any other undertaking or instruction by the person promising or ordering payment to
do any act in addition to the payment of money, but the promise or order may contain (i) an undertaking
or power to give, maintain, or protect collateral to secure payment, (ii) an authorization or power to the
holder to confess judgment or realize on or dispose of collateral, or (iii) a waiver of the benefit of any
law intended for the advantage or protection of an obligor.
(b) "Instrument" means a negotiable instrument.
(c) An order that meets all of the requirements of subsection (a), except paragraph (1), and otherwise falls
within the definition of "check" in subsection (f) is a negotiable instrument and a check.
(d) A promise or order other than a check is not an instrument if, at the time it is issued or first comes into
possession of a holder, it contains a conspicuous statement, however expressed, to the effect that the
promise or order is not negotiable or is not an instrument governed by this Article.
(e) An instrument is a "note" if it is a promise and is a "draft" if it is an order. If an instrument falls within the
definition of both "note" and "draft," a person entitled to enforce the instrument may treat it as either.
(f) "Check" means (i) a draft, other than a documentary draft, payable on demand and drawn on a bank or
(ii) a cashier's check or teller's check. An instrument may be a check even though it is described on its face
by another term, such as "money order."
(g) "Cashier's check" means a draft with respect to which the drawer and drawee are the same bank or
branches of the same bank.
(h) "Teller's check" means a draft drawn by a bank (i) on another bank, or (ii) payable at or through a bank.
(i) "Traveler's check" means an instrument that (i) is payable on demand, (ii) is drawn on or payable at or
through a bank, (iii) is designated by the term "traveler's check" or by a substantially similar term, and (iv)
requires, as a condition to payment, a countersignature by a person whose specimen signature appears on
the instrument.
(j) "Certificate of deposit" means an instrument containing an acknowledgment by a bank that a sum of
money has been received by the bank and a promise by the bank to repay the sum of money. A certificate
of deposit is a note of the bank.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 3-104. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 4
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The definition of "negotiable instrument" defines the scope of Article 3 since Section 3-102 states: "This Article
applies to negotiable instruments." The definition in Section 3-104(a) incorporates other definitions in Article 3. An
instrument is either a "promise," defined in Section 3-103(a)(9), or "order," defined in Section 3-103(a)(6). A
promise is a written undertaking to pay money signed by the person undertaking to pay. An order is a written
instruction to pay money signed by the person giving the instruction. Thus, the term "negotiable instrument" is
limited to a signed writing that orders or promises payment of money. "Money" is defined in Section 1-201(24) and
is not limited to United States dollars. It also includes a medium of exchange established by a foreign government
or monetary units of account established by an intergovernmental organization or by agreement between two or
more nations. Five other requirements are stated in Section 3-104(a): First, the promise or order must be
"unconditional." The quoted term is explained in Section 3-106. Second, the amount of money must be "a fixed
amount *** with or without interest or other charges described in the promise or order." Section 3-112(b) relates to
"interest." Third, the promise or order must be "payable to bearer or to order." The quoted phrase is explained in
Section 3-109. An exception to this requirement is stated in subsection (c). Fourth, the promise or order must be
payable "on demand or at a definite time." The quoted phrase is explained in Section 3-108. Fifth, the promise or
order may not state "any other undertaking or instruction by the person promising or ordering payment to do any act
in addition to the payment of money" with three exceptions. The quoted phrase is based on the first sentence of
N.I.L. Section 5 which is the precursor of "no other promise, order, obligation or power given by the maker or
drawer" appearing in former Section 3-104(1)(b). The words "instruction" and "undertaking" are used instead of
"order" and "promise" that are used in the N.I.L. formulation because the latter words are defined terms that include
only orders or promises to pay money. The three exceptions stated in Section 3-104(a)(3) are based on and are
intended to have the same meaning as former Section 3-112(1)(b), (c), (d), and (e), as well as N.I.L. § 5(1), (2), and
(3). Subsection (b) states that "instrument" means a "negotiable instrument." This follows former Section 3-
102(1)(e) which treated the two terms as synonymous.
2. Unless subsection (c) applies, the effect of subsection (a)(1) and Section 3-102(a) is to exclude from Article 3
any promise or order that is not payable to bearer or to order. There is no provision in revised Article 3 that is
comparable to former Section 3-805. The comment to former Section 3-805 states that the typical example of a
writing covered by that section is a check reading "Pay John Doe." Such a check was governed by former Article 3
but there could not be a holder in due course of the check. Under Section 3-104(c) such a check is governed by
revised Article 3 and there can be a holder in due course of the check. But subsection (c) applies only to checks.
The comment to former Section 3-805 does not state any example other than the check to illustrate that section.
Subsection (c) is based on the belief that it is good policy to treat checks, which are payment instruments, as
negotiable instruments whether or not they contain the words "to the order of". These words are almost always preprinted
on the check form. Occasionally the drawer of a check may strike out these words before issuing the check.
In the past some credit unions used check forms that did not contain the quoted words. Such check forms may still
be in use but they are no longer common. Absence of the quoted words can easily be overlooked and should not
affect the rights of holders who may pay money or give credit for a check without being aware that it is not in the
conventional form.
Total exclusion from Article 3 of other promises or orders that are not payable to bearer or to order serves a
useful purpose. It provides a simple device to clearly exclude a writing that does not fit the pattern of typical
negotiable instruments and which is not intended to be a negotiable instrument. If a writing could be an instrument
despite the absence of "to order" or "to bearer" language and a dispute arises with respect to the writing, it might be
argued that the writing is a negotiable instrument because the other requirements of subsection (a) are somehow
met. Even if the argument is eventually found to be without merit it can be used as a litigation ploy. Words making a
promise or order payable to bearer or to order are the most distinguishing feature of a negotiable instrument and
such words are frequently referred to as "words of negotiability." Article 3 is not meant to apply to contracts for the
sale of goods or services or the sale or lease of real property or similar writings that may contain a promise to pay
money. The use of words of negotiability in such contracts would be an aberration. Absence of the words precludes
any argument that such contracts might be negotiable instruments.
§ 3-104. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT
Page 3 of 4
An order or promise that is excluded from Article 3 because of the requirements of Section 3-104(a) may
nevertheless be similar to a negotiable instrument in many respects. Although such a writing cannot be made a
negotiable instrument within Article 3 by contract or conduct of its parties, nothing in Section 3-104 or in Section 3-
102 is intended to mean that in a particular case involving such a writing a court could not arrive at a result similar
to the result that would follow if the writing were a negotiable instrument. For example, a court might find that the
obligor with respect to a promise that does not fall within Section 3-104(a) is precluded from asserting a defense
against a bona fide purchaser. The preclusion could be based on estoppel or ordinary principles of contract. It does
not depend upon the law of negotiable instruments. An example is stated in the paragraph following Case # 2 in
Comment 4 to Section 3-302.
Moreover, consistent with the principle stated in Section 1-102(2)(b), the immediate parties to an order or promise
that is not an instrument may provide by agreement that one or more of the provisions of Article 3 determine their
rights and obligations under the writing. Upholding the parties' choice is not inconsistent with Article 3. Such an
agreement may bind a transferee of the writing if the transferee has notice of it or the agreement arises from usage
of trade and the agreement does not violate other law or public policy. An example of such an agreement is a
provision that a transferee of the writing has the rights of a holder in due course stated in Article 3 if the transferee
took rights under the writing in good faith, for value, and without notice of a claim or defense.
Even without an agreement of the parties to an order or promise that is not an instrument, it may be appropriate,
consistent with the principles stated in Section 1-102(2), for a court to apply one or more provisions of Article 3 to
the writing by analogy, taking into account the expectations of the parties and the differences between the writing
and an instrument governed by Article 3. Whether such application is appropriate depends upon the facts of each
case.
3. Subsection (d) allows exclusion from Article 3 of a writing that would otherwise be an instrument under
subsection (a) by a statement to the effect that the writing is not negotiable or is not governed by Article 3. For
example, a promissory note can be stamped with the legend NOT NEGOTIABLE. The effect under subsection (d) is
not only to negate the possibility of a holder in due course, but to prevent the writing from being a negotiable
instrument for any purpose. Subsection (d) does not, however, apply to a check. If a writing is excluded from Article
3 by subsection (d), a court could, nevertheless, apply Article 3 principles to it by analogy as stated in Comment 2.
4. Instruments are divided into two general categories: drafts and notes. A draft is an instrument that is an order.
A note is an instrument that is a promise. Section 3-104(e). The term "bill of exchange" is not used in Article 3. It is
generally understood to be a synonym for the term "draft." Subsections (f) through (j) define particular instruments
that fall within the categories of draft and note. The term "draft," defined in subsection (e), includes a "check" which
is defined in subsection (f). "Check" includes a share draft drawn on a credit union payable through a bank because
the definition of bank (Section 4-105) includes credit unions. However, a draft drawn on an insurance company
payable through a bank is not a check because it is not drawn on a bank. "Money orders" are sold both by banks
and non-banks. They vary in form and their form determines how they are treated in Article 3. The most common
form of money order sold by banks is that of an ordinary check drawn by the purchaser except that the amount is
machine impressed. That kind of money order is a check under Article 3 and is subject to a stop order by the
purchaser-drawer as in the case of ordinary checks. The seller bank is the drawee and has no obligation to a holder
to pay the money order. If a money order falls within the definition of a teller's check, the rules applicable to teller's
checks apply. Postal money orders are subject to federal law. "Teller's check" is separately defined in subsection
(h). A teller's check is always drawn by a bank and is usually drawn on another bank. In some cases a teller's check
is drawn on a nonbank but is made payable at or through a bank. Article 3 treats both types of teller's check
identically, and both are included in the definition of "check." A cashier's check, defined in subsection (g), is also
included in the definition of "check." Traveler's checks are issued both by banks and nonbanks and may be in the
form of a note or draft. Subsection (i) states the essential characteristics of a traveler's check. The requirement that
the instrument be "drawn on or payable at or through a bank" may be satisfied without words on the instrument that
identify a bank as drawee or paying agent so long as the instrument bears an appropriate routing number that
identifies a bank as paying agent.
The definitions in Regulation CC § 229.2 of the terms "check," "cashier's check," "teller's check," and "traveler's
check" are different from the definitions of those terms in Article 3.
§ 3-104. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT
Page 4 of 4
Certificates of deposit are treated in former Article 3 as a separate type of instrument. In revised Article 3, Section
3-104(j) treats them as notes.
5. There are some differences between the requirements of Article 3 and the requirements included in Article 3 of
the Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes. Most obviously, the
Convention does not include the limitation on extraneous undertakings set forth in Section 3-104(a)(3), and does
not permit documents payable to bearer that would be permissible under Section 3-104(a)(1) and Section 3-109.
See Convention Article 3. In most respects, however, the requirements of Section 3-104 and Article 3 of the
Convention are quite similar. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial
Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-105. ISSUE OF INSTRUMENT
(a) "Issue" means the first delivery of an instrument by the maker or drawer, whether to a holder or
nonholder, for the purpose of giving rights on the instrument to any person.
(b) An unissued instrument, or an unissued incomplete instrument that is completed, is binding on the
maker or drawer, but nonissuance is a defense. An instrument that is conditionally issued or is issued for a
special purpose is binding on the maker or drawer, but failure of the condition or special purpose to be
fulfilled is a defense.
(c) "Issuer" applies to issued and unissued instruments and means a maker or drawer of an instrument.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Under former Section 3-102(1)(a) "issue" was defined as the first delivery to a "holder or a remitter" but the
term "remitter" was neither defined nor otherwise used. In revised Article 3, Section 3-105(a) defines "issue" more
broadly to include the first delivery to anyone by the drawer or maker for the purpose of giving rights to anyone on
the instrument. "Delivery" with respect to instruments is defined in Section 1-201(14) as meaning "voluntary transfer
of possession."
2. Subsection (b) continues the rule that nonissuance, conditional issuance or issuance for a special purpose is a
defense of the maker or drawer of an instrument. Thus, the defense can be asserted against a person other than a
holder in due course. The same rule applies to nonissuance of an incomplete instrument later completed.
3. Subsection (c) defines "issuer" to include the signer of an unissued instrument for convenience of reference in
the statute.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-106. UNCONDITIONAL PROMISE OR ORDER
(a) Except as provided in this section, for the purposes of Section 3-104(a), a promise or order is
unconditional unless it states (i) an express condition to payment, (ii) that the promise or order is subject to
or governed by another record, or (iii) that rights or obligations with respect to the promise or order are
stated in another record. A reference to another record does not of itself make the promise or order
conditional.
(b) A promise or order is not made conditional (i) by a reference to another record for a statement of rights
with respect to collateral, prepayment, or acceleration, or (ii) because payment is limited to resort to a
particular fund or source.
(c) If a promise or order requires, as a condition to payment, a countersignature by a person whose
specimen signature appears on the promise or order, the condition does not make the promise or order
conditional for the purposes of Section 3-104(a). If the person whose specimen signature appears on an
instrument fails to countersign the instrument, the failure to countersign is a defense to the obligation of the
issuer, but the failure does not prevent a transferee of the instrument from becoming a holder of the
instrument.
(d) If a promise or order at the time it is issued or first comes into possession of a holder contains a
statement, required by applicable statutory or administrative law, to the effect that the rights of a holder or
transferee are subject to claims or defenses that the issuer could assert against the original payee, the
promise or order is not thereby made conditional for the purposes of Section 3-104(a); but if the promise or
order is an instrument, there cannot be a holder in due course of the instrument.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This provision replaces former Section 3-105. Its purpose is to define when a promise or order fulfills the
requirement in Section 3-104(a) that it be an "unconditional" promise or order to pay. Under Section 3-106(a) a
promise or order is deemed to be unconditional unless one of the two tests of the subsection make the promise or
order conditional. If the promise or order states an express condition to payment, the promise or order is not an
instrument. For example, a promise states, "I promise to pay $ 100,000 to the order of John Doe if he conveys title
to Blackacre to me." The promise is not an instrument because there is an express condition to payment. However,
suppose a promise states, "In consideration of John Doe's promise to convey title to Blackacre I promise to pay $
100,000 to the order of John Doe." That promise can be an instrument if Section 3-104 is otherwise satisfied.
Although the recital of the executory promise of Doe to convey Blackacre might be read as an implied condition that
the promise be performed, the condition is not an express condition as required by Section 3-106(a)(i). This result is
consistent with former Section 3-105(1)(a) and (b). Former Section 3-105(1)(b) is not repeated in Section 3-106
because it is not necessary. It is an example of an implied condition. Former Section 3-105(1)(d), (e), and (f) and
the first clause of former Section 3-105(1)(c) are other examples of implied conditions. They are not repeated in
Section 3-106 because they are not necessary. The law is not changed.
§ 3-106. UNCONDITIONAL PROMISE OR ORDER
Page 2 of 3
Section 3-106(a)(ii) and (iii) carry forward the substance of former Section 3-105(2)(a). The only change is the use
of "writing" instead of "agreement" and a broadening of the language that can result in conditionality. For example,
a promissory note is not an instrument defined by Section 3-104 if it contains any of the following statements: 1.
"This note is subject to a contract of sale dated April 1, 1990 between the payee and maker of this note." 2. "This
note is subject to a loan and security agreement dated April 1, 1990 between the payee and maker of this note." 3.
"Rights and obligations of the parties with respect to this note are stated in an agreement dated April 1, 1990
between the payee and maker of this note." It is not relevant whether any condition to payment is or is not stated in
the writing to which reference is made. The rationale is that the holder of a negotiable instrument should not be
required to examine another document to determine rights with respect to payment. But subsection (b)(i) permits
reference to a separate writing for information with respect to collateral, prepayment, or acceleration.
Many notes issued in commercial transactions are secured by collateral, are subject to acceleration in the event
of default, or are subject to prepayment. A statement of rights and obligations concerning collateral, prepayment, or
acceleration does not prevent the note from being an instrument if the statement is in the note itself. See Section 3-
104(a)(3) and Section 3-108(b). In some cases it may be convenient not to include a statement concerning
collateral, prepayment, or acceleration in the note, but rather to refer to an accompanying loan agreement, security
agreement or mortgage for that statement. Subsection (b)(i) allows a reference to the appropriate writing for a
statement of these rights. For example, a note would not be made conditional by the following statement: "This note
is secured by a security interest in collateral described in a security agreement dated April 1, 1990 between the
payee and maker of this note. Rights and obligations with respect to the collateral are [stated in] [governed by] the
security agreement." The bracketed words are alternatives, either of which complies.
Subsection (b)(ii) addresses the issues covered by former Section 3-105(1)(f), (g), and (h) and Section 3-
105(2)(b). Under Section 3-106(a) a promise or order is not made conditional because payment is limited to
payment from a particular source or fund. This reverses the result of former Section 3-105(2)(b). There is no cogent
reason why the general credit of a legal entity must be pledged to have a negotiable instrument. Market forces
determine the marketability of instruments of this kind. If potential buyers don't want promises or orders that are
payable only from a particular source or fund, they won't take them, but Article 3 should apply.
2. Subsection (c) applies to traveler's checks or other instruments that may require a countersignature. Although
the requirement of a countersignature is a condition to the obligation to pay, traveler's checks are treated in the
commercial world as money substitutes and therefore should be governed by Article 3. The first sentence of
subsection (c) allows a traveler's check to meet the definition of instrument by stating that the countersignature
condition does not make it conditional for the purposes of Section 3-104. The second sentence states the effect of a
failure to meet the condition. Suppose a thief steals a traveler's check and cashes it by skillfully imitating the
specimen signature so that the countersignature appears to be authentic. The countersignature is for the purpose of
identification of the owner of the instrument. It is not an indorsement. Subsection (c) provides that the failure of the
owner to countersign does not prevent a transferee from becoming a holder. Thus, the merchant or bank that
cashed the traveler's check becomes a holder when the traveler's check is taken. The forged countersignature is a
defense to the obligation of the issuer to pay the instrument, and is included in defenses under Section 3-305(a)(2).
These defenses may not be asserted against a holder in due course. Whether a holder has notice of the defense is
a factual question. If the countersignature is a very bad forgery, there may be notice. But if the merchant or bank
cashed a traveler's check and the countersignature appeared to be similar to the specimen signature, there might
not be notice that the countersignature was forged. Thus, the merchant or bank could be a holder in due course.
3. Subsection (d) concerns the effect of a statement to the effect that the rights of a holder or transferee are
subject to claims and defenses that the issuer could assert against the original payee. The subsection applies only
if the statement is required by statutory or administrative law. The prime example is the Federal Trade Commission
Rule (16 C.F.R. Part 433) preserving consumers' claims and defenses in consumer credit sales. The intent of the
FTC rule is to make it impossible for there to be a holder in due course of a note bearing the FTC legend and
undoubtedly that is the result. But, under former Article 3, the legend may also have had the unintended effect of
making the note conditional, thus excluding the note from former Article 3 altogether. Subsection (d) is designed to
make it possible to preclude the possibility of a holder in due course without excluding the instrument from Article 3.
Most of the provisions of Article 3 are not affected by the holder-in-due-course doctrine and there is no reason why
§ 3-106. UNCONDITIONAL PROMISE OR ORDER
Page 3 of 3
Article 3 should not apply to a note bearing the FTC legend if holder-in-due-course rights are not involved. Under
subsection (d) the statement does not make the note conditional. If the note otherwise meets the requirements of
Section 3-104(a) it is a negotiable instrument for all purposes except that there cannot be a holder in due course of
the note. No particular form of legend or statement is required by subsection (d). The form of a particular legend or
statement may be determined by the other statute or administrative law. For example, the FTC legend required in a
note taken by the seller in a consumer sale of goods or services is tailored to that particular transaction and
therefore uses language that is somewhat different from that stated in subsection (d), but the difference in
expression does not affect the essential similarity of the message conveyed. The effect of the FTC legend is to
make the rights of a holder or transferee subject to claims or defenses that the issuer could assert against the
original payee of the note.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-107. INSTRUMENT PAYABLE IN FOREIGN MONEY
Unless the instrument otherwise provides, an instrument that states the amount payable in foreign money may be
paid in the foreign money or in an equivalent amount in dollars calculated by using the current bank-offered spot
rate at the place of payment for the purchase of dollars on the day on which the instrument is paid.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
The definition of instrument in Section 3-104 requires that the promise or order be payable in "money." That term
is defined in Section 1-201(24) and is not limited to United States dollars. Section 3-107 states than an instrument
payable in foreign money may be paid in dollars if the instrument does not prohibit it. It also states a conversion rate
which applies in the absence of a different conversion rate stated in the instrument. The reference in former Section
3-107(1) to instruments payable in "currency" or "current funds" has been dropped as superfluous.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-108
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-108. PAYABLE ON DEMAND OR AT DEFINITE TIME
(a) A promise or order is "payable on demand" if it (i) states that it is payable on demand or at sight, or
otherwise indicates that it is payable at the will of the holder, or (ii) does not state any time of payment.
(b) A promise or order is "payable at a definite time" if it is payable on elapse of a definite period of time
after sight or acceptance or at a fixed date or dates or at a time or times readily ascertainable at the time
the promise or order is issued, subject to rights of (i) prepayment, (ii) acceleration, (iii) extension at the
option of the holder, or (iv) extension to a further definite time at the option of the maker or acceptor or
automatically upon or after a specified act or event.
(c) If an instrument, payable at a fixed date, is also payable upon demand made before the fixed date, the
instrument is payable on demand until the fixed date and, if demand for payment is not made before that
date, becomes payable at a definite time on the fixed date.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section is a restatement of former Section 3-108 and Section 3-109. Subsection (b) broadens former Section
3-109 somewhat by providing that a definite time includes a time readily ascertainable at the time the promise or
order is issued. Subsection (b)(iii) and (iv) restates former Section 3-109(1)(d). It adopts the generally accepted rule
that a clause providing for extension at the option of the holder, even without a time limit, does not affect
negotiability since the holder is given only a right which the holder would have without the clause. If the extension is
to be at the option of the maker or acceptor or is to be automatic, a definite time limit must be stated or the time of
payment remains uncertain and the order or promise is not a negotiable instrument. If a definite time limit is stated,
the effect upon certainty of time of payment is the same as if the instrument were made payable at the ultimate date
with a term providing for acceleration.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-109
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-109. PAYABLE TO BEARER OR TO ORDER
(a) A promise or order is payable to bearer if it:
(1) states that it is payable to bearer or to the order of bearer or otherwise indicates that the person in
possession of the promise or order is entitled to payment;
(2) does not state a payee; or
(3) states that it is payable to or to the order of cash or otherwise indicates that it is not payable to an
identified person.
(b) A promise or order that is not payable to bearer is payable to order if it is payable (i) to the order of an
identified person or (ii) to an identified person or order. A promise or order that is payable to order is
payable to the identified person.
(c) An instrument payable to bearer may become payable to an identified person if it is specially indorsed
pursuant to Section 3-205(a). An instrument payable to an identified person may become payable to bearer
if it is indorsed in blank pursuant to Section 3-205(b).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Under Section 3-104(a), a promise or order cannot be an instrument unless the instrument is payable to bearer
or to order when it is issued or unless Section 3-104(c) applies. The terms "payable to bearer" and "payable to
order" are defined in Section 3-109. The quoted terms are also relevant in determining how an instrument is
negotiated. If the instrument is payable to bearer it can be negotiated by delivery alone. Section 3-201(b). An
instrument that is payable to an identified person cannot be negotiated without the indorsement of the identified
person. Section 3-201(b). An instrument payable to order is payable to an identified person. Section 3-109(b). Thus,
an instrument payable to order requires the indorsement of the person to whose order the instrument is payable.
2. Subsection (a) states when an instrument is payable to bearer. An instrument is payable to bearer if it states
that it is payable to bearer, but some instruments use ambiguous terms. For example, check forms usually have the
words "to the order of" printed at the beginning of the line to be filled in for the name of the payee. If the drawer
writes in the word "bearer" or "cash," the check reads "to the order of bearer" or "to the order of cash." In each case
the check is payable to bearer. Sometimes the drawer will write the name of the payee "John Doe" but will add the
words "or bearer." In that case the check is payable to bearer. Subsection (a). Under subsection (b), if an
instrument is payable to bearer it can't be payable to order. This is different from former Section 3-110(3). An
instrument that purports to be payable both to order and bearer states contradictory terms. A transferee of the
instrument should be able to rely on the bearer term and acquire rights as a holder without obtaining the
indorsement of the identified payee. An instrument is also payable to bearer if it does not state a payee. Instruments
that do not state a payee are in most cases incomplete instruments. In some cases the drawer of a check may
deliver or mail it to the person to be paid without filling in the line for the name of the payee. Under subsection (a)
the check is payable to bearer when it is sent or delivered. It is also an incomplete instrument. This case is
§ 3-109. PAYABLE TO BEARER OR TO ORDER
Page 2 of 2
discussed in Comment 2 to Section 3-115. Subsection (a)(3) contains the words "otherwise indicates that it is not
payable to an identified person." The quoted words are meant to cover uncommon cases in which an instrument
indicates that it is not meant to be payable to a specific person. Such an instrument is treated like a check payable
to "cash." The quoted words are not meant to apply to an instrument stating that it is payable to an identified person
such as "ABC Corporation" if ABC Corporation is a nonexistent company. Although the holder of the check cannot
be the nonexistent company, the instrument is not payable to bearer. Negotiation of such an instrument is governed
by Section 3-404(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-110
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-110. IDENTIFICATION OF PERSON TO WHOM INSTRUMENT IS PAYABLE
(a) The person to whom an instrument is initially payable is determined by the intent of the person, whether
or not authorized, signing as, or in the name or behalf of, the issuer of the instrument. The instrument is
payable to the person intended by the signer even if that person is identified in the instrument by a name or
other identification that is not that of the intended person. If more than one person signs in the name or
behalf of the issuer of an instrument and all the signers do not intend the same person as payee, the
instrument is payable to any person intended by one or more of the signers.
(b) If the signature of the issuer of an instrument is made by automated means, such as a check-writing
machine, the payee of the instrument is determined by the intent of the person who supplied the name or
identification of the payee, whether or not authorized to do so.
(c) A person to whom an instrument is payable may be identified in any way, including by name, identifying
number, office, or account number. For the purpose of determining the holder of an instrument, the
following rules apply:
(1) If an instrument is payable to an account and the account is identified only by number, the
instrument is payable to the person to whom the account is payable. If an instrument is payable to an
account identified by number and by the name of a person, the instrument is payable to the named
person, whether or not that person is the owner of the account identified by number.
(2) If an instrument is payable to:
(i) a trust, an estate, or a person described as trustee or representative of a trust or estate, the
instrument is payable to the trustee, the representative, or a successor of either, whether or not the
beneficiary or estate is also named;
(ii) a person described as agent or similar representative of a named or identified person, the
instrument is payable to the represented person, the representative, or a successor of the
representative;
(iii) a fund or organization that is not a legal entity, the instrument is payable to a representative of
the members of the fund or organization; or
(iv) an office or to a person described as holding an office, the instrument is payable to the named
person, the incumbent of the office, or a successor to the incumbent.
(d) If an instrument is payable to two or more persons alternatively, it is payable to any of them and may be
negotiated, discharged, or enforced by any or all of them in possession of the instrument. If an instrument is
payable to two or more persons not alternatively, it is payable to all of them and may be negotiated,
discharged, or enforced only by all of them. If an instrument payable to two or more persons is ambiguous
as to whether it is payable to the persons alternatively, the instrument is payable to the persons
alternatively.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 3-110. IDENTIFICATION OF PERSON TO WHOM INSTRUMENT IS PAYABLE
Page 2 of 3
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 3-110 states rules for determining the identity of the person to whom an instrument is initially payable if
the instrument is payable to an identified person. This issue usually arises in a dispute over the validity of an
indorsement in the name of the payee. Subsection (a) states the general rule that the person to whom an
instrument is payable is determined by the intent of "the person, whether or not authorized, signing as, or in the
name or behalf of, the issuer of the instrument." "Issuer" means the maker or drawer of the instrument. Section 3-
105(c). If X signs a check as drawer of a check on X's account, the intent of X controls. If X, as President of
Corporation, signs a check as President in behalf of Corporation as drawer, the intent of X controls. If X forges Y's
signature as drawer of a check, the intent of X also controls. Under Section 3-103(a)(3), Y is referred to as the
drawer of the check because the signing of Y's name identifies Y as the drawer. But since Y's signature was forged
Y has no liability as drawer (Section 3-403(a)) unless some other provision of Article 3 or Article 4 makes Y liable.
Since X, even though unauthorized, signed in the name of Y as issuer, the intent of X determines to whom the
check is payable.
In the case of a check payable to "John Smith," since there are many people in the world named "John Smith" it is
not possible to identify the payee of the check unless there is some further identification or the intention of the
drawer is determined. Name alone is sufficient under subsection (a), but the intention of the drawer determines
which John Smith is the person to whom the check is payable. The same issue is presented in cases of
misdescriptions of the payee. The drawer intends to pay a person known to the drawer as John Smith. In fact that
person's name is James Smith or John Jones or some other entirely different name. If the check identifies the
payee as John Smith, it is nevertheless payable to the person intended by the drawer. That person may indorse the
check in either the name John Smith or the person's correct name or in both names. Section 3-204(d). The intent of
the drawer is also controlling in fictitious payee cases. Section 3-404(b). The last sentence of subsection (a) refers
to rare cases in which the signature of an organization requires more than one signature and the persons signing
on behalf of the organization do not all intend the same person as payee. Any person intended by a signer for the
organization is the payee and an indorsement by that person is an effective indorsement.
Subsection (b) recognizes the fact that in a large number of cases there is no human signer of an instrument
because the instrument, usually a check, is produced by automated means such as a check-writing machine. In that
case, the relevant intent is that of the person who supplied the name of the payee. In most cases that person is an
employee of the drawer, but in some cases the person could be an outsider who is committing a fraud by
introducing names of payees of checks into the system that produces the checks. A check-writing machine is likely
to be operated by means of a computer in which is stored information as to name and address of the payee and the
amount of the check. Access to the computer may allow production of fraudulent checks without knowledge of the
organization that is the issuer of the check. Section 3-404(b) is also concerned with this issue. See Case # 4 in
Comment 2 to Section 3-404.
2. Subsection (c) allows the payee to be identified in any way including the various ways stated. Subsection (c)(1)
relates to instruments payable to bank accounts. In some cases the account might be identified by name and
number, and the name and number might refer to different persons. For example, a check is payable to "X
Corporation Account No. 12345 in Bank of Podunk." Under the last sentence of subsection (c)(1), this check is
payable to X Corporation and can be negotiated by X Corporation even if Account No. 12345 is some other
person's account or the check is not deposited in that account. In other cases the payee is identified by an account
number and the name of the owner of the account is not stated. For example, Debtor pays Creditor by issuing a
check drawn on Payor Bank. The check is payable to a bank account owned by Creditor but identified only by
number. Under the first sentence of subsection (c)(1) the check is payable to Creditor and, under Section 1-
201(20), Creditor becomes the holder when the check is delivered. Under Section 3-201(b), further negotiation of
the check requires the indorsement of Creditor. But under Section 4-205(a), if the check is taken by a depositary
bank for collection, the bank may become a holder without the indorsement. Under Section 3-102(b), provisions of
Article 4 prevail over those of Article 3. The depositary bank warrants that the amount of the check was credited to
the payee's account.
3. Subsection (c)(2) replaces former Section 3-117 and subsection (1)(e), (f), and (g) of former Section 3-110.
This provision merely determines who can deal with an instrument as a holder. It does not determine ownership of
§ 3-110. IDENTIFICATION OF PERSON TO WHOM INSTRUMENT IS PAYABLE
Page 3 of 3
the instrument or its proceeds. Subsection (c)(2)(i) covers trusts and estates. If the instrument is payable to the trust
or estate or to the trustee or representative of the trust or estate, the instrument is payable to the trustee or
representative or any successor. Under subsection (c)(2)(ii), if the instrument states that it is payable to Doe,
President of X Corporation, either Doe or X Corporation can be holder of the instrument. Subsection (c)(2)(iii)
concerns informal organizations that are not legal entities such as unincorporated clubs and the like. Any
representative of the members of the organization can act as holder. Subsection (c)(2)(iv) applies principally to
instruments payable to public offices such as a check payable to County Tax Collector.
4. Subsection (d) replaces former Section 3-116. An instrument payable to X or Y is governed by the first
sentence of subsection (d). An instrument payable to X and Y is governed by the second sentence of subsection
(d). If an instrument is payable to X or Y, either is the payee and if either is in possession that person is the holder
and the person entitled to enforce the instrument. Section 3-301. If an instrument is payable to X and Y, neither X
nor Y acting alone is the person to whom the instrument is payable. Neither person, acting alone, can be the holder
of the instrument. The instrument is "payable to an identified person." The "identified person" is X and Y acting
jointly. Section 3-109(b) and Section 1-102(5)(a). Thus, under Section 1-201(20) X or Y, acting alone, cannot be the
holder or the person entitled to enforce or negotiate the instrument because neither, acting alone, is the identified
person stated in the instrument.
The third sentence of subsection (d) is directed to cases in which it is not clear whether an instrument is payable
to multiple payees alternatively. In the case of ambiguity persons dealing with the instrument should be able to rely
on the indorsement of a single payee. For example, an instrument payable to X and/or Y is treated like an
instrument payable to X or Y.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-111
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-111. PLACE OF PAYMENT
Except as otherwise provided for items in Article 4, an instrument is payable at the place of payment stated in the
instrument. If no place of payment is stated, an instrument is payable at the address of the drawee or maker stated
in the instrument. If no address is stated, the place of payment is the place of business of the drawee or maker. If a
drawee or maker has more than one place of business, the place of payment is any place of business of the drawee
or maker chosen by the person entitled to enforce the instrument. If the drawee or maker has no place of business,
the place of payment is the residence of the drawee or maker.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
If an instrument is payable at a bank in the United States, Section 3-501(b)(1) states that presentment must be
made at the place of payment, i.e. the bank. The place of presentment of a check is governed by Regulation CC §
229.36.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-112
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-112. INTEREST
(a) Unless otherwise provided in the instrument, (i) an instrument is not payable with interest, and (ii)
interest on an interest-bearing instrument is payable from the date of the instrument.
(b) Interest may be stated in an instrument as a fixed or variable amount of money or it may be expressed
as a fixed or variable rate or rates. The amount or rate of interest may be stated or described in the
instrument in any manner and may require reference to information not contained in the instrument. If an
instrument provides for interest, but the amount of interest payable cannot be ascertained from the
description, interest is payable at the judgment rate in effect at the place of payment of the instrument and
at the time interest first accrues.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Under Section 3-104(a) the requirement of a "fixed amount" applies only to principal. The amount of interest
payable is that described in the instrument. If the description of interest in the instrument does not allow for the
amount of interest to be ascertained, interest is payable at the judgment rate. Hence, if an instrument calls for
interest, the amount of interest will always be determinable. If a variable rate of interest is prescribed, the amount of
interest is ascertainable by reference to the formula or index described or referred to in the instrument. The last
sentence of subsection (b) replaces subsection (d) of former Section 3-118.
2. The purpose of subsection (b) is to clarify the meaning of "interest" in the introductory clause of Section 3-
104(a). It is not intended to validate a provision for interest in an instrument if that provision violates other law.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-113
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-113. DATE OF INSTRUMENT
(a) An instrument may be antedated or postdated. The date stated determines the time of payment if the
instrument is payable at a fixed period after date. Except as provided in Section 4-401(c), an instrument
payable on demand is not payable before the date of the instrument.
(b) If an instrument is undated, its date is the date of its issue or, in the case of an unissued instrument, the
date it first comes into possession of a holder.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section replaces former Section 3-114. Subsections (1) and (3) of former Section 3-114 are deleted as
unnecessary. Section 3-113(a) is based in part on subsection (2) of former Section 3-114. The rule that a demand
instrument is not payable before the date of the instrument is subject to Section 4-401(c) which allows the payor
bank to pay a postdated check unless the drawer has notified the bank of the postdating pursuant to a procedure
prescribed in that subsection. With respect to an undated instrument, the date is the date of issue.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-114
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-114. CONTRADICTORY TERMS OF INSTRUMENT
If an instrument contains contradictory terms, typewritten terms prevail over printed terms, handwritten terms
prevail over both, and words prevail over numbers.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Section 3-114 replaces subsections (b) and (c) of former Section 3-118.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-115
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-115. INCOMPLETE INSTRUMENT
(a) "Incomplete instrument" means a signed writing, whether or not issued by the signer, the contents of
which show at the time of signing that it is incomplete but that the signer intended it to be completed by the
addition of words or numbers.
(b) Subject to subsection (c), if an incomplete instrument is an instrument under Section 3-104, it may be
enforced according to its terms if it is not completed, or according to its terms as augmented by completion.
If an incomplete instrument is not an instrument under Section 3-104, but, after completion, the
requirements of Section 3-104 are met, the instrument may be enforced according to its terms as
augmented by completion.
(c) If words or numbers are added to an incomplete instrument without authority of the signer, there is an
alteration of the incomplete instrument under Section 3-407.
(d) The burden of establishing that words or numbers were added to an incomplete instrument without
authority of the signer is on the person asserting the lack of authority.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section generally carries forward the rules set out in former Section 3-115. The term "incomplete
instrument" applies both to an "instrument," i.e. a writing meeting all the requirements of Section 3-104, and to a
writing intended to be an instrument that is signed but lacks some element of an instrument. The test in both cases
is whether the contents show that it is incomplete and that the signer intended that additional words or numbers be
added.
2. If an incomplete instrument meets the requirements of Section 3-104 and is not completed it may be enforced
in accordance with its terms. Suppose, in the following two cases, that a note delivered to the payee is incomplete
solely because a space on the pre-printed note form for the due date is not filled in:
Case # 1. If the incomplete instrument is never completed, the note is payable on demand. Section 3-108(a)(ii).
However, if the payee and the maker agreed to a due date, the maker may have a defense under Section 3-117 if
demand for payment is made before the due date agreed to by the parties.
Case # 2. If the payee completes the note by filling in the due date agreed to by the parties, the note is payable
on the due date stated. However, if the due date filled in was not the date agreed to by the parties there is an
alteration of the note. Section 3-407 governs the case.
Suppose Debtor pays Creditor by giving Creditor a check on which the space for the name of the payee is left
blank. The check is an instrument but it is incomplete. The check is enforceable in its incomplete form and it is
payable to bearer because it does not state a payee. Section 3-109(a)(2). Thus, Creditor is a holder of the check.
Normally in this kind of case Creditor would simply fill in the space with Creditor's name. When that occurs the
check becomes payable to the Creditor.
§ 3-115. INCOMPLETE INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 2
3. In some cases the incomplete instrument does not meet the requirements of Section 3-104. An example is a
check with the amount not filled in. The check cannot be enforced until the amount is filled in. If the payee fills in an
amount authorized by the drawer the check meets the requirements of Section 3-104 and is enforceable as
completed. If the payee fills in an unauthorized amount there is an alteration of the check and Section 3-407
applies.
4. Section 3-302(a)(1) also bears on the problem of incomplete instruments. Under that section a person cannot
be a holder in due course of the instrument if it is so incomplete as to call into question its validity. Subsection (d) of
Section 3-115 is based on the last clause of subsection (2) of former Section 3-115.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-116
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-116. JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY; CONTRIBUTION
(a) Except as otherwise provided in the instrument, two or more persons who have the same liability on an
instrument as makers, drawers, acceptors, indorsers who indorse as joint payees, or anomalous indorsers
are jointly and severally liable in the capacity in which they sign.
(b) Except as provided in Section 3-419(f) or by agreement of the affected parties, a party having joint and
several liability who pays the instrument is entitled to receive from any party having the same joint and
several liability contribution in accordance with applicable law.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) replaces subsection (e) of former Section 3-118. Subsection (b) states contribution rights of
parties with joint and several liability by referring to applicable law. But subsection (b) is subject to Section 3-419(f).
If one of the parties with joint and several liability is an accommodation party and the other is the accommodated
party, Section 3-419(f) applies. Because one of the joint and several obligors may have recourse against the other
joint and several obligor under subsection (b), each party that is jointly and severally liable under subsection (a) is a
secondary obligor in part and a principal obligor in part, as those terms are defined in Section 3-103(a). Accordingly,
Section 3-605 determines the effect of a release, an extension of time, or a modification of the obligation of one of
the joint and several obligors, as well as the effect of an impairment of collateral provided by one of those obligors.
2. Indorsers normally do not have joint and several liability. Rather, an earlier indorser has liability to a later
indorser. But indorsers can have joint and several liability in two cases. If an instrument is payable to two payees
jointly, both payees must indorse. The indorsement is a joint indorsement and the indorsers have joint and several
liability and subsection (b) applies. The other case is that of two or more anomalous indorsers. The term is defined
in Section 3-205(d). An anomalous indorsement normally indicates that the indorser signed as an accommodation
party. If more than one accommodation party indorses a note as an accommodation to the maker, the indorsers
have joint and several liability and subsection (b) applies.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-117
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-117. OTHER AGREEMENTS AFFECTING INSTRUMENT
Subject to applicable law regarding exclusion of proof of contemporaneous or previous agreements, the obligation
of a party to an instrument to pay the instrument may be modified, supplemented, or nullified by a separate
agreement of the obligor and a person entitled to enforce the instrument, if the instrument is issued or the obligation
is incurred in reliance on the agreement or as part of the same transaction giving rise to the agreement. To the
extent an obligation is modified, supplemented, or nullified by an agreement under this section, the agreement is a
defense to the obligation.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The separate agreement might be a security agreement or mortgage or it might be an agreement that
contradicts the terms of the instrument. For example, a person may be induced to sign an instrument under an
agreement that the signer will not be liable on the instrument unless certain conditions are met. Suppose X
requested credit from Creditor who is willing to give the credit only if an acceptable accommodation party will sign
the note of X as co-maker. Y agrees to sign as co-maker on the condition that Creditor also obtain the signature of
Z as co-maker. Creditor agrees and Y signs as co-maker with X. Creditor fails to obtain the signature of Z on the
note. Under Sections 3-412 and 3-419(b), Y is obliged to pay the note, but Section 3-117 applies. In this case, the
agreement modifies the terms of the note by stating a condition to the obligation of Y to pay the note. This case is
essentially similar to a case in which a maker of a note is induced to sign the note by fraud of the holder. Although
the agreement that Y not be liable on the note unless Z also signs may not have been fraudulently made, a
subsequent attempt by Creditor to require Y to pay the note in violation of the agreement is a bad faith act. Section
3-117, in treating the agreement as a defense, allows Y to assert the agreement against Creditor, but the defense
would not be good against a subsequent holder in due course of the note that took it without notice of the
agreement. If there cannot be a holder in due course because of Section 3-106(d), a subsequent holder that took
the note in good faith, for value and without knowledge of the agreement would not be able to enforce the liability of
Y. This result is consistent with the risk that a holder not in due course takes with respect to fraud in inducing
issuance of an instrument.
2. The effect of merger or integration clauses to the effect that a writing is intended to be the complete and
exclusive statement of the terms of the agreement or that the agreement is not subject to conditions is left to the
supplementary law of the jurisdiction pursuant to Section 1-103. Thus, in the case discussed in Comment 1,
whether Y is permitted to prove the condition to Y's obligation to pay the note is determined by that law. Moreover,
nothing in this section is intended to validate an agreement which is fraudulent or void as against public policy, as in
the case of a note given to deceive a bank examiner.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 3-117. OTHER AGREEMENTS AFFECTING INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-118
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-118. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
(a) Except as provided in subsection (e), an action to enforce the obligation of a party to pay a note
payable at a definite time must be commenced within six years after the due date or dates stated in the
note or, if a due date is accelerated, within six years after the accelerated due date.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (d) or (e), if demand for payment is made to the maker of a note
payable on demand, an action to enforce the obligation of a party to pay the note must be commenced
within six years after the demand. If no demand for payment is made to the maker, an action to enforce the
note is barred if neither principal nor interest on the note has been paid for a continuous period of 10 years.
(c) Except as provided in subsection (d), an action to enforce the obligation of a party to an unaccepted
draft to pay the draft must be commenced within three years after dishonor of the draft or 10 years after the
date of the draft, whichever period expires first.
(d) An action to enforce the obligation of the acceptor of a certified check or the issuer of a teller's check,
cashier's check, or traveler's check must be commenced within three years after demand for payment is
made to the acceptor or issuer, as the case may be.
(e) An action to enforce the obligation of a party to a certificate of deposit to pay the instrument must be
commenced within six years after demand for payment is made to the maker, but if the instrument states a
due date and the maker is not required to pay before that date, the six-year period begins when a demand
for payment is in effect and the due date has passed.
(f) An action to enforce the obligation of a party to pay an accepted draft, other than a certified check, must
be commenced (i) within six years after the due date or dates stated in the draft or acceptance if the
obligation of the acceptor is payable at a definite time, or (ii) within six years after the date of the
acceptance if the obligation of the acceptor is payable on demand.
(g) Unless governed by other law regarding claims for indemnity or contribution, an action (i) for conversion
of an instrument, for money had and received, or like action based on conversion, (ii) for breach of
warranty, or (iii) to enforce an obligation, duty, or right arising under this Article and not governed by this
section must be commenced within three years after the [cause of action] accrues.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 3-118 differs from former Section 3-122, which states when a cause of action accrues on an
instrument. Section 3-118 does not define when a cause of action accrues. Accrual of a cause of action is stated in
other sections of Article 3 such as those that state the various obligations of parties to an instrument. The only
purpose of Section 3-118 is to define the time within which an action to enforce an obligation, duty, or right arising
under Article 3 must be commenced. Section 3-118 does not attempt to state all rules with respect to a statute of
limitations. For example, the circumstances under which the running of a limitations period may be tolled is left to
other law pursuant to Section 1-103.
§ 3-118. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
Page 2 of 3
2. The first six subsections apply to actions to enforce an obligation of any party to an instrument to pay the
instrument. This changes present law in that indorsers who may become liable on an instrument after issue are
subject to a period of limitations running from the same date as that of the maker or drawer. Subsections (a) and (b)
apply to notes. If the note is payable at a definite time, a six-year limitations period starts at the due date of the
note, subject to prior acceleration. If the note is payable on demand, there are two limitations periods. Although a
note payable on demand could theoretically be called a day after it was issued, the normal expectation of the
parties is that the note will remain outstanding until there is some reason to call it. If the law provides that the
limitations period does not start until demand is made, the cause of action to enforce it may never be barred. On the
other hand, if the limitations period starts when demand for payment may be made, i.e. at any time after the note
was issued, the payee of a note on which interest or portions of principal are being paid could lose the right to
enforce the note even though it was treated as a continuing obligation by the parties. Some demand notes are not
enforced because the payee has forgiven the debt. This is particularly true in family and other noncommercial
transactions. A demand note found after the death of the payee may be presented for payment many years after it
was issued. The maker may be a relative and it may be difficult to determine whether the note represents a real or a
forgiven debt. Subsection (b) is designed to bar notes that no longer represent a claim to payment and to require
reasonably prompt action to enforce notes on which there is default. If a demand for payment is made to the maker,
a six-year limitations period starts to run when demand is made. The second sentence of subsection (b) bars an
action to enforce a demand note if no demand has been made on the note and no payment of interest or principal
has been made for a continuous period of 10 years. This covers the case of a note that does not bear interest or a
case in which interest due on the note has not been paid. This kind of case is likely to be a family transaction in
which a failure to demand payment may indicate that the holder did not intend to enforce the obligation but
neglected to destroy the note. A limitations period that bars stale claims in this kind of case is appropriate if the
period is relatively long.
3. Subsection (c) applies primarily to personal uncertified checks. Checks are payment instruments rather than
credit instruments. The limitations period expires three years after the date of dishonor or 10 years after the date of
the check, whichever is earlier. Teller's checks, cashier's checks, certified checks, and traveler's checks are treated
differently under subsection (d) because they are commonly treated as cash equivalents. A great delay in
presenting a cashier's check for payment in most cases will occur because the check was mislaid during that
period. The person to whom traveler's checks are issued may hold them indefinitely as a safe form of cash for use
in an emergency. There is no compelling reason for barring the claim of the owner of the cashier's check or
traveler's check. Under subsection (d) the claim is never barred because the three-year limitations period does not
start to run until demand for payment is made. The limitations period in subsection (d) in effect applies only to cases
in which there is a dispute about the legitimacy of the claim of the person demanding payment.
4. Subsection (e) covers certificates of deposit. The limitations period of six years doesn't start to run until the
depositor demands payment. Most certificates of deposit are payable on demand even if they state a due date. The
effect of a demand for payment before maturity is usually that the bank will pay, but that a penalty will be assessed
against the depositor in the form of a reduction in the amount of interest that is paid. Subsection (e) also provides
for cases in which the bank has no obligation to pay until the due date. In that case the limitations period doesn't
start to run until there is a demand for payment in effect and the due date has passed.
5. Subsection (f) applies to accepted drafts other than certified checks. When a draft is accepted it is in effect
turned into a note of the acceptor. In almost all cases the acceptor will agree to pay at a definite time. Subsection (f)
states that in that case the six-year limitations period starts to run on the due date. In the rare case in which the
obligation of the acceptor is payable on demand, the six-year limitations period starts to run at the date of the
acceptance.
6. Subsection (g) covers warranty and conversion cases and other actions to enforce obligations or rights arising
under Article 3. A three-year period is stated and subsection (g) follows general law in stating that the period runs
from the time the cause of action accrues. Since the traditional term "cause of action" may have been replaced in
some states by "claim for relief" or some equivalent term, the words "cause of action" have been bracketed to
indicate that the words may be replaced by an appropriate substitute to conform to local practice.
§ 3-118. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
Page 3 of 3
7. One of the most significant differences between this Article and the Convention on International Bills of
Exchange and International Promissory Notes is that the statute of limitation under the Convention generally is only
four years, rather than the six years provided by this section. See Convention Article 84. Amendments approved by
the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-119
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3-119. NOTICE OF RIGHT TO DEFEND ACTION
In an action for breach of an obligation for which a third person is answerable over pursuant to this Article or Article
4, the defendant may give the third person notice of the litigation in a record, and the person notified may then give
similar notice to any other person who is answerable over. If the notice states (i) that the person notified may come
in and defend and (ii) that failure to do so will bind the person notified in an action later brought by the person giving
the notice as to any determination of fact common to the two litigations, the person notified is so bound unless after
seasonable receipt of the notice the person notified does come in and defend.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section is a restatement of former Section 3-803.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-201
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 2. NEGOTIATION, TRANSFER, AND INDORSEMENT
§ 3-201. NEGOTIATION
(a) "Negotiation" means a transfer of possession, whether voluntary or involuntary, of an instrument by a
person other than the issuer to a person who thereby becomes its holder.
(b) Except for negotiation by a remitter, if an instrument is payable to an identified person, negotiation
requires transfer of possession of the instrument and its indorsement by the holder. If an instrument is
payable to bearer, it may be negotiated by transfer of possession alone.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsections (a) and (b) are based in part on subsection (1) of former Section 3-202. A person can become
holder of an instrument when the instrument is issued to that person, or the status of holder can arise as the result
of an event that occurs after issuance. "Negotiation" is the term used in Article 3 to describe this post-issuance
event. Normally, negotiation occurs as the result of a voluntary transfer of possession of an instrument by a holder
to another person who becomes the holder as a result of the transfer. Negotiation always requires a change in
possession of the instrument because nobody can be a holder without possessing the instrument, either directly or
through an agent. But in some cases the transfer of possession is involuntary and in some cases the person
transferring possession is not a holder. In defining "negotiation" former Section 3-202(1) used the word "transfer,"
an undefined term, and "delivery," defined in Section 1-201(14) to mean voluntary change of possession. Instead,
subsections (a) and (b) use the term "transfer of possession" and, subsection (a) states that negotiation can occur
by an involuntary transfer of possession. For example, if an instrument is payable to bearer and it is stolen by Thief
or is found by Finder, Thief or Finder becomes the holder of the instrument when possession is obtained. In this
case there is an involuntary transfer of possession that results in negotiation to Thief or Finder.
2. In most cases negotiation occurs by a transfer of possession by a holder or remitter. Remitter transactions
usually involve a cashier's or teller's check. For example, Buyer buys goods from Seller and pays for them with a
cashier's check of Bank that Buyer buys from Bank. The check is issued by Bank when it is delivered to Buyer,
regardless of whether the check is payable to Buyer or to Seller. Section 3-105(a). If the check is payable to Buyer,
negotiation to Seller is done by delivery of the check to Seller after it is indorsed by Buyer. It is more common,
however, that the check when issued will be payable to Seller. In that case Buyer is referred to as the "remitter."
Section 3-103(a)(11). The remitter, although not a party to the check, is the owner of the check until ownership is
transferred to Seller by delivery. This transfer is a negotiation because Seller becomes the holder of the check
when Seller obtains possession. In some cases Seller may have acted fraudulently in obtaining possession of the
check. In those cases Buyer may be entitled to rescind the transfer to Seller because of the fraud and assert a
claim of ownership to the check under Section 3-306 against Seller or a subsequent transferee of the check.
Section 3-202(b) provides for rescission of negotiation, and that provision applies to rescission by a remitter as well
as by a holder.
3. Other sections of Article 3 may modify the rule stated in the first sentence of subsection (b). See for example,
Sections 3-404, 3-405 and 3-406.
§ 3-201. NEGOTIATION
Page 2 of 2
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-202
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 2. NEGOTIATION, TRANSFER, AND INDORSEMENT
§ 3-202. NEGOTIATION SUBJECT TO RESCISSION
(a) Negotiation is effective even if obtained (i) from an infant, a corporation exceeding its powers, or a
person without capacity, (ii) by fraud, duress, or mistake, or (iii) in breach of duty or as part of an illegal
transaction.
(b) To the extent permitted by other law, negotiation may be rescinded or may be subject to other
remedies, but those remedies may not be asserted against a subsequent holder in due course or a person
paying the instrument in good faith and without knowledge of facts that are a basis for rescission or other
remedy.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section is based on former Section 3-207. Subsection (2) of former Section 3-207 prohibited rescission of
a negotiation against holders in due course. Subsection (b) of Section 3-202 extends this protection to payor banks.
2. Subsection (a) applies even though the lack of capacity or the illegality, is of a character which goes to the
essence of the transaction and makes it entirely void. It is inherent in the character of negotiable instruments that
any person in possession of an instrument which by its terms is payable to that person or to bearer is a holder and
may be dealt with by anyone as a holder. The principle finds its most extreme application in the well settled rule that
a holder in due course may take the instrument even from a thief and be protected against the claim of the rightful
owner. The policy of subsection (a) is that any person to whom an instrument is negotiated is a holder until the
instrument has been recovered from that person's possession. The remedy of a person with a claim to an
instrument is to recover the instrument by replevin or otherwise; to impound it or to enjoin its enforcement, collection
or negotiation; to recover its proceeds from the holder; or to intervene in any action brought by the holder against
the obligor. As provided in Section 3-305(c), the claim of the claimant is not a defense to the obligor unless the
claimant defends the action.
3. There can be no rescission or other remedy against a holder in due course or a person who pays in good faith
and without notice, even though the prior negotiation may have been fraudulent or illegal in its essence and entirely
void. As against any other party the claimant may have any remedy permitted by law. This section is not intended to
specify what that remedy may be, or to prevent any court from imposing conditions or limitations such as prompt
action or return of the consideration received. All such questions are left to the law of the particular jurisdiction.
Section 3-202 gives no right that would not otherwise exist. The section is intended to mean that any remedies
afforded by other law are cut off only by a holder in due course.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-203
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 2. NEGOTIATION, TRANSFER, AND INDORSEMENT
§ 3-203. TRANSFER OF INSTRUMENT; RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY TRANSFER
(a) An instrument is transferred when it is delivered by a person other than its issuer for the purpose of
giving to the person receiving delivery the right to enforce the instrument.
(b) Transfer of an instrument, whether or not the transfer is a negotiation, vests in the transferee any right
of the transferor to enforce the instrument, including any right as a holder in due course, but the transferee
cannot acquire rights of a holder in due course by a transfer, directly or indirectly, from a holder in due
course if the transferee engaged in fraud or illegality affecting the instrument.
(c) Unless otherwise agreed, if an instrument is transferred for value and the transferee does not become a
holder because of lack of indorsement by the transferor, the transferee has a specifically enforceable right
to the unqualified indorsement of the transferor, but negotiation of the instrument does not occur until the
indorsement is made.
(d) If a transferor purports to transfer less than the entire instrument, negotiation of the instrument does not
occur. The transferee obtains no rights under this Article and has only the rights of a partial assignee.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 3-203 is based on former Section 3-201 which stated that a transferee received such rights as the
transferor had. The former section was confusing because some rights of the transferor are not vested in the
transferee unless the transfer is a negotiation. For example, a transferee that did not become the holder could not
negotiate the instrument, a right that the transferor had. Former Section 3-201 did not define "transfer." Subsection
(a) defines transfer by limiting it to cases in which possession of the instrument is delivered for the purpose of giving
to the person receiving delivery the right to enforce the instrument.
Although transfer of an instrument might mean in a particular case that title to the instrument passes to the
transferee, that result does not follow in all cases. The right to enforce an instrument and ownership of the
instrument are two different concepts. A thief who steals a check payable to bearer becomes the holder of the
check and a person entitled to enforce it, but does not become the owner of the check. If the thief transfers the
check to a purchaser the transferee obtains the right to enforce the check. If the purchaser is not a holder in due
course, the owner's claim to the check may be asserted against the purchaser. Ownership rights in instruments
may be determined by principles of the law of property, independent of Article 3, which do not depend upon whether
the instrument was transferred under Section 3-203. Moreover, a person who has an ownership right in an
instrument might not be a person entitled to enforce the instrument. For example, suppose X is the owner and
holder of an instrument payable to X. X sells the instrument to Y but is unable to deliver immediate possession to Y.
Instead, X signs a document conveying all of X's right, title, and interest in the instrument to Y. Although the
document may be effective to give Y a claim to ownership of the instrument, Y is not a person entitled to enforce the
instrument until Y obtains possession of the instrument. No transfer of the instrument occurs under Section 3-203(a)
until it is delivered to Y.
§ 3-203. TRANSFER OF INSTRUMENT; RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY TRANSFER
Page 2 of 3
An instrument is a reified right to payment. The right is represented by the instrument itself. The right to payment
is transferred by delivery of possession of the instrument "by a person other than its issuer for the purpose of giving
to the person receiving delivery the right to enforce the instrument." The quoted phrase excludes issue of an
instrument, defined in Section 3-105, and cases in which a delivery of possession is for some purpose other than
transfer of the right to enforce. For example, if a check is presented for payment by delivering the check to the
drawee, no transfer of the check to the drawee occurs because there is no intent to give the drawee the right to
enforce the check.
2. Subsection (b) states that transfer vests in the transferee any right of the transferor to enforce the instrument
"including any right as a holder in due course." If the transferee is not a holder because the transferor did not
indorse, the transferee is nevertheless a person entitled to enforce the instrument under Section 3-301 if the
transferor was a holder at the time of transfer. Although the transferee is not a holder, under subsection (b) the
transferee obtained the rights of the transferor as holder. Because the transferee's rights are derivative of the
transferor's rights, those rights must be proved. Because the transferee is not a holder, there is no presumption
under Section 3-308 that the transferee, by producing the instrument, is entitled to payment. The instrument, by its
terms, is not payable to the transferee and the transferee must account for possession of the unindorsed instrument
by proving the transaction through which the transferee acquired it. Proof of a transfer to the transferee by a holder
is proof that the transferee has acquired the rights of a holder. At that point the transferee is entitled to the
presumption under Section 3-308.
Under subsection (b) a holder in due course that transfers an instrument transfers those rights as a holder in due
course to the purchaser. The policy is to assure the holder in due course a free market for the instrument. There is
one exception to this rule stated in the concluding clause of subsection (b). A person who is party to fraud or
illegality affecting the instrument is not permitted to wash the instrument clean by passing it into the hands of a
holder in due course and then repurchasing it.
3. Subsection (c) applies only to a transfer for value. It applies only if the instrument is payable to order or
specially indorsed to the transferor. The transferee acquires, in the absence of a contrary agreement, the
specifically enforceable right to the indorsement of the transferor. Unless otherwise agreed, it is a right to the
general indorsement of the transferor with full liability as indorser, rather than to an indorsement without recourse.
The question may arise if the transferee has paid in advance and the indorsement is omitted fraudulently or through
oversight. A transferor who is willing to indorse only without recourse or unwilling to indorse at all should make
those intentions clear before transfer. The agreement of the transferee to take less than an unqualified indorsement
need not be an express one, and the understanding may be implied from conduct, from past practice, or from the
circumstances of the transaction. Subsection (c) provides that there is no negotiation of the instrument until the
indorsement by the transferor is made. Until that time the transferee does not become a holder, and if earlier notice
of a defense or claim is received, the transferee does not qualify as a holder in due course under Section 3-302.
4. The operation of Section 3-203 is illustrated by the following cases. In each case Payee, by fraud, induced
Maker to issue a note to Payee. The fraud is a defense to the obligation of Maker to pay the note under Section 3-
305(a)(2).
Case # 1. Payee negotiated the note to X who took as a holder in due course. After the instrument became
overdue X negotiated the note to Y who had notice of the fraud. Y succeeds to X's rights as a holder in due course
and takes free of Maker's defense of fraud.
Case # 2. Payee negotiated the note to X who took as a holder in due course. Payee then repurchased the note
from X. Payee does not succeed to X's rights as a holder in due course and is subject to Maker's defense of fraud.
Case # 3. Payee negotiated the note to X who took as a holder in due course. X sold the note to Purchaser who
received possession. The note, however, was indorsed to X and X failed to indorse it. Purchaser is a person entitled
to enforce the instrument under Section 3-301 and succeeds to the rights of X as holder in due course. Purchaser is
not a holder, however, and under Section 3-308 Purchaser will have to prove the transaction with X under which the
rights of X as holder in due course were acquired.
§ 3-203. TRANSFER OF INSTRUMENT; RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY TRANSFER
Page 3 of 3
Case # 4. Payee sold the note to Purchaser who took for value, in good faith and without notice of the defense of
Maker. Purchaser received possession of the note but Payee neglected to indorse it. Purchaser became a person
entitled to enforce the instrument but did not become the holder because of the missing indorsement. If Purchaser
received notice of the defense of Maker before obtaining the indorsement of Payee, Purchaser cannot become a
holder in due course because at the time notice was received the note had not been negotiated to Purchaser. If
indorsement by Payee was made after Purchaser received notice, Purchaser had notice of the defense when it
became the holder.
5. Subsection (d) restates former Section 3-202(3). The cause of action on an instrument cannot be split. Any
indorsement which purports to convey to any party less than the entire amount of the instrument is not effective for
negotiation. This is true of either "Pay A one-half," or "Pay A two-thirds and B one-third." Neither A nor B becomes a
holder. On the other hand an indorsement reading merely "Pay A and B" is effective, since it transfers the entire
cause of action to A and B as tenants in common. An indorsement purporting to convey less than the entire
instrument does, however, operate as a partial assignment of the cause of action. Subsection (d) makes no attempt
to state the legal effect of such an assignment, which is left to other law. A partial assignee of an instrument has
rights only to the extent the applicable law gives rights, either at law or in equity, to a partial assignee.
6. The rules for transferring instruments set out in this section are similar to the rules in Article 13 of the
Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes. Amendments approved by the
Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-204
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 2. NEGOTIATION, TRANSFER, AND INDORSEMENT
§ 3-204. INDORSEMENT
(a) "Indorsement" means a signature, other than that of a signer as maker, drawer, or acceptor, that alone
or accompanied by other words is made on an instrument for the purpose of (i) negotiating the instrument,
(ii) restricting payment of the instrument, or (iii) incurring indorser's liability on the instrument, but regardless
of the intent of the signer, a signature and its accompanying words is an indorsement unless the
accompanying words, terms of the instrument, place of the signature, or other circumstances
unambiguously indicate that the signature was made for a purpose other than indorsement. For the
purpose of determining whether a signature is made on an instrument, a paper affixed to the instrument is a
part of the instrument.
(b) "Indorser" means a person who makes an indorsement.
(c) For the purpose of determining whether the transferee of an instrument is a holder, an indorsement that
transfers a security interest in the instrument is effective as an unqualified indorsement of the instrument.
(d) If an instrument is payable to a holder under a name that is not the name of the holder, indorsement
may be made by the holder in the name stated in the instrument or in the holder's name or both, but
signature in both names may be required by a person paying or taking the instrument for value or
collection.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) is a definition of "indorsement," a term which was not defined in former Article 3. Indorsement is
defined in terms of the purpose of the signature. If a blank or special indorsement is made to give rights as a holder
to a transferee the indorsement is made for the purpose of negotiating the instrument. Subsection (a)(i). If the
holder of a check has an account in the drawee bank and wants to be sure that payment of the check will be made
by credit to the holder's account, the holder can indorse the check by signing the holder's name with the
accompanying words "for deposit only" before presenting the check for payment to the drawee bank. In that case
the purpose of the quoted words is to restrict payment of the instrument. Subsection (a)(ii). If X wants to guarantee
payment of a note signed by Y as maker, X can do so by signing X's name to the back of the note as an
indorsement. This indorsement is known as an anomalous indorsement (Section 3-205(d)) and is made for the
purpose of incurring indorser's liability on the note. Subsection (a)(iii). In some cases an indorsement may serve
more than one purpose. For example, if the holder of a check deposits it to the holder's account in a depositary
bank for collection and indorses the check by signing the holder's name with the accompanying words "for deposit
only" the purpose of the indorsement is both to negotiate the check to the depositary bank and to restrict payment
of the check.
The "but" clause of the first sentence of subsection (a) elaborates on former Section 3-402. In some cases it may
not be clear whether a signature was meant to be that of an indorser, a party to the instrument in some other
capacity such as drawer, maker or acceptor, or a person who was not signing as a party. The general rule is that a
signature is an indorsement if the instrument does not indicate an unambiguous intent of the signer not to sign as
§ 3-204. INDORSEMENT
Page 2 of 2
an indorser. Intent may be determined by words accompanying the signature, the place of signature, or other
circumstances. For example, suppose a depositary bank gives cash for a check properly indorsed by the payee.
The bank requires the payee's employee to sign the back of the check as evidence that the employee received the
cash. If the signature consists only of the initials of the employee it is not reasonable to assume that it was meant to
be an indorsement. If there was a full signature but accompanying words indicated that it was meant as a receipt for
the cash given for the check, it is not an indorsement. If the signature is not qualified in any way and appears in the
place normally used for indorsements, it may be an indorsement even though the signer intended the signature to
be a receipt. To take another example, suppose the drawee of a draft signs the draft on the back in the space
usually used for indorsements. No words accompany the signature. Since the drawee has no reason to sign a draft
unless the intent is to accept the draft, the signature is effective as an acceptance. Custom and usage may be used
to determine intent. For example, by long-established custom and usage, a signature in the lower right hand corner
of an instrument indicates an intent to sign as the maker of a note or the drawer of a draft. Any similar clear
indication of an intent to sign in some other capacity or for some other purpose may establish that a signature is not
an indorsement. For example, if the owner of a traveler's check countersigns the check in the process of negotiating
it, the countersignature is not an indorsement. The countersignature is a condition to the issuer's obligation to pay
and its purpose is to provide a means of verifying the identify of the person negotiating the traveler's check by
allowing comparison of the specimen signature and the countersignature. The countersignature is not necessary for
negotiation and the signer does not incur indorser's liability. See Comment 2 to Section 3-106.
The last sentence of subsection (a) is based on subsection (2) of former Section 3-202. An indorsement on an
allonge is valid even though there is sufficient space on the instrument for an indorsement.
2. Assume that Payee indorses a note to Creditor as security for a debt. Under subsection (b) of Section 3-203
Creditor takes Payee's rights to enforce or transfer the instrument subject to the limitations imposed by Article 9.
Subsection (c) of Section 3-204 makes clear that Payee's indorsement to Creditor, even though it mentions creation
of a security interest, is an unqualified indorsement that gives to Creditor the right to enforce the note as its holder.
3. Subsection (d) is a restatement of former Section 3-203. Section 3-110(a) states that an instrument is payable
to the person intended by the person signing as or in the name or behalf of the issuer even if that person is
identified by a name that is not the true name of the person. In some cases the name used in the instrument is a
misspelling of the correct name and in some cases the two names may be entirely different. The payee may indorse
in the name used in the instrument, in the payee's correct name, or in both. In each case the indorsement is
effective. But because an indorsement in a name different from that used in the instrument may raise a question
about its validity and an indorsement in a name that is not the correct name of the payee may raise a problem of
identifying the indorser, the accepted commercial practice is to indorse in both names. Subsection (d) allows a
person paying or taking the instrument for value or collection to require indorsement in both names.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-205
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 2. NEGOTIATION, TRANSFER, AND INDORSEMENT
§ 3-205. SPECIAL INDORSEMENT; BLANK INDORSEMENT; ANOMALOUS
INDORSEMENT
(a) If an indorsement is made by the holder of an instrument, whether payable to an identified person or
payable to bearer, and the indorsement identifies a person to whom it makes the instrument payable, it is a
"special indorsement." When specially indorsed, an instrument becomes payable to the identified person
and may be negotiated only by the indorsement of that person. The principles stated in Section 3-110 apply
to special indorsements.
(b) If an indorsement is made by the holder of an instrument and it is not a special indorsement, it is a
"blank indorsement." When indorsed in blank, an instrument becomes payable to bearer and may be
negotiated by transfer of possession alone until specially indorsed.
(c) The holder may convert a blank indorsement that consists only of a signature into a special
indorsement by writing, above the signature of the indorser, words identifying the person to whom the
instrument is made payable.
(d) "Anomalous indorsement" means an indorsement made by a person who is not the holder of the
instrument. An anomalous indorsement does not affect the manner in which the instrument may be
negotiated.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) is based on subsection (1) of former Section 3-204. It states the test of a special indorsement to
be whether the indorsement identifies a person to whom the instrument is payable. Section 3-110 states rules for
identifying the payee of an instrument. Section 3-205(a) incorporates the principles stated in Section 3-110 in
identifying an indorsee. The language of Section 3-110 refers to language used by the issuer of the instrument.
When that section is used with respect to an indorsement, Section 3-110 must be read as referring to the language
used by the indorser.
2. Subsection (b) is based on subsection (2) of former Section 3-204. An indorsement made by the holder is
either a special or blank indorsement. If the indorsement is made by a holder and is not a special indorsement, it is
a blank indorsement. For example, the holder of an instrument, intending to make a special indorsement, writes the
words "Pay to the order of" without completing the indorsement by writing the name of the indorsee. The holder's
signature appears under the quoted words. The indorsement is not a special indorsement because it does not
identify a person to whom it makes the instrument payable. Since it is not a special indorsement it is a blank
indorsement and the instrument is payable to bearer. The result is analogous to that of a check in which the name
of the payee is left blank by the drawer. In that case the check is payable to bearer. See the last paragraphs of
Comment 2 to Section 3-115.
A blank indorsement is usually the signature of the indorser on the back of the instrument without other words.
Subsection (c) is based on subsection (3) of former Section 3-204. A "restrictive indorsement" described in Section
§ 3-205. SPECIAL INDORSEMENT; BLANK INDORSEMENT; ANOMALOUS INDORSEMENT
Page 2 of 2
3-206 can be either a blank indorsement or a special indorsement. "Pay to T, in trust for B" is a restrictive
indorsement. It is also a special indorsement because it identifies T as the person to whom the instrument is
payable. "For deposit only" followed by the signature of the payee of a check is a restrictive indorsement. It is also a
blank indorsement because it does not identify the person to whom the instrument is payable.
3. The only effect of an "anomalous indorsement," defined in subsection (d), is to make the signer liable on the
instrument as an indorser. Such an indorsement is normally made by an accommodation party. Section 3-419.
4. Articles 14 and 16 of the Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes
includes similar rules for blank and special indorsements. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board
for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-206
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 2. NEGOTIATION, TRANSFER, AND INDORSEMENT
§ 3-206. RESTRICTIVE INDORSEMENT
(a) An indorsement limiting payment to a particular person or otherwise prohibiting further transfer or
negotiation of the instrument is not effective to prevent further transfer or negotiation of the instrument.
(b) An indorsement stating a condition to the right of the indorsee to receive payment does not affect the
right of the indorsee to enforce the instrument. A person paying the instrument or taking it for value or
collection may disregard the condition, and the rights and liabilities of that person are not affected by
whether the condition has been fulfilled.
(c) If an instrument bears an indorsement (i) described in Section 4-201(b), or (ii) in blank or to a particular
bank using the words "for deposit," "for collection," or other words indicating a purpose of having the
instrument collected by a bank for the indorser or for a particular account, the following rules apply:
(1) A person, other than a bank, who purchases the instrument when so indorsed converts the
instrument unless the amount paid for the instrument is received by the indorser or applied consistently
with the indorsement.
(2) A depositary bank that purchases the instrument or takes it for collection when so indorsed
converts the instrument unless the amount paid by the bank with respect to the instrument is received
by the indorser or applied consistently with the indorsement.
(3) A payor bank that is also the depositary bank or that takes the instrument for immediate payment
over the counter from a person other than a collecting bank converts the instrument unless the
proceeds of the instrument are received by the indorser or applied consistently with the indorsement.
(4) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (3), a payor bank or intermediary bank may disregard
the indorsement and is not liable if the proceeds of the instrument are not received by the indorser or
applied consistently with the indorsement.
(d) Except for an indorsement covered by subsection (c), if an instrument bears an indorsement using
words to the effect that payment is to be made to the indorsee as agent, trustee, or other fiduciary for the
benefit of the indorser or another person, the following rules apply:
(1) Unless there is notice of breach of fiduciary duty as provided in Section 3-307, a person who
purchases the instrument from the indorsee or takes the instrument from the indorsee for collection or
payment may pay the proceeds of payment or the value given for the instrument to the indorsee without
regard to whether the indorsee violates a fiduciary duty to the indorser.
(2) A subsequent transferee of the instrument or person who pays the instrument is neither given
notice nor otherwise affected by the restriction in the indorsement unless the transferee or payor knows
that the fiduciary dealt with the instrument or its proceeds in breach of fiduciary duty.
(e) The presence on an instrument of an indorsement to which this section applies does not prevent a
purchaser of the instrument from becoming a holder in due course of the instrument unless the purchaser is
a converter under subsection (c) or has notice or knowledge of breach of fiduciary duty as stated in
subsection (d).
(f) In an action to enforce the obligation of a party to pay the instrument, the obligor has a defense if
payment would violate an indorsement to which this section applies and the payment is not permitted by
this section.
§ 3-206. RESTRICTIVE INDORSEMENT
Page 2 of 3
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section replaces former Sections 3-205 and 3-206 and clarifies the law of restrictive indorsements.
2. Subsection (a) provides that an indorsement that purports to limit further transfer or negotiation is ineffective to
prevent further transfer or negotiation. If a payee indorses "Pay A only," A may negotiate the instrument to
subsequent holders who may ignore the restriction on the indorsement. Subsection (b) provides that an
indorsement that states a condition to the right of a holder to receive payment is ineffective to condition payment.
Thus if a payee indorses "Pay A if A ships goods complying with our contract," the right of A to enforce the
instrument is not affected by the condition. In the case of a note, the obligation of the maker to pay A is not affected
by the indorsement. In the case of a check, the drawee can pay A without regard to the condition, and if the check
is dishonored the drawer is liable to pay A. If the check was negotiated by the payee to A in return for a promise to
perform a contract and the promise was not kept, the payee would have a defense or counterclaim against A if the
check were dishonored and A sued the payee as indorser, but the payee would have that defense or counterclaim
whether or not the condition to the right of A was expressed in the indorsement. Former Section 3-206 treated a
conditional indorsement like indorsements for deposit or collection. In revised Article 3, Section 3-206(b) rejects that
approach and makes the conditional indorsement ineffective with respect to parties other than the indorser and
indorsee. Since the indorsements referred to in subsections (a) and (b) are not effective as restrictive indorsements,
they are no longer described as restrictive indorsements.
3. The great majority of restrictive indorsements are those that fall within subsection (c) which continues previous
law. The depositary bank or the payor bank, if it takes the check for immediate payment over the counter, must act
consistently with the indorsement, but an intermediary bank or payor bank that takes the check from a collecting
bank is not affected by the indorsement. Any other person is also bound by the indorsement. For example, suppose
a check is payable to X, who indorses in blank but writes above the signature the words "For deposit only." The
check is stolen and is cashed at a grocery store by the thief. The grocery store indorses the check and deposits it in
Depositary Bank. The account of the grocery store is credited and the check is forwarded to Payor Bank which pays
the check. Under subsection (c), the grocery store and Depositary Bank are converters of the check because X did
not receive the amount paid for the check. Payor Bank and any intermediary bank in the collection process are not
liable to X. This Article does not displace the law of waiver as it may apply to restrictive indorsements. The
circumstances under which a restrictive indorsement may be waived by the person who made it is not determined
by this Article.
4. Subsection (d) replaces subsection (4) of former Section 3-206. Suppose Payee indorses a check "Pay to T in
trust for B." T indorses in blank and delivers it to (a) Holder for value; (b) Depositary Bank for collection; or (c) Payor
Bank for payment. In each case these takers can safely pay T so long as they have no notice under Section 3-307
of any breach of fiduciary duty that T may be committing. For example, under subsection (b) * of Section 3-307
these takers have notice of a breach of trust if the check was taken in any transaction known by the taker to be for
T's personal benefit. Subsequent transferees of the check from Holder or Depositary Bank are not affected by the
restriction unless they have knowledge that T dealt with the check in breach of trust.5. Subsection (f) allows a
restrictive indorsement to be used as a defense by a person obliged to pay the instrument if that person would be
liable for paying in violation of the indorsement.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
* Previous incorrect cross reference corrected by Permanent Editorial Board action November 1992.
§ 3-206. RESTRICTIVE INDORSEMENT
Page 3 of 3
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-207
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 2. NEGOTIATION, TRANSFER, AND INDORSEMENT
§ 3-207. REACQUISITION
Reacquisition of an instrument occurs if it is transferred to a former holder, by negotiation or otherwise. A former
holder who reacquires the instrument may cancel indorsements made after the reacquirer first became a holder of
the instrument. If the cancellation causes the instrument to be payable to the reacquirer or to bearer, the reacquirer
may negotiate the instrument. An indorser whose indorsement is canceled is discharged, and the discharge is
effective against any subsequent holder.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Section 3-207 restates former Section 3-208. Reacquisition refers to cases in which a former holder reacquires
the instrument either by negotiation from the present holder or by a transfer other than negotiation. If the
reacquisition is by negotiation, the former holder reacquires the status of holder. Although Section 3-207 allows the
holder to cancel all indorsements made after the holder first acquired holder status, cancellation is not necessary.
Status of holder is not affected whether or not cancellation is made. But if the reacquisition is not the result of
negotiation the former holder can obtain holder status only by striking the former holder's indorsement and any
subsequent indorsements. The latter case is an exception to the general rule that if an instrument is payable to an
identified person, the indorsement of that person is necessary to allow a subsequent transferee to obtain the status
of holder. Reacquisition without indorsement by the person to whom the instrument is payable is illustrated by two
examples:
Case # 1. X, a former holder, buys the instrument from Y, the present holder. Y delivers the instrument to X but
fails to indorse it. Negotiation does not occur because the transfer of possession did not result in X's becoming
holder. Section 3-201(a). The instrument by its terms is payable to Y, not to X. But X can obtain the status of holder
by striking X's indorsement and all subsequent indorsements. When these indorsements are struck, the instrument
by its terms is payable either to X or to bearer, depending upon how X originally became holder. In either case X
becomes holder. Section 1-201(20).
Case # 2. X, the holder of an instrument payable to X, negotiates it to Y by special indorsement. The negotiation
is part of an underlying transaction between X and Y. The underlying transaction is rescinded by agreement of X
and Y, and Y returns the instrument without Y's indorsement. The analysis is the same as that in Case # 1. X can
obtain holder status by cancelling X's indorsement to Y.
In Case # 1 and Case # 2, X acquired ownership of the instrument after reacquisition, but X's title was clouded
because the instrument by its terms was not payable to X. Normally, X can remedy the problem by obtaining Y's
indorsement, but in some cases X may not be able to conveniently obtain that indorsement. Section 3-207 is a rule
of convenience which relieves X of the burden of obtaining an indorsement that serves no substantive purpose. The
effect of cancellation of any indorsement under Section 3-207 is to nullify it. Thus, the person whose indorsement is
canceled is relieved of indorser's liability. Since cancellation is notice of discharge, discharge is effective even with
respect to the rights of a holder in due course. Sections 3-601 and 3-604.
§ 3-207. REACQUISITION
Page 2 of 2
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-301
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-301. PERSON ENTITLED TO ENFORCE INSTRUMENT
"Person entitled to enforce" an instrument means (i) the holder of the instrument, (ii) a nonholder in possession of
the instrument who has the rights of a holder, or (iii) a person not in possession of the instrument who is entitled to
enforce the instrument pursuant to Section 3-309 or 3-418(d). A person may be a person entitled to enforce the
instrument even though the person is not the owner of the instrument or is in wrongful possession of the instrument.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section replaces former Section 3-301 that stated the rights of a holder. The rights stated in former Section 3-
301 to transfer, negotiate, enforce, or discharge an instrument are stated in other sections of Article 3. In revised
Article 3, Section 3-301 defines "person entitled to enforce" an instrument. The definition recognizes that
enforcement is not limited to holders. The quoted phrase includes a person enforcing a lost or stolen instrument.
Section 3-309. It also includes a person in possession of an instrument who is not a holder. A nonholder in
possession of an instrument includes a person that acquired rights of a holder by subrogation or under Section 3-
203(a). It also includes both a remitter that has received an instrument from the issuer but has not yet transferred or
negotiated the instrument to another person and also any other person who under applicable law is a successor to
the holder or otherwise acquires the holder's rights. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for
Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-302
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-302. HOLDER IN DUE COURSE
(a) Subject to subsection (c) and Section 3-106(d), "holder in due course" means the holder of an
instrument if:
(1) the instrument when issued or negotiated to the holder does not bear such apparent evidence of
forgery or alteration or is not otherwise so irregular or incomplete as to call into question its authenticity;
and
(2) the holder took the instrument (i) for value, (ii) in good faith, (iii) without notice that the instrument is
overdue or has been dishonored or that there is an uncured default with respect to payment of another
instrument issued as part of the same series, (iv) without notice that the instrument contains an
unauthorized signature or has been altered, (v) without notice of any claim to the instrument described
in Section 3-306, and (vi) without notice that any party has a defense or claim in recoupment described
in Section 3-305(a).
(b) Notice of discharge of a party, other than discharge in an insolvency proceeding, is not notice of a
defense under subsection (a), but discharge is effective against a person who became a holder in due
course with notice of the discharge. Public filing or recording of a document does not of itself constitute
notice of a defense, claim in recoupment, or claim to the instrument.
(c) Except to the extent a transferor or predecessor in interest has rights as a holder in due course, a
person does not acquire rights of a holder in due course of an instrument taken (i) by legal process or by
purchase in an execution, bankruptcy, or creditor's sale or similar proceeding, (ii) by purchase as part of a
bulk transaction not in ordinary course of business of the transferor, or (iii) as the successor in interest to an
estate or other organization.
(d) If, under Section 3-303(a)(1), the promise of performance that is the consideration for an instrument
has been partially performed, the holder may assert rights as a holder in due course of the instrument only
to the fraction of the amount payable under the instrument equal to the value of the partial performance
divided by the value of the promised performance.
(e) If (i) the person entitled to enforce an instrument has only a security interest in the instrument and (ii)
the person obliged to pay the instrument has a defense, claim in recoupment, or claim to the instrument
that may be asserted against the person who granted the security interest, the person entitled to enforce
the instrument may assert rights as a holder in due course only to an amount payable under the instrument
which, at the time of enforcement of the instrument, does not exceed the amount of the unpaid obligation
secured.
(f) To be effective, notice must be received at a time and in a manner that gives a reasonable opportunity
to act on it.
(g) This section is subject to any law limiting status as a holder in due course in particular classes of
transactions.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 3-302. HOLDER IN DUE COURSE
Page 2 of 5
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a)(1) is a return to the N.I.L. rule that the taker of an irregular or incomplete instrument is not a
person the law should protect against defenses of the obligor or claims of prior owners. This reflects a policy choice
against extending the holder in due course doctrine to an instrument that is so incomplete or irregular "as to call into
question its authenticity." The term "authenticity" is used to make it clear that the irregularity or incompleteness
must indicate that the instrument may not be what it purports to be. Persons who purchase or pay such instruments
should do so at their own risk. Under subsection (1) of former Section 3-304, irregularity or incompleteness gave a
purchaser notice of a claim or defense. But it was not clear from that provision whether the claim or defense had to
be related to the irregularity or incomplete aspect of the instrument. This ambiguity is not present in subsection
(a)(1).
2. Subsection (a)(2) restates subsection (1) of former Section 3-302. Section 3-305(a) makes a distinction
between defenses to the obligation to pay an instrument and claims in recoupment by the maker or drawer that may
be asserted to reduce the amount payable on the instrument. Because of this distinction, which was not made in
former Article 3, the reference in subsection (a)(2)(vi) is to both a defense and a claim in recoupment. Notice of
forgery or alteration is stated separately because forgery and alteration are not technically defenses under
subsection (a) of Section 3-305.
3. Discharge is also separately treated in the first sentence of subsection (b). Except for discharge in an
insolvency proceeding, which is specifically stated to be a real defense in Section 3-305(a)(1), discharge is not
expressed in Article 3 as a defense and is not included in Section 3-305(a)(2). Discharge is effective against
anybody except a person having rights of a holder in due course who took the instrument without notice of the
discharge. Notice of discharge does not disqualify a person from becoming a holder in due course. For example, a
check certified after it is negotiated by the payee may subsequently be negotiated to a holder. If the holder had
notice that the certification occurred after negotiation by the payee, the holder necessarily had notice of the
discharge of the payee as indorser. Section 3-415(d). Notice of that discharge does not prevent the holder from
becoming a holder in due course, but the discharge is effective against the holder. Section 3-601(b). Notice of a
defense under Section 3-305(a)(1) of a maker, drawer or acceptor based on a bankruptcy discharge is different.
There is no reason to give holder in due course status to a person with notice of that defense. The second sentence
of subsection (b) is from former Section 3-304(5).
4. Professor Britton in his treatise Bills and Notes 309 (1961) stated: "A substantial number of decisions before
the [N.I.L.] indicates that at common law there was nothing in the position of the payee as such which made it
impossible for him to be a holder in due course." The courts were divided, however, about whether the payee of an
instrument could be a holder in due course under the N.I.L.. Some courts read N.I.L. § 52(4) to mean that a person
could be a holder in due course only if the instrument was "negotiated" to that person. N.I.L. § 30 stated that "an
instrument is negotiated when it is transferred from one person to another in such manner as to constitute the
transferee the holder thereof." Normally, an instrument is "issued" to the payee; it is not transferred to the payee.
N.I.L. § 191 defined "issue" as the "first delivery of the instrument *** to a person who takes it as a holder." Thus,
some courts concluded that the payee never could be a holder in due course. Other courts concluded that there
was no evidence that the N.I.L. was intended to change the common law rule that the payee could be a holder in
due course. Professor Britton states on p. 318: "The typical situations which raise the [issue] are those where the
defense of a maker is interposed because of fraud by a [maker who is] principal debtor *** against a surety comaker,
or where the defense of fraud by a purchasing remitter is interposed by the drawer of the instrument against
the good faith purchasing payee."
Former Section 3-302(2) stated: "A payee may be a holder in due course." This provision was intended to resolve
the split of authority under the N.I.L.. It made clear that there was no intent to change the common-law rule that
allowed a payee to become a holder in due course. See Comment 2 to former Section 3-302. But there was no
need to put subsection (2) in former Section 3-302 because the split in authority under the N.I.L. was caused by the
particular wording of N.I.L. § 52(4). The troublesome language in that section was not repeated in former Article 3
nor is it repeated in revised Article 3. Former Section 3-302(2) has been omitted in revised Article 3 because it is
§ 3-302. HOLDER IN DUE COURSE
Page 3 of 5
surplusage and may be misleading. The payee of an instrument can be a holder in due course, but use of the
holder-in-due-course doctrine by the payee of an instrument is not the normal situation.
The primary importance of the concept of holder in due course is with respect to assertion of defenses or claims
in recoupment (Section 3-305) and of claims to the instrument (Section 3-306). The holder-in-due-course doctrine
assumes the following case as typical. Obligor issues a note or check to Obligee. Obligor is the maker of the note or
drawer of the check. Obligee is the payee. Obligor has some defense to Obligor's obligation to pay the instrument.
For example, Obligor issued the instrument for goods that Obligee promised to deliver. Obligee never delivered the
goods. The failure of Obligee to deliver the goods is a defense. Section 3-303(b). Although Obligor has a defense
against Obligee, if the instrument is negotiated to Holder and the requirements of subsection (a) are met, Holder
may enforce the instrument against Obligor free of the defense. Section 3-305(b). In the typical case the holder in
due course is not the payee of the instrument. Rather, the holder in due course is an immediate or remote
transferee of the payee. If Obligor in our example is the only obligor on the check or note, the holder-in-due-course
doctrine is irrelevant in determining rights between Obligor and Obligee with respect to the instrument.
But in a small percentage of cases it is appropriate to allow the payee of an instrument to assert rights as a holder
in due course. The cases are like those referred to in the quotation from Professor Britton referred to above, or
other cases in which conduct of some third party is the basis of the defense of the issuer of the instrument. The
following are examples:
Case # 1. Buyer pays for goods bought from Seller by giving to Seller a cashier's check bought from Bank. Bank
has a defense to its obligation to pay the check because Buyer bought the check from Bank with a check known to
be drawn on an account with insufficient funds to cover the check. If Bank issued the check to Buyer as payee and
Buyer indorsed it over to Seller, it is clear that Seller can be a holder in due course taking free of the defense if
Seller had no notice of the defense. Seller is a transferee of the check. There is no good reason why Seller's
position should be any different if Bank drew the check to the order of Seller as payee. In that case, when Buyer
took delivery of the check from Bank, Buyer became the owner of the check even though Buyer was not the holder.
Buyer was a remitter. Section 3-103(a)(11). At that point nobody was the holder. When Buyer delivered the check to
Seller, ownership of the check was transferred to Seller who also became the holder. This is a negotiation. Section
3-201. The rights of Seller should not be affected by the fact that in one case the negotiation to Seller was by a
holder and in the other case the negotiation was by a remitter. Moreover, it should be irrelevant whether Bank
delivered the check to Buyer and Buyer delivered it to Seller or whether Bank delivered it directly to Seller. In either
case Seller can be a holder in due course that takes free of Bank's defense.
Case # 2. X fraudulently induces Y to join X in a spurious venture to purchase a business. The purchase is to be
financed by a bank loan for part of the price. Bank lends money to X and Y by deposit in a joint account of X and Y
who sign a note payable to Bank for the amount of the loan. X then withdraws the money from the joint account and
absconds. Bank acted in good faith and without notice of the fraud of X against Y. Bank is payee of the note
executed by Y, but its right to enforce the note against Y should not be affected by the fact that Y was induced to
execute the note by the fraud of X. Bank can be a holder in due course that takes free of the defense of Y. Case # 2
is similar to Case # 1. In each case the payee of the instrument has given value to the person committing the fraud
in exchange for the obligation of the person against whom the fraud was committed. In each case the payee was
not party to the fraud and had no notice of it. Suppose in Case # 2 that the note does not meet the requirements of
Section 3-104(a) and thus is not a negotiable instrument covered by Article 3. In that case, Bank cannot be a holder
in due course but the result should be the same. Bank's rights are determined by general principles of contract law.
Restatement Second, Contracts § 164(2) governs the case. If Y is induced to enter into a contract with Bank by a
fraudulent misrepresentation by X, the contract is voidable by Y unless Bank "in good faith and without reason to
know of the misrepresentation either gives value or relies materially on the transaction." Comment e to § 164(2)
states:
"This is the same principle that protects an innocent person who purchases goods or commercial paper in
good faith, without notice and for value from one who obtained them from the original owner by a
misrepresentation. See Uniform Commercial Code §§ 2-403(1), 3-305. In the cases that fall within [§
§ 3-302. HOLDER IN DUE COURSE
Page 4 of 5
164(2)], however, the innocent person deals directly with the recipient of the misrepresentation, which is
made by one not a party to the contract."
The same result follows in Case # 2 if Y had been induced to sign the note as an accommodation party (Section
3-419). If Y signs as co-maker of a note for the benefit of X, Y is a surety with respect to the obligation of X to pay
the note but is liable as maker of the note to pay Bank. Section 3-419(b). If Bank is a holder in due course, the fraud
of X cannot be asserted against Bank under Section 3-305(b). But the result is the same without resort to holder-indue-
course doctrine. If the note is not a negotiable instrument governed by Article 3, general rules of suretyship
apply. Restatement, Security § 119 states that the surety (Y) cannot assert a defense against the creditor (Bank)
based on the fraud of the principal (X) if the creditor "without knowledge of the fraud *** extended credit to the
principal on the security of the surety's promise ***." The underlying principle of § 119 is the same as that of §
164(2) of Restatement Second, Contracts.
Case # 3. Corporation draws a check payable to Bank. The check is given to an officer of Corporation who is
instructed to deliver it to Bank in payment of a debt owed by Corporation to Bank. Instead, the officer, intending to
defraud Corporation, delivers the check to Bank in payment of the officer's personal debt, or the check is delivered
to Bank for deposit to the officer's personal account. If Bank obtains payment of the check, Bank has received funds
of Corporation which have been used for the personal benefit of the officer. Corporation in this case will assert a
claim to the proceeds of the check against Bank. If Bank was a holder in due course of the check it took the check
free of Corporation's claim. Section 3-306. The issue in this case is whether Bank had notice of the claim when it
took the check. If Bank knew that the officer was a fiduciary with respect to the check, the issue is governed by
Section 3-307.
Case # 4. Employer, who owed money to X, signed a blank check and delivered it to Secretary with instructions to
complete the check by typing in X's name and the amount owed to X. Secretary fraudulently completed the check
by typing in the name of Y, a creditor to whom Secretary owed money. Secretary then delivered the check to Y in
payment of Secretary's debt. Y obtained payment of the check. This case is similar to Case # 3. Since Secretary
was authorized to complete the check, Employer is bound by Secretary's act in making the check payable to Y. The
drawee bank properly paid the check. Y received funds of Employer which were used for the personal benefit of
Secretary. Employer asserts a claim to these funds against Y. If Y is a holder in due course, Y takes free of the
claim. Whether Y is a holder in due course depends upon whether Y had notice of Employer's claim.
5. Subsection (c) is based on former Section 3-302(3). Like former Section 3-302(3), subsection (c) is intended to
state existing case law. It covers a few situations in which the purchaser takes an instrument under unusual
circumstances. The purchaser is treated as a successor in interest to the prior holder and can acquire no better
rights. But if the prior holder was a holder in due course, the purchaser obtains rights of a holder in due course.
Subsection (c) applies to a purchaser in an execution sale or sale in bankruptcy. It applies equally to an attaching
creditor or any other person who acquires the instrument by legal process or to a representative, such as an
executor, administrator, receiver or assignee for the benefit of creditors, who takes the instrument as part of an
estate. Subsection (c) applies to bulk purchases lying outside of the ordinary course of business of the seller. For
example, it applies to the purchase by one bank of a substantial part of the paper held by another bank which is
threatened with insolvency and seeking to liquidate its assets. Subsection (c) would also apply when a new
partnership takes over for value all of the assets of an old one after a new member has entered the firm, or to a
reorganized or consolidated corporation taking over the assets of a predecessor.
In the absence of controlling state law to the contrary, subsection (c) applies to a sale by a state bank
commissioner of the assets of an insolvent bank. However, subsection (c) may be preempted by federal law if the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation takes over an insolvent bank. Under the governing federal law, the FDIC
and similar financial institution insurers are given holder in due course status and that status is also acquired by
their assignees under the shelter doctrine.
6. Subsections (d) and (e) clarify two matters not specifically addressed by former Article 3:
§ 3-302. HOLDER IN DUE COURSE
Page 5 of 5
Case # 5. Payee negotiates a $ 1,000 note to Holder who agrees to pay $ 900 for it. After paying $ 500, Holder
learns that Payee defrauded Maker in the transaction giving rise to the note. Under subsection (d) Holder may
assert rights as a holder in due course to the extent of $ 555.55 ($ 500 / $ 900 = .555 x $ 1,000 = $ 555.55). This
formula rewards Holder with a ratable portion of the bargained for profit.
Case # 6. Payee negotiates a note of Maker for $ 1,000 to Holder as security for payment of Payee's debt to
Holder of $ 600. Maker has a defense which is good against Payee but of which Holder has no notice. Subsection
(e) applies. Holder may assert rights as a holder in due course only to the extent of $ 600. Payee does not get the
benefit of the holder-in-due-course status of Holder. With respect to $ 400 of the note, Maker may assert any rights
that Maker has against Payee. A different result follows if the payee of a note negotiated it to a person who took it
as a holder in due course and that person pledged the note as security for a debt. Because the defense cannot be
asserted against the pledgor, the pledgee can assert rights as a holder in due course for the full amount of the note
for the benefit of both the pledgor and the pledgee.
7. There is a large body of state statutory and case law restricting the use of the holder in due course doctrine in
consumer transactions as well as some business transactions that raise similar issues. Subsection (g) subordinates
Article 3 to that law and any other similar law that may evolve in the future. Section 3-106(d) also relates to statutory
or administrative law intended to restrict use of the holder-in-due-course doctrine. See Comment 3 to Section 3-
106.
8. The status of holder in due course resembles the status of protected holder under Article 29 of the Convention
on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes. The requirements for being a protected
holder under Article 29 generally track those of Section 3-302. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial
Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-303
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-303. VALUE AND CONSIDERATION
(a) An instrument is issued or transferred for value if:
(1) the instrument is issued or transferred for a promise of performance, to the extent the promise has
been performed;
(2) the transferee acquires a security interest or other lien in the instrument other than a lien obtained
by judicial proceeding;
(3) the instrument is issued or transferred as payment of, or as security for, an antecedent claim
against any person, whether or not the claim is due;
(4) the instrument is issued or transferred in exchange for a negotiable instrument; or
(5) the instrument is issued or transferred in exchange for the incurring of an irrevocable obligation to a
third party by the person taking the instrument.
(b) "Consideration" means any consideration sufficient to support a simple contract. The drawer or maker
of an instrument has a defense if the instrument is issued without consideration. If an instrument is issued
for a promise of performance, the issuer has a defense to the extent performance of the promise is due and
the promise has not been performed. If an instrument is issued for value as stated in subsection (a), the
instrument is also issued for consideration.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) is a restatement of former Section 3-303 and subsection (b) replaces former Section 3-408. The
distinction between value and consideration in Article 3 is a very fine one. Whether an instrument is taken for value
is relevant to the issue of whether a holder is a holder in due course. If an instrument is not issued for consideration
the issuer has a defense to the obligation to pay the instrument. Consideration is defined in subsection (b) as "any
consideration sufficient to support a simple contract." The definition of value in Section 1-201(44), which doesn't
apply to Article 3, includes "any consideration sufficient to support a simple contract." Thus, outside Article 3,
anything that is consideration is also value. A different rule applies in Article 3. Subsection (b) of Section 3-303
states that if an instrument is issued for value it is also issued for consideration.
Case # 1. X owes Y $ 1,000. The debt is not represented by a note. Later X issues a note to Y for the debt. Under
subsection (a)(3) X's note is issued for value. Under subsection (b) the note is also issued for consideration whether
or not, under contract law, Y is deemed to have given consideration for the note.
Case # 2. X issues a check to Y in consideration of Y's promise to perform services in the future. Although the
executory promise is consideration for issuance of the check it is value only to the extent the promise is performed.
Subsection (a)(1).
§ 3-303. VALUE AND CONSIDERATION
Page 2 of 2
Case # 3. X issues a note to Y in consideration of Y's promise to perform services. If at the due date of the note
Y's performance is not yet due, Y may enforce the note because it was issued for consideration. But if at the due
date of the note, Y's performance is due and has not been performed, X has a defense. Subsection (b).
2. Subsection (a), which defines value, has primary importance in cases in which the issue is whether the holder
of an instrument is a holder in due course and particularly to cases in which the issuer of the instrument has a
defense to the instrument. Suppose Buyer and Seller signed a contract on April 1 for the sale of goods to be
delivered on May 1. Payment of 50% of the price of the goods was due upon signing of the contract. On April 1
Buyer delivered to Seller a check in the amount due under the contract. The check was drawn by X to Buyer as
payee and was indorsed to Seller. When the check was presented for payment to the drawee on April 2, it was
dishonored because X had stopped payment. At that time Seller had not taken any action to perform the contract
with Buyer. If X has a defense on the check, the defense can be asserted against Seller who is not a holder in due
course because Seller did not give value for the check. Subsection (a)(1). The policy basis for subsection (a)(1) is
that the holder who gives an executory promise of performance will not suffer an out-of-pocket loss to the extent the
executory promise is unperformed at the time the holder learns of dishonor of the instrument. When Seller took
delivery of the check on April 1, Buyer's obligation to pay 50% of the price on that date was suspended, but when
the check was dishonored on April 2 the obligation revived. Section 3-310(b). If payment for goods is due at or
before delivery and the buyer fails to make the payment, the seller is excused from performing the promise to
deliver the goods. Section 2-703. Thus, Seller is protected from an out-of-pocket loss even if the check is not
enforceable. Holder-in-due-course status is not necessary to protect Seller.
3. Subsection (a)(2) equates value with the obtaining of a security interest or a nonjudicial lien in the instrument.
The term "security interest" covers Article 9 cases in which an instrument is taken as collateral as well as bank
collection cases in which a bank acquires a security interest under Section 4-210. The acquisition of a common-law
or statutory banker's lien is also value under subsection (a)(2). An attaching creditor or other person who acquires a
lien by judicial proceedings does not give value for the purposes of subsection (a)(2).
4. Subsection (a)(3) follows former Section 3-303(b) in providing that the holder takes for value if the instrument is
taken in payment of or as security for an antecedent claim, even though there is no extension of time or other
concession, and whether or not the claim is due. Subsection (a)(3) applies to any claim against any person; there is
no requirement that the claim arise out of contract. In particular the provision is intended to apply to an instrument
given in payment of or as security for the debt of a third person, even though no concession is made in return.
5. Subsection (a)(4) and (5) restate former Section 3-303(c). They state generally recognized exceptions to the
rule that an executory promise is not value. A negotiable instrument is value because it carries the possibility of
negotiation to a holder in due course, after which the party who gives it is obliged to pay. The same reasoning
applies to any irrevocable commitment to a third person, such as a letter of credit issued when an instrument is
taken.
6. The term "promise" in paragraph (a)(1) is used in the phrase "promise of performance" and for that reason
does not have the specialized meaning given that term in Section 3-103(a)(12). See Section 1-201 ("Changes from
Former Law"). No inference should be drawn from the decision to use the phrase "promise of performance,"
although the phrase does include the word "promise," which has the specialized definition set forth in Section 3-
103. Indeed, that is true even though "undertaking" is used instead of "promise" in Section 3-104(a)(3). See Section
3-104 comment 1 (explaining the use of the term "undertaking" in Section 3-104 to avoid use of the defined term
"promise"). Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2,
2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-304
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-304. OVERDUE INSTRUMENT
(a) An instrument payable on demand becomes overdue at the earliest of the following times:
(1) on the day after the day demand for payment is duly made;
(2) if the instrument is a check, 90 days after its date; or
(3) if the instrument is not a check, when the instrument has been outstanding for a period of time after
its date which is unreasonably long under the circumstances of the particular case in light of the nature
of the instrument and usage of the trade.
(b) With respect to an instrument payable at a definite time the following rules apply:
(1) If the principal is payable in installments and a due date has not been accelerated, the instrument
becomes overdue upon default under the instrument for nonpayment of an installment, and the
instrument remains overdue until the default is cured.
(2) If the principal is not payable in installments and the due date has not been accelerated, the
instrument becomes overdue on the day after the due date.
(3) If a due date with respect to principal has been accelerated, the instrument becomes overdue on
the day after the accelerated due date.
(c) Unless the due date of principal has been accelerated, an instrument does not become overdue if there
is default in payment of interest but no default in payment of principal.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. To be a holder in due course, one must take without notice that an instrument is overdue. Section 3-
302(a)(2)(iii). Section 3-304 replaces subsection (3) of former Section 3-304. For the sake of clarity it treats demand
and time instruments separately. Subsection (a) applies to demand instruments. A check becomes stale after 90
days.
Under former Section 3-304(3)(c), a holder that took a demand note had notice that it was overdue if it was taken
"more than a reasonable length of time after its issue." In substitution for this test, subsection (a)(3) requires the
trier of fact to look at both the circumstances of the particular case and the nature of the instrument and trade
usage. Whether a demand note is stale may vary a great deal depending on the facts of the particular case.
2. Subsections (b) and (c) cover time instruments. They follow the distinction made under former Article 3
between defaults in payment of principal and interest. In subsection (b) installment instruments and single payment
instruments are treated separately. If an installment is late, the instrument is overdue until the default is cured.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 3-304. OVERDUE INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-305
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-305. DEFENSES AND CLAIMS IN RECOUPMENT; CLAIMS IN CONSUMER
TRANSACTIONS
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the right to enforce the obligation of a party to pay an
instrument is subject to the following:
(1) a defense of the obligor based on (i) infancy of the obligor to the extent it is a defense to a simple
contract, (ii) duress, lack of legal capacity, or illegality of the transaction which, under other law, nullifies
the obligation of the obligor, (iii) fraud that induced the obligor to sign the instrument with neither
knowledge nor reasonable opportunity to learn of its character or its essential terms, or (iv) discharge of
the obligor in insolvency proceedings;
(2) a defense of the obligor stated in another section of this Article or a defense of the obligor that
would be available if the person entitled to enforce the instrument were enforcing a right to payment
under a simple contract; and
(3) a claim in recoupment of the obligor against the original payee of the instrument if the claim arose
from the transaction that gave rise to the instrument; but the claim of the obligor may be asserted
against a transferee of the instrument only to reduce the amount owing on the instrument at the time
the action is brought.
(b) The right of a holder in due course to enforce the obligation of a party to pay the instrument is subject
to defenses of the obligor stated in subsection (a)(1), but is not subject to defenses of the obligor stated in
subsection (a)(2) or claims in recoupment stated in subsection (a)(3) against a person other than the
holder.
(c) Except as stated in subsection (d), in an action to enforce the obligation of a party to pay the
instrument, the obligor may not assert against the person entitled to enforce the instrument a defense,
claim in recoupment, or claim to the instrument ( Section 3-306) of another person, but the other person's
claim to the instrument may be asserted by the obligor if the other person is joined in the action and
personally asserts the claim against the person entitled to enforce the instrument. An obligor is not obliged
to pay the instrument if the person seeking enforcement of the instrument does not have rights of a holder
in due course and the obligor proves that the instrument is a lost or stolen instrument.
(d) In an action to enforce the obligation of an accommodation party to pay an instrument, the
accommodation party may assert against the person entitled to enforce the instrument any defense or claim
in recoupment under subsection (a) that the accommodated party could assert against the person entitled
to enforce the instrument, except the defenses of discharge in insolvency proceedings, infancy, and lack of
legal capacity.
(e) In a consumer transaction, if law other than this article requires that an instrument include a statement
to the effect that the rights of a holder or transferee are subject to a claim or defense that the issuer could
assert against the original payee, and the instrument does not include such a statement:
(1) the instrument has the same effect as if the instrument included such a statement;
(2) the issuer may assert against the holder or transferee all claims and defenses that would have
been available if the instrument included such a statement; and
§ 3-305. DEFENSES AND CLAIMS IN RECOUPMENT; CLAIMS IN CONSUMER TRANSACTIONS
Page 2 of 5
(3) the extent to which claims may be asserted against the holder or transferee is determined as if the
instrument included such a statement.
(f) This section is subject to law other than this article that establishes a different rule for consumer
transactions.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: If a consumer protection law in this state addresses the same issue as subsection (g), it should
be examined for consistency with subsection (g) and, if inconsistent, should be amended.
1. Subsection (a) states the defenses to the obligation of a party to pay the instrument. Subsection (a)(1) states
the "real defenses" that may be asserted against any person entitled to enforce the instrument.
Subsection (a)(1)(i) allows assertion of the defense of infancy against a holder in due course, even though the
effect of the defense is to render the instrument voidable but not void. The policy is one of protection of the infant
even at the expense of occasional loss to an innocent purchaser. No attempt is made to state when infancy is
available as a defense or the conditions under which it may be asserted. In some jurisdictions it is held that an
infant cannot rescind the transaction or set up the defense unless the holder is restored to the position held before
the instrument was taken which, in the case of a holder in due course, is normally impossible. In other states an
infant who has misrepresented age may be estopped to assert infancy. Such questions are left to other law, as an
integral part of the policy of each state as to the protection of infants.
Subsection (a)(1)(ii) covers mental incompetence, guardianship, ultra vires acts or lack of corporate capacity to do
business, or any other incapacity apart from infancy. Such incapacity is largely statutory. Its existence and effect is
left to the law of each state. If under the state law the effect is to render the obligation of the instrument entirely null
and void, the defense may be asserted against a holder in due course. If the effect is merely to render the obligation
voidable at the election of the obligor, the defense is cut off.
Duress, which is also covered by subsection (a)(ii), is a matter of degree. An instrument signed at the point of a
gun is void, even in the hands of a holder in due course. One signed under threat to prosecute the son of the maker
for theft may be merely voidable, so that the defense is cut off. Illegality is most frequently a matter of gambling or
usury, but may arise in other forms under a variety of statutes. The statutes differ in their provisions and the
interpretations given them. They are primarily a matter of local concern and local policy. All such matters are
therefore left to the local law. If under that law the effect of the duress or the illegality is to make the obligation
entirely null and void, the defense may be asserted against a holder in due course. Otherwise it is cut off.
Subsection (a)(1)(iii) refers to "real" or "essential" fraud, sometimes called fraud in the essence or fraud in the
factum, as effective against a holder in due course. The common illustration is that of the maker who is tricked into
signing a note in the belief that it is merely a receipt or some other document. The theory of the defense is that the
signature on the instrument is ineffective because the signer did not intend to sign such an instrument at all. Under
this provision the defense extends to an instrument signed with knowledge that it is a negotiable instrument, but
without knowledge of its essential terms. The test of the defense is that of excusable ignorance of the contents of
the writing signed. The party must not only have been in ignorance, but must also have had no reasonable
opportunity to obtain knowledge. In determining what is a reasonable opportunity all relevant factors are to be taken
into account, including the intelligence, education, business experience, and ability to read or understand English of
the signer. Also relevant is the nature of the representations that were made, whether the signer had good reason
to rely on the representations or to have confidence in the person making them, the presence or absence of any
third person who might read or explain the instrument to the signer, or any other possibility of obtaining independent
§ 3-305. DEFENSES AND CLAIMS IN RECOUPMENT; CLAIMS IN CONSUMER TRANSACTIONS
Page 3 of 5
information, and the apparent necessity, or lack of it, for acting without delay. Unless the misrepresentation meets
this test, the defense is cut off by a holder in due course.
Subsection (a)(1)(iv) states specifically that the defense of discharge in insolvency proceedings is not cut off when
the instrument is purchased by a holder in due course. "Insolvency proceedings" is defined in Section 1-201(22)
and it includes bankruptcy whether or not the debtor is insolvent. Subsection (2)(e) of former Section 3-305 is
omitted. The substance of that provision is stated in Section 3-601(b).
2. Subsection (a)(2) states other defenses that, pursuant to subsection (b), are cut off by a holder in due course.
These defenses comprise those specifically stated in Article 3 and those based on common law contract principles.
Article 3 defenses are nonissuance of the instrument, conditional issuance, and issuance for a special purpose
(Section 3-105(b)); failure to countersign a traveler's check (Section 3-106(c)); modification of the obligation by a
separate agreement (Section 3-117); payment that violates a restrictive indorsement (Section 3-206(f)); instruments
issued without consideration or for which promised performance has not been given (Section 3-303(b)), and breach
of warranty when a draft is accepted (Section 3-417(b)). The most prevalent common law defenses are fraud,
misrepresentation or mistake in the issuance of the instrument. In most cases the holder in due course will be an
immediate or remote transferee of the payee of the instrument. In most cases the holder-in-due-course doctrine is
irrelevant if defenses are being asserted against the payee of the instrument, but in a small number of cases the
payee of the instrument may be a holder in due course. Those cases are discussed in Comment 4 to Section 3-302.
Assume Buyer issues a note to Seller in payment of the price of goods that Seller fraudulently promises to deliver
but which are never delivered. Seller negotiates the note to Holder who has no notice of the fraud. If Holder is a
holder in due course, Holder is not subject to Buyer's defense of fraud. But in some cases an original party to the
instrument is a holder in due course. For example, Buyer fraudulently induces Bank to issue a cashier's check to
the order of Seller. The check is delivered by Bank to Seller, who has no notice of the fraud. Seller can be a holder
in due course and can take the check free of Bank's defense of fraud. This case is discussed as Case # 1 in
Comment 4 to Section 3-302. Former Section 3-305 stated that a holder in due course takes free of defenses of
"any party to the instrument with whom the holder has not dealt." The meaning of this language was not at all clear
and if read literally could have produced the wrong result. In the hypothetical case, it could be argued that Seller
"dealt" with Bank because Bank delivered the check to Seller. But it is clear that Seller should take free of Bank's
defense against Buyer regardless of whether Seller took delivery of the check from Buyer or from Bank. The quoted
language is not included in Section 3-305. It is not necessary. If Buyer issues an instrument to Seller and Buyer has
a defense against Seller, that defense can obviously be asserted. Buyer and Seller are the only people involved.
The holder-in-due-course doctrine has no relevance. The doctrine applies only to cases in which more than two
parties are involved. Its essence is that the holder in due course does not have to suffer the consequences of a
defense of the obligor on the instrument that arose from an occurrence with a third party.
3. Subsection (a)(3) is concerned with claims in recoupment which can be illustrated by the following example.
Buyer issues a note to the order of Seller in exchange for a promise of Seller to deliver specified equipment. If
Seller fails to deliver the equipment or delivers equipment that is rightfully rejected, Buyer has a defense to the note
because the performance that was the consideration for the note was not rendered. Section 3-303(b). This defense
is included in Section 3-305(a)(2). That defense can always be asserted against Seller. This result is the same as
that reached under former Section 3-408.
But suppose Seller delivered the promised equipment and it was accepted by Buyer. The equipment, however,
was defective. Buyer retained the equipment and incurred expenses with respect to its repair. In this case, Buyer
does not have a defense under Section 3-303(b). Seller delivered the equipment and the equipment was accepted.
Under Article 2, Buyer is obliged to pay the price of the equipment which is represented by the note. But Buyer may
have a claim against Seller for breach of warranty. If Buyer has a warranty claim, the claim may be asserted against
Seller as a counterclaim or as a claim in recoupment to reduce the amount owing on the note. It is not relevant
whether Seller is or is not a holder in due course of the note or whether Seller knew or had notice that Buyer had
the warranty claim. It is obvious that holder-in-due-course doctrine cannot be used to allow Seller to cut off a
warranty claim that Buyer has against Seller. Subsection (b) specifically covers this point by stating that a holder in
due course is not subject to a "claim in recoupment *** against a person other than the holder."
§ 3-305. DEFENSES AND CLAIMS IN RECOUPMENT; CLAIMS IN CONSUMER TRANSACTIONS
Page 4 of 5
Suppose Seller negotiates the note to Holder. If Holder had notice of Buyer's warranty claim at the time the note
was negotiated to Holder, Holder is not a holder in due course (Section 3-302(a)(2)(iv)) and Buyer may assert the
claim against Holder (Section 3-305(a)(3)) but only as a claim in recoupment, i.e. to reduce the amount owed on the
note. If the warranty claim is $ 1,000 and the unpaid note is $ 10,000, Buyer owes $ 9,000 to Holder. If the warranty
claim is more than the unpaid amount of the note, Buyer owes nothing to Holder, but Buyer cannot recover the
unpaid amount of the warranty claim from Holder. If Buyer had already partially paid the note, Buyer is not entitled
to recover the amounts paid. The claim can be used only as an offset to amounts owing on the note. If Holder had
no notice of Buyer's claim and otherwise qualifies as a holder in due course, Buyer may not assert the claim against
Holder. Section 3-305(b).
The result under Section 3-305 is consistent with the result reached under former Article 3, but the rules for
reaching the result are stated differently. Under former Article 3 Buyer could assert rights against Holder only if
Holder was not a holder in due course, and Holder's status depended upon whether Holder had notice of a defense
by Buyer. Courts have held that Holder had that notice if Holder had notice of Buyer's warranty claim. The rationale
under former Article 3 was "failure of consideration." This rationale does not distinguish between cases in which the
seller fails to perform and those in which the buyer accepts the performance of seller but makes a claim against the
seller because the performance is faulty. The term "failure of consideration" is subject to varying interpretations and
is not used in Article 3. The use of the term "claim in recoupment" in Section 3-305(a)(3) is a more precise
statement of the nature of Buyer's right against Holder. The use of the term does not change the law because the
treatment of a defense under subsection (a)(2) and a claim in recoupment under subsection (a)(3) is essentially the
same.
Under former Article 3, case law was divided on the issue of the extent to which an obligor on a note could assert
against a transferee who is not a holder in due course a debt or other claim that the obligor had against the original
payee of the instrument. Some courts limited claims to those that arose in the transaction that gave rise to the note.
This is the approach taken in Section 3-305(a)(3). Other courts allowed the obligor on the note to use any debt or
other claim, no matter how unrelated to the note, to offset the amount owed on the note. Under current judicial
authority and non-UCC statutory law, there will be many cases in which a transferee of a note arising from a sale
transaction will not qualify as a holder in due course. For example, applicable law may require the use of a note to
which there cannot be a holder in due course. See Section 3-106(d) and Comment 3 to Section 3-106. It is
reasonable to provide that the buyer should not be denied the right to assert claims arising out of the sale
transaction. Subsection (a)(3) is based on the belief that it is not reasonable to require the transferee to bear the
risk that wholly unrelated claims may also be asserted. The determination of whether a claim arose from the
transaction that gave rise to the instrument is determined by law other than this Article and thus may vary as local
law varies.
4. Subsection (c) concerns claims and defenses of a person other than the obligor on the instrument. It applies
principally to cases in which an obligation is paid with the instrument of a third person. For example, Buyer buys
goods from Seller and negotiates to Seller a cashier's check issued by Bank in payment of the price. Shortly after
delivering the check to Seller, Buyer learns that Seller had defrauded Buyer in the sale transaction. Seller may
enforce the check against Bank even though Seller is not a holder in due course. Bank has no defense to its
obligation to pay the check and it may not assert defenses, claims in recoupment, or claims to the instrument of
Buyer, except to the extent permitted by the "but" clause of the first sentence of subsection (c). Buyer may have a
claim to the instrument under Section 3-306 based on a right to rescind the negotiation to Seller because of Seller's
fraud. Section 3-202(b) and Comment 2 to Section 3-201. Bank cannot assert that claim unless Buyer is joined in
the action in which Seller is trying to enforce payment of the check. In that case Bank may pay the amount of the
check into court and the court will decide whether that amount belongs to Buyer or Seller. The last sentence of
subsection (c) allows the issuer of an instrument such as a cashier's check to refuse payment in the rare case in
which the issuer can prove that the instrument is a lost or stolen instrument and the person seeking enforcement
does not have rights of a holder in due course.
5. Subsection (d) applies to instruments signed for accommodation (Section 3-419) and this subsection equates
the obligation of the accommodation party to that of the accommodated party. The accommodation party can assert
whatever defense or claim the accommodated party had against the person enforcing the instrument. The only
§ 3-305. DEFENSES AND CLAIMS IN RECOUPMENT; CLAIMS IN CONSUMER TRANSACTIONS
Page 5 of 5
exceptions are discharge in bankruptcy, infancy and lack of capacity. The same rule does not apply to an
indorsement by a holder of the instrument in negotiating the instrument. The indorser, as transferor, makes a
warranty to the indorsee, as transferee, that no defense or claim in recoupment is good against the indorser.
Section 3-416(a)(4). Thus, if the indorsee sues the indorser because of dishonor of the instrument, the indorser may
not assert the defense or claim in recoupment of the maker or drawer against the indorsee.
Section 3-305(d) must be read in conjunction with Section 3-605, which provides rules (usually referred to as
suretyship defenses) for determining when the obligation of an accommodation party is discharged, in whole or in
part, because of some act or omission of a person entitled to enforce the instrument. To the extent a rule stated in
Section 3-605 is inconsistent with Section 3-305(d), the Section 3-605 rule governs. For example, Section 3-605(a)
provides rules for determining when and to what extent a discharge of the accommodated party under Section 3-
604 will discharge the accommodation party. As explained in Comment 2 to Section 3-605, discharge of the
accommodated party is normally part of a settlement under which the holder of a note accepts partial payment from
an accommodated party who is financially unable to pay the entire amount of the note. If the holder then brings an
action against the accommodation party to recover the remaining unpaid amount of the note, the accommodation
party cannot use Section 3-305(d) to nullify Section 3-605() by asserting the discharge of the accommodated party
as a defense. On the other hand, suppose the accommodated party is a buyer of goods who issued the note to the
seller who took the note for the buyer's obligation to pay for the goods. Suppose the buyer has a claim for breach of
warranty with respect to the goods against the seller and the warranty claim may be asserted against the holder of
the note. The warranty claim is a claim in recoupment. If the holder and the accommodated party reach a
settlement under which the holder accepts payment less than the amount of the note in full satisfaction of the note
and the warranty claim, the accommodation party could defend an action on the note by the holder by asserting the
accord and satisfaction under Section 3-305(d). There is no conflict with Section 3-605() because that provision is
not intended to apply to settlement of disputed claims.
6. Subsection (e) is added to clarify the treatment of an instrument that omits the notice currently required by the
Federal Trade Commission Rule related to certain consumer credit sales and consumer purchase money loans (16
C.F.R. Part 433). This subsection adopts the view that the instrument should be treated as if the language required
by the FTC Rule were present. It is based on the language describing that rule in Section 3-106(d) and the
analogous provision in Section 9-404(d).
7. Subsection (f) is modeled on Sections 9-403(e) and 9-404(c). It ensures that Section 3-305 is interpreted to
accommodate relevant consumer-protection laws. The absence of such a provision from other sections in Article 3
should not justify any inference about the meaning of those sections.
8. Articles 28 and 30 of the Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes
includes a similar dichotomy, with a narrower group of defenses available against a protected holder under Articles
28(1) and 30 than are available under Article 28(2) against a holder that is not a protected holder.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-306
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-306. CLAIMS TO AN INSTRUMENT
A person taking an instrument, other than a person having rights of a holder in due course, is subject to a claim of
a property or possessory right in the instrument or its proceeds, including a claim to rescind a negotiation and to
recover the instrument or its proceeds. A person having rights of a holder in due course takes free of the claim to
the instrument.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section expands on the reference to "claims to" the instrument mentioned in former Sections 3-305 and 3-
306. Claims covered by the section include not only claims to ownership but also any other claim of a property or
possessory right. It includes the claim to a lien or the claim of a person in rightful possession of an instrument who
was wrongfully deprived of possession. Also included is a claim based on Section 3-202(b) for rescission of a
negotiation of the instrument by the claimant. Claims to an instrument under Section 3-306 are different from claims
in recoupment referred to in Section 3-305(a)(3). The rule of this section is similar to the rule of Article 30(2) of the
Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes. Amendments approved by the
Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-307
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-307. NOTICE OF BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY
(a) In this section:
(1) "Fiduciary" means an agent, trustee, partner, corporate officer or director, or other representative
owing a fiduciary duty with respect to an instrument.
(2) "Represented person" means the principal, beneficiary, partnership, corporation, or other person to
whom the duty stated in paragraph (1) is owed.
(b) If (i) an instrument is taken from a fiduciary for payment or collection or for value, (ii) the taker has
knowledge of the fiduciary status of the fiduciary, and (iii) the represented person makes a claim to the
instrument or its proceeds on the basis that the transaction of the fiduciary is a breach of fiduciary duty, the
following rules apply:
(1) Notice of breach of fiduciary duty by the fiduciary is notice of the claim of the represented person.
(2) In the case of an instrument payable to the represented person or the fiduciary as such, the taker
has notice of the breach of fiduciary duty if the instrument is (i) taken in payment of or as security for a
debt known by the taker to be the personal debt of the fiduciary, (ii) taken in a transaction known by the
taker to be for the personal benefit of the fiduciary, or (iii) deposited to an account other than an
account of the fiduciary, as such, or an account of the represented person.
(3) If an instrument is issued by the represented person or the fiduciary as such, and made payable to
the fiduciary personally, the taker does not have notice of the breach of fiduciary duty unless the taker
knows of the breach of fiduciary duty.
(4) If an instrument is issued by the represented person or the fiduciary as such, to the taker as payee,
the taker has notice of the breach of fiduciary duty if the instrument is (i) taken in payment of or as
security for a debt known by the taker to be the personal debt of the fiduciary, (ii) taken in a transaction
known by the taker to be for the personal benefit of the fiduciary, or (iii) deposited to an account other
than an account of the fiduciary, as such, or an account of the represented person.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section states rules for determining when a person who has taken an instrument from a fiduciary has
notice of a breach of fiduciary duty that occurs as a result of the transaction with the fiduciary. Former Section 3-
304(2) and (4)(e) related to this issue, but those provisions were unclear in their meaning. Section 3-307 is intended
to clarify the law by stating rules that comprehensively cover the issue of when the taker of an instrument has notice
of breach of a fiduciary duty and thus notice of a claim to the instrument or its proceeds.
2. Subsection (a) defines the terms "fiduciary" and "represented person" and the introductory paragraph of
subsection (b) describes the transaction to which the section applies. The basic scenario is one in which the
fiduciary in effect embezzles money of the represented person by applying the proceeds of an instrument that
§ 3-307. NOTICE OF BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY
Page 2 of 3
belongs to the represented person to the personal use of the fiduciary. The person dealing with the fiduciary may be
a depositary bank that takes the instrument for collection or a bank or other person that pays value for the
instrument. The section also covers a transaction in which an instrument is presented for payment to a payor bank
that pays the instrument by giving value to the fiduciary. Subsections (b)(2), (3), and (4) state rules for determining
when the person dealing with the fiduciary has notice of breach of fiduciary duty. Subsection (b)(1) states that
notice of breach of fiduciary duty is notice of the represented person's claim to the instrument or its proceeds.
Under Section 3-306, a person taking an instrument is subject to a claim to the instrument or its proceeds, unless
the taker has rights of a holder in due course. Under Section 3-302(a)(2)(v), the taker cannot be a holder in due
course if the instrument was taken with notice of a claim under Section 3-306. Section 3-307 applies to cases in
which a represented person is asserting a claim because a breach of fiduciary duty resulted in a misapplication of
the proceeds of an instrument. The claim of the represented person is a claim described in Section 3-306. Section
3-307 states rules for determining when a person taking an instrument has notice of the claim which will prevent
assertion of rights as a holder in due course. It also states rules for determining when a payor bank pays an
instrument with notice of breach of fiduciary duty.
Section 3-307(b) applies only if the person dealing with the fiduciary "has knowledge of the fiduciary status of the
fiduciary." Notice which does not amount to knowledge is not enough to cause Section 3-307 to apply. "Knowledge"
is defined in Section 1-201(25). In most cases, the "taker" referred to in Section 3-307 will be a bank or other
organization. Knowledge of an organization is determined by the rules stated in Section 1-201(27). In many cases,
the individual who receives and processes an instrument on behalf of the organization that is the taker of the
instrument "for payment or collection or for value" is a clerk who has no knowledge of any fiduciary status of the
person from whom the instrument is received. In such cases, Section 3-307 doesn't apply because, under Section
1-201(27), knowledge of the organization is determined by the knowledge of the "individual conducting that
transaction," i.e. the clerk who receives and processes the instrument. Furthermore, paragraphs (2) and (4) each
require that the person acting for the organization have knowledge of facts that indicate a breach of fiduciary duty.
In the case of an instrument taken for deposit to an account, the knowledge is found in the fact that the deposit is
made to an account other than that of the represented person or a fiduciary account for benefit of that person. In
other cases the person acting for the organization must know that the instrument is taken in payment or as security
for a personal debt of the fiduciary or for the personal benefit of the fiduciary. For example, if the instrument is being
used to buy goods or services, the person acting for the organization must know that the goods or services are for
the personal benefit of the fiduciary. The requirement that the taker have knowledge rather than notice is meant to
limit Section 3-307 to relatively uncommon cases in which the person who deals with the fiduciary knows all the
relevant facts: the fiduciary status and that the proceeds of the instrument are being used for the personal debt or
benefit of the fiduciary or are being paid to an account that is not an account of the represented person or of the
fiduciary, as such. Mere notice of these facts is not enough to put the taker on notice of the breach of fiduciary duty
and does not give rise to any duty of investigation by the taker.
3. Subsection (b)(2) applies to instruments payable to the represented person or the fiduciary as such. For
example, a check payable to Corporation is indorsed in the name of Corporation by Doe as its President. Doe gives
the check to Bank as partial repayment of a personal loan that Bank had made to Doe. The check was indorsed
either in blank or to Bank. Bank collects the check and applies the proceeds to reduce the amount owed on Doe's
loan. If the person acting for Bank in the transaction knows that Doe is a fiduciary and that the check is being used
to pay a personal obligation of Doe, subsection (b)(2) applies. If Corporation has a claim to the proceeds of the
check because the use of the check by Doe was a breach of fiduciary duty, Bank has notice of the claim and did not
take the check as a holder in due course. The same result follows if Doe had indorsed the check to himself before
giving it to Bank. Subsection (b)(2) follows Uniform Fiduciaries Act § 4 in providing that if the instrument is payable
to the fiduciary, as such, or to the represented person, the taker has notice of a claim if the instrument is negotiated
for the fiduciary's personal debt. If fiduciary funds are deposited to a personal account of the fiduciary or to an
account that is not an account of the represented person or of the fiduciary, as such, there is a split of authority
concerning whether the bank is on notice of a breach of fiduciary duty. Subsection (b)(2)(iii) states that the bank is
given notice of breach of fiduciary duty because of the deposit. The Uniform Fiduciaries Act § 9 states that the bank
is not on notice unless it has knowledge of facts that makes its receipt of the deposit an act of bad faith.
§ 3-307. NOTICE OF BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY
Page 3 of 3
The rationale of subsection (b)(2) is that it is not normal for an instrument payable to the represented person or
the fiduciary, as such, to be used for the personal benefit of the fiduciary. It is likely that such use reflects an
unlawful use of the proceeds of the instrument. If the fiduciary is entitled to compensation from the represented
person for services rendered or for expenses incurred by the fiduciary the normal mode of payment is by a check
drawn on the fiduciary account to the order of the fiduciary.
4. Subsection (b)(3) is based on Uniform Fiduciaries Act § 6 and applies when the instrument is drawn by the
represented person or the fiduciary as such to the fiduciary personally. The term "personally" is used as it is used in
the Uniform Fiduciaries Act to mean that the instrument is payable to the payee as an individual and not as a
fiduciary. For example, Doe as President of Corporation writes a check on Corporation's account to the order of
Doe personally. The check is then indorsed over to Bank as in Comment 3. In this case there is no notice of breach
of fiduciary duty because there is nothing unusual about the transaction. Corporation may have owed Doe money
for salary, reimbursement for expenses incurred for the benefit of Corporation, or for any other reason. If Doe is
authorized to write checks on behalf of Corporation to pay debts of Corporation, the check is a normal way of
paying a debt owed to Doe. Bank may assume that Doe may use the instrument for his personal benefit.
5. Subsection (b)(4) can be illustrated by a hypothetical case. Corporation draws a check payable to an
organization. X, an officer or employee of Corporation, delivers the check to a person acting for the organization.
The person signing the check on behalf of Corporation is X or another person. If the person acting for the
organization in the transaction knows that X is a fiduciary, the organization is on notice of a claim by Corporation if it
takes the instrument under the same circumstances stated in subsection (b)(2). If the organization is a bank and the
check is taken in repayment of a personal loan of the bank to X, the case is like the case discussed in Comment 3.
It is unusual for Corporation, the represented person, to pay a personal debt of Doe by issuing a check to the bank.
It is more likely that the use of the check by Doe reflects an unlawful use of the proceeds of the check. The same
analysis applies if the check is made payable to an organization in payment of goods or services. If the person
acting for the organization knew of the fiduciary status of X and that the goods or services were for X's personal
benefit, the organization is on notice of a claim by Corporation to the proceeds of the check. See the discussion in
the last paragraph of Comment 2.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-308
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-308. PROOF OF SIGNATURES AND STATUS AS HOLDER IN DUE
COURSE
(a) In an action with respect to an instrument, the authenticity of, and authority to make, each signature on
the instrument is admitted unless specifically denied in the pleadings. If the validity of a signature is denied
in the pleadings, the burden of establishing validity is on the person claiming validity, but the signature is
presumed to be authentic and authorized unless the action is to enforce the liability of the purported signer
and the signer is dead or incompetent at the time of trial of the issue of validity of the signature. If an action
to enforce the instrument is brought against a person as the undisclosed principal of a person who signed
the instrument as a party to the instrument, the plaintiff has the burden of establishing that the defendant is
liable on the instrument as a represented person under Section 3-402(a).
(b) If the validity of signatures is admitted or proved and there is compliance with subsection (a), a plaintiff
producing the instrument is entitled to payment if the plaintiff proves entitlement to enforce the instrument
under Section 3-301, unless the defendant proves a defense or claim in recoupment. If a defense or claim
in recoupment is proved, the right to payment of the plaintiff is subject to the defense or claim, except to the
extent the plaintiff proves that the plaintiff has rights of a holder in due course which are not subject to the
defense or claim.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 3-308 is a modification of former Section 3-307. The first two sentences of subsection (a) are a
restatement of former Section 3-307(1). The purpose of the requirement of a specific denial in the pleadings is to
give the plaintiff notice of the defendant's claim of forgery or lack of authority as to the particular signature, and to
afford the plaintiff an opportunity to investigate and obtain evidence. If local rules of pleading permit, the denial may
be on information and belief, or it may be a denial of knowledge or information sufficient to form a belief. It need not
be under oath unless the local statutes or rules require verification. In the absence of such specific denial the
signature stands admitted, and is not in issue. Nothing in this section is intended, however, to prevent amendment
of the pleading in a proper case.
The question of the burden of establishing the signature arises only when it has been put in issue by specific
denial. "Burden of establishing" is defined in Section 1-201. The burden is on the party claiming under the
signature, but the signature is presumed to be authentic and authorized except as stated in the second sentence of
subsection (a). "Presumed" is defined in Section 1-201 and means that until some evidence is introduced which
would support a finding that the signature is forged or unauthorized, the plaintiff is not required to prove that it is
valid. The presumption rests upon the fact that in ordinary experience forged or unauthorized signatures are very
uncommon, and normally any evidence is within the control of, or more accessible to, the defendant. The defendant
is therefore required to make some sufficient showing of the grounds for the denial before the plaintiff is required to
introduce evidence. The defendant's evidence need not be sufficient to require a directed verdict, but it must be
enough to support the denial by permitting a finding in the defendant's favor. Until introduction of such evidence the
presumption requires a finding for the plaintiff. Once such evidence is introduced the burden of establishing the
§ 3-308. PROOF OF SIGNATURES AND STATUS AS HOLDER IN DUE COURSE
Page 2 of 2
signature by a preponderance of the total evidence is on the plaintiff. The presumption does not arise if the action is
to enforce the obligation of a purported signer who has died or become incompetent before the evidence is
required, and so is disabled from obtaining or introducing it. "Action" is defined in Section 1-201 and includes a
claim asserted against the estate of a deceased or an incompetent.
The last sentence of subsection (a) is a new provision that is necessary to take into account Section 3-402(a) that
allows an undisclosed principal to be liable on an instrument signed by an authorized representative. In that case
the person enforcing the instrument must prove that the undisclosed principal is liable.
2. Subsection (b) restates former Section 3-307(2) and (3). Once signatures are proved or admitted a holder, by
mere production of the instrument, proves "entitlement to enforce the instrument" because under Section 3-301 a
holder is a person entitled to enforce the instrument. Any other person in possession of an instrument may recover
only if that person has the rights of a holder. Section 3-301. That person must prove a transfer giving that person
such rights under Section 3-203(b) or that such rights were obtained by subrogation or succession.
If a plaintiff producing the instrument proves entitlement to enforce the instrument, either as a holder or a person
with rights of a holder, the plaintiff is entitled to recovery unless the defendant proves a defense or claim in
recoupment. Until proof of a defense or claim in recoupment is made, the issue as to whether the plaintiff has rights
of a holder in due course does not arise. In the absence of a defense or claim in recoupment, any person entitled to
enforce the instrument is entitled to recover. If a defense or claim in recoupment is proved, the plaintiff may seek to
cut off the defense or claim in recoupment by proving that the plaintiff is a holder in due course or that the plaintiff
has rights of a holder in due course under Section 3-203(b) or by subrogation or succession. All elements of
Section 3-302(a) must be proved.
Nothing in this section is intended to say that the plaintiff must necessarily prove rights as a holder in due course.
The plaintiff may elect to introduce no further evidence, in which case a verdict may be directed for the plaintiff or
the defendant, or the issue of the defense or claim in recoupment may be left to the trier of fact, according to the
weight and sufficiency of the defendant's evidence. The plaintiff may elect to rebut the defense or claim in
recoupment by proof to the contrary, in which case a verdict may be directed for either party or the issue may be for
the trier of fact. Subsection (b) means only that if the plaintiff claims the rights of a holder in due course against the
defense or claim in recoupment, the plaintiff has the burden of proof on that issue.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-309
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-309. ENFORCEMENT OF LOST, DESTROYED, OR STOLEN INSTRUMENT
(a) A person not in possession of an instrument is entitled to enforce the instrument if:
(1) the person seeking to enforce the instrument:
(A) was entitled to enforce the instrument when loss of possession occurred; or
(B) has directly or indirectly acquired ownership of the instrument from a person who was entitled
to enforce the instrument when loss of possession occurred;
(2) the loss of possession was not the result of a transfer by the person or a lawful seizure; and
(3) the person cannot reasonably obtain possession of the instrument because the instrument was
destroyed, its whereabouts cannot be determined, or it is in the wrongful possession of an unknown
person or a person that cannot be found or is not amenable to service of process.
(b) A person seeking enforcement of an instrument under subsection (a) must prove the terms of the
instrument and the person's right to enforce the instrument. If that proof is made, Section 3-308 applies to
the case as if the person seeking enforcement had produced the instrument. The court may not enter
judgment in favor of the person seeking enforcement unless it finds that the person required to pay the
instrument is adequately protected against loss that might occur by reason of a claim by another person to
enforce the instrument. Adequate protection may be provided by any reasonable means.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 3-309 is a modification of former Section 3-804. The rights stated are those of "a person entitled to
enforce the instrument" at the time of loss rather than those of an "owner" as in former Section 3-804. Under
subsection (b), judgment to enforce the instrument cannot be given unless the court finds that the defendant will be
adequately protected against a claim to the instrument by a holder that may appear at some later time. The court is
given discretion in determining how adequate protection is to be assured. Former Section 3-804 allowed the court
to "require security indemnifying the defendant against loss." Under Section 3-309 adequate protection is a flexible
concept. For example, there is substantial risk that a holder in due course may make a demand for payment if the
instrument was payable to bearer when it was lost or stolen. On the other hand if the instrument was payable to the
person who lost the instrument and that person did not indorse the instrument, no other person could be a holder of
the instrument. In some cases there is risk of loss only if there is doubt about whether the facts alleged by the
person who lost the instrument are true. Thus, the type of adequate protection that is reasonable in the
circumstances may depend on the degree of certainty about the facts in the case.
2. Subsection (a) is intended to reject the result in Dennis Joslin Co. v. Robinson Broadcasting Corp., 977 F.
Supp. 491 (D.D.C. 1997). A transferee of a lost instrument need prove only that its transferor was entitled to
enforce, not that the transferee was in possession at the time the instrument was lost. The protections of subsection
(a) should also be available when instruments are lost during transit, because whatever the precise status of
§ 3-309. ENFORCEMENT OF LOST, DESTROYED, OR STOLEN INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 2
ownership at the point of loss, either the sender or the receiver ordinarily would have been entitled to enforce the
instrument during the course of transit. The amendments to subsection (a) are not intended to alter in any way the
rules that apply to the preservation of checks in connection with truncation or any other expedited method of check
collection or processing.
3. A security interest may attach to the right of a person not in possession of an instrument to enforce the
instrument. Although the secured party may not be the owner of the instrument, the secured party may nevertheless
be entitled to exercise its debtor's right to enforce the instrument by resorting to its collection rights under the
circumstances described in Section 9-607. This section does not address whether the person required to pay the
instrument owes any duty to a secured party that is not itself the owner of the instrument.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-310
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-310. EFFECT OF INSTRUMENT ON OBLIGATION FOR WHICH TAKEN
(a) Unless otherwise agreed, if a certified check, cashier's check, or teller's check is taken for an obligation,
the obligation is discharged to the same extent discharge would result if an amount of money equal to the
amount of the instrument were taken in payment of the obligation. Discharge of the obligation does not
affect any liability that the obligor may have as an indorser of the instrument.
(b) Unless otherwise agreed and except as provided in subsection (a), if a note or an uncertified check is
taken for an obligation, the obligation is suspended to the same extent the obligation would be discharged if
an amount of money equal to the amount of the instrument were taken, and the following rules apply:
(1) In the case of an uncertified check, suspension of the obligation continues until dishonor of the
check or until it is paid or certified. Payment or certification of the check results in discharge of the
obligation to the extent of the amount of the check.
(2) In the case of a note, suspension of the obligation continues until dishonor of the note or until it is
paid. Payment of the note results in discharge of the obligation to the extent of the payment.
(3) Except as provided in paragraph (4), if the check or note is dishonored and the obligee of the
obligation for which the instrument was taken is the person entitled to enforce the instrument, the
obligee may enforce either the instrument or the obligation. In the case of an instrument of a third
person which is negotiated to the obligee by the obligor, discharge of the obligor on the instrument also
discharges the obligation.
(4) If the person entitled to enforce the instrument taken for an obligation is a person other than the
obligee, the obligee may not enforce the obligation to the extent the obligation is suspended. If the
obligee is the person entitled to enforce the instrument but no longer has possession of it because it
was lost, stolen, or destroyed, the obligation may not be enforced to the extent of the amount payable
on the instrument, and to that extent the obligee's rights against the obligor are limited to enforcement
of the instrument.
(c) If an instrument other than one described in subsection (a) or (b) is taken for an obligation, the effect is
(i) that stated in subsection (a) if the instrument is one on which a bank is liable as maker or acceptor, or (ii)
that stated in subsection (b) in any other case.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 3-310 is a modification of former Section 3-802. As a practical matter, application of former Section 3-
802 was limited to cases in which a check or a note was given for an obligation. Subsections (a) and (b) of Section
3-310 are therefore stated in terms of checks and notes in the interests of clarity. Subsection (c) covers the rare
cases in which some other instrument is given to pay an obligation.
2. Subsection (a) deals with the case in which a certified check, cashier's check or teller's check is given in
payment of an obligation. In that case the obligation is discharged unless there is an agreement to the contrary.
§ 3-310. EFFECT OF INSTRUMENT ON OBLIGATION FOR WHICH TAKEN
Page 2 of 3
Subsection (a) drops the exception in former Section 3-802 for cases in which there is a right of recourse on the
instrument against the obligor. Under former Section 3-802(1)(a) the obligation was not discharged if there was a
right of recourse on the instrument against the obligor. Subsection (a) changes this result. The underlying obligation
is discharged, but any right of recourse on the instrument is preserved.
3. Subsection (b) concerns cases in which an uncertified check or a note is taken for an obligation. The typical
case is that in which a buyer pays for goods or services by giving the seller the buyer's personal check, or in which
the buyer signs a note for the purchase price. Subsection (b) also applies to the uncommon cases in which a check
or note of a third person is given in payment of the obligation. Subsection (b) preserves the rule under former
Section 3-802(1)(b) that the buyer's obligation to pay the price is suspended, but subsection (b) spells out the effect
more precisely. If the check or note is dishonored, the seller may sue on either the dishonored instrument or the
contract of sale if the seller has possession of the instrument and is the person entitled to enforce it. If the right to
enforce the instrument is held by somebody other than the seller, the seller can't enforce the right to payment of the
price under the sales contract because that right is represented by the instrument which is enforceable by
somebody else. Thus, if the seller sold the note or the check to a holder and has not reacquired it after dishonor,
the only right that survives is the right to enforce the instrument. What that means is that even though the
suspension of the obligation may end upon dishonor under paragraph (b)(1), the obligation is not revived in the
circumstances described in paragraph (b)(4). Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform
Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
The last sentence of subsection (b)(3) applies to cases in which an instrument of another person is indorsed over
to the obligee in payment of the obligation. For example, Buyer delivers an uncertified personal check of X payable
to the order of Buyer to Seller in payment of the price of goods. Buyer indorses the check over to Seller. Buyer is
liable on the check as indorser. If Seller neglects to present the check for payment or to deposit it for collection
within 30 days of the indorsement, Buyer's liability as indorser is discharged. Section 3-415(e). Under the last
sentence of Section 3-310(b)(3) Buyer is also discharged on the obligation to pay for the goods.
4. There was uncertainty concerning the applicability of former Section 3-802 to the case in which the check given
for the obligation was stolen from the payee, the payee's signature was forged, and the forger obtained payment.
The last sentence of subsection (b)(4) addresses this issue. If the payor bank pays a holder, the drawer is
discharged on the underlying obligation because the check was paid. Subsection (b)(1). If the payor bank pays a
person not entitled to enforce the instrument, as in the hypothetical case, the suspension of the underlying
obligation continues because the check has not been paid. Section 3-602(a). The payee's cause of action is against
the depositary bank or payor bank in conversion under Section 3-420 or against the drawer under Section 3-309. In
the latter case, the drawer's obligation under Section 3-414(b) is triggered by dishonor which occurs because the
check is unpaid. Presentment for payment to the drawee is excused under Section 3-504(a)(i) and, under Section
3-502(e), dishonor occurs without presentment if the check is not paid. The payee cannot merely ignore the
instrument and sue the drawer on the underlying contract. This would impose on the drawer the risk that the check
when stolen was indorsed in blank or to bearer.
A similar analysis applies with respect to lost instruments that have not been paid. If a creditor takes a check of
the debtor in payment of an obligation, the obligation is suspended under the introductory paragraph of subsection
(b). If the creditor then loses the check, what are the creditor's rights? The creditor can request the debtor to issue a
new check and in many cases, the debtor will issue a replacement check after stopping payment on the lost check.
In that case both the debtor and creditor are protected. But the debtor is not obliged to issue a new check. If the
debtor refuses to issue a replacement check, the last sentence of subsection (b)(4) applies. The creditor may not
enforce the obligation of debtor for which the check was taken. The creditor may assert only rights on the check.
The creditor can proceed under Section 3-309 to enforce the obligation of the debtor, as drawer, to pay the check.
5. Subsection (c) deals with rare cases in which other instruments are taken for obligations. If a bank is the obligor
on the instrument, subsection (a) applies and the obligation is discharged. In any other case subsection (b) applies.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 3-310. EFFECT OF INSTRUMENT ON OBLIGATION FOR WHICH TAKEN
Page 3 of 3
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-311
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-311. ACCORD AND SATISFACTION BY USE OF INSTRUMENT
(a) If a person against whom a claim is asserted proves that (i) that person in good faith tendered an
instrument to the claimant as full satisfaction of the claim, (ii) the amount of the claim was unliquidated or
subject to a bona fide dispute, and (iii) the claimant obtained payment of the instrument, the following
subsections apply.
(b) Unless subsection (c) applies, the claim is discharged if the person against whom the claim is asserted
proves that the instrument or an accompanying written communication contained a conspicuous statement
to the effect that the instrument was tendered as full satisfaction of the claim.
(c) Subject to subsection (d), a claim is not discharged under subsection (b) if either of the following
applies:
(1) The claimant, if an organization, proves that (i) within a reasonable time before the tender, the
claimant sent a conspicuous statement to the person against whom the claim is asserted that
communications concerning disputed debts, including an instrument tendered as full satisfaction of a
debt, are to be sent to a designated person, office, or place, and (ii) the instrument or accompanying
communication was not received by that designated person, office, or place.
(2) The claimant, whether or not an organization, proves that within 90 days after payment of the
instrument, the claimant tendered repayment of the amount of the instrument to the person against
whom the claim is asserted. This paragraph does not apply if the claimant is an organization that sent a
statement complying with paragraph (1)(i).
(d) A claim is discharged if the person against whom the claim is asserted proves that within a reasonable
time before collection of the instrument was initiated, the claimant, or an agent of the claimant having direct
responsibility with respect to the disputed obligation, knew that the instrument was tendered in full
satisfaction of the claim.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section deals with an informal method of dispute resolution carried out by use of a negotiable instrument.
In the typical case there is a dispute concerning the amount that is owed on a claim.
Case # 1. The claim is for the price of goods or services sold to a consumer who asserts that he or she is not
obliged to pay the full price for which the consumer was billed because of a defect or breach of warranty with
respect to the goods or services.
Case # 2. A claim is made on an insurance policy. The insurance company alleges that it is not liable under the
policy for the amount of the claim.
In either case the person against whom the claim is asserted may attempt an accord and satisfaction of the
disputed claim by tendering a check to the claimant for some amount less than the full amount claimed by the
§ 3-311. ACCORD AND SATISFACTION BY USE OF INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 4
claimant. A statement will be included on the check or in a communication accompanying the check to the effect
that the check is offered as full payment or full satisfaction of the claim. Frequently, there is also a statement to the
effect that obtaining payment of the check is an agreement by the claimant to a settlement of the dispute for the
amount tendered. Before enactment of revised Article 3, the case law was in conflict over the question of whether
obtaining payment of the check had the effect of an agreement to the settlement proposed by the debtor. This issue
was governed by a common law rule, but some courts hold that the common law was modified by former Section 1-
207 which they interpreted as applying to full settlement checks.
2. Comment d. to Restatement of Contracts, Section 281 discusses the full satisfaction check and the applicable
common law rule. In a case like Case # 1, the buyer can propose a settlement of the disputed bill by a clear
notation on the check indicating that the check is tendered as full satisfaction of the bill. Under the common law rule
the seller, by obtaining payment of the check accepts the offer of compromise by the buyer. The result is the same
if the seller adds a notation to the check indicating that the check is accepted under protest or in only partial
satisfaction of the claim. Under the common law rule the seller can refuse the check or can accept it subject to the
condition stated by the buyer, but the seller can't accept the check and refuse to be bound by the condition. The
rule applies only to an unliquidated claim or a claim disputed in good faith by the buyer. The dispute in the courts
was whether Section 1-207 changed the common law rule. The Restatement states that section "need not be read
as changing this well-established rule."
3. As part of the revision of Article 3, Section 1-207 has been amended to add subsection (2) stating that Section
1-207 "does not apply to an accord and satisfaction." Because of that amendment and revised Article 3, Section 3-
311 governs full satisfaction checks. Section 3-311 follows the common law rule with some minor variations to
reflect modern business conditions. In cases covered by Section 3-311 there will often be an individual on one side
of the dispute and a business organization on the other. This section is not designed to favor either the individual or
the business organization. In Case # 1 the person seeking the accord and satisfaction is an individual. In Case # 2
the person seeking the accord and satisfaction is an insurance company. Section 3-311 is based on a belief that the
common law rule produces a fair result and that informal dispute resolution by full satisfaction checks should be
encouraged.
4. Subsection (a) states three requirements for application of Section 3-311. "Good faith" in subsection (a)(i) is
defined in Section 3-103(a)(4) as not only honesty in fact, but the observance of reasonable commercial standards
of fair dealing. The meaning of "fair dealing" will depend upon the facts in the particular case. For example, suppose
an insurer tenders a check in settlement of a claim for personal injury in an accident clearly covered by the
insurance policy. The claimant is necessitous and the amount of the check is very small in relationship to the extent
of the injury and the amount recoverable under the policy. If the trier of fact determines that the insurer was taking
unfair advantage of the claimant, an accord and satisfaction would not result from payment of the check because of
the absence of good faith by the insurer in making the tender. Another example of lack of good faith is found in the
practice of some business debtors in routinely printing full satisfaction language on their check stocks so that all or
a large part of the debts of the debtor are paid by checks bearing the full satisfaction language, whether or not there
is any dispute with the creditor. Under such a practice the claimant cannot be sure whether a tender in full
satisfaction is or is not being made. Use of a check on which full satisfaction language was affixed routinely
pursuant to such a business practice may prevent an accord and satisfaction on the ground that the check was not
tendered in good faith under subsection (a)(i).
Section 3-311 does not apply to cases in which the debt is a liquidated amount and not subject to a bona fide
dispute. Subsection (a)(ii). Other law applies to cases in which a debtor is seeking discharge of such a debt by
paying less than the amount owed. For the purpose of subsection (a)(iii) obtaining acceptance of a check is
considered to be obtaining payment of the check.
The person seeking the accord and satisfaction must prove that the requirements of subsection (a) are met. If that
person also proves that the statement required by subsection (b) was given, the claim is discharged unless
subsection (c) applies. Normally the statement required by subsection (b) is written on the check. Thus, the
canceled check can be used to prove the statement as well as the fact that the claimant obtained payment of the
check. Subsection (b) requires a "conspicuous" statement that the instrument was tendered in full satisfaction of the
claim. "Conspicuous" is defined in Section 1-201(10). The statement is conspicuous if "it is so written that a
§ 3-311. ACCORD AND SATISFACTION BY USE OF INSTRUMENT
Page 3 of 4
reasonable person against whom it is to operate ought to have noticed it." If the claimant can reasonably be
expected to examine the check, almost any statement on the check should be noticed and is therefore
conspicuous. In cases in which the claimant is an individual the claimant will receive the check and will normally
indorse it. Since the statement conceming tender in full satisfaction normally will appear above the space provided
for the claimant's indorsement of the check, the claimant "ought to have noticed" the statement.
5. Subsection (c)(1) is a limitation on subsection (b) in cases in which the claimant is an organization. It is
designed to protect the claimant against inadvertent accord and satisfaction. If the claimant is an organization
payment of the check might be obtained without notice to the personnel of the organization concerned with the
disputed claim. Some business organizations have claims against very large numbers of customers. Examples are
department stores, public utilities and the like. These claims are normally paid by checks sent by customers to a
designated office at which clerks employed by the claimant or a bank acting for the claimant process the checks
and record the amounts paid. If the processing office is not designed to deal with communications extraneous to
recording the amount of the check and the account number of the customer, payment of a full satisfaction check
can easily be obtained without knowledge by the claimant of the existence of the full satisfaction statement. This is
particularly true if the statement is written on the reverse side of the check in the area in which indorsements are
usually written. Normally, the clerks of the claimant have no reason to look at the reverse side of checks.
Indorsement by the claimant normally is done by mechanical means or there may be no indorsement at all. Section
4-205(a). Subsection (c)(1) allows the claimant to protect itself by advising customers by a conspicuous statement
that communications regarding disputed debts must be sent to a particular person, office, or place. The statement
must be given to the customer within a reasonable time before the tender is made. This requirement is designed to
assure that the customer has reasonable notice that the full satisfaction check must be sent to a particular place.
The reasonable time requirement could be satisfied by a notice on the billing statement sent to the customer. If the
full satisfaction check is sent to the designated destination and the check is paid, the claim is discharged. If the
claimant proves that the check was not received at the designated destination the claim is not discharged unless
subsection (d) applies.
6. Subsection (c)(2) is also designed to prevent inadvertent accord and satisfaction. It can be used by a claimant
other than an organization or by a claimant as an alternative to subsection (c)(1). Some organizations may be
reluctant to use subsection (c)(1) because it may result in confusion of customers that causes checks to be
routinely sent to the special designated person, office, or place. Thus, much of the benefit of rapid processing of
checks may be lost. An organization that chooses not to send a notice complying with subsection (c)(1)(i) may
prevent an inadvertent accord and satisfaction by complying with subsection (c)(2). If the claimant discovers that it
has obtained payment of a full satisfaction check, it may prevent an accord and satisfaction if, within 90 days of the
payment of the check, the claimant tenders repayment of the amount of the check to the person against whom the
claim is asserted.
7. Subsection (c) is subject to subsection (d). If a person against whom a claim is asserted proves that the
claimant obtained payment of a check known to have been tendered in full satisfaction of the claim by "the claimant
or an agent of the claimant having direct responsibility with respect to the disputed obligation," the claim is
discharged even if (i) the check was not sent to the person, office, or place required by a notice complying with
subsection (c)(1), or (ii) the claimant tendered repayment of the amount of the check in compliance with subsection
(c)(2).
A claimant knows that a check was tendered in full satisfaction of a claim when the claimant "has actual
knowledge" of that fact. Section 1-201(25). Under Section 1-201(27), if the claimant is an organization, it has
knowledge that a check was tendered in full satisfaction of the claim when that fact is
"brought to the attention of the individual conducting that transaction, and in any event when it would have been
brought to his attention if the organization had exercised due diligence. An organization exercises due diligence if it
maintains reasonable routines for communicating significant information to the person conducting the transaction
and there is reasonable compliance with the routines. Due diligence does not require an individual acting for the
organization to communicate information unless such communication is part of his regular duties or unless he has
reason to know of the transaction and that the transaction would be materially affected by the information."
§ 3-311. ACCORD AND SATISFACTION BY USE OF INSTRUMENT
Page 4 of 4
With respect to an attempted accord and satisfaction the "individual conducting that transaction" is an employee
or other agent of the organization having direct responsibility with respect to the dispute. For example, if the check
and communication are received by a collection agency acting for the claimant to collect the disputed claim,
obtaining payment of the check will result in an accord and satisfaction even if the claimant gave notice, pursuant to
subsection (c)(1), that full satisfaction checks be sent to some other office. Similarly, if a customer asserting a claim
for breach of warranty with respect to defective goods purchased in a retail outlet of a large chain store delivers the
full satisfaction check to the manager of the retail outlet at which the goods were purchased, obtaining payment of
the check will also result in an accord and satisfaction. On the other hand, if the check is mailed to the chief
executive officer of the chain store subsection (d) would probably not be satisfied. The chief executive officer of a
large corporation may have general responsibility for operations of the company, but does not normally have direct
responsibility for resolving a small disputed bill to a customer. A check for a relatively small amount mailed to a high
executive officer of a large organization is not likely to receive the executive's personal attention. Rather, the check
would normally be routinely sent to the appropriate office for deposit and credit to the customer's account. If the
check does receive the personal attention of the high executive officer and the officer is aware of the full-satisfaction
language, collection of the check will result in an accord and satisfaction because subsection (d) applies. In this
case the officer has assumed direct responsibility with respect to the disputed transaction.
If a full satisfaction check is sent to a lock box or other office processing checks sent to the claimant, it is
irrelevant whether the clerk processing the check did or did not see the statement that the check was tendered as
full satisfaction of the claim. Knowledge of the clerk is not imputed to the organization because the clerk has no
responsibility with respect to an accord and satisfaction. Moreover, there is no failure of "due diligence" under
Section 1-201(27) if the claimant does not require its clerks to look for full satisfaction statements on checks or
accompanying communications. Nor is there any duty of the claimant to assign that duty to its clerks. Section 3-
311(c) is intended to allow a claimant to avoid an inadvertent accord and satisfaction by complying with either
subsection (c)(1) or (2) without burdening the check-processing operation with extraneous and wasteful additional
duties.
8. In some cases the disputed claim may have been assigned to a finance company or bank as part of a financing
arrangement with respect to accounts receivable. If the account debtor was notified of the assignment, the claimant
is the assignee of the account receivable and the "agent of the claimant" in subsection (d) refers to an agent of the
assignee.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-312
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 3. ENFORCEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS
§ 3-312. LOST, DESTROYED, OR STOLEN CASHIER'S CHECK, TELLER'S
CHECK, OR CERTIFIED CHECK
(a) In this section:
(1) "Check" means a cashier's check, teller's check, or certified check.
(2) "Claimant" means a person who claims the right to receive the amount of a cashier's check, teller's
check, or certified check that was lost, destroyed, or stolen.
(3) "Declaration of loss" means a statement, made in a record under penalty of perjury, to the effect
that (i) the declarer lost possession of a check, (ii) the declarer is the drawer or payee of the check, in
the case of a certified check, or the remitter or payee of the check, in the case of a cashier's check or
teller's check, (iii) the loss of possession was not the result of a transfer by the declarer or a lawful
seizure, and (iv) the declarer cannot reasonably obtain possession of the check because the check was
destroyed, its whereabouts cannot be determined, or it is in the wrongful possession of an unknown
person or a person that cannot be found or is not amenable to service of process.
(4) "Obligated bank" means the issuer of a cashier's check or teller's check or the acceptor of a
certified check.
(b) A claimant may assert a claim to the amount of a check by a communication to the obligated bank
describing the check with reasonable certainty and requesting payment of the amount of the check, if (i) the
claimant is the drawer or payee of a certified check or the remitter or payee of a cashier's check or teller's
check, (ii) the communication contains or is accompanied by a declaration of loss of the claimant with
respect to the check, (iii) the communication is received at a time and in a manner affording the bank a
reasonable time to act on it before the check is paid, and (iv) the claimant provides reasonable identification
if requested by the obligated bank. Delivery of a declaration of loss is a warranty of the truth of the
statements made in the declaration. If a claim is asserted in compliance with this subsection, the following
rules apply:
(1) The claim becomes enforceable at the later of (i) the time the claim is asserted, or (ii) the 90th day
following the date of the check, in the case of a cashier's check or teller's check, or the 90th day
following the date of the acceptance, in the case of a certified check.
(2) Until the claim becomes enforceable, it has no legal effect and the obligated bank may pay the
check or, in the case of a teller's check, may permit the drawee to pay the check. Payment to a person
entitled to enforce the check discharges all liability of the obligated bank with respect to the check.
(3) If the claim becomes enforceable before the check is presented for payment, the obligated bank is
not obliged to pay the check.
(4) When the claim becomes enforceable, the obligated bank becomes obliged to pay the amount of
the check to the claimant if payment of the check has not been made to a person entitled to enforce the
check. Subject to Section 4-302(a)(1), payment to the claimant discharges all liability of the obligated
bank with respect to the check.
(c) If the obligated bank pays the amount of a check to a claimant under subsection (b)(4) and the check is
presented for payment by a person having rights of a holder in due course, the claimant is obliged to (i)
§ 3-312. LOST, DESTROYED, OR STOLEN CASHIER'S CHECK, TELLER'S CHECK, OR CERTIFIED
CHECK
Page 2 of 5
refund the payment to the obligated bank if the check is paid, or (ii) pay the amount of the check to the
person having rights of a holder in due course if the check is dishonored.
(d) If a claimant has the right to assert a claim under subsection (b) and is also a person entitled to enforce
a cashier's check, teller's check, or certified check which is lost, destroyed, or stolen, the claimant may
assert rights with respect to the check either under this section or Section 3-309.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section applies to cases in which a cashier's check, teller's check, or certified check is lost, destroyed, or
stolen. In one typical case a customer of a bank closes his or her account and takes a cashier's check or teller's
check of the bank as payment of the amount of the account. The customer may be moving to a new area and the
check is to be used to open a bank account in that area. In such a case the check will normally be payable to the
customer. In another typical case a cashier's check or teller's check is bought from a bank for the purpose of paying
some obligation of the buyer of the check. In such a case the check may be made payable to the customer and
then negotiated to the creditor by indorsement. But often, the payee of the check is the creditor. In the latter case
the customer is a remitter. The section covers loss of the check by either the remitter or the payee. The section also
covers loss of a certified check by either the drawer or payee.
Under Section 3-309 a person seeking to enforce a lost, destroyed, or stolen cashier's check or teller's check may
be required by the court to give adequate protection to the issuing bank against loss that might occur by reason of
the claim by another person to enforce the check. This might require the posting of an expensive bond for the
amount of the check. Moreover, Section 3-309 applies only to a person entitled to enforce the check. It does not
apply to a remitter of a cashier's check or teller's check or to the drawer of a certified check. Section 3-312 applies
to both. The purpose of Section 3-312 is to offer a person who loses such a check a means of getting refund of the
amount of the check within a reasonable period of time without the expense of posting a bond and with full
protection of the obligated bank.
2. A claim to the amount of a lost, destroyed, or stolen cashier's check, teller's check, or certified check may be
made under subsection (b) if the following requirements of that subsection are met. First, a claim may be asserted
only by the drawer or payee of a certified check or the remitter or payee of a cashier's check or teller's check. An
indorsee of a check is not covered because the indorsee is not an original party to the check or a remitter.
Limitation to an original party or remitter gives the obligated bank the ability to determine, at the time it becomes
obligated on the check, the identity of the person or persons who can assert a claim with respect to the check. The
bank is not faced with having to determine the rights of some person who was not a party to the check at that time
or with whom the bank had not dealt. If a cashier's check is issued to the order of the person who purchased it from
the bank and that person indorses it over to a third person who loses the check, the third person may assert rights
to enforce the check under Section 3-309 but has no rights under Section 3-312.
Second, the claim must be asserted by a communication to the obligated bank describing the check with
reasonable certainty and requesting payment of the amount of the check. "Obligated bank" is defined in subsection
(a)(4). Third, the communication must be received in time to allow the obligated bank to act on the claim before the
check is paid, and the claimant must provide reasonable identification if requested. Subsections (b)(iii) and (iv).
Fourth, the communication must contain or be accompanied by a declaration of loss described in subsection (b).
This declaration is an affidavit or other writing made under penalty of perjury alleging the loss, destruction, or theft
of the check and stating that the declarer is a person entitled to assert a claim, i.e. the drawer or payee of a certified
check or the remitter or payee of a cashier's check or teller's check.
§ 3-312. LOST, DESTROYED, OR STOLEN CASHIER'S CHECK, TELLER'S CHECK, OR CERTIFIED
CHECK
Page 3 of 5
A claimant who delivers a declaration of loss makes a warranty of the truth of the statements made in the
declaration. The warranty is made to the obligated bank and anybody who has a right to enforce the check. If the
declaration of loss falsely alleges loss of a cashier's check that did not in fact occur, a holder of the check who was
unable to obtain payment because subsection (b)(3) and (4) caused the obligated bank to dishonor the check would
have a cause of action against the declarer for breach of warranty.
The obligated bank may not impose additional requirements on the claimant to assert a claim under subsection
(b). For example, the obligated bank may not require the posting of a bond or other form of security. Section 3-
312(b) states the procedure for asserting claims covered by the section. Thus, procedures that may be stated in
other law for stating claims to property do not apply and are displaced within the meaning of Section 1-103.
3. A claim asserted under subsection (b) does not have any legal effect, however, until the date it becomes
enforceable, which cannot be earlier than 90 days after the date of a cashier's check or teller's check or 90 days
after the date of acceptance of a certified check. Thus, if a lost check is presented for payment within the 90-day
period, the bank may pay a person entitled to enforce the check without regard to the claim and is discharged of all
liability with respect to the check. This ensures the continued utility of cashier's checks, teller's checks, and certified
checks as cash equivalents. Virtually all such checks are presented for payment within 90 days.
If the claim becomes enforceable and payment has not been made to a person entitled to enforce the check, the
bank becomes obligated to pay the amount of the check to the claimant. Subsection (b)(4). When the bank
becomes obligated to pay the amount of the check to the claimant, the bank is relieved of its obligation to pay the
check. Subsection (b)(3). Thus, any person entitled to enforce the check, including even a holder in due course,
loses the right to enforce the check after a claim under subsection (b) becomes enforceable.
If the obligated bank pays the claimant under subsection (b)(4), the bank is discharged of all liability with respect
to the check. The only exception is the unlikely case in which the obligated bank subsequently incurs liability under
Section 4-302(a)(1) with respect to the check. For example, Obligated Bank is the issuer of a cashier's check and,
after a claim becomes enforceable, it pays the claimant under subsection (b)(4). Later the check is presented to
Obligated Bank for payment over the counter. Under subsection (b)(3), Obligated Bank is not obliged to pay the
check and may dishonor the check by returning it to the person who presented it for payment. But the normal rules
of check collection are not affected by Section 3-312. If Obligated Bank retains the check beyond midnight of the
day of presentment without settling for it, it becomes accountable for the amount of the check under Section 4-
302(a)(1) even though it had no obligation to pay the check.
An obligated bank that pays the amount of a check to a claimant under subsection (b)(4) is discharged of all
liability on the check so long as the assertion of the claim meets the requirements of subsection (b) discussed in
Comment 2. This is important in cases of fraudulent declarations of loss. For example, if the claimant falsely alleges
a loss that in fact did not occur, the bank, subject to Section 1-203, may rely on the declaration of loss. On the other
hand, a claim may be asserted only by a person described in subsection (b)(i). Thus, the bank is discharged under
subsection (a)(4) only if it pays such a person. Although it is highly unlikely, it is possible that more than one person
could assert a claim under subsection (b) to the amount of a check. Such a case could occur if one of the claimants
makes a false declaration of loss. The obligated bank is not required to determine whether a claimant who complies
with subsection (b) is acting wrongfully. The bank may utilize procedures outside this Article, such as interpleader,
under which the conflicting claims may be adjudicated.
Although it is unlikely that a lost check would be presented for payment after the claimant was paid by the bank
under subsection (b)(4), it is possible for it to happen. Suppose the declaration of loss by the claimant fraudulently
alleged a loss that in fact did not occur. If the claimant negotiated the check, presentment for payment would occur
shortly after negotiation in almost all cases. Thus, a fraudulent declaration of loss is not likely to occur unless the
check is negotiated after the 90-day period has already expired or shortly before expiration. In such a case the
holder of the check, who may not have noticed the date of the check, is not entitled to payment from the obligated
bank if the check is presented for payment after the claim becomes enforceable. Subsection (b)(3). The remedy of
the holder who is denied payment in that case is an action against the claimant under subsection (c) if the holder is
§ 3-312. LOST, DESTROYED, OR STOLEN CASHIER'S CHECK, TELLER'S CHECK, OR CERTIFIED
CHECK
Page 4 of 5
a holder in due course, or for breach of warranty under subsection (b). The holder would also have common law
remedies against the claimant under the law of restitution or fraud.
4. The following cases illustrate the operation of Section 3-312:
Case # 1. Obligated Bank (OB) certified a check drawn by its customer, Drawer (D), payable to Payee (P). Two
days after the check was certified, D lost the check and then asserted a claim pursuant to subsection (b). The check
had not been presented for payment when D's claim became enforceable 90 days after the check was certified.
Under subsection (b)(4), at the time D's claim became enforceable OB became obliged to pay D the amount of the
check. If the check is later presented for payment, OB may refuse to pay the check and has no obligation to anyone
to pay the check. Any obligation owed by D to P, for which the check was intended as payment, is unaffected
because the check was never delivered to P.
Case # 2. Obligated Bank (OB) issued a teller's check to Remitter (R) payable to Payee (P). R delivered the
check to P in payment of an obligation. P lost the check and then asserted a claim pursuant to subsection (b). To
carry out P's order, OB issued an order pursuant to Section 4-403(a) to the drawee of the teller's check to stop
payment of the check effective on the 90th day after the date of the teller's check. The check was not presented for
payment. On the 90th day after the date of the teller's check P's claim becomes enforceable and OB becomes
obliged to pay P the amount of the check. As in Case # 1, OB has no further liability with respect to the check to
anyone. When R delivered the check to P, R's underlying obligation to P was discharged under Section 3-310.
Thus, R suffered no loss. Since P received the amount of the check, P also suffered no loss except with respect to
the delay in receiving the amount of the check.
Case # 3. Obligated Bank (OB) issued a cashier's check to its customer, Payee (P). Two days after issue, the
check was stolen from P who then asserted a claim pursuant to subsection (b). Ten days after issue, the check was
deposited by X in an account in Depositary Bank (DB). X had found the check and forged the indorsement of P. DB
promptly presented the check to OB and obtained payment on behalf of X. On the 90th day after the date of the
check P's claim becomes enforceable and P is entitled to receive the amount of the check from OB. Subsection
(b)(4). Although the check was presented for payment before P's claim becomes enforceable, OB is not discharged.
Because of the forged indorsement X was not a holder and neither was DB. Thus, neither is a person entitled to
enforce the check (Section 3-301) and OB is not discharged under Section 3-602(a). Thus, under subsection (b)(4),
because OB did not pay a person entitled to enforce the check, OB must pay P. OB's remedy is against DB for
breach of warranty under Section 4-208(a)(1). As an alternative to the remedy under Section 3-312, P could recover
from DB for conversion under Section 3-420(a).
Case # 4. Obligated Bank (OB) issued a cashier's check to its customer, Payee (P). P made an unrestricted blank
indorsement of the check and mailed the check to P's bank for deposit to P's account. The check was never
received by P's bank. When P discovered the loss, P asserted a claim pursuant to subsection (b). X found the
check and deposited it in X's account in Depositary Bank (DB) after indorsing the check. DB presented the check
for payment before the end of the 90-day period after its date. OB paid the check. Because of the unrestricted blank
indorsement by P, X became a holder of the check. DB also became a holder. Since the check was paid before P's
claim became enforceable and payment was made to a person entitled to enforce the check, OB is discharged of all
liability with respect to the check. Subsection (b)(2). Thus, P is not entitled to payment from OB. Subsection (b)(4)
doesn't apply.
Case # 5. Obligated Bank (OB) issued a cashier's check to its customer, Payee (P). P made an unrestricted blank
indorsement of the check and mailed the check to P's bank for deposit to P's account. The check was never
received by P's bank. When P discovered the loss, P asserted a claim pursuant to subsection (b). At the end of the
90-day period after the date of the check, OB paid the amount of the check to P under subsection (b)(4). X then
found the check and deposited it to X's account in Depositary Bank (DB). DB presented the check to OB for
payment. OB is not obliged to pay the check. Subsection (b)(4). If OB dishonors the check, DB's remedy is to
charge back X's account. Section 4-214(a). Although P, as an indorser, would normally have liability to DB under
Section 3-415(a) because the check was dishonored, P is released from that liability under Section 3-415(e)
§ 3-312. LOST, DESTROYED, OR STOLEN CASHIER'S CHECK, TELLER'S CHECK, OR CERTIFIED
CHECK
Page 5 of 5
because collection of the check was initiated more than 30 days after the indorsement. DB has a remedy only
against X. A depositary bank that takes a cashier's check that cannot be presented for payment before expiration of
the 90-day period after its date is on notice that the check might not be paid because of the possibility of a claim
asserted under subsection (b) which would excuse the issuer of the check from paying the check. Thus, the
depositary bank cannot safely release funds with respect to the check until it has assurance that the check has
been paid. DB cannot be a holder in due course of the check because it took the check when the check was
overdue. Section 3-304(a)(2). Thus, DB has no action against P under subsection (c).
Case # 6. Obligated Bank (OB) issued a cashier's check payable to bearer and delivered it to its customer,
Remitter (R). R held the check for 90 days and then wrongfully asserted a claim to the amount of the check under
subsection (b). The declaration of loss fraudulently stated that the check was lost. R received payment from OB
under subsection (b)(4). R then negotiated the check to X for value. X presented the check to OB for payment.
Although OB, under subsection (b)(2), was not obliged to pay the check, OB paid X by mistake. OB's teller did not
notice that the check was more than 90 days old and was not aware that OB was not obliged to pay the check. If X
took the check in good faith, OB may not recover from X. Section 3-418(c). OB's remedy is to recover from R for
fraud or for breach of warranty in making a false declaration of loss. Subsection (b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-401
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-401. SIGNATURE
(a) A person is not liable on an instrument unless (i) the person signed the instrument, or (ii) the person is
represented by an agent or representative who signed the instrument and the signature is binding on the
represented person under Section 3-402.
(b) A signature may be made (i) manually or by means of a device or machine, and (ii) by the use of any
name, including a trade or assumed name, or by a word, mark, or symbol executed or adopted by a person
with present intention to authenticate a writing.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Obligation on an instrument depends on a signature that is binding on the obligor. The signature may be made
by the obligor personally or by an agent authorized to act for the obligor. Signature by agents is covered by Section
3-402. It is not necessary that the name of the obligor appear on the instrument, so long as there is a signature that
binds the obligor. Signature includes an indorsement.
2. A signature may be handwritten, typed, printed or made in any other manner. It need not be subscribed, and
may appear in the body of the instrument, as in the case of "I, John Doe, promise to pay ***" without any other
signature. It may be made by mark, or even by thumbprint. It may be made in any name, including any trade name
or assumed name, however false and fictitious, which is adopted for the purpose. Parol evidence is admissible to
identify the signer, and when the signer is identified the signature is effective. Indorsement in a name other than
that of the indorser is governed by Section 3-204(d).
This section is not intended to affect any other law requiring a signature by mark to be witnessed, or any signature
to be otherwise authenticated, or requiring any form of proof.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-402
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-402. SIGNATURE BY REPRESENTATIVE
(a) If a person acting, or purporting to act, as a representative signs an instrument by signing either the
name of the represented person or the name of the signer, the represented person is bound by the
signature to the same extent the represented person would be bound if the signature were on a simple
contract. If the represented person is bound, the signature of the representative is the "authorized signature
of the represented person" and the represented person is liable on the instrument, whether or not identified
in the instrument.
(b) If a representative signs the name of the representative to an instrument and the signature is an
authorized signature of the represented person, the following rules apply:
(1) If the form of the signature shows unambiguously that the signature is made on behalf of the
represented person who is identified in the instrument, the representative is not liable on the
instrument.
(2) Subject to subsection (c), if (i) the form of the signature does not show unambiguously that the
signature is made in a representative capacity or (ii) the represented person is not identified in the
instrument, the representative is liable on the instrument to a holder in due course that took the
instrument without notice that the representative was not intended to be liable on the instrument. With
respect to any other person, the representative is liable on the instrument unless the representative
proves that the original parties did not intend the representative to be liable on the instrument.
(c) If a representative signs the name of the representative as drawer of a check without indication of the
representative status and the check is payable from an account of the represented person who is identified
on the check, the signer is not liable on the check if the signature is an authorized signature of the
represented person.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) states when the represented person is bound on an instrument if the instrument is signed by a
representative. If under the law of agency the represented person would be bound by the act of the representative
in signing either the name of the represented person or that of the representative, the signature is the authorized
signature of the represented person. Former Section 3-401(1) stated that "no person is liable on an instrument
unless his signature appears thereon." This was interpreted as meaning that an undisclosed principal is not liable
on an instrument. This interpretation provided an exception to ordinary agency law that binds an undisclosed
principal on a simple contract.
It is questionable whether this exception was justified by the language of former Article 3 and there is no apparent
policy justification for it. The exception is rejected by subsection (a) which returns to ordinary rules of agency. If P,
the principal, authorized A, the agent, to borrow money on P's behalf and A signed A's name to a note without
disclosing that the signature was on behalf of P, A is liable on the instrument. But if the person entitled to enforce
the note can also prove that P authorized A to sign on P's behalf, why shouldn't P also be liable on the instrument?
§ 3-402. SIGNATURE BY REPRESENTATIVE
Page 2 of 3
To recognize the liability of P takes nothing away from the utility of negotiable instruments. Furthermore, imposing
liability on P has the merit of making it impossible to have an instrument on which nobody is liable even though it
was authorized by P. That result could occur under former Section 3-401(1) if an authorized agent signed "as
agent" but the note did not identify the principal. If the dispute was between the agent and the payee of the note,
the agent could escape liability on the note by proving that the agent and the payee did not intend that the agent be
liable on the note when the note was issued. Former Section 3-403(2)(b). Under the prevailing interpretation of
former Section 3-401(1), the principal was not liable on the note under former 3-401(1) because the principal's
name did not appear on the note. Thus, nobody was liable on the note even though all parties knew that the note
was signed by the agent on behalf of the principal. Under Section 3-402(a) the principal would be liable on the note.
2. Subsection (b) concerns the question of when an agent who signs an instrument on behalf of a principal is
bound on the instrument. The approach followed by former Section 3-403 was to specify the form of signature that
imposed or avoided liability. This approach was unsatisfactory. There are many ways in which there can be
ambiguity about a signature. It is better to state a general rule. Subsection (b)(1) states that if the form of the
signature unambiguously shows that it is made on behalf of an identified represented person (for example, "P, by A,
Treasurer") the agent is not liable. This is a workable standard for a court to apply. Subsection (b)(2) partly changes
former Section 3-403(2). Subsection (b)(2) relates to cases in which the agent signs on behalf of a principal but the
form of the signature does not fall within subsection (b)(1). The following cases are illustrative. In each case John
Doe is the authorized agent of Richard Roe and John Doe signs a note on behalf of Richard Roe. In each case the
intention of the original parties to the instrument is that Roe is to be liable on the instrument but Doe is not to be
liable.
Case # 1. Doe signs "John Doe" without indicating in the note that Doe is signing as agent. The note does not
identify Richard Roe as the represented person.
Case # 2. Doe signs "John Doe, Agent" but the note does not identify Richard Roe as the represented person.
Case # 3. The name "Richard Roe" is written on the note and immediately below that name Doe signs "John Doe"
without indicating that Doe signed as agent.
In each case Doe is liable on the instrument to a holder in due course without notice that Doe was not intended to
be liable. In none of the cases does Doe's signature unambiguously show that Doe was signing as agent for an
identified principal. A holder in due course should be able to resolve any ambiguity against Doe.
But the situation is different if a holder in due course is not involved. In each case Roe is liable on the note.
Subsection (a). If the original parties to the note did not intend that Doe also be liable, imposing liability on Doe is a
windfall to the person enforcing the note. Under subsection (b)(2) Doe is prima facie liable because his signature
appears on the note and the form of the signature does not unambiguously refute personal liability. But Doe can
escape liability by proving that the original parties did not intend that he be liable on the note. This is a change from
former Section 3-403(2)(a).
A number of cases under former Article 3 involved situations in which an agent signed the agent's name to a note,
without qualification and without naming the person represented, intending to bind the principal but not the agent.
The agent attempted to prove that the other party had the same intention. Some of these cases involved mistake,
and in some there was evidence that the agent may have been deceived into signing in that manner. In some of the
cases the court refused to allow proof of the intention of the parties and imposed liability on the agent based on
former Section 3-403(2)(a) even though both parties to the instrument may have intended that the agent not be
liable. Subsection (b)(2) changes the result of those cases, and is consistent with Section 3-117 which allows oral
or written agreements to modify or nullify apparent obligations on the instrument.
Former Section 3-403 spoke of the represented person being "named" in the instrument. Section 3-402 speaks of
the represented person being "identified" in the instrument. This change in terminology is intended to reject
decisions under former Section 3-403(2) requiring that the instrument state the legal name of the represented
person.
§ 3-402. SIGNATURE BY REPRESENTATIVE
Page 3 of 3
3. Subsection (c) is directed at the check cases. It states that if the check identifies the represented person the
agent who signs on the signature line does not have to indicate agency status. Virtually all checks used today are in
personalized form which identify the person on whose account the check is drawn. In this case, nobody is deceived
into thinking that the person signing the check is meant to be liable. This subsection is meant to overrule cases
decided under former Article 3 such as Griffin v. Ellinger, 538 S.W.2d 97 (Texas 1976).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-403
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-403. UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE
(a) Unless otherwise provided in this Article or Article 4, an unauthorized signature is ineffective except as
the signature of the unauthorized signer in favor of a person who in good faith pays the instrument or takes
it for value. An unauthorized signature may be ratified for all purposes of this Article.
(b) If the signature of more than one person is required to constitute the authorized signature of an
organization, the signature of the organization is unauthorized if one of the required signatures is lacking.
(c) The civil or criminal liability of a person who makes an unauthorized signature is not affected by any
provision of this Article which makes the unauthorized signature effective for the purposes of this Article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. "Unauthorized" signature is defined in Section 1-201(43) as one that includes a forgery as well as a signature
made by one exceeding actual or apparent authority. Former Section 3-404(1) stated that an unauthorized
signature was inoperative as the signature of the person whose name was signed unless that person "is precluded
from denying it." Under former Section 3-406 if negligence by the person whose name was signed contributed to an
unauthorized signature, that person "is precluded from asserting the *** lack of authority." Both of these sections
were applied to cases in which a forged signature appeared on an instrument and the person asserting rights on the
instrument alleged that the negligence of the purported signer contributed to the forgery. Since the standards for
liability between the two sections differ, the overlap between the sections caused confusion. Section 3-403(a) deals
with the problem by removing the preclusion language that appeared in former Section 3-404.
2. The except clause of the first sentence of subsection (a) states the generally accepted rule that the
unauthorized signature, while it is wholly inoperative as that of the person whose name is signed, is effective to
impose liability upon the signer or to transfer any rights that the signer may have in the instrument. The signer's
liability is not in damages for breach of warranty of authority, but is full liability on the instrument in the capacity in
which the signer signed. It is, however, limited to parties who take or pay the instrument in good faith; and one who
knows that the signature is unauthorized cannot recover from the signer on the instrument.
3. The last sentence of subsection (a) allows an unauthorized signature to be ratified. Ratification is a retroactive
adoption of the unauthorized signature by the person whose name is signed and may be found from conduct as
well as from express statements. For example, it may be found from the retention of benefits received in the
transaction with knowledge of the unauthorized signature. Although the forger is not an agent, ratification is
governed by the rules and principles applicable to ratification of unauthorized acts of an agent.
Ratification is effective for all purposes of this Article. The unauthorized signature becomes valid so far as its
effect as a signature is concerned. Although the ratification may relieve the signer of liability on the instrument, it
does not of itself relieve the signer of liability to the person whose name is signed. It does not in any way affect the
criminal law. No policy of the criminal law prevents a person whose name is forged to assume liability to others on
the instrument by ratifying the forgery, but the ratification cannot affect the rights of the state. While the ratification
§ 3-403. UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE
Page 2 of 2
may be taken into account with other relevant facts in determining punishment, it does not relieve the signer of
criminal liability.
4. Subsection (b) clarifies the meaning of "unauthorized" in cases in which an instrument contains less than all of
the signatures that are required as authority to pay a check. Judicial authority was split on the issue whether the
one-year notice period under former Section 4-406(4) (now Section 4-406(f)) barred a customer's suit against a
payor bank that paid a check containing less than all of the signatures required by the customer to authorize
payment of the check. Some cases took the view that if a customer required that a check contain the signatures of
both A and B to authorize payment and only A signed, there was no unauthorized signature within the meaning of
that term in former Section 4-406(4) because A's signature was neither unauthorized nor forged. The other cases
correctly pointed out that it was the customer's signature at issue and not that of A; hence, the customer's signature
was unauthorized if all signatures required to authorize payment of the check were not on the check. Subsection (b)
follows the latter line of cases. The same analysis applies if A forged the signature of B. Because the forgery is not
effective as a signature of B, the required signature of B is lacking.
Subsection (b) refers to "the authorized signature of an organization." The definition of "organization" in Section 1-
201(28) is very broad. It covers not only commercial entities but also "two or more persons having a joint or
common interest." Hence subsection (b) would apply when a husband and wife are both required to sign an
instrument.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-404
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-404. IMPOSTORS; FICTITIOUS PAYEES
(a) If an impostor, by use of the mails or otherwise, induces the issuer of an instrument to issue the
instrument to the impostor, or to a person acting in concert with the impostor, by impersonating the payee
of the instrument or a person authorized to act for the payee, an indorsement of the instrument by any
person in the name of the payee is effective as the indorsement of the payee in favor of a person who, in
good faith, pays the instrument or takes it for value or for collection.
(b) If (i) a person whose intent determines to whom an instrument is payable ( Section 3-110(a) or (b))
does not intend the person identified as payee to have any interest in the instrument, or (ii) the person
identified as payee of an instrument is a fictitious person, the following rules apply until the instrument is
negotiated by special indorsement:
(1) Any person in possession of the instrument is its holder.
(2) An indorsement by any person in the name of the payee stated in the instrument is effective as the
indorsement of the payee in favor of a person who, in good faith, pays the instrument or takes it for
value or for collection.
(c) Under subsection (a) or (b), an indorsement is made in the name of a payee if (i) it is made in a name
substantially similar to that of the payee or (ii) the instrument, whether or not indorsed, is deposited in a
depositary bank to an account in a name substantially similar to that of the payee.
(d) With respect to an instrument to which subsection (a) or (b) applies, if a person paying the instrument
or taking it for value or for collection fails to exercise ordinary care in paying or taking the instrument and
that failure substantially contributes to loss resulting from payment of the instrument, the person bearing the
loss may recover from the person failing to exercise ordinary care to the extent the failure to exercise
ordinary care contributed to the loss.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Under former Article 3, the impostor cases were governed by former Section 3-405(1)(a) and the fictitious
payee cases were governed by Section 3-405(1)(b). Section 3-404 replaces former Section 3-405(1)(a) and (b) and
modifies the previous law in some respects. Former Section 3-405 was read by some courts to require that the
indorsement be in the exact name of the named payee. Revised Article 3 rejects this result. Section 3-404(c)
requires only that the indorsement be made in a name "substantially similar" to that of the payee. Subsection (c)
also recognizes the fact that checks may be deposited without indorsement. Section 4-205(a).
Subsection (a) changes the former law in a case in which the impostor is impersonating an agent. Under former
Section 3-405(1)(a), if Impostor impersonated Smith and induced the drawer to draw a check to the order of Smith,
Impostor could negotiate the check. If Impostor impersonated Smith, the president of Smith Corporation, and the
check was payable to the order of Smith Corporation, the section did not apply. See the last paragraph of Comment
§ 3-404. IMPOSTORS; FICTITIOUS PAYEES
Page 2 of 4
2 to former Section 3-405. In revised Article 3, Section 3-404(a) gives Impostor the power to negotiate the check in
both cases.
2. Subsection (b) is based in part on former Section 3-405(1)(b) and in part on N.I.L. § 9(3). It covers cases in
which an instrument is payable to a fictitious or nonexisting person and to cases in which the payee is a real person
but the drawer or maker does not intend the payee to have any interest in the instrument. Subsection (b) applies to
any instrument, but its primary importance is with respect to checks of corporations and other organizations. It also
applies to forged check cases. The following cases illustrate subsection (b):
Case # 1. Treasurer is authorized to draw checks in behalf of Corporation. Treasurer fraudulently draws a check
of Corporation payable to Supplier Co., a non-existent company. Subsection (b) applies because Supplier Co. is a
fictitious person and because Treasurer did not intend Supplier Co. to have any interest in the check. Under
subsection (b)(1) Treasurer, as the person in possession of the check, becomes the holder of the check. Treasurer
indorses the check in the name "Supplier Co." and deposits it in Depositary Bank. Under subsection (b)(2) and
(c)(i), the indorsement is effective to make Depositary Bank the holder and therefore a person entitled to enforce
the instrument. Section 3-301.
Case # 2. Same facts as Case # 1 except that Supplier Co. is an actual company that does business with
Corporation. If Treasurer intended to steal the check when the check was drawn, the result in Case # 2 is the same
as the result in Case # 1. Subsection (b) applies because Treasurer did not intend Supplier Co. to have any interest
in the check. It does not make any difference whether Supplier Co. was or was not a creditor of Corporation when
the check was drawn. If Treasurer did not decide to steal the check until after the check was drawn, the case is
covered by Section 3-405 rather than Section 3-404(b), but the result is the same. See Case # 6 in Comment 3 to
Section 3-405.
Case # 3. Checks of Corporation must be signed by two officers. President and Treasurer both sign a check of
Corporation payable to Supplier Co., a company that does business with Corporation from time to time but to which
Corporation does not owe any money. Treasurer knows that no money is owed to Supplier Co. and does not intend
that Supplier Co. have any interest in the check. President believes that money is owed to Supplier Co. Treasurer
obtains possession of the check after it is signed. Subsection (b) applies because Treasurer is "a person whose
intent determines to whom an instrument is payable" and Treasurer does not intend Supplier Co. to have any
interest in the check. Treasurer becomes the holder of the check and may negotiate it by indorsing it in the name
"Supplier Co."
Case # 4. Checks of Corporation are signed by a check-writing machine. Names of payees of checks produced
by the machine are determined by information entered into the computer that operates the machine. Thief, a person
who is not an employee or other agent of Corporation, obtains access to the computer and causes the check-writing
machine to produce a check payable to Supplier Co., a non-existent company. Subsection (b)(ii) applies. Thief then
obtains possession of the check. At that point Thief becomes the holder of the check because Thief is the person in
possession of the instrument. Subsection (b)(1). Under Section 3-301 Thief, as holder, is the "person entitled to
enforce the instrument" even though Thief does not have title to the check and is in wrongful possession of it. Thief
indorses the check in the name "Supplier Co." and deposits it in an account in Depositary Bank which Thief opened
in the name "Supplier Co." Depositary Bank takes the check in good faith and credits the "Supplier Co." account.
Under subsection (b)(2) and (c)(i), the indorsement is effective. Depositary Bank becomes the holder and the
person entitled to enforce the check. The check is presented to the drawee bank for payment and payment is made.
Thief then withdraws the credit to the account. Although the check was issued without authority given by
Corporation, the drawee bank is entitled to pay the check and charge Corporation's account if there was an
agreement with Corporation allowing the bank to debit Corporation's account for payment of checks produced by
the check-writing machine whether or not authorized. The indorsement is also effective if Supplier Co. is a real
person. In that case subsection (b)(i) applies. Under Section 3-110(b) Thief is the person whose intent determines
to whom the check is payable, and Thief did not intend Supplier Co. to have any interest in the check. When the
drawee bank pays the check, there is no breach of warranty under Section 3-417(a)(1) or 4-208(a)(1) because
Depositary Bank was a person entitled to enforce the check when it was forwarded for payment.
§ 3-404. IMPOSTORS; FICTITIOUS PAYEES
Page 3 of 4
Case # 5. Thief, who is not an employee or agent of Corporation, steals check forms of Corporation. John Doe is
president of Corporation and is authorized to sign checks on behalf of Corporation as drawer. Thief draws a check
in the name of Corporation as drawer by forging the signature of Doe. Thief makes the check payable to the order
of Supplier Co. with the intention of stealing it. Whether Supplier Co. is a fictitious person or a real person, Thief
becomes the holder of the check and the person entitled to enforce it. The analysis is the same as that in Case # 4.
Thief deposits the check in an account in Depositary Bank which Thief opened in the name "Supplier Co." Thief
either indorses the check in a name other than "Supplier Co." or does not indorse the check at all. Under Section 4-
205(a) a depositary bank may become holder of a check deposited to the account of a customer if the customer
was a holder, whether or not the customer indorses. Subsection (c)(ii) treats deposit to an account in a name
substantially similar to that of the payee as the equivalent of indorsement in the name of the payee. Thus, the
deposit is an effective indorsement of the check. Depositary Bank becomes the holder of the check and the person
entitled to enforce the check. If the check is paid by the drawee bank, there is no breach of warranty under Section
3-417(a)(1) or 4-208(a)(1) because Depositary Bank was a person entitled to enforce the check when it was
forwarded for payment and, unless Depositary Bank knew about the forgery of Doe's signature, there is no breach
of warranty under Section 3-417(a)(3) or 4-208(a)(3). Because the check was a forged check the drawee bank is
not entitled to charge Corporation's account unless Section 3-406 or Section 4-406 applies.
3. In cases governed by subsection (a) the dispute will normally be between the drawer of the check that was
obtained by the impostor and the drawee bank that paid it. The drawer is precluded from obtaining recredit of the
drawer's account by arguing that the check was paid on a forged indorsement so long as the drawee bank acted in
good faith in paying the check. Cases governed by subsection (b) are illustrated by Cases # 1 through # 5 in
Comment 2. In Cases # 1, # 2, and # 3 there is no forgery of the check, thus the drawer of the check takes the loss
if there is no lack of good faith by the banks involved. Cases # 4 and # 5 are forged check cases. Depositary Bank
is entitled to retain the proceeds of the check if it didn't know about the forgery. Under Section 3-418 the drawee
bank is not entitled to recover from Depositary Bank on the basis of payment by mistake because Depositary Bank
took the check in good faith and gave value for the check when the credit given for the check was withdrawn. And
there is no breach of warranty under Section 3-417(a)(1) or (3) or 4-208(a)(1) or (3). Unless Section 3-406 applies
the loss is taken by the drawee bank if a forged check is paid, and that is the result in Case # 5. In Case # 4 the
loss is taken by Corporation, the drawer, because an agreement between Corporation and the drawee bank
allowed the bank to debit Corporation's account despite the unauthorized use of the check-writing machine.
If a check payable to an impostor, fictitious payee, or payee not intended to have an interest in the check is paid,
the effect of subsections (a) and (b) is to place the loss on the drawer of the check rather than on the drawee or the
depositary bank that took the check for collection. Cases governed by subsection (a) always involve fraud, and
fraud is almost always involved in cases governed by subsection (b). The drawer is in the best position to avoid the
fraud and thus should take the loss. This is true in Case # 1, Case # 2, and Case # 3. But in some cases the person
taking the check might have detected the fraud and thus have prevented the loss by the exercise of ordinary care.
In those cases, if that person failed to exercise ordinary care, it is reasonable that that person bear loss to the
extent the failure contributed to the loss. Subsection (d) is intended to reach that result. It allows the person who
suffers loss as a result of payment of the check to recover from the person who failed to exercise ordinary care. In
Case # 1, Case # 2, and Case # 3, the person suffering the loss is Corporation, the drawer of the check. In each
case the most likely defendant is the depositary bank that took the check and failed to exercise ordinary care. In
those cases, the drawer has a cause of action against the offending bank to recover a portion of the loss. The
amount of loss to be allocated to each party is left to the trier of fact. Ordinary care is defined in Section 3-103(a)(7).
An example of the type of conduct by a depositary bank that could give rise to recovery under subsection (d) is
discussed in Comment 4 to Section 3-405. That comment addresses the last sentence of Section 3-405(b) which is
similar to Section 3-404(d).
In Case # 1, Case # 2, and Case # 3, there was no forgery of the drawer's signature. But cases involving checks
payable to a fictitious payee or a payee not intended to have an interest in the check are often forged check cases
as well. Examples are Case # 4 and Case # 5. Normally, the loss in forged check cases is on the drawee bank that
paid the check. Case # 5 is an example. In Case # 4 the risk with respect to the forgery is shifted to the drawer
because of the agreement between the drawer and the drawee bank. The doctrine that prevents a drawee bank
from recovering payment with respect to a forged check if the payment was made to a person who took the check
§ 3-404. IMPOSTORS; FICTITIOUS PAYEES
Page 4 of 4
for value and in good faith is incorporated into Section 3-418 and Sections 3-417(a)(3) and 4-208(a)(3). This
doctrine is based on the assumption that the depositary bank normally has no way of detecting the forgery because
the drawer is not that bank's customer. On the other hand, the drawee bank, at least in some cases, may be able to
detect the forgery by comparing the signature on the check with the specimen signature that the drawee has on file.
But in some forged check cases the depositary bank is in a position to detect the fraud. Those cases typically
involve a check payable to a fictitious payee or a payee not intended to have an interest in the check. Subsection
(d) applies to those cases. If the depositary bank failed to exercise ordinary care and the failure substantially
contributed to the loss, the drawer in Case # 4 or the drawee bank in Case # 5 has a cause of action against the
depositary bank under subsection (d). Comment 4 to Section 3-405 can be used as a guide to the type of conduct
that could give rise to recovery under Section 3-404(d).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-405
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-405. EMPLOYER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FRAUDULENT INDORSEMENT
BY EMPLOYEE
(a) In this section:
(1) "Employee" includes an independent contractor and employee of an independent contractor
retained by the employer.
(2) "Fraudulent indorsement" means (i) in the case of an instrument payable to the employer, a forged
indorsement purporting to be that of the employer, or (ii) in the case of an instrument with respect to
which the employer is the issuer, a forged indorsement purporting to be that of the person identified as
payee.
(3) "Responsibility" with respect to instruments means authority (i) to sign or indorse instruments on
behalf of the employer, (ii) to process instruments received by the employer for bookkeeping purposes,
for deposit to an account, or for other disposition, (iii) to prepare or process instruments for issue in the
name of the employer, (iv) to supply information determining the names or addresses of payees of
instruments to be issued in the name of the employer, (v) to control the disposition of instruments to be
issued in the name of the employer, or (vi) to act otherwise with respect to instruments in a responsible
capacity. "Responsibility" does not include authority that merely allows an employee to have access to
instruments or blank or incomplete instrument forms that are being stored or transported or are part of
incoming or outgoing mail, or similar access.
(b) For the purpose of determining the rights and liabilities of a person who, in good faith, pays an
instrument or takes it for value or for collection, if an employer entrusted an employee with responsibility
with respect to the instrument and the employee or a person acting in concert with the employee makes a
fraudulent indorsement of the instrument, the indorsement is effective as the indorsement of the person to
whom the instrument is payable if it is made in the name of that person. If the person paying the instrument
or taking it for value or for collection fails to exercise ordinary care in paying or taking the instrument and
that failure substantially contributes to loss resulting from the fraud, the person bearing the loss may
recover from the person failing to exercise ordinary care to the extent the failure to exercise ordinary care
contributed to the loss.
(c) Under subsection (b), an indorsement is made in the name of the person to whom an instrument is
payable if (i) it is made in a name substantially similar to the name of that person or (ii) the instrument,
whether or not indorsed, is deposited in a depositary bank to an account in a name substantially similar to
the name of that person.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 3-405 is addressed to fraudulent indorsements made by an employee with respect to instruments with
respect to which the employer has given responsibility to the employee. It covers two categories of fraudulent
§ 3-405. EMPLOYER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FRAUDULENT INDORSEMENT BY EMPLOYEE
Page 2 of 4
indorsements: indorsements made in the name of the employer to instruments payable to the employer and
indorsements made in the name of payees of instruments issued by the employer. This section applies to
instruments generally but normally the instrument will be a check. Section 3-405 adopts the principle that the risk of
loss for fraudulent indorsements by employees who are entrusted with responsibility with respect to checks should
fall on the employer rather than the bank that takes the check or pays it, if the bank was not negligent in the
transaction. Section 3-405 is based on the belief that the employer is in a far better position to avoid the loss by
care in choosing employees, in supervising them, and in adopting other measures to prevent forged indorsements
on instruments payable to the employer or fraud in the issuance of instruments in the name of the employer. If the
bank failed to exercise ordinary care, subsection (b) allows the employer to shift loss to the bank to the extent the
bank's failure to exercise ordinary care contributed to the loss. "Ordinary care" is defined in Section 3-103(a)(7).
The provision applies regardless of whether the employer is negligent.
The first category of cases governed by Section 3-405 are those involving indorsements made in the name of
payees of instruments issued by the employer. In this category, Section 3-405 includes cases that were covered by
former Section 3-405(1)(c). The scope of Section 3-405 in revised Article 3 is, however, somewhat wider. It covers
some cases not covered by former Section 3-405(1)(c) in which the entrusted employee makes a forged
indorsement to a check drawn by the employer. An example is Case # 6 in Comment 3. Moreover, a larger group of
employees is included in revised Section 3-405. The key provision is the definition of "responsibility" in subsection
(a)(1) which identifies the kind of responsibility delegated to an employee which will cause the employer to take
responsibility for the fraudulent acts of that employee. An employer can insure this risk by employee fidelity bonds.
The second category of cases governed by Section 3-405--fraudulent indorsements of the name of the employer
to instruments payable to the employer--were covered in former Article 3 by Section 3-406. Under former Section 3-
406, the employer took the loss only if negligence of the employer could be proved. Under revised Article 3, Section
3-406 need not be used with respect to forgeries of the employer's indorsement. Section 3-405 imposes the loss on
the employer without proof of negligence.
2. With respect to cases governed by former Section 3-405(1)(c), Section 3-405 is more favorable to employers in
one respect. The bank was entitled to the preclusion provided by former Section 3-405(1)(c) if it took the check in
good faith. The fact that the bank acted negligently did not shift the loss to the bank so long as the bank acted in
good faith. Under revised Section 3-405 the loss may be recovered from the bank to the extent the failure of the
bank to exercise ordinary care contributed to the loss.
3. Section 3-404(b) and Section 3-405 both apply to cases of employee fraud. Section 3-404(b) is not limited to
cases of employee fraud, but most of the cases to which it applies will be cases of employee fraud. The following
cases illustrate the application of Section 3-405. In each case it is assumed that the bank that took the check acted
in good faith and was not negligent.
Case # 1. Janitor, an employee of Employer, steals a check for a very large amount payable to Employer after
finding it on a desk in one of Employer's offices. Janitor forges Employer's indorsement on the check and obtains
payment. Since Janitor was not entrusted with "responsibility" with respect to the check, Section 3-405 does not
apply. Section 3-406 might apply to this case. The issue would be whether Employer was negligent in safeguarding
the check. If not, Employer could assert that the indorsement was forged and bring an action for conversion against
the depositary or payor bank under Section 3-420.
Case # 2. X is Treasurer of Corporation and is authorized to write checks on behalf of Corporation by signing X's
name as Treasurer. X draws a check in the name of Corporation and signs X's name as Treasurer. The check is
made payable to X. X then indorses the check and obtains payment. Assume that Corporation did not owe any
money to X and did not authorize X to write the check. Although the writing of the check was not authorized,
Corporation is bound as drawer of the check because X had authority to sign checks on behalf of Corporation. This
result follows from agency law and Section 3-402(a). Section 3-405 does not apply in this case because there is no
forged indorsement. X was payee of the check so the indorsement is valid. Section 3-110(a).
Case # 3. The duties of Employee, a bookkeeper, include posting the amounts of checks payable to Employer to
the accounts of the drawers of the checks. Employee steals a check payable to Employer which was entrusted to
§ 3-405. EMPLOYER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FRAUDULENT INDORSEMENT BY EMPLOYEE
Page 3 of 4
Employee and forges Employer's indorsement. The check is deposited by Employee to an account in Depositary
Bank which Employee opened in the same name as Employer, and the check is honored by the drawee bank. The
indorsement is effective as Employer's indorsement because Employee's duties include processing checks for
bookkeeping purposes. Thus, Employee is entrusted with "responsibility" with respect to the check. Neither
Depositary Bank nor the drawee bank is liable to Employer for conversion of the check. The same result follows if
Employee deposited the check in the account in Depositary Bank without indorsement. Section 4-205(a). Under
subsection (c) deposit in a depositary bank in an account in a name substantially similar to that of Employer is the
equivalent of an indorsement in the name of Employer.
Case # 4. Employee's duties include stamping Employer's unrestricted blank indorsement on checks received by
Employer and depositing them in Employer's bank account. After stamping Employer's unrestricted blank
indorsement on a check, Employee steals the check and deposits it in Employee's personal bank account. Section
3-405 doesn't apply because there is no forged indorsement. Employee is authorized by Employer to indorse
Employer's checks. The fraud by Employee is not the indorsement but rather the theft of the indorsed check.
Whether Employer has a cause of action against the bank in which the check was deposited is determined by
whether the bank had notice of the breach of fiduciary duty by Employee. The issue is determined under Section 3-
307.
Case # 5. The computer that controls Employer's check-writing machine was programmed to cause a check to be
issued to Supplier Co. to which money was owed by Employer. The address of Supplier Co. was included in the
information in the computer. Employee is an accounts payable clerk whose duties include entering information into
the computer. Employee fraudulently changed the address of Supplier Co. in the computer data bank to an address
of Employee. The check was subsequently produced by the check-writing machine and mailed to the address that
Employee had entered into the computer. Employee obtained possession of the check, indorsed it in the name of
Supplier Co, and deposited it to an account in Depositary Bank which Employee opened in the name "Supplier Co."
The check was honored by the drawee bank. The indorsement is effective under Section 3-405(b) because
Employee's duties allowed Employee to supply information determining the address of the payee of the check. An
employee that is entrusted with duties that enable the employee to determine the address to which a check is to be
sent controls the disposition of the check and facilitates forgery of the indorsement. The employer is held
responsible. The drawee may debit the account of Employer for the amount of the check. There is no breach of
warranty by Depositary Bank under Section 3-417(a)(1) or 4-208(a)(1).
Case # 6. Treasurer is authorized to draw checks in behalf of Corporation. Treasurer draws a check of
Corporation payable to Supplier Co., a company that sold goods to Corporation. The check was issued to pay the
price of these goods. At the time the check was signed Treasurer had no intention of stealing the check. Later,
Treasurer stole the check, indorsed it in the name "Supplier Co." and obtained payment by depositing it to an
account in Depositary Bank which Treasurer opened in the name "Supplier Co.". The indorsement is effective under
Section 3-405(b). Section 3-404(b) does not apply to this case.
Case # 7. Checks of Corporation are signed by Treasurer in behalf of Corporation as drawer. Clerk's duties
include the preparation of checks for issue by Corporation. Clerk prepares a check payable to the order of Supplier
Co. for Treasurer's signature. Clerk fraudulently informs Treasurer that the check is needed to pay a debt owed to
Supplier Co, a company that does business with Corporation. No money is owed to Supplier Co. and Clerk intends
to steal the check. Treasurer signs it and returns it to Clerk for mailing. Clerk does not indorse the check but
deposits it to an account in Depositary Bank which Clerk opened in the name "Supplier Co.". The check is honored
by the drawee bank. Section 3-404(b)(i) does not apply to this case because Clerk, under Section 3-110(a), is not
the person whose intent determines to whom the check is payable. But Section 3-405 does apply and it treats the
deposit by Clerk as an effective indorsement by Clerk because Clerk was entrusted with responsibility with respect
to the check. If Supplier Co. is a fictitious person Section 3-404(b)(ii) applies. But the result is the same. Clerk's
deposit is treated as an effective indorsement of the check whether Supplier Co. is a fictitious or a real person or
whether money was or was not owing to Supplier Co. The drawee bank may debit the account of Corporation for
the amount of the check and there is no breach of warranty by Depositary Bank under Section 3-417(1)(a).
§ 3-405. EMPLOYER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FRAUDULENT INDORSEMENT BY EMPLOYEE
Page 4 of 4
4. The last sentence of subsection (b) is similar to subsection (d) of Section 3-404 which is discussed in Comment
3 to Section 3-404. In Case # 5, Case # 6, or Case # 7 the depositary bank may have failed to exercise ordinary
care when it allowed the employee to open an account in the name "Supplier Co.," to deposit checks payable to
"Supplier Co." in that account, or to withdraw funds from that account that were proceeds of checks payable to
Supplier Co. Failure to exercise ordinary care is to be determined in the context of all the facts relating to the bank's
conduct with respect to the bank's collection of the check. If the trier of fact finds that there was such a failure and
that the failure substantially contributed to loss, it could find the depositary bank liable to the extent the failure
contributed to the loss. The last sentence of subsection (b) can be illustrated by an example. Suppose in Case # 5
that the check is not payable to an obscure "Supplier Co." but rather to a well-known national corporation. In
addition, the check is for a very large amount of money. Before depositing the check, Employee opens an account
in Depositary Bank in the name of the corporation and states to the person conducting the transaction for the bank
that Employee is manager of a new office being opened by the corporation. Depositary Bank opens the account
without requiring Employee to produce any resolutions of the corporation's board of directors or other evidence of
authorization of Employee to act for the corporation. A few days later, the check is deposited, the account is
credited, and the check is presented for payment. After Depositary Bank receives payment, it allows Employee to
withdraw the credit by a wire transfer to an account in a bank in a foreign country. The trier of fact could find that
Depositary Bank did not exercise ordinary care and that the failure to exercise ordinary care contributed to the loss
suffered by Employer. The trier of fact could allow recovery by Employer from Depositary Bank for all or part of the
loss suffered by Employer.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-406
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-406. NEGLIGENCE CONTRIBUTING TO FORGED SIGNATURE OR
ALTERATION OF INSTRUMENT
(a) A person whose failure to exercise ordinary care substantially contributes to an alteration of an
instrument or to the making of a forged signature on an instrument is precluded from asserting the
alteration or the forgery against a person who, in good faith, pays the instrument or takes it for value or for
collection.
(b) Under subsection (a), if the person asserting the preclusion fails to exercise ordinary care in paying or
taking the instrument and that failure substantially contributes to loss, the loss is allocated between the
person precluded and the person asserting the preclusion according to the extent to which the failure of
each to exercise ordinary care contributed to the loss.
(c) Under subsection (a), the burden of proving failure to exercise ordinary care is on the person asserting
the preclusion. Under subsection (b), the burden of proving failure to exercise ordinary care is on the
person precluded.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 3-406(a) is based on former Section 3-406. With respect to alteration, Section 3-406 adopts the
doctrine of Young v. Grote, 4 Bing. 253 (1827), which held that a drawer who so negligently draws an instrument as
to facilitate its material alteration is liable to a drawee who pays the altered instrument in good faith. Under Section
3-406 the doctrine is expanded to apply not only to drafts but to all instruments. It includes in the protected class
any "person who, in good faith, pays the instrument or takes it for value or for collection." Section 3-406 rejects
decisions holding that the maker of a note owes no duty of care to the holder because at the time the instrument is
issued there is no contract between them. By issuing the instrument and "setting it afloat upon a sea of strangers"
the maker or drawer voluntarily enters into a relation with later holders which justifies imposition of a duty of care. In
this respect an instrument so negligently drawn as to facilitate alteration does not differ in principle from an
instrument containing blanks which may be filled. Under Section 3-407 a person paying an altered instrument or
taking it for value, in good faith and without notice of the alteration may enforce rights with respect to the instrument
according to its original terms. If negligence of the obligor substantially contributes to an alteration, this section
gives the holder or the payor the alternative right to treat the altered instrument as though it had been issued in the
altered form.
No attempt is made to define particular conduct that will constitute "failure to exercise ordinary care [that]
substantially contributes to an alteration." Rather, "ordinary care" is defined in Section 3-103(a)(7) in general terms.
The question is left to the court or the jury for decision in the light of the circumstances in the particular case
including reasonable commercial standards that may apply.
Section 3-406 does not make the negligent party liable in tort for damages resulting from the alteration. If the
negligent party is estopped from asserting the alteration the person taking the instrument is fully protected because
the taker can treat the instrument as having been issued in the altered form.
§ 3-406. NEGLIGENCE CONTRIBUTING TO FORGED SIGNATURE OR ALTERATION OF INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 3
2. Section 3-406 applies equally to a failure to exercise ordinary care that substantially contributes to the making
of a forged signature on an instrument. Section 3-406 refers to "forged signature" rather than "unauthorized
signature" that appeared in former Section 3-406 because it more accurately describes the scope of the provision.
Unauthorized signature is a broader concept that includes not only forgery but also the signature of an agent which
does not bind the principal under the law of agency. The agency cases are resolved independently under agency
law. Section 3-406 is not necessary in those cases.
The "substantially contributes" test of former Section 3-406 is continued in this section in preference to a "direct
and proximate cause" test. The "substantially contributes" test is meant to be less stringent than a "direct and
proximate cause" test. Under the less stringent test the preclusion should be easier to establish. Conduct
"substantially contributes" to a material alteration or forged signature if it is a contributing cause of the alteration or
signature and a substantial factor in bringing it about. The analysis of "substantially contributes" in former Section 3-
406 by the court in Thompson Maple Products v. Citizens National Bank of Corry, 234 A.2d 32 (Pa.Super.Ct.1967),
states what is intended by the use of the same words in revised Section 3-406(b). Since Section 3-404(d) and
Section 3-405(b) also use the words "substantially contributes" the analysis of these words also applies to those
provisions.
3. The following cases illustrate the kind of conduct that can be the basis of a preclusion under Section 3-406(a):
Case # 1. Employer signs checks drawn on Employer's account by use of a rubber stamp of Employer's
signature. Employer keeps the rubber stamp along with Employer's personalized blank check forms in an unlocked
desk drawer. An unauthorized person fraudulently uses the check forms to write checks on Employer's account.
The checks are signed by use of the rubber stamp. If Employer demands that Employer's account in the drawee
bank be recredited because the forged check was not properly payable, the drawee bank may defend by asserting
that Employer is precluded from asserting the forgery. The trier of fact could find that Employer failed to exercise
ordinary care to safeguard the rubber stamp and the check forms and that the failure substantially contributed to the
forgery of Employer's signature by the unauthorized use of the rubber stamp.
Case # 2. An insurance company draws a check to the order of Sarah Smith in payment of a claim of a
policyholder, Sarah Smith, who lives in Alabama. The insurance company also has a policyholder with the same
name who lives in Illinois. By mistake, the insurance company mails the check to the Illinois Sarah Smith who
indorses the check and obtains payment. Because the payee of the check is the Alabama Sarah Smith, the
indorsement by the Illinois Sarah Smith is a forged indorsement. Section 3-110(a). The trier of fact could find that
the insurance company failed to exercise ordinary care when it mailed the check to the wrong person and that the
failure substantially contributed to the making of the forged indorsement. In that event the insurance company could
be precluded from asserting the forged indorsement against the drawee bank that honored the check.
Case # 3. A company writes a check for $ 10. The figure "10" and the word "ten" are typewritten in the appropriate
spaces on the check form. A large blank space is left after the figure and the word. The payee of the check, using a
typewriter with a typeface similar to that used on the check, writes the word "thousand" after the word "ten" and a
comma and three zeros after the figure "10". The drawee bank in good faith pays $ 10,000 when the check is
presented for payment and debits the account of the drawer in that amount. The trier of fact could find that the
drawer failed to exercise ordinary care in writing the check and that the failure substantially contributed to the
alteration. In that case the drawer is precluded from asserting the alteration against the drawee if the check was
paid in good faith.
4. Subsection (b) differs from former Section 3-406 in that it adopts a concept of comparative negligence. If the
person precluded under subsection (a) proves that the person asserting the preclusion failed to exercise ordinary
care and that failure substantially contributed to the loss, the loss may be allocated between the two parties on a
comparative negligence basis. In the case of a forged indorsement the litigation is usually between the payee of the
check and the depositary bank that took the check for collection. An example is a case like Case # 1 of Comment 3
to Section 3-405. If the trier of fact finds that Employer failed to exercise ordinary care in safeguarding the check
and that the failure substantially contributed to the making of the forged indorsement, subsection (a) of Section 3-
406 applies. If Employer brings an action for conversion against the depositary bank that took the checks from the
§ 3-406. NEGLIGENCE CONTRIBUTING TO FORGED SIGNATURE OR ALTERATION OF INSTRUMENT
Page 3 of 3
forger, the depositary bank could assert the preclusion under subsection (a). But suppose the forger opened an
account in the depositary bank in a name identical to that of Employer, the payee of the check, and then deposited
the check in the account. Subsection (b) may apply. There may be an issue whether the depositary bank should
have been alerted to possible fraud when a new account was opened for a corporation shortly before a very large
check payable to a payee with the same name is deposited. Circumstances surrounding the opening of the account
may have suggested that the corporation to which the check was payable may not be the same as the corporation
for which the account was opened. If the trier of fact finds that collecting the check under these circumstances was
a failure to exercise ordinary care, it could allocate the loss between the depositary bank and Employer, the payee.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-407
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-407. ALTERATION
(a) "Alteration" means (i) an unauthorized change in an instrument that purports to modify in any respect
the obligation of a party, or (ii) an unauthorized addition of words or numbers or other change to an
incomplete instrument relating to the obligation of a party.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c), an alteration fraudulently made discharges a party whose
obligation is affected by the alteration unless that party assents or is precluded from asserting the
alteration. No other alteration discharges a party, and the instrument may be enforced according to its
original terms.
(c) A payor bank or drawee paying a fraudulently altered instrument or a person taking it for value, in good
faith and without notice of the alteration, may enforce rights with respect to the instrument (i) according to
its original terms, or (ii) in the case of an incomplete instrument altered by unauthorized completion,
according to its terms as completed.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This provision restates former Section 3-407. Former Section 3-407 defined a "material" alteration as any
alteration that changes the contract of the parties in any respect. Revised Section 3-407 refers to such a change as
an alteration. As under subsection (2) of former Section 3-407, discharge because of alteration occurs only in the
case of an alteration fraudulently made. There is no discharge if a blank is filled in the honest belief that it is
authorized or if a change is made with a benevolent motive such as a desire to give the obligor the benefit of a
lower interest rate. Changes favorable to the obligor are unlikely to be made with any fraudulent intent, but if such
an intent is found the alteration may operate as a discharge.
Discharge is a personal defense of the party whose obligation is modified and anyone whose obligation is not
affected is not discharged. But if an alteration discharges a party there is also discharge of any party having a right
of recourse against the discharged party because the obligation of the party with the right of recourse is affected by
the alteration. Assent to the alteration given before or after it is made will prevent the party from asserting the
discharge. The phrase "or is precluded from asserting the alteration" in subsection (b) recognizes the possibility of
an estoppel or other ground barring the defense which does not rest on assent.
2. Under subsection (c) a person paying a fraudulently altered instrument or taking it for value, in good faith and
without notice of the alteration, is not affected by a discharge under subsection (b). The person paying or taking the
instrument may assert rights with respect to the instrument according to its original terms or, in the case of an
incomplete instrument that is altered by unauthorized completion, according to its terms as completed. If blanks are
filled or an incomplete instrument is otherwise completed, subsection (c) places the loss upon the party who left the
instrument incomplete by permitting enforcement in its completed form. This result is intended even though the
instrument was stolen from the issuer and completed after the theft.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 3-407. ALTERATION
Page 2 of 2
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-408
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-408. DRAWEE NOT LIABLE ON UNACCEPTED DRAFT
A check or other draft does not of itself operate as an assignment of funds in the hands of the drawee available for
its payment, and the drawee is not liable on the instrument until the drawee accepts it.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section is a restatement of former Section 3-409(1). Subsection (2) of former Section 3-409 is deleted as
misleading and superfluous. Comment 3 says of subsection (2): "It is intended to make it clear that this section
does not in any way affect any liability which may arise apart from the instrument." In reality subsection (2) did not
make anything clear and was a source of confusion. If all it meant was that a bank that has not certified a check
may engage in other conduct that might make it liable to a holder, it stated the obvious and was superfluous.
Section 1-103 is adequate to cover those cases.
2. Liability with respect to drafts may arise under other law. For example, Section 4-302 imposes liability on a
payor bank for late return of an item.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-409
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-409. ACCEPTANCE OF DRAFT; CERTIFIED CHECK
(a) "Acceptance" means the drawee's signed agreement to pay a draft as presented. It must be written on
the draft and may consist of the drawee's signature alone. Acceptance may be made at any time and
becomes effective when notification pursuant to instructions is given or the accepted draft is delivered for
the purpose of giving rights on the acceptance to any person.
(b) A draft may be accepted although it has not been signed by the drawer, is otherwise incomplete, is
overdue, or has been dishonored.
(c) If a draft is payable at a fixed period after sight and the acceptor fails to date the acceptance, the holder
may complete the acceptance by supplying a date in good faith.
(d) "Certified check" means a check accepted by the bank on which it is drawn. Acceptance may be made
as stated in subsection (a) or by a writing on the check which indicates that the check is certified. The
drawee of a check has no obligation to certify the check, and refusal to certify is not dishonor of the check.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The first three subsections of Section 3-409 are a restatement of former Section 3-410. Subsection (d) adds a
definition of certified check which is a type of accepted draft.
2. Subsection (a) states the generally recognized rule that the mere signature of the drawee on the instrument is a
sufficient acceptance. Customarily the signature is written vertically across the face of the instrument, but since the
drawee has no reason to sign for any other purpose a signature in any other place, even on the back of the
instrument, is sufficient. It need not be accompanied by such words as "Accepted," "Certified," or "Good." It must
not, however, bear any words indicating an intent to refuse to honor the draft. The last sentence of subsection (a)
states the generally recognized rule that an acceptance written on the draft takes effect when the drawee notifies
the holder or gives notice according to instructions.
3. The purpose of subsection (c) is to provide a definite date of payment if none appears on the instrument. An
undated acceptance of a draft payable "thirty days after sight" is incomplete. Unless the acceptor writes in a
different date the holder is authorized to complete the acceptance according to the terms of the draft by supplying a
date of acceptance. Any date supplied by the holder is effective if made in good faith.
4. The last sentence of subsection (d) states the generally recognized rule that in the absence of agreement a
bank is under no obligation to certify a check. A check is a demand instrument calling for payment rather than
acceptance. The bank may be liable for breach of any agreement with the drawer, the holder, or any other person
by which it undertakes to certify. Its liability is not on the instrument, since the drawee is not so liable until
acceptance. Section 3-408. Any liability is for breach of the separate agreement.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 3-409. ACCEPTANCE OF DRAFT; CERTIFIED CHECK
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-410
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-410. ACCEPTANCE VARYING DRAFT
(a) If the terms of a drawee's acceptance vary from the terms of the draft as presented, the holder may
refuse the acceptance and treat the draft as dishonored. In that case, the drawee may cancel the
acceptance.
(b) The terms of a draft are not varied by an acceptance to pay at a particular bank or place in the United
States, unless the acceptance states that the draft is to be paid only at that bank or place.
(c) If the holder assents to an acceptance varying the terms of a draft, the obligation of each drawer and
indorser that does not expressly assent to the acceptance is discharged.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section is a restatement of former Section 3-412. It applies to conditional acceptances, acceptances for
part of the amount, acceptances to pay at a different time from that required by the draft, or to the acceptance of
less than all of the drawees. It applies to any other engagement changing the essential terms of the draft. If the
drawee makes a varied acceptance the holder may either reject it or assent to it. The holder may reject by insisting
on acceptance of the draft as presented. Refusal by the drawee to accept the draft as presented is dishonor. In that
event the drawee is not bound by the varied acceptance and is entitled to have it canceled.
If the holder assents to the varied acceptance, the drawee's obligation as acceptor is according to the terms of the
varied acceptance. Under subsection (c) the effect of the holder's assent is to discharge any drawer or indorser who
does not also assent. The assent of the drawer or indorser must be affirmatively expressed. Mere failure to object
within a reasonable time is not assent which will prevent the discharge.
2. Under subsection (b) an acceptance does not vary from the terms of the draft if it provides for payment at any
particular bank or place in the United States unless the acceptance states that the draft is to be paid only at such
bank or place. Section 3-501(b)(1) states that if an instrument is payable at a bank in the United States presentment
must be made at the place of payment (Section 3-111) which in this case is at the designated bank.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-411
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-411. REFUSAL TO PAY CASHIER'S CHECKS, TELLER'S CHECKS, AND
CERTIFIED CHECKS
(a) In this section, "obligated bank" means the acceptor of a certified check or the issuer of a cashier's
check or teller's check bought from the issuer.
(b) If the obligated bank wrongfully (i) refuses to pay a cashier's check or certified check, (ii) stops payment
of a teller's check, or (iii) refuses to pay a dishonored teller's check, the person asserting the right to
enforce the check is entitled to compensation for expenses and loss of interest resulting from the
nonpayment and may recover consequential damages if the obligated bank refuses to pay after receiving
notice of particular circumstances giving rise to the damages.
(c) Expenses or consequential damages under subsection (b) are not recoverable if the refusal of the
obligated bank to pay occurs because (i) the bank suspends payments, (ii) the obligated bank asserts a
claim or defense of the bank that it has reasonable grounds to believe is available against the person
entitled to enforce the instrument, (iii) the obligated bank has a reasonable doubt whether the person
demanding payment is the person entitled to enforce the instrument, or (iv) payment is prohibited by law.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. In some cases a creditor may require that the debt be paid by an obligation of a bank. The debtor may comply
by obtaining certification of the debtor's check, but more frequently the debtor buys from a bank a cashier's check or
teller's check payable to the creditor. The check is taken by the creditor as a cash equivalent on the assumption
that the bank will pay the check. Sometimes, the debtor wants to retract payment by inducing the obligated bank not
to pay. The typical case involves a dispute between the parties to the transaction in which the check is given in
payment. In the case of a certified check or cashier's check, the bank can safely pay the holder of the check despite
notice that there may be an adverse claim to the check (Section 3-602). It is also clear that the bank that sells a
teller's check has no duty to order the bank on which it is drawn not to pay it. A debtor using any of these types of
checks has no right to stop payment. Nevertheless, some banks will refuse payment as an accommodation to a
customer. Section 3-411 is designed to discourage this practice.
2. The term "obligated bank" refers to the issuer of the cashier's check or teller's check and the acceptor of the
certified check. If the obligated bank wrongfully refuses to pay, it is liable to pay for expenses and loss of interest
resulting from the refusal to pay. There is no express provision for attorney's fees, but attorney's fees are not meant
to be necessarily excluded. They could be granted because they fit within the language "expenses *** resulting from
the nonpayment." In addition the bank may be liable to pay consequential damages if it has notice of the particular
circumstances giving rise to the damages.
3. Subsection (c) provides that expenses or consequential damages are not recoverable if the refusal to pay is
because of the reasons stated. The purpose is to limit that recovery to cases in which the bank refuses to pay even
though its obligation to pay is clear and it is able to pay. Subsection (b) applies only if the refusal to honor the check
is wrongful. If the bank is not obliged to pay there is no recovery. The bank may assert any claim or defense that it
§ 3-411. REFUSAL TO PAY CASHIER'S CHECKS, TELLER'S CHECKS, AND CERTIFIED CHECKS
Page 2 of 2
has, but normally the bank would not have a claim or defense. In the usual case it is a remitter that is asserting a
claim to the check on the basis of a rescission of negotiation to the payee under Section 3-202. See Comment 2 to
Section 3-201. The bank can assert that claim if there is compliance with Section 3-305(c), but the bank is not
protected from damages under subsection (b) if the claim of the remitter is not upheld. In that case, the bank is
insulated from damages only if payment is enjoined under Section 3-602(b)(1). Subsection (c)(iii) refers to cases in
which the bank may have a reasonable doubt about the identity of the person demanding payment. For example, a
cashier's check is payable to "Supplier Co." The person in possession of the check presents it for payment over the
counter and claims to be an officer of Supplier Co. The bank may refuse payment until it has been given adequate
proof that the presentment in fact is being made for Supplier Co., the person entitled to enforce the check.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-412
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-412. OBLIGATION OF ISSUER OF NOTE OR CASHIER'S CHECK
The issuer of a note or cashier's check or other draft drawn on the drawer is obliged to pay the instrument (i)
according to its terms at the time it was issued or, if not issued, at the time it first came into possession of a holder,
or (ii) if the issuer signed an incomplete instrument, according to its terms when completed, to the extent stated in
Sections 3-115 and 3-407. The obligation is owed to a person entitled to enforce the instrument or to an indorser
who paid the instrument under Section 3-415.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The obligations of the maker, acceptor, drawer, and indorser are stated in four separate sections. Section 3-
412 states the obligation of the maker of a note and is consistent with former Section 3-413(1). Section 3-412 also
applies to the issuer of a cashier's check or other draft drawn on the drawer. Under former Section 3-118(a), since a
cashier's check or other draft drawn on the drawer was "effective as a note," the drawer was liable under former
Section 3-413(1) as a maker. Under Sections 3-103(a)(6) and 3-104(f) a cashier's check or other draft drawn on the
drawer is treated as a draft to reflect common commercial usage, but the liability of the drawer is stated by Section
3-412 as being the same as that of the maker of a note rather than that of the drawer of a draft. Thus, Section 3-412
does not in substance change former law.
2. Under Section 3-105(b) nonissuance of either a complete or incomplete instrument is a defense by a maker or
drawer against a person that is not a holder in due course.
3. The obligation of the maker may be modified in the case of alteration if, under Section 3-406, the maker is
precluded from asserting the alteration.
4. The rule of this section is similar to the rule of Article 39 of the Convention on International Bills of Exchange
and International Promissory Notes. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform
Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-413
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-413. OBLIGATION OF ACCEPTOR
(a) The acceptor of a draft is obliged to pay the draft (i) according to its terms at the time it was accepted,
even though the acceptance states that the draft is payable "as originally drawn" or equivalent terms, (ii) if
the acceptance varies the terms of the draft, according to the terms of the draft as varied, or (iii) if the
acceptance is of a draft that is an incomplete instrument, according to its terms when completed, to the
extent stated in Sections 3-115 and 3-407. The obligation is owed to a person entitled to enforce the draft
or to the drawer or an indorser who paid the draft under Section 3-414 or 3-415.
(b) If the certification of a check or other acceptance of a draft states the amount certified or accepted, the
obligation of the acceptor is that amount. If (i) the certification or acceptance does not state an amount, (ii)
the amount of the instrument is subsequently raised, and (iii) the instrument is then negotiated to a holder in
due course, the obligation of the acceptor is the amount of the instrument at the time it was taken by the
holder in due course.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Subsection (a) is consistent with former Section 3-413(1). Subsection (b) has primary importance with respect to
certified checks. It protects the holder in due course of a certified check that was altered after certification and
before negotiation to the holder in due course. A bank can avoid liability for the altered amount by stating on the
check the amount the bank agrees to pay. The subsection applies to other accepted drafts as well. The rule of this
section is similar to the rule of Articles 41 of the Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International
Promissory Notes. Articles 42 and 43 of the Convention include more detailed rules that in many respects do not
have parallels in this Article. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial
Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-414
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-414. OBLIGATION OF DRAWER
(a) This section does not apply to cashier's checks or other drafts drawn on the drawer.
(b) If an unaccepted draft is dishonored, the drawer is obliged to pay the draft (i) according to its terms at
the time it was issued or, if not issued, at the time it first came into possession of a holder, or (ii) if the
drawer signed an incomplete instrument, according to its terms when completed, to the extent stated in
Sections 3-115 and 3-407. The obligation is owed to a person entitled to enforce the draft or to an indorser
who paid the draft under Section 3-415.
(c) If a draft is accepted by a bank, the drawer is discharged, regardless of when or by whom acceptance
was obtained.
(d) If a draft is accepted and the acceptor is not a bank, the obligation of the drawer to pay the draft if the
draft is dishonored by the acceptor is the same as the obligation of an indorser under Section 3-415(a) and
(c).
(e) If a draft states that it is drawn "without recourse" or otherwise disclaims liability of the drawer to pay
the draft, the drawer is not liable under subsection (b) to pay the draft if the draft is not a check. A
disclaimer of the liability stated in subsection (b) is not effective if the draft is a check.
(f) If (i) a check is not presented for payment or given to a depositary bank for collection within 30 days
after its date, (ii) the drawee suspends payments after expiration of the 30-day period without paying the
check, and (iii) because of the suspension of payments, the drawer is deprived of funds maintained with the
drawee to cover payment of the check, the drawer to the extent deprived of funds may discharge its
obligation to pay the check by assigning to the person entitled to enforce the check the rights of the drawer
against the drawee with respect to the funds.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) excludes cashier's checks because the obligation of the issuer of a cashier's check is stated in
Section 3-412.
2. Subsection (b) states the obligation of the drawer on an unaccepted draft. It replaces former Section 3-413(2).
The requirement under former Article 3 of notice of dishonor or protest has been eliminated. Under revised Article 3,
notice of dishonor is necessary only with respect to indorser's liability. The liability of the drawer of an unaccepted
draft is treated as a primary liability. Under former Section 3-102(1)(d) the term "secondary party" was used to refer
to a drawer or indorser. The quoted term is not used in revised Article 3. The effect of a draft drawn without
recourse is stated in subsection (e).
3. Under subsection (c) the drawer is discharged of liability on a draft accepted by a bank regardless of when
acceptance was obtained. This changes former Section 3-411(1) which provided that the drawer is discharged only
if the holder obtains acceptance. Holders that have a bank obligation do not normally rely on the drawer to
§ 3-414. OBLIGATION OF DRAWER
Page 2 of 2
guarantee the bank's solvency. A holder can obtain protection against the insolvency of a bank acceptor by a
specific guaranty of payment by the drawer or by obtaining an indorsement by the drawer. Section 3-205(d).
4. Subsection (d) states the liability of the drawer if a draft is accepted by a drawee other than a bank and the
acceptor dishonors. The drawer of an unaccepted draft is the only party liable on the instrument. The drawee has
no liability on the draft. Section 3-408. When the draft is accepted, the obligations change. The drawee, as
acceptor, becomes primarily liable and the drawer's liability is that of a person secondarily liable as a guarantor of
payment. The drawer's liability is identical to that of an indorser, and subsection (d) states the drawer's liability that
way. The drawer is liable to pay the person entitled to enforce the draft or any indorser that pays pursuant to
Section 3-415. The drawer in this case is discharged if notice of dishonor is required by Section 3-503 and is not
given in compliance with that section. A drawer that pays has a right of recourse against the acceptor. Section 3-
413(a).
5. Subsection (e) does not permit the drawer of a check to avoid liability under subsection (b) by drawing the
check without recourse. There is no legitimate purpose served by issuing a check on which nobody is liable.
Drawing without recourse is effective to disclaim liability of the drawer if the draft is not a check. Suppose, in a
documentary sale, Seller draws a draft on Buyer for the price of goods shipped to Buyer. The draft is payable upon
delivery to the drawee of an order bill of lading covering the goods. Seller delivers the draft with the bill of lading to
Finance Company that is named as payee of the draft. If Seller draws without recourse Finance Company takes the
risk that Buyer will dishonor. If Buyer dishonors, Finance Company has no recourse against Seller but it can obtain
reimbursement by selling the goods which it controls through the bill of lading.
6. Subsection (f) is derived from former Section 3-502(1)(b). It is designed to protect the drawer of a check
against loss resulting from suspension of payments by the drawee bank when the holder of the check delays
collection of the check. For example, X writes a check payable to Y for $ 1,000. The check is covered by funds in
X's account in the drawee bank. Y delays initiation of collection of the check for more than 30 days after the date of
the check. The drawee bank suspends payments after the 30-day period and before the check is presented for
payment. If the $ 1,000 of funds in X's account have not been withdrawn, X has a claim for those funds against the
drawee bank and, if subsection (e) were not in effect, X would be liable to Y on the check because the check was
dishonored. Section 3-502(e). If the suspension of payments by the drawee bank will result in payment to X of less
than the full amount of the $ 1,000 in the account or if there is a significant delay in payment to X, X will suffer a loss
which would not have been suffered if Y had promptly initiated collection of the check. In most cases, X will not
suffer any loss because of the existence of federal bank deposit insurance that covers accounts up to $ 100,000.
Thus, subsection (e) has relatively little importance. There might be some cases, however, in which the account is
not fully insured because it exceeds $ 100,000 or because the account doesn't qualify for deposit insurance.
Subsection (f) retains the phrase "deprived of funds maintained with the drawee" appearing in former Section 3-
502(1)(b). The quoted phrase applies if the suspension of payments by the drawee prevents the drawer from
receiving the benefit of funds which would have paid the check if the holder had been timely in initiating collection.
Thus, any significant delay in obtaining full payment of the funds is a deprivation of funds. The drawer can
discharge drawer's liability by assigning rights against the drawee with respect to the funds to the holder.
7. The obligation of the drawer under this section is similar to the obligation of the drawer under Article 38 of the
Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes. Amendments approved by the
Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-415
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-415. OBLIGATION OF INDORSER
(a) Subject to subsections (b), (c), (d), (e) and to Section 3-419(d), if an instrument is dishonored, an
indorser is obliged to pay the amount due on the instrument (i) according to the terms of the instrument at
the time it was indorsed, or (ii) if the indorser indorsed an incomplete instrument, according to its terms
when completed, to the extent stated in Sections 3-115 and 3-407. The obligation of the indorser is owed to
a person entitled to enforce the instrument or to a subsequent indorser who paid the instrument under this
section.
(b) If an indorsement states that it is made "without recourse" or otherwise disclaims liability of the
indorser, the indorser is not liable under subsection (a) to pay the instrument.
(c) If notice of dishonor of an instrument is required by Section 3-503 and notice of dishonor complying
with that section is not given to an indorser, the liability of the indorser under subsection (a) is discharged.
(d) If a draft is accepted by a bank after an indorsement is made, the liability of the indorser under
subsection (a) is discharged.
(e) If an indorser of a check is liable under subsection (a) and the check is not presented for payment, or
given to a depositary bank for collection, within 30 days after the day the indorsement was made, the
liability of the indorser under subsection (a) is discharged.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsections (a) and (b) restate the substance of former Section 3-414(1). Subsection (2) of former Section 3-
414 has been dropped because it is superfluous. Although notice of dishonor is not mentioned in subsection (a), it
must be given in some cases to charge an indorser. It is covered in subsection (c). Regulation CC § 229.35(b)
provides that a bank handling a check for collection or return is liable to a bank that subsequently handles the check
to the extent the latter bank does not receive payment for the check. This liability applies whether or not the bank
incurring the liability indorsed the check.
2. Section 3-503 states when notice of dishonor is required and how it must be given. If required notice of
dishonor is not given in compliance with Section 3-503, subsection (c) of Section 3-415 states that the effect is to
discharge the indorser's obligation.
3. Subsection (d) is similar in effect to Section 3-414(c) if the draft is accepted by a bank after the indorsement is
made. See Comment 3 to Section 3-414. If a draft is accepted by a bank before the indorsement is made, the
indorser incurs the obligation stated in subsection (a).
4. Subsection (e) modifies former Sections 3-503(2)(b) and 3-502(1)(a) by stating a 30-day rather than a sevenday
period, and stating it as an absolute rather than a presumptive period.
5. As stated in subsection (a), the obligation of an indorser to pay the amount due on the instrument is generally
owed not only to a person entitled to enforce the instrument but also to a subsequent indorser who paid the
§ 3-415. OBLIGATION OF INDORSER
Page 2 of 2
instrument. But if the prior indorser and the subsequent indorser are both anomalous indorsers, this rule does not
apply. In that case, Section 3-116 applies. Under Section 3-116(a), the anomalous indorsers are jointly and
severally liable and if either pays the instrument the indorser who pays has a right of contribution against the other.
Section 3-116(b). The right to contribution in Section 3-116(b) is subject to "agreement of the affected parties."
Suppose the subsequent indorser can prove an agreement with the prior indorser under which the prior indorser
agreed to treat the subsequent indorser as a guarantor of the obligation of the prior indorser. Rights of the two
indorsers between themselves would be governed by the agreement. Under suretyship law, the subsequent
indorser under such an agreement is referred to as a sub-surety. Under the agreement, if the subsequent indorser
pays the instrument there is a right to reimbursement from the prior indorser; if the prior indorser pays the
instrument, there is no right of recourse against the subsequent indorser. See PEB Commentary No. 11, dated
February 10, 1994 [Appendix V, infra].
6. The rule of this section is similar to the rule of Article 44 of the Convention on International Bills of Exchange
and International Promissory Notes. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform
Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-416
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-416. TRANSFER WARRANTIES
(a) A person who transfers an instrument for consideration warrants to the transferee and, if the transfer is
by indorsement, to any subsequent transferee that:
(1) the warrantor is a person entitled to enforce the instrument;
(2) all signatures on the instrument are authentic and authorized;
(3) the instrument has not been altered;
(4) the instrument is not subject to a defense or claim in recoupment of any party which can be
asserted against the warrantor;
(5) the warrantor has no knowledge of any insolvency proceeding commenced with respect to the
maker or acceptor or, in the case of an unaccepted draft, the drawer; and
(6) with respect to a remotely-created consumer item, that the person on whose account the item is
drawn authorized the issuance of the item in the amount for which the item is drawn.
(b) A person to whom the warranties under subsection (a) are made and who took the instrument in good
faith may recover from the warrantor as damages for breach of warranty an amount equal to the loss
suffered as a result of the breach, but not more than the amount of the instrument plus expenses and loss
of interest incurred as a result of the breach.
(c) The warranties stated in subsection (a) cannot be disclaimed with respect to checks. Unless notice of a
claim for breach of warranty is given to the warrantor within 30 days after the claimant has reason to know
of the breach and the identity of the warrantor, the liability of the warrantor under subsection (b) is
discharged to the extent of any loss caused by the delay in giving notice of the claim.
(d) A [cause of action] for breach of warranty under this section accrues when the claimant has reason to
know of the breach.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) is taken from subsection (2) of former Section 3-417. Subsections (3) and (4) of former Section
3-417 are deleted. Warranties under subsection (a) in favor of the immediate transferee apply to all persons who
transfer an instrument for consideration whether or not the transfer is accompanied by indorsement. Any
consideration sufficient to support a simple contract will support those warranties. If there is an indorsement the
warranty runs with the instrument and the remote holder may sue the indorser-warrantor directly and thus avoid a
multiplicity of suits.
2. Since the purpose of transfer (Section 3-203(a)) is to give the transferee the right to enforce the instrument,
subsection (a)(1) is a warranty that the transferor is a person entitled to enforce the instrument (Section 3-301).
Under Section 3-203(b) transfer gives the transferee any right of the transferor to enforce the instrument.
§ 3-416. TRANSFER WARRANTIES
Page 2 of 2
Subsection (a)(1) is in effect a warranty that there are no unauthorized or missing indorsements that prevent the
transferor from making the transferee a person entitled to enforce the instrument.
3. The rationale of subsection (a)(4) is that the transferee does not undertake to buy an instrument that is not
enforceable in whole or in part, unless there is a contrary agreement. Even if the transferee takes as a holder in due
course who takes free of the defense or claim in recoupment, the warranty gives the transferee the option of
proceeding against the transferor rather than litigating with the obligor on the instrument the issue of the holder-indue-
course status of the transferee. Subsection (3) of former Section 3-417 which limits this warranty is deleted.
The rationale is that while the purpose of a "no recourse" indorsement is to avoid a guaranty of payment, the
indorsement does not clearly indicate an intent to disclaim warranties.
4. Under subsection (a)(5) the transferor does not warrant against difficulties of collection, impairment of the credit
of the obligor or even insolvency. The transferee is expected to determine such questions before taking the
obligation. If insolvency proceedings as defined in Section 1-201(22) have been instituted against the party who is
expected to pay and the transferor knows it, the concealment of that fact amounts to a fraud upon the transferee,
and the warranty against knowledge of such proceedings is provided accordingly.
5. Transfer warranties may be disclaimed with respect to any instrument except a check. Between the immediate
parties disclaimer may be made by agreement. In the case of an indorser, disclaimer of transferor's liability, to be
effective, must appear in the indorsement with words such as "without warranties" or some other specific reference
to warranties. But in the case of a check, subsection (c) of Section 3-416 provides that transfer warranties cannot
be disclaimed at all. In the check collection process the banking system relies on these warranties.
6. Subsection (b) states the measure of damages for breach of warranty. There is no express provision for
attorney's fees, but attorney's fees are not meant to be necessarily excluded. They could be granted because they
fit within the phrase "expenses *** incurred as a result of the breach." The intention is to leave to other state law the
issue as to when attorney's fees are recoverable.
7. Since the traditional term "cause of action" may have been replaced in some states by "claim for relief" or some
equivalent term, the words "cause of action" in subsection (d) have been bracketed to indicate that the words may
be replaced by an appropriate substitute to conform to local practice.
8. Subsection (a)(6) is based on a number of nonuniform amendments designed to address concerns about
certain kinds of check fraud. The provision implements a limited rejection of Price v. Neal, 97 Eng. Rep. 871 (K.B.
1762), so that in certain circumstances (those involving remotely-created consumer items) the payor bank can use
a warranty claim to absolve itself of responsibility for honoring an unauthorized item. The provision rests on the
premise that monitoring by depositary banks can control this type of fraud more effectively than any practices
readily available to payor banks. The provision expressly includes both the case in which the consumer does not
authorize the item at all and also the case in which the consumer authorizes the item but in an amount different
from the amount in which the item is drawn. Similar provisions appear in Sections 3-417, 4-207, and 4-208.
The provision supplements applicable federal law, which requires telemarketers who submit instruments for
payment to obtain the customer's "express verifiable authorization," which may be either in writing or tape recorded
and must be made available upon request to the customer's bank. Federal Trade Commission's Telemarketing
Sales Rule, 16 C.F.R. § 310.3(a)(3), implementing the Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention
Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 6101-6108. Some states also have consumer-protection laws governing authorization of
instruments in telemarketing transactions. See, e.g., 9 Vt. Stat. Ann. § 2464.
9. Article 45 of the Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes includes
warranties that are similar (except for the warranty in subsection (a)(6)).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-417
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-417. PRESENTMENT WARRANTIES
(a) If an unaccepted draft is presented to the drawee for payment or acceptance and the drawee pays or
accepts the draft, (i) the person obtaining payment or acceptance, at the time of presentment, and (ii) a
previous transferor of the draft, at the time of transfer, warrant to the drawee making payment or accepting
the draft in good faith that:
(1) the warrantor is, or was, at the time the warrantor transferred the draft, a person entitled to enforce
the draft or authorized to obtain payment or acceptance of the draft on behalf of a person entitled to
enforce the draft;
(2) the draft has not been altered;
(3) the warrantor has no knowledge that the signature of the drawer of the draft is unauthorized; and
(4) with respect to any remotely-created consumer item, that the person on whose account the item is
drawn authorized the issuance of the item in the amount for which the item is drawn.
(b) A drawee making payment may recover from any warrantor damages for breach of warranty equal to
the amount paid by the drawee less the amount the drawee received or is entitled to receive from the
drawer because of the payment. In addition, the drawee is entitled to compensation for expenses and loss
of interest resulting from the breach. The right of the drawee to recover damages under this subsection is
not affected by any failure of the drawee to exercise ordinary care in making payment. If the drawee
accepts the draft, breach of warranty is a defense to the obligation of the acceptor. If the acceptor makes
payment with respect to the draft, the acceptor is entitled to recover from any warrantor for breach of
warranty the amounts stated in this subsection.
(c) If a drawee asserts a claim for breach of warranty under subsection (a) based on an unauthorized
indorsement of the draft or an alteration of the draft, the warrantor may defend by proving that the
indorsement is effective under Section 3-404 or 3-405 or the drawer is precluded under Section 3-406 or 4-
406 from asserting against the drawee the unauthorized indorsement or alteration.
(d) If (i) a dishonored draft is presented for payment to the drawer or an indorser or (ii) any other
instrument is presented for payment to a party obliged to pay the instrument, and (iii) payment is received,
the following rules apply:
(1) The person obtaining payment and a prior transferor of the instrument warrant to the person
making payment in good faith that the warrantor is, or was, at the time the warrantor transferred the
instrument, a person entitled to enforce the instrument or authorized to obtain payment on behalf of a
person entitled to enforce the instrument.
(2) The person making payment may recover from any warrantor for breach of warranty an amount
equal to the amount paid plus expenses and loss of interest resulting from the breach.
(e) The warranties stated in subsections (a) and (d) cannot be disclaimed with respect to checks. Unless
notice of a claim for breach of warranty is given to the warrantor within 30 days after the claimant has
reason to know of the breach and the identity of the warrantor, the liability of the warrantor under
subsection (b) or (d) is discharged to the extent of any loss caused by the delay in giving notice of the
claim.
§ 3-417. PRESENTMENT WARRANTIES
Page 2 of 3
(f) A [cause of action] for breach of warranty under this section accrues when the claimant has reason to
know of the breach.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section replaces subsection (1) of former Section 3-417. The former provision was difficult to understand
because it purported to state in one subsection all warranties given to any person paying any instrument. The result
was a provision replete with exceptions that could not be readily understood except after close scrutiny of the
language. In revised Section 3-417, presentment warranties made to drawees of uncertified checks and other
unaccepted drafts are stated in subsection (a). All other presentment warranties are stated in subsection (d).
2. Subsection (a) states three warranties. Subsection (a)(1) in effect is a warranty that there are no unauthorized
or missing indorsements. "Person entitled to enforce" is defined in Section 3-301. Subsection (a)(2) is a warranty
that there is no alteration. Subsection (a)(3) is a warranty of no knowledge that there is a forged drawer's signature.
Subsection (a) states that the warranties are made to the drawee and subsections (b) and (c) identify the drawee as
the person entitled to recover for breach of warranty. There is no warranty made to the drawer under subsection (a)
when presentment is made to the drawee. Warranty to the drawer is governed by subsection (d) and that applies
only when presentment for payment is made to the drawer with respect to a dishonored draft. In Sun ' N Sand, Inc.
v. United California Bank, 582 P.2d 920 (Cal.1978), the court held that under former Section 3-417(1) a warranty
was made to the drawer of a check when the check was presented to the drawee for payment. The result in that
case is rejected.
3. Subsection (a)(1) retains the rule that the drawee does not admit the authenticity of indorsements and
subsection (a)(3) retains the rule of Price v. Neal, 3 Burr. 1354 (1762), that the drawee takes the risk that the
drawer's signature is unauthorized unless the person presenting the draft has knowledge that the drawer's
signature is unauthorized. Under subsection (a)(3) the warranty of no knowledge that the drawer's signature is
unauthorized is also given by prior transferors of the draft.
4. Subsection (d) applies to presentment for payment in all cases not covered by subsection (a). It applies to
presentment of notes and accepted drafts to any party obliged to pay the instrument, including an indorser, and to
presentment of dishonored drafts if made to the drawer or an indorser. In cases covered by subsection (d), there is
only one warranty and it is the same as that stated in subsection (a)(1). There are no warranties comparable to
subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) because they are appropriate only in the case of presentment to the drawee of an
unaccepted draft. With respect to presentment of an accepted draft to the acceptor, there is no warranty with
respect to alteration or knowledge that the signature of the drawer is unauthorized. Those warranties were made to
the drawee when the draft was presented for acceptance (Section 3-417(a)(2) and (3)) and breach of that warranty
is a defense to the obligation of the drawee as acceptor to pay the draft. If the drawee pays the accepted draft the
drawee may recover the payment from any warrantor who was in breach of warranty when the draft was accepted.
Section 3-417(b). Thus, there is no necessity for these warranties to be repeated when the accepted draft is
presented for payment. Former Section 3-417(1)(b)(iii) and (c)(iii) are not included in revised Section 3-417 because
they are unnecessary. Former Section 3-417(1)(c)(iv) is not included because it is also unnecessary. The acceptor
should know what the terms of the draft were at the time acceptance was made.
If presentment is made to the drawer or maker, there is no necessity for a warranty concerning the signature of
that person or with respect to alteration. If presentment is made to an indorser, the indorser had itself warranted
authenticity of signatures and that the instrument was not altered. Section 3-416(a)(2) and (3).
5. The measure of damages for breach of warranty under subsection (a) is stated in subsection (b). There is no
express provision for attorney's fees, but attorney's fees are not meant to be necessarily excluded. They could be
§ 3-417. PRESENTMENT WARRANTIES
Page 3 of 3
granted because they fit within the language "expenses *** resulting from the breach." Subsection (b) provides that
the right of the drawee to recover for breach of warranty is not affected by a failure of the drawee to exercise
ordinary care in paying the draft. This provision follows the result reached under former Article 3 in Hartford
Accident & Indemnity Co. v. First Pennsylvania Bank, 859 F.2d 295 (3d Cir.1988).
6. Subsection (c) applies to checks and other unaccepted drafts. It gives to the warrantor the benefit of rights that
the drawee has against the drawer under Section 3-404, 3-405, 3-406, or 4-406. If the drawer's conduct contributed
to a loss from forgery or alteration, the drawee should not be allowed to shift the loss from the drawer to the
warrantor.
7. The first sentence of subsection (e) recognizes that checks are normally paid by automated means and that
payor banks rely on warranties in making payment. Thus, it is not appropriate to allow disclaimer or warranties
appearing on checks that normally will not be examined by the payor bank. The second sentence requires a breach
of warranty claim to be asserted within 30 days after the drawee learns of the breach and the identity of the
warrantor.
8. Since the traditional term "cause of action" may have been replaced in some states by "claim for relief" or some
equivalent term, the words "cause of action" in subsection (f) have been bracketed to indicate that the words may
be replaced by an appropriate substitute to conform to local practice.
9. For discussion of subsection (a)(4), see Comment 8 to Section 3-416.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-418
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-418. PAYMENT OR ACCEPTANCE BY MISTAKE
(a) Except as provided in subsection (c), if the drawee of a draft pays or accepts the draft and the drawee
acted on the mistaken belief that (i) payment of the draft had not been stopped pursuant to Section 4-403 or
(ii) the signature of the drawer of the draft was authorized, the drawee may recover the amount of the draft
from the person to whom or for whose benefit payment was made or, in the case of acceptance, may
revoke the acceptance. Rights of the drawee under this subsection are not affected by failure of the drawee
to exercise ordinary care in paying or accepting the draft.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c), if an instrument has been paid or accepted by mistake and the
case is not covered by subsection (a), the person paying or accepting may, to the extent permitted by the
law governing mistake and restitution, (i) recover the payment from the person to whom or for whose
benefit payment was made or (ii) in the case of acceptance, may revoke the acceptance.
(c) The remedies provided by subsection (a) or (b) may not be asserted against a person who took the
instrument in good faith and for value or who in good faith changed position in reliance on the payment or
acceptance. This subsection does not limit remedies provided by Section 3-417 or 4-407.
(d) Notwithstanding Section 4-215, if an instrument is paid or accepted by mistake and the payor or
acceptor recovers payment or revokes acceptance under subsection (a) or (b), the instrument is deemed
not to have been paid or accepted and is treated as dishonored, and the person from whom payment is
recovered has rights as a person entitled to enforce the dishonored instrument.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section covers payment or acceptance by mistake and replaces former Section 3-418. Under former
Article 3, the remedy of a drawee that paid or accepted a draft by mistake was based on the law of mistake and
restitution, but that remedy was not specifically stated. It was provided by Section 1-103. Former Section 3-418 was
simply a limitation on the unstated remedy under the law of mistake and restitution. Under revised Article 3, Section
3-418 specifically states the right of restitution in subsections (a) and (b). Subsection (a) allows restitution in the two
most common cases in which the problem is presented: payment or acceptance of forged checks and checks on
which the drawer has stopped payment. If the drawee acted under a mistaken belief that the check was not forged
or had not been stopped, the drawee is entitled to recover the funds paid or to revoke the acceptance whether or
not the drawee acted negligently. But in each case, by virtue of subsection (c), the drawee loses the remedy if the
person receiving payment or acceptance was a person who took the check in good faith and for value or who in
good faith changed position in reliance on the payment or acceptance. Subsections (a) and (c) are consistent with
former Section 3-418 and the rule of Price v. Neal. The result in the two cases covered by subsection (a) is that the
drawee in most cases will not have a remedy against the person paid because there is usually a person who took
the check in good faith and for value or who in good faith changed position in reliance on the payment or
acceptance.
§ 3-418. PAYMENT OR ACCEPTANCE BY MISTAKE
Page 2 of 3
2. If a check has been paid by mistake and the payee receiving payment did not give value for the check or did
not change position in reliance on the payment, the drawee bank is entitled to recover the amount of the check
under subsection (a) regardless of how the check was paid. The drawee bank normally pays a check by a credit to
an account of the collecting bank that presents the check for payment. The payee of the check normally receives
the payment by a credit to the payee's account in the depositary bank. But in some cases the payee of the check
may have received payment directly from the drawee bank by presenting the check for payment over the counter. In
those cases the payee is entitled to receive cash, but the payee may prefer another form of payment such as a
cashier's check or teller's check issued by the drawee bank. Suppose Seller contracted to sell goods to Buyer. The
contract provided for immediate payment by Buyer and delivery of the goods 20 days after payment. Buyer paid by
mailing a check for $ 10,000 drawn on Bank payable to Seller. The next day Buyer gave a stop payment order to
Bank with respect to the check Buyer had mailed to Seller. A few days later Seller presented Buyer's check to Bank
for payment over the counter and requested a cashier's check as payment. Bank issued and delivered a cashier's
check for $ 10,000 payable to Seller. The teller failed to discover Buyer's stop order. The next day Bank discovered
the mistake and immediately advised Seller of the facts. Seller refused to return the cashier's check and did not
deliver any goods to Buyer.
Under Section 4-215, Buyer's check was paid by Bank at the time it delivered its cashier's check to Seller. See
Comment 3 to Section 4-215. Bank is obliged to pay the cashier's check and has no defense to that obligation. The
cashier's check was issued for consideration because it was issued in payment of Buyer's check. Although Bank
has no defense on its cashier's check it may have a right to recover $ 10,000, the amount of Buyer's check, from
Seller under Section 3-418(a). Bank paid Buyer's check by mistake. Seller did not give value for Buyer's check
because the promise to deliver goods to Buyer was never performed. Section 3-303(a)(1). And, on these facts,
Seller did not change position in reliance on the payment of Buyer's check. Thus, the first sentence of Section 3-
418(c) does not apply and Seller is obliged to return $ 10,000 to Bank. Bank is obliged to pay the cashier's check
but it has a counterclaim against Seller based on its rights under Section 3-418(a). This claim can be asserted
against Seller, but it cannot be asserted against some other person with rights of a holder in due course of the
cashier's check. A person without rights of a holder in due course of the cashier's check would take subject to
Bank's claim against Seller because it is a claim in recoupment. Section 3-305(a)(3).
If Bank recovers from Seller under Section 3-418(a), the payment of Buyer's check is treated as unpaid and
dishonored. Section 3-418(d). One consequence is that Seller may enforce Buyer's obligation as drawer to pay the
check. Section 3-414. Another consequence is that Seller's rights against Buyer on the contract of sale are also
preserved. Under Section 3-310(b) Buyer's obligation to pay for the goods was suspended when Seller took Buyer's
check and remains suspended until the check is either dishonored or paid. Under Section 3-310(b)(1) * the
obligation is discharged when the check is paid. Since Section 3-418(d) treats Buyer's check as unpaid and
dishonored, Buyer's obligation is not discharged and suspension of the obligation terminates. Under Section 3-
310(b)(3), Seller may enforce either the contract of sale or the check subject to defenses and claims of Buyer.If
Seller had released the goods to Buyer before learning about the stop order, Bank would have no recovery against
Seller under Section 3-418(a) because Seller in that case gave value for Buyer's check. Section 3-418(c). In this
case Bank's sole remedy is under Section 4-407 by subrogation.
3. Subsection (b) covers cases of payment or acceptance by mistake that are not covered by subsection (a). It
directs courts to deal with those cases under the law governing mistake and restitution. Perhaps the most important
class of cases that falls under subsection (b), because it is not covered by subsection (a), is that of payment by the
drawee bank of a check with respect to which the bank has no duty to the drawer to pay either because the drawer
has no account with the bank or because available funds in the drawer's account are not sufficient to cover the
amount of the check. With respect to such a case, under Restatement of Restitution § 29, if the bank paid because
of a mistaken belief that there were available funds in the drawer's account sufficient to cover the amount of the
check, the bank is entitled to restitution. But § 29 is subject to Restatement of Restitution § 33 which denies
restitution if the holder of the check receiving payment paid value in good faith for the check and had no reason to
know that the check was paid by mistake when payment was received.
* Previous incorrect cross reference corrected by Permanent Editorial Board action November 1992.
§ 3-418. PAYMENT OR ACCEPTANCE BY MISTAKE
Page 3 of 3
The result in some cases is clear. For example, suppose Father gives Daughter a check for $ 10,000 as a
birthday gift. The check is drawn on Bank in which both Father and Daughter have accounts. Daughter deposits the
check in her account in Bank. An employee of Bank, acting under the belief that there were available funds in
Father's account to cover the check, caused Daughter's account to be credited for $ 10,000. In fact, Father's
account was overdrawn and Father did not have overdraft privileges. Since Daughter received the check
gratuitously there is clear unjust enrichment if she is allowed to keep the $ 10,000 and Bank is unable to obtain
reimbursement from Father. Thus, Bank should be permitted to reverse the credit to Daughter's account. But this
case is not typical. In most cases the remedy of restitution will not be available because the person receiving
payment of the check will have given value for it in good faith.
In some cases, however, it may not be clear whether a drawee bank should have a right of restitution. For
example, a check-kiting scheme may involve a large number of checks drawn on a number of different banks in
which the drawer's credit balances are based on uncollected funds represented by fraudulently drawn checks. No
attempt is made in Section 3-418 to state rules for determining the conflicting claims of the various banks that may
be victimized by such a scheme. Rather, such cases are better resolved on the basis of general principles of law
and the particular facts presented in the litigation.
4. The right of the drawee to recover a payment or to revoke an acceptance under Section 3-418 is not affected
by the rules under Article 4 that determine when an item is paid. Even though a payor bank may have paid an item
under Section 4-215, it may have a right to recover the payment under Section 3-418. National Savings & Trust Co.
v. Park Corp., 722 F.2d 1303 (6th Cir. 1983), cert. denied, 466 U.S. 939 (1984), correctly states the law on the
issue under former Article 3. Revised Article 3 does not change the previous law.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-419
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-419. INSTRUMENTS SIGNED FOR ACCOMMODATION
(a) If an instrument is issued for value given for the benefit of a party to the instrument ("accommodated
party") and another party to the instrument ("accommodation party") signs the instrument for the purpose of
incurring liability on the instrument without being a direct beneficiary of the value given for the instrument,
the instrument is signed by the accommodation party "for accommodation."
(b) An accommodation party may sign the instrument as maker, drawer, acceptor, or indorser and, subject
to subsection (d), is obliged to pay the instrument in the capacity in which the accommodation party signs.
The obligation of an accommodation party may be enforced notwithstanding any statute of frauds and
whether or not the accommodation party receives consideration for the accommodation.
(c) A person signing an instrument is presumed to be an accommodation party and there is notice that the
instrument is signed for accommodation if the signature is an anomalous indorsement or is accompanied by
words indicating that the signer is acting as surety or guarantor with respect to the obligation of another
party to the instrument. Except as provided in Section 3-605, the obligation of an accommodation party to
pay the instrument is not affected by the fact that the person enforcing the obligation had notice when the
instrument was taken by that person that the accommodation party signed the instrument for
accommodation.
(d) If the signature of a party to an instrument is accompanied by words indicating unambiguously that the
party is guaranteeing collection rather than payment of the obligation of another party to the instrument, the
signer is obliged to pay the amount due on the instrument to a person entitled to enforce the instrument
only if (i) execution of judgment against the other party has been returned unsatisfied, (ii) the other party is
insolvent or in an insolvency proceeding, (iii) the other party cannot be served with process, or (iv) it is
otherwise apparent that payment cannot be obtained from the other party.
(e) If the signature of a party to an instrument is accompanied by words indicating that the party
guarantees payment or the signer signs the instrument as an accommodation party in some other manner
that does not unambiguously indicate an intention to guarantee collection rather than payment, the signer is
obliged to pay the amount due on the instrument to a person entitled to enforce the instrument in the same
circumstances as the accommodated party would be obliged, without prior resort to the accommodated
party by the person entitled to enforce the instrument.
(f) An accommodation party who pays the instrument is entitled to reimbursement from the accommodated
party and is entitled to enforce the instrument against the accommodated party. In proper circumstances,
an accommodation party may obtain relief that requires the accommodated party to perform its obligations
on the instrument. An accommodated party that pays the instrument has no right of recourse against, and is
not entitled to contribution from, an accommodation party.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
§ 3-419. INSTRUMENTS SIGNED FOR ACCOMMODATION
Page 2 of 3
1. Section 3-419 replaces former Section 3-415 and 3-416. An accommodation party is a person who signs an
instrument to benefit the accommodated party either by signing at the time value is obtained by the accommodated
party or later, and who is not a direct beneficiary of the value obtained. An accommodation party will usually be a
co-maker or anomalous indorser. Subsection (a) distinguishes between direct and indirect benefit. For example, if X
cosigns a note of Corporation that is given for a loan to Corporation, X is an accommodation party if no part of the
loan was paid to X or for X's direct benefit. This is true even though X may receive indirect benefit from the loan
because X is employed by Corporation or is a stockholder of Corporation, or even if X is the sole stockholder so
long as Corporation and X are recognized as separate entities.
2. It does not matter whether an accommodation party signs gratuitously either at the time the instrument is
issued or after the instrument is in the possession of a holder. Subsection (b) of Section 3-419 takes the view stated
in Comment 3 to former Section 3-415 that there need be no consideration running to the accommodation party:
"The obligation of the accommodation party is supported by any consideration for which the instrument is taken
before it is due. Subsection (2) is intended to change occasional decisions holding that there is no sufficient
consideration where an accommodation party signs a note after it is in the hands of a holder who has given value.
The [accommodation] party is liable to the holder in such a case even though there is no extension of time or other
concession."
3. As stated in Comment 1, whether a person is an accommodation party is a question of fact. But it is almost
always the case that a co-maker who signs with words of guaranty after the signature is an accommodation party.
The same is true of an anomalous indorser. In either case a person taking the instrument is put on notice of the
accommodation status of the co-maker or indorser. This is relevant to Section 3-605(e). But, under subsection (c),
signing with words of guaranty or as an anomalous indorser also creates a presumption that the signer is an
accommodation party. A party challenging accommodation party status would have to rebut this presumption by
producing evidence that the signer was in fact a direct beneficiary of the value given for the instrument.
An accommodation party is always a surety. A surety who is not a party to the instrument, however, is not an
accommodation party. For example, if M issues a note payable to the order of P, and S signs a separate contract in
which S agrees to pay P the amount of the instrument if it is dishonored, S is a surety but is not an accommodation
party. In such a case, S's rights and duties are determined under the general law of suretyship. In unusual cases
two parties to an instrument may have a surety relationship that is not governed by Article 3 because the
requirements of Section 3-419(a) are not met. In those cases the general law of suretyship applies to the
relationship. See PEB Commentary No. 11, dated February 10, 1994 [Appendix V, infra].
4. Subsection (b) states that an accommodation party is liable on the instrument in the capacity in which the party
signed the instrument. In most cases that capacity will be either that of a maker or indorser of a note. But
subsection (d) provides a limitation on subsection (b). If the signature of the accommodation party is accompanied
by words indicating unambiguously that the party is guaranteeing collection rather than payment of the instrument,
liability is limited to that stated in subsection (d), which is based on former Section 3-416(2).
Former Article 3 was confusing because the obligation of a guarantor was covered both in Section 3-415 and in
Section 3-416. The latter section suggested that a signature accompanied by words of guaranty created an
obligation distinct from that of an accommodation party. Revised Article 3 eliminates that confusion by stating in
Section 3-419 the obligation of a person who uses words of guaranty. Portions of former Section 3-416 are
preserved. Former Section 3-416(2) is reflected in Section 3-419(d) and former Section 3-416(4) is reflected in
Section 3-419(c). Words added to an anomalous indorsement indicating that payment of the instrument is
guaranteed by the indorser do not change the liability of the indorser as stated in Section 3-415. This is a change
from former Section 3-416(5). See PEB Commentary No. 11, supra.
5. Subsection (f) like former Section 3-415(5), provides that an accommodation party that pays the instrument is
entitled to enforce the instrument against the accommodated party. Since the accommodation party that pays the
instrument is entitled to enforce the instrument against the accommodated party, the accommodation party also
obtains rights to any security interest or other collateral that secures payment of the instrument. Subsection (f) also
provides that an accommodation party that pays the instrument is entitled to reimbursement from the
accommodated party. See PEB Commentary No. 11, supra.
§ 3-419. INSTRUMENTS SIGNED FOR ACCOMMODATION
Page 3 of 3
6. In occasional cases, the accommodation party might pay the instrument even though the accommodated party
had a defense to its obligation that was available to the accommodation party under Section 3-305(d). In such
cases, the accommodation party's right to reimbursement may conflict with the accommodated party's right to raise
its defense. For example, suppose the accommodation party pays the instrument without being aware of the
defense. In that case the accommodation party should be entitled to reimbursement. Suppose the accommodation
party paid the instrument with knowledge of the defense. In that case, to the extent of the defense, reimbursement
ordinarily would not be justified, but under some circumstances reimbursement may be justified depending upon the
facts of the case. The resolution of this conflict is left to the general law of suretyship. Section 1-103. See PEB
Commentary No. 11, supra.
7. Section 3-419, along with Section 3-116(a) and (b), Section 3-305(d) and Section 3-605, provides rules
governing the rights of accommodation parties. In addition, except to the extent that it is displaced by provisions of
this Article, the general law of suretyship also applies to the rights of accommodation parties. Section 1-103. See
PEB Commentary No. 11, supra.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-420
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 4. LIABILITY OF PARTIES
§ 3-420. CONVERSION OF INSTRUMENT
(a) The law applicable to conversion of personal property applies to instruments. An instrument is also
converted if it is taken by transfer, other than a negotiation, from a person not entitled to enforce the
instrument or a bank makes or obtains payment with respect to the instrument for a person not entitled to
enforce the instrument or receive payment. An action for conversion of an instrument may not be brought
by (i) the issuer or acceptor of the instrument or (ii) a payee or in dorsee who did not receive delivery of the
instrument either directly or through delivery to an agent or a co-payee.
(b) In an action under subsection (a), the measure of liability is presumed to be the amount payable on the
instrument, but recovery may not exceed the amount of the plaintiff's interest in the instrument.
(c) A representative, other than a depositary bank, who has in good faith dealt with an instrument or its
proceeds on behalf of one who was not the person entitled to enforce the instrument is not liable in
conversion to that person beyond the amount of any proceeds that it has not paid out.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 3-420 is a modification of former Section 3-419. The first sentence of Section 3-420(a) states a general
rule that the law of conversion applicable to personal property also applies to instruments. Paragraphs (a) and (b) of
former Section 3-419(1) are deleted as inappropriate in cases of noncash items that may be delivered for
acceptance or payment in collection letters that contain varying instructions as to what to do in the event of
nonpayment on the day of delivery. It is better to allow such cases to be governed by the general law of conversion
that would address the issue of when, under the circumstances prevailing, the presenter's right to possession has
been denied. The second sentence of Section 3-420(a) states that an instrument is converted if it is taken by
transfer other than a negotiation from a person not entitled to enforce the instrument or taken for collection or
payment from a person not entitled to enforce the instrument or receive payment. This covers cases in which a
depositary or payor bank takes an instrument bearing a forged indorsement. It also covers cases in which an
instrument is payable to two persons and the two persons are not alternative payees, e.g. a check payable to John
and Jane Doe. Under Section 3-110(d) the check can be negotiated or enforced only by both persons acting jointly.
Thus, neither payee acting without the consent of the other, is a person entitled to enforce the instrument. If John
indorses the check and Jane does not, the indorsement is not effective to allow negotiation of the check. If
Depositary Bank takes the check for deposit to John's account, Depositary Bank is liable to Jane for conversion of
the check if she did not consent to the transaction. John, acting alone, is not the person entitled to enforce the
check because John is not the holder of the check. Section 3-110(d) and Comment 4 to Section 3-110. Depositary
Bank does not get any greater rights under Section 4-205(1). If it acted for John as its customer, it did not become
holder of the check under that provision because John, its customer, was not a holder.
Under former Article 3, the cases were divided on the issue of whether the drawer of a check with a forged
indorsement can assert rights against a depositary bank that took the check. The last sentence of Section 3-420(a)
resolves the conflict by following the rule stated in Stone & Webster Engineering Corp. v. First National Bank &
§ 3-420. CONVERSION OF INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 3
Trust Co., 184 N.E.2d 358 (Mass. 1962). There is no reason why a drawer should have an action in conversion.
The check represents an obligation of the drawer rather than property of the drawer. The drawer has an adequate
remedy against the payor bank for recredit of the drawer's account for unauthorized payment of the check.
There was also a split of authority under former Article 3 on the issue of whether a payee who never received the
instrument is a proper plaintiff in a conversion action. The typical case was one in which a check was stolen from
the drawer or in which the check was mailed to an address different from that of the payee and was stolen after it
arrived at that address. The thief forged the indorsement of the payee and obtained payment by depositing the
check to an account in a depositary bank. The issue was whether the payee could bring an action in conversion
against the depositary bank or the drawee bank. In revised Article 3, under the last sentence of Section 3-420(a),
the payee has no conversion action because the check was never delivered to the payee. Until delivery, the payee
does not have any interest in the check. The payee never became the holder of the check nor a person entitled to
enforce the check. Section 3-301. Nor is the payee injured by the fraud. Normally the drawer of a check intends to
pay an obligation owed to the payee. But if the check is never delivered to the payee, the obligation owed to the
payee is not affected. If the check falls into the hands of a thief who obtains payment after forging the signature of
the payee as an indorsement, the obligation owed to the payee continues to exist after the thief receives payment.
Since the payee's right to enforce the underlying obligation is unaffected by the fraud of the thief, there is no reason
to give any additional remedy to the payee. The drawer of the check has no conversion remedy, but the drawee is
not entitled to charge the drawer's account when the drawee wrongfully honored the check. The remedy of the
drawee is against the depositary bank for breach of warranty under Section 3-417(a)(1) or 4-208(a)(1). The loss will
fall on the person who gave value to the thief for the check.
The situation is different if the check is delivered to the payee. If the check is taken for an obligation owed to the
payee, the last sentence of Section 3-310(b)(4) provides that the obligation may not be enforced to the extent of the
amount of the check. The payee's rights are restricted to enforcement of the payee's rights in the instrument. In this
event the payee is injured by the theft and has a cause of action for conversion.
The payee receives delivery when the check comes into the payee's possession, as for example when it is put
into the payee's mailbox. Delivery to an agent is delivery to the payee. If a check is payable to more than one
payee, delivery to one of the payees is deemed to be delivery to all of the payees. Occasionally, the person
asserting a conversion cause of action is an indorsee rather than the original payee. If the check is stolen before the
check can be delivered to the indorsee and the indorsee's indorsement is forged, the analysis is similar. For
example, a check is payable to the order of A. A indorses it to B and puts it into an envelope addressed to B. The
envelope is never delivered to B. Rather, Thief steals the envelope, forges B's indorsement to the check and
obtains payment. Because the check was never delivered to B, the indorsee, B has no cause of action for
conversion, but A does have such an action. A is the owner of the check. B never obtained rights in the check. If A
intended to negotiate the check to B in payment of an obligation, that obligation was not affected by the conduct of
Thief. B can enforce that obligation. Thief stole A's property not B's.
2. Subsection (2) of former Section 3-419 is amended because it is not clear why the former law distinguished
between the liability of the drawee and that of other converters. Why should there be a conclusive presumption that
the liability is face amount if a drawee refuses to pay or return an instrument or makes payment on a forged
indorsement, while the liability of a maker who does the same thing is only presumed to be the face amount?
Moreover, it was not clear under former Section 3-419(2) what face amount meant. If a note for $ 10,000 is payable
in a year at 10% interest, it is common to refer to $ 10,000 as the face amount, but if the note is converted the loss
to the owner also includes the loss of interest. In revised Article 3, Section 3-420(b), by referring to "amount payable
on the instrument," allows the full amount due under the instrument to be recovered.
The "but" clause in subsection (b) addresses the problem of conversion actions in multiple payee checks. Section
3-110(d) states that an instrument cannot be enforced unless all payees join in the action. But an action for
conversion might be brought by a payee having no interest or a limited interest in the proceeds of the check. This
clause prevents such a plaintiff from receiving a windfall. An example is a check payable to a building contractor
and a supplier of building material. The check is not payable to the payees alternatively. Section 3-110(d). The
check is delivered to the contractor by the owner of the building. Suppose the contractor forges supplier's signature
as an indorsement of the check and receives the entire proceeds of the check. The supplier should not, without
§ 3-420. CONVERSION OF INSTRUMENT
Page 3 of 3
qualification, be able to recover the entire amount of the check from the bank that converted the check. Depending
upon the contract between the contractor and the supplier, the amount of the check may be due entirely to the
contractor, in which case there should be no recovery, entirely to the supplier, in which case recovery should be for
the entire amount, or part may be due to one and the rest to the other, in which case recovery should be limited to
the amount due to the supplier.
3. Subsection (3) of former Section 3-419 drew criticism from the courts, that saw no reason why a depositary
bank should have the defense stated in the subsection. See Knesz v. Central Jersey Bank & Trust Co., 477 A.2d
806 (N.J. 1984). The depositary bank is ultimately liable in the case of a forged indorsement check because of its
warranty to the payor bank under Section 4-208(a)(1) and it is usually the most convenient defendant in cases
involving multiple checks drawn on different banks. There is no basis for requiring the owner of the check to bring
multiple actions against the various payor banks and to require those banks to assert warranty rights against the
depositary bank. In revised Article 3, the defense provided by Section 3-420(c) is limited to collecting banks other
than the depositary bank. If suit is brought against both the payor bank and the depositary bank, the owner, of
course, is entitled to but one recovery.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-501
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 5. DISHONOR
§ 3-501. PRESENTMENT
(a) "Presentment" means a demand made by or on behalf of a person entitled to enforce an instrument (i)
to pay the instrument made to the drawee or a party obliged to pay the instrument or, in the case of a note
or accepted draft payable at a bank, to the bank, or (ii) to accept a draft made to the drawee.
(b) The following rules are subject to Article 4, agreement of the parties, and clearing-house rules and the
like:
(1) Presentment may be made at the place of payment of the instrument and must be made at the
place of payment if the instrument is payable at a bank in the United States; may be made by any
commercially reasonable means, including an oral, written, or electronic communication; is effective
when the demand for payment or acceptance is received by the person to whom presentment is made;
and is effective if made to any one of two or more makers, acceptors, drawees, or other payors.
(2) Upon demand of the person to whom presentment is made, the person making presentment must
(i) exhibit the instrument, (ii) give reasonable identification and, if presentment is made on behalf of
another person, reasonable evidence of authority to do so, and (iii) sign a receipt on the instrument for
any payment made or surrender the instrument if full payment is made.
(3) Without dishonoring the instrument, the party to whom presentment is made may (i) return the
instrument for lack of a necessary indorsement, or (ii) refuse payment or acceptance for failure of the
presentment to comply with the terms of the instrument, an agreement of the parties, or other
applicable law or rule.
(4) The party to whom presentment is made may treat presentment as occurring on the next business
day after the day of presentment if the party to whom presentment is made has established a cut-off
hour not earlier than 2 p.m. for the receipt and processing of instruments presented for payment or
acceptance and presentment is made after the cut-off hour.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Subsection (a) defines presentment. Subsection (b)(1) states the place and manner of presentment. Electronic
presentment is authorized. The communication of the demand for payment or acceptance is effective when
received. Subsection (b)(2) restates former Section 3-505. Subsection (b)(2)(i) allows the person to whom
presentment is made to require exhibition of the instrument, unless the parties have agreed otherwise as in an
electronic presentment agreement. Former Section 3-507(3) is the antecedent of subsection (b)(3)(i). Since a payor
must decide whether to pay or accept on the day of presentment, subsection (b)(4) allows the payor to set a cut-off
hour for receipt of instruments presented.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 3-501. PRESENTMENT
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-502
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 5. DISHONOR
§ 3-502. DISHONOR
(a) Dishonor of a note is governed by the following rules:
(1) If the note is payable on demand, the note is dishonored if presentment is duly made to the maker
and the note is not paid on the day of presentment.
(2) If the note is not payable on demand and is payable at or through a bank or the terms of the note
require presentment, the note is dishonored if presentment is duly made and the note is not paid on the
day it becomes payable or the day of presentment, whichever is later.
(3) If the note is not payable on demand and paragraph (2) does not apply, the note is dishonored if it
is not paid on the day it becomes payable.
(b) Dishonor of an unaccepted draft other than a documentary draft is governed by the following rules:
(1) If a check is duly presented for payment to the payor bank otherwise than for immediate payment
over the counter, the check is dishonored if the payor bank makes timely return of the check or sends
timely notice of dishonor or nonpayment under Section 4-301 or 4-302, or becomes accountable for the
amount of the check under Section 4-302.
(2) If a draft is payable on demand and paragraph (1) does not apply, the draft is dishonored if
presentment for payment is duly made to the drawee and the draft is not paid on the day of
presentment.
(3) If a draft is payable on a date stated in the draft, the draft is dishonored if (i) presentment for
payment is duly made to the drawee and payment is not made on the day the draft becomes payable or
the day of presentment, whichever is later, or (ii) presentment for acceptance is duly made before the
day the draft becomes payable and the draft is not accepted on the day of presentment.
(4) If a draft is payable on elapse of a period of time after sight or acceptance, the draft is dishonored if
presentment for acceptance is duly made and the draft is not accepted on the day of presentment.
(c) Dishonor of an unaccepted documentary draft occurs according to the rules stated in subsection (b)(2),
(3), and (4), except that payment or acceptance may be delayed without dishonor until no later than the
close of the third business day of the drawee following the day on which payment or acceptance is required
by those paragraphs.
(d) Dishonor of an accepted draft is governed by the following rules:
(1) If the draft is payable on demand, the draft is dishonored if presentment for payment is duly made
to the acceptor and the draft is not paid on the day of presentment.
(2) If the draft is not payable on demand, the draft is dishonored if presentment for payment is duly
made to the acceptor and payment is not made on the day it becomes payable or the day of
presentment, whichever is later.
(e) In any case in which presentment is otherwise required for dishonor under this section and presentment
is excused under Section 3-504, dishonor occurs without presentment if the instrument is not duly accepted
or paid.
§ 3-502. DISHONOR
Page 2 of 4
(f) If a draft is dishonored because timely acceptance of the draft was not made and the person entitled to
demand acceptance consents to a late acceptance, from the time of acceptance the draft is treated as
never having been dishonored.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 3-415 provides that an indorser is obliged to pay an instrument if the instrument is dishonored and is
discharged if the indorser is entitled to notice of dishonor and notice is not given. Under Section 3-414, the drawer
is obliged to pay an unaccepted draft if it is dishonored. The drawer, however, is not entitled to notice of dishonor
except to the extent required in a case governed by Section 3-414(d). Part 5 tells when an instrument is dishonored
(Section 3-502) and what it means to give notice of dishonor (Section 3-503). Often dishonor does not occur until
presentment (Section 3-501), and frequently presentment and notice of dishonor are excused (Section 3-504).
2. In the great majority of cases presentment and notice of dishonor are waived with respect to notes. In most
cases a formal demand for payment to the maker of the note is not contemplated. Rather, the maker is expected to
send payment to the holder of the note on the date or dates on which payment is due. If payment is not made when
due, the holder usually makes a demand for payment, but in the normal case in which presentment is waived,
demand is irrelevant and the holder can proceed against indorsers when payment is not received. Under former
Article 3, in the small minority of cases in which presentment and dishonor were not waived with respect to notes,
the indorser was discharged from liability (former Section 3-502(1)(a)) unless the holder made presentment to the
maker on the exact day the note was due (former Section 3-503(1)(c)) and gave notice of dishonor to the indorser
before midnight of the third business day after dishonor (former Section 3-508(2)). These provisions are omitted
from Revised Article 3 as inconsistent with practice which seldom involves face-to-face dealings.
3. Subsection (a) applies to notes. Subsection (a)(1) applies to notes payable on demand. Dishonor requires
presentment, and dishonor occurs if payment is not made on the day of presentment. There is no change from
previous Article 3. Subsection (a)(2) applies to notes payable at a definite time if the note is payable at or through a
bank or, by its terms, presentment is required. Dishonor requires presentment, and dishonor occurs if payment is
not made on the due date or the day of presentment if presentment is made after the due date. Subsection (a)(3)
applies to all other notes. If the note is not paid on its due date it is dishonored. This allows holders to collect notes
in ways that make sense commercially without having to be concerned about a formal presentment on a given day.
4. Subsection (b) applies to unaccepted drafts other than documentary drafts. Subsection (b)(1) applies to
checks. Except for checks presented for immediate payment over the counter, which are covered by subsection
(b)(2), dishonor occurs according to rules stated in Article 4. Those rules contemplate four separate situations that
warrant discussion. The first two situations arise in the normal course of affairs, in which the drawee bank makes
settlement for the amount of the check to the presenting bank. In the first situation, the drawee bank under Section
4-301 recovers this settlement if it returns the check by its midnight deadline (Section 4-104). In that case the check
is not paid and dishonor occurs under Section 3-502(b)(1). The second situation arises if the drawee bank has
made such a settlement and does not return the check or give notice of dishonor or nonpayment within the midnight
deadline. In that case, the settlement becomes final payment of the check under Section 4-215. Because the
drawee bank already has paid such an item, it cannot be "accountable" for the item under the terms of Section 4-
302(a)(1). Thus, no dishonor occurs regardless of whether the drawee bank retains the check indefinitely or for
some reason returns the check after its midnight deadline.
The third and fourth situations arise less commonly, in cases in which the drawee bank does not settle for the
check when it is received. Under Section 4-302 if the drawee bank is not also the depositary bank and retains the
check without settling for it beyond midnight of the day it is presented for payment, the bank at that point becomes
"accountable" for the amount of the check, i.e., it is obliged to pay the amount of the check. If the drawee bank is
§ 3-502. DISHONOR
Page 3 of 4
also the depositary bank, the bank becomes accountable for the amount of the check if the bank does not pay the
check or return it or send notice of dishonor by its midnight deadline. Hence, if the drawee bank is also the
depositary bank and does not either settle for the check when it is received (a settlement that would ripen into final
payment if the drawee bank failed to take action to recover the settlement by its midnight deadline) or return the
check or an appropriate notice by its midnight deadline, the drawee bank will become accountable for the amount of
the check under Section 4-302. Thus, in all cases in which the drawee bank becomes accountable under Section 4-
302, the check has not been paid (either by a settlement that became unrecoverable or otherwise) and thus, under
Section 3-502(b)(1), the check is dishonored.
The fact that a bank that is accountable for the amount of the check under Section 4-302 is obliged to pay the
check does not mean that the check has been paid. Indeed, because each of the paragraphs of Section 4-302(b) is
limited by its terms to situations in which a bank has not paid the item, a drawee bank will be accountable under
Section 4-302 only in situations in which it has not previously paid the check. Section 3-502(b)(1) reflects the view
that a person presenting a check is entitled to payment, not just the ability to hold the drawee accountable under
Section 4-302. If that payment is not made in a timely manner, the check is dishonored.
Regulation CC Section 229.36(d) provides that settlement between banks for the forward collection of checks is
final. The relationship of that section to Articles 3 and 4 is discussed in the Commentary to that section.
Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
Subsection (b)(2) applies to demand drafts other than those governed by subsection (b)(1). It covers checks
presented for immediate payment over the counter and demand drafts other than checks. Dishonor occurs if
presentment for payment is made and payment is not made on the day of presentment.
Subsection (b)(3) and (4) applies to time drafts. An unaccepted time draft differs from a time note. The maker of a
note knows that the note has been issued, but the drawee of a draft may not know that a draft has been drawn on it.
Thus, with respect to drafts, presentment for payment or acceptance is required. Subsection (b)(3) applies to drafts
payable on a date stated in the draft. Dishonor occurs if presentment for payment is made and payment is not made
on the day the draft becomes payable or the day of presentment if presentment is made after the due date. The
holder of an unaccepted draft payable on a stated date has the option of presenting the draft for acceptance before
the day the draft becomes payable to establish whether the drawee is willing to assume liability by accepting. Under
subsection (b)(3)(ii) dishonor occurs when the draft is presented and not accepted. Subsection (b)(4) applies to
unaccepted drafts payable on elapse of a period of time after sight or acceptance. If the draft is payable 30 days
after sight, the draft must be presented for acceptance to start the running of the 30-day period. Dishonor occurs if it
is not accepted. The rules in subsection (b)(3) and (4) follow former Section 3-501(1)(a).
5. Subsection (c) gives drawees an extended period to pay documentary drafts because of the time that may be
needed to examine the documents. The period prescribed is that given by Section 5-112 in cases in which a letter
of credit is involved.
6. Subsection (d) governs accepted drafts. If the acceptor's obligation is to pay on demand the rule, stated in
subsection (d)(1), is the same as for that of a demand note stated in subsection (a)(1). If the acceptor's obligation is
to pay at a definite time the rule, stated in subsection (d)(2), is the same as that of a time note payable at a bank
stated in subsection (b)(2).
7. Subsection (e) is a limitation on subsection (a)(1) and (2), subsection (b), subsection (c), and subsection (d).
Each of those provisions states dishonor as occurring after presentment. If presentment is excused under Section
3-504, dishonor occurs under those provisions without presentment if the instrument is not duly accepted or paid.
8. Under subsection (b)(3)(ii) and (4) if a draft is presented for acceptance and the draft is not accepted on the
day of presentment, there is dishonor. But after dishonor, the holder may consent to late acceptance. In that case,
under subsection (f), the late acceptance cures the dishonor. The draft is treated as never having been dishonored.
If the draft is subsequently presented for payment and payment is refused dishonor occurs at that time.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 3-502. DISHONOR
Page 4 of 4
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-503
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 5. DISHONOR
§ 3-503. NOTICE OF DISHONOR
(a) The obligation of an indorser stated in Section 3-415(a) and the obligation of a drawer stated in Section
3-414(d) may not be enforced unless (i) the indorser or drawer is given notice of dishonor of the instrument
complying with this section or (ii) notice of dishonor is excused under Section 3-504(b).
(b) Notice of dishonor may be given by any person; may be given by any commercially reasonable means,
including an oral, written, or electronic communication; and is sufficient if it reasonably identifies the
instrument and indicates that the instrument has been dishonored or has not been paid or accepted. Return
of an instrument given to a bank for collection is sufficient notice of dishonor.
(c) Subject to Section 3-504(c), with respect to an instrument taken for collection by a collecting bank,
notice of dishonor must be given (i) by the bank before midnight of the next banking day following the
banking day on which the bank receives notice of dishonor of the instrument, or (ii) by any other person
within 30 days following the day on which the person receives notice of dishonor. With respect to any other
instrument, notice of dishonor must be given within 30 days following the day on which dishonor occurs.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) is consistent with former Section 3-501(2)(a), but notice of dishonor is no longer relevant to the
liability of a drawer except for the case of a draft accepted by an acceptor other than a bank. Comments 2 and 4 to
Section 3-414. There is no reason why drawers should be discharged on instruments they draw until payment or
acceptance. They are entitled to have the instrument presented to the drawee and dishonored (Section 3-414(b))
before they are liable to pay, but no notice of dishonor need be made to them as a condition of liability. Subsection
(b), which states how notice of dishonor is given, is based on former Section 3-508(3).
2. Subsection (c) replaces former Section 3-508(2). It differs from that section in that it provides a 30-day period
for a person other than a collecting bank to give notice of dishonor rather than the three-day period allowed in
former Article 3. Delay in giving notice of dishonor may be excused under Section 3-504(c).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-504
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 5. DISHONOR
§ 3-504. EXCUSED PRESENTMENT AND NOTICE OF DISHONOR
(a) Presentment for payment or acceptance of an instrument is excused if (i) the person entitled to present
the instrument cannot with reasonable diligence make presentment, (ii) the maker or acceptor has
repudiated an obligation to pay the instrument or is dead or in insolvency proceedings, (iii) by the terms of
the instrument presentment is not necessary to enforce the obligation of indorsers or the drawer, (iv) the
drawer or indorser whose obligation is being enforced has waived presentment or otherwise has no reason
to expect or right to require that the instrument be paid or accepted, or (v) the drawer instructed the drawee
not to pay or accept the draft or the drawee was not obligated to the drawer to pay the draft.
(b) Notice of dishonor is excused if (i) by the terms of the instrument notice of dishonor is not necessary to
enforce the obligation of a party to pay the instrument, or (ii) the party whose obligation is being enforced
waived notice of dishonor. A waiver of presentment is also a waiver of notice of dishonor.
(c) Delay in giving notice of dishonor is excused if the delay was caused by circumstances beyond the
control of the person giving the notice and the person giving the notice exercised reasonable diligence after
the cause of the delay ceased to operate.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Section 3-504 is largely a restatement of former Section 3-511. Subsection (4) of former Section 3-511 is replaced
by Section 3-502(f).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-505
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 5. DISHONOR
§ 3-505. EVIDENCE OF DISHONOR
(a) The following are admissible as evidence and create a presumption of dishonor and of any notice of
dishonor stated:
(1) a document regular in form as provided in subsection (b) which purports to be a protest;
(2) a purported stamp or writing of the drawee, payor bank, or presenting bank on or accompanying
the instrument stating that acceptance or payment has been refused unless reasons for the refusal are
stated and the reasons are not consistent with dishonor;
(3) a book or record of the drawee, payor bank, or collecting bank, kept in the usual course of business
which shows dishonor, even if there is no evidence of who made the entry.
(b) A protest is a certificate of dishonor made by a United States consul or vice consul, or a notary public
or other person authorized to administer oaths by the law of the place where dishonor occurs. It may be
made upon information satisfactory to that person. The protest must identify the instrument and certify
either that presentment has been made or, if not made, the reason why it was not made, and that the
instrument has been dishonored by nonacceptance or nonpayment. The protest may also certify that notice
of dishonor has been given to some or all parties.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Protest is no longer mandatory and must be requested by the holder. Even if requested, protest is not a condition
to the liability of indorsers or drawers. Protest is a service provided by the banking system to establish that dishonor
has occurred. Like other services provided by the banking system, it will be available if market incentives, inter-bank
agreements, or governmental regulations require it, but liabilities of parties no longer rest on it. Protest may be a
requirement for liability on international drafts governed by foreign law which this Article cannot affect.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-601
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 6. DISCHARGE AND PAYMENT
§ 3-601. DISCHARGE AND EFFECT OF DISCHARGE
(a) The obligation of a party to pay the instrument is discharged as stated in this Article or by an act or
agreement with the party which would discharge an obligation to pay money under a simple contract.
(b) Discharge of the obligation of a party is not effective against a person acquiring rights of a holder in due
course of the instrument without notice of the discharge.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Subsection (a) replaces subsections (1) and (2) of former Section 3-601. Subsection (b) restates former Section
3-602. Notice of discharge is not treated as notice of a defense that prevents holder in due course status. Section 3-
302(b). Discharge is effective against a holder in due course only if the holder had notice of the discharge when
holder in due course status was acquired. For example, if an instrument bearing a canceled indorsement is taken
by a holder, the holder has notice that the indorser has been discharged. Thus, the discharge is effective against
the holder even if the holder is a holder in due course.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-602
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 6. DISCHARGE AND PAYMENT
§ 3-602. PAYMENT
(a) Subject to subsection (e), an instrument is paid to the extent payment is made by or on behalf of a party
obliged to pay the instrument, and to a person entitled to enforce the instrument.
(b) Subject to subsection (e), a note is paid to the extent payment is made by or on behalf of a party
obliged to pay the note to a person that formerly was entitled to enforce the note only if at the time of the
payment the party obliged to pay has not received adequate notification that the note has been transferred
and that payment is to be made to the transferee. A notification is adequate only if it is signed by the
transferor or the transferee; reasonably identifies the transferred note; and provides an address at which
payments subsequently are to be made. Upon request, a transferee shall seasonably furnish reasonable
proof that the note has been transferred. Unless the transferee complies with the request, a payment to the
person that formerly was entitled to enforce the note is effective for purposes of subsection (c) even if the
party obliged to pay the note has received a notification under this paragraph.
(c) Subject to subsection (e), to the extent of a payment under subsections (a) and (b), the obligation of the
party obliged to pay the instrument is discharged even though payment is made with knowledge of a claim
to the instrument under Section 3-306 by another person.
(d) Subject to subsection (e), a transferee, or any party that has acquired rights in the instrument directly or
indirectly from a transferee, including any such party that has rights as a holder in due course, is deemed to
have notice of any payment that is made under subsection (b) after the date that the note is transferred to
the transferee but before the party obliged to pay the note receives adequate notification of the transfer.
(e) The obligation of a party to pay the instrument is not discharged under subsections (a) through (d) if:
(1) a claim to the instrument under Section 3-306 is enforceable against the party receiving payment
and (i) payment is made with knowledge by the payor that payment is prohibited by injunction or similar
process of a court of competent jurisdiction, or (ii) in the case of an instrument other than a cashier's
check, teller's check, or certified check, the party making payment accepted, from the person having a
claim to the instrument, indemnity against loss resulting from refusal to pay the person entitled to
enforce the instrument; or
(2) the person making payment knows that the instrument is a stolen instrument and pays a person it
knows is in wrongful possession of the instrument.
(f) As used in this section, "signed," with respect to a record that is not a writing, includes the attachment to
or logical association with the record of an electronic symbol, sound, or process with the present intent to
adopt or accept the record.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section replaces former Section 3-603(1). The phrase "claim to the instrument" in subsection (a) means,
by reference to Section 3-306, a claim of ownership or possession and not a claim in recoupment. Subsection
§ 3-602. PAYMENT
Page 2 of 2
(e)(1)(ii) is added to conform to Section 3-411. Section 3-411 is intended to discourage an obligated bank from
refusing payment of a cashier's check, certified check or dishonored teller's check at the request of a claimant to the
check who provided the bank with indemnity against loss. See Comment 1 to Section 3-411. An obligated bank that
refuses payment under those circumstances not only remains liable on the check but may also be liable to the
holder of the check for consequential damages. Section 3-602(e)(1)(ii) and Section 3-411, read together, change
the rule of former Section 3-603(1) with respect to the obligation of the obligated bank on the check. Payment to the
holder of a cashier's check, teller's check, or certified check discharges the obligation of the obligated bank on the
check to both the holder and the claimant even though indemnity has been given by the person asserting the claim.
If the obligated bank pays the check in violation of an agreement with the claimant in connection with the indemnity
agreement, any liability that the bank may have for violation of the agreement is not governed by Article 3, but is left
to other law. This section continues the rule that the obligor is not discharged on the instrument if payment is made
in violation of an injunction against payment. See Section 3-411(c)(iv).
2. Subsection (a) covers payments made in a traditional manner, to the person entitled to enforce the instrument.
Subsection (b), which provides an alternative method of payment, deals with the situation in which a person entitled
to enforce the instrument transfers the instrument without giving notice to parties obligated to pay the instrument. If
that happens and one of those parties subsequently makes a payment to the transferor, the payment is effective
even though it is not made to the person entitled to enforce the instrument. Unlike the earlier version of Section 3-
602, this rule is consistent with Section 9-406(a), Restatement of Mortgages § 5.5, and Restatement of Contracts §
338(1).
3. In determining the party to whom a payment is made for purposes of this section, courts should look to
traditional rules of agency. Thus, if the original payee of a note transfers ownership of the note to a third party but
continues to service the obligation, the law of agency might treat payments made to the original payee as payments
made to the third party.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-603
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 6. DISCHARGE AND PAYMENT
§ 3-603. TENDER OF PAYMENT
(a) If tender of payment of an obligation to pay an instrument is made to a person entitled to enforce the
instrument, the effect of tender is governed by principles of law applicable to tender of payment under a
simple contract.
(b) If tender of payment of an obligation to pay an instrument is made to a person entitled to enforce the
instrument and the tender is refused, there is discharge, to the extent of the amount of the tender, of the
obligation of an indorser or accommodation party having a right of recourse with respect to the obligation to
which the tender relates.
(c) If tender of payment of an amount due on an instrument is made to a person entitled to enforce the
instrument, the obligation of the obligor to pay interest after the due date on the amount tendered is
discharged. If presentment is required with respect to an instrument and the obligor is able and ready to
pay on the due date at every place of payment stated in the instrument, the obligor is deemed to have
made tender of payment on the due date to the person entitled to enforce the instrument.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Section 3-603 replaces former Section 3-604. Subsection (a) generally incorporates the law of tender of payment
applicable to simple contracts. Subsections (b) and (c) state particular rules. Subsection (b) replaces former Section
3-604(2). Under subsection (b) refusal of a tender of payment discharges any indorser or accommodation party
having a right of recourse against the party making the tender. Subsection (c) replaces former Section 3-604(1) and
(3).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-604
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 6. DISCHARGE AND PAYMENT
§ 3-604. DISCHARGE BY CANCELLATION OR RENUNCIATION
(a) A person entitled to enforce an instrument, with or without consideration, may discharge the obligation
of a party to pay the instrument (i) by an intentional voluntary act, such as surrender of the instrument to the
party, destruction, mutilation, or cancellation of the instrument, cancellation or striking out of the party's
signature, or the addition of words to the instrument indicating discharge, or (ii) by agreeing not to sue or
otherwise renouncing rights against the party by a signed record.
(b) Cancellation or striking out of an indorsement pursuant to subsection (a) does not affect the status and
rights of a party derived from the indorsement.
(c) In this section, "signed," with respect to a record that is not a writing, includes the attachment to or
logical association with the record of an electronic symbol, sound, or process with the present intent to
adopt or accept the record.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Section 3-604 replaces former Section 3-605.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 3-605
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 3. NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
> PART 6. DISCHARGE AND PAYMENT
§ 3-605. DISCHARGE OF SECONDARY OBLIGORS
(a) If a person entitled to enforce an instrument releases the obligation of a principal obligor in whole or in
part, and another party to the instrument is a secondary obligor with respect to the obligation of that
principal obligor, the following rules apply:
(1) Any obligations of the principal obligor to the secondary obligor with respect to any previous
payment by the secondary obligor are not affected. Unless the terms of the release preserve the
secondary obligor's recourse, the principal obligor is discharged, to the extent of the release, from any
other duties to the secondary obligor under this article.
(2) Unless the terms of the release provide that the person entitled to enforce the instrument retains
the right to enforce the instrument against the secondary obligor, the secondary obligor is discharged to
the same extent as the principal obligor from any unperformed portion of its obligation on the
instrument. If the instrument is a check and the obligation of the secondary obligor is based on an
indorsement of the check, the secondary obligor is discharged without regard to the language or
circumstances of the discharge or other release.
(3) If the secondary obligor is not discharged under paragraph (2), the secondary obligor is discharged
to the extent of the value of the consideration for the release, and to the extent that the release would
otherwise cause the secondary obligor a loss.
(b) If a person entitled to enforce an instrument grants a principal obligor an extension of the time at which
one or more payments are due on the instrument and another party to the instrument is a secondary obligor
with respect to the obligation of that principal obligor, the following rules apply:
(1) Any obligations of the principal obligor to the secondary obligor with respect to any previous
payment by the secondary obligor are not affected. Unless the terms of the extension preserve the
secondary obligor's recourse, the extension correspondingly extends the time for performance of any
other duties owed to the secondary obligor by the principal obligor under this article.
(2) The secondary obligor is discharged to the extent that the extension would otherwise cause the
secondary obligor a loss.
(3) To the extent that the secondary obligor is not discharged under paragraph (2), the secondary
obligor may perform its obligations to a person entitled to enforce the instrument as if the time for
payment had not been extended or, unless the terms of the extension provide that the person entitled
to enforce the instrument retains the right to enforce the instrument against the secondary obligor as if
the time for payment had not been extended, treat the time for performance of its obligations as having
been extended correspondingly.
(c) If a person entitled to enforce an instrument agrees, with or without consideration, to a modification of
the obligation of a principal obligor other than a complete or partial release or an extension of the due date
and another party to the instrument is a secondary obligor with respect to the obligation of that principal
obligor, the following rules apply:
(1) Any obligations of the principal obligor to the secondary obligor with respect to any previous
payment by the secondary obligor are not affected. The modification correspondingly modifies any
other duties owed to the secondary obligor by the principal obligor under this article.
§ 3-605. DISCHARGE OF SECONDARY OBLIGORS
Page 2 of 9
(2) The secondary obligor is discharged from any unperformed portion of its obligation to the extent
that the modification would otherwise cause the secondary obligor a loss.
(3) To the extent that the secondary obligor is not discharged under paragraph (2), the secondary
obligor may satisfy its obligation on the instrument as if the modification had not occurred, or treat its
obligation on the instrument as having been modified correspondingly.
(d) If the obligation of a principal obligor is secured by an interest in collateral, another party to the
instrument is a secondary obligor with respect to that obligation, and a person entitled to enforce the
instrument impairs the value of the interest in collateral, the obligation of the secondary obligor is
discharged to the extent of the impairment. The value of an interest in collateral is impaired to the extent the
value of the interest is reduced to an amount less than the amount of the recourse of the secondary obligor,
or the reduction in value of the interest causes an increase in the amount by which the amount of the
recourse exceeds the value of the interest. For purposes of this subsection, impairing the value of an
interest in collateral includes failure to obtain or maintain perfection or recordation of the interest in
collateral, release of collateral without substitution of collateral of equal value or equivalent reduction of the
underlying obligation, failure to perform a duty to preserve the value of collateral owed, under Article 9 or
other law, to a debtor or other person secondarily liable, and failure to comply with applicable law in
disposing of or otherwise enforcing the interest in collateral.
(e) A secondary obligor is not discharged under subsections (a)(3), (b), (c), or (d) unless the person
entitled to enforce the instrument knows that the person is a secondary obligor or has notice under Section
3-419(c) that the instrument was signed for accommodation.
(f) A secondary obligor is not discharged under this section if the secondary obligor consents to the event
or conduct that is the basis of the discharge, or the instrument or a separate agreement of the party
provides for waiver of discharge under this section specifically or by general language indicating that parties
waive defenses based on suretyship or impairment of collateral. Unless the circumstances indicate
otherwise, consent by the principal obligor to an act that would lead to a discharge under this section
constitutes consent to that act by the secondary obligor if the secondary obligor controls the principal
obligor or deals with the person entitled to enforce the instrument on behalf of the principal obligor.
(g) A release or extension preserves a secondary obligor's recourse if the terms of the release or
extension provide that:
(1) the person entitled to enforce the instrument retains the right to enforce the instrument against the
secondary obligor; and
(2) the recourse of the secondary obligor continues as if the release or extension had not been
granted.
(h) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i), a secondary obligor asserting discharge under this
section has the burden of persuasion both with respect to the occurrence of the acts alleged to harm the
secondary obligor and loss or prejudice caused by those acts.
(i) If the secondary obligor demonstrates prejudice caused by an impairment of its recourse, and the
circumstances of the case indicate that the amount of loss is not reasonably susceptible of calculation or
requires proof of facts that are not ascertainable, it is presumed that the act impairing recourse caused a
loss or impairment equal to the liability of the secondary obligor on the instrument. In that event, the burden
of persuasion as to any lesser amount of the loss is on the person entitled to enforce the instrument.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
§ 3-605. DISCHARGE OF SECONDARY OBLIGORS
Page 3 of 9
1. This section contains rules that are applicable when a secondary obligor (as defined in Section 3-103(a)(17)) is
a party to an instrument. These rules essentially parallel modern interpretations of the law of suretyship and
guaranty that apply when a secondary obligor is not a party to an instrument. See generally Restatement of the
Law, Third, Suretyship and Guaranty (1996). Of course, the rules in this section do not resolve all possible issues
concerning the rights and duties of the parties. In the event that a situation is presented that is not resolved by this
section (or the other related sections of this Article), the resolution may be provided by the general law of suretyship
because, pursuant to Section 1-103, that law is applicable unless displaced by provisions of this Act.
2. Like the law of suretyship and guaranty, Section 3-605 provides secondary obligors with defenses that are not
available to other parties to instruments. The general operation of Section 3-605, and its relationship to the law of
suretyship and guaranty, can be illustrated by an example. Bank agrees to lend $ 10,000 to Borrower, but only if
Backer also is liable for repayment of the loan. The parties could consummate that transaction in three different
ways. First, if Borrower and Backer incurred those obligations with contracts not govemed by this Article (such as a
note that is not an instrument for purposes of this Article), the general law of suretyship and guaranty would be
applicable. Under modern nomenclature, Bank is the "obligee," Borrower is the "principal obligor," and Backer is the
"secondary obligor." See Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 1. Then assume that Bank and Borrower
agree to a modification of their rights and obligations after the note is signed. For example, they might agree that
Borrower may repay the loan at some date after the due date, or that Borrower may discharge its repayment
obligation by paying Bank $ 3,000 rather than $ 10,000. Alternatively, suppose that Bank releases collateral that
Borrower has given to secure the loan. Under the law of suretyship and guaranty, the secondary obligor may be
discharged under certain circumstances if these modifications of the obligations between Bank (the obligee) and
Borrower (the principal obligor) are made without the consent of Backer (the secondary obligor). The rights that the
secondary obligor has to a discharge of its liability in such cases commonly are referred to as suretyship defenses.
The extent of the discharge depends upon the particular circumstances. See Restatement of Suretyship and
Guaranty §§ 37, 39-44.
A second possibility is that the parties might decide to evidence the loan by a negotiable instrument. In that
scenario, Borrower signs a note under which Borrower is obliged to pay $ 10,000 to the order of Bank on a due date
stated in the note. Backer becomes liable for the repayment obligation by signing the note as a co-maker or
indorser. In either case the note is signed for accommodation, Backer is an accommodation party, and Borrower is
the accommodated party. See Section 3-419 (describing the obligations of accommodation parties). For purposes
of Section 3-605, Backer is also a "secondary obligor" and Borrower is a "principal obligor," as those terms are
defined in Section 3-103. Because Backer is a party to the instrument, its rights to a discharge based on any
modification of obligations between Bank and Borrower are governed by Section 3-605 rather than by the general
law of suretyship and guaranty. Within Section 3-605, subsection (a) describes the consequences of a release of
Borrower, subsection (b) describes the consequences of an extension of time, and subsection (c) describes the
consequences of other modifications.
The third possibility is that Borrower would use an instrument governed by this Article to evidence its repayment
obligation, but Backer's obligation would be created in some way other than by becoming party to that instrument.
In that case, Backer's rights are determined by suretyship and guaranty law rather than by this Article. See
Comment 3 to Section 3-419.
A person also can acquire secondary liability without having been a secondary obligor at the time that the
principal obligation was created. For example, a transferee of real or personal property that assumes the obligation
of the transferor as maker of a note secured by the property becomes by operation of law a principal obligor, with
the transferor becoming a secondary obligor. Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 2(e); Restatement of
Mortgages § 5.1. Article 3 does not determine the effect of the release of the transferee in that case because the
assuming transferee is not a "party" to the instrument as defined in Section 3-103(a)(10). Section 3-605(a) does not
apply then because the holder has not discharged the obligation of a "principal obligor," a term defined in Section 3-
103(a)(11). Thus, the resolution of that question is governed by the law of suretyship. See Restatement of
Suretyship and Guaranty § 39.
§ 3-605. DISCHARGE OF SECONDARY OBLIGORS
Page 4 of 9
3. Section 3-605 is not, however, limited to the conventional situation of the accommodation party discussed in
Comment 2. It also applies in four other situations. First, it applies to indorsers of notes who are not accommodation
parties. Unless an indorser signs without recourse, the indorser's liability under Section 3-415(a) is functionally
similar to that of a guarantor of payment. For example, if Bank in the second hypothetical discussed in Comment 2
indorsed the note and transferred it to Second Bank, Bank is liable to Second Bank in the event of dishonor of the
note by Borrower. Section 3-415(a). Because of that secondary liability as indorser, Bank qualifies as a "secondary
obligor" under Section 3-103(a)(17) and has the same rights under Section 3-605 as an accommodation party.
Second, a similar analysis applies to the drawer of a draft that is accepted by a party that is not a bank. Under
Section 3-414(d), that drawer has liability on the same terms as an indorser under Section 3-415(a). Thus, the
drawer in that case is a "secondary obligor" under Section 3-103(a)(17) and has rights under Section 3-605 to that
extent.
Third, a similar principle justifies application of Section 3-605 to persons who indorse a check. Assume that
Drawer draws a check to the order of Payee. Payee then indorses the check and transfers it to Transferee. If
Transferee presents the check and it is dishonored, Transferee may recover from Drawer under Section 3-414 or
Payee under Section 3-415. Because of that secondary liability as an indorser, Payee is a secondary obligor under
Section 3-103(a)(17). Drawer is a "principal obligor" under Section 3-103(a)(11). As noted in Comment 4, below,
however, Section 3-605(a)(3) will discharge indorsers of checks in some cases in which other secondary obligors
will not be discharged by this section.
Fourth, this section also deals with the rights of co-makers of instruments, even when those co-makers do not
qualify as accommodation parties. The co-makers' rights of contribution under Section 3-116 make each co-maker
a secondary obligor to the extent of that right of contribution.
4. Subsection (a) is based on Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 39. It addresses the effects of a release
of the principal obligor by the person entitled to enforce the instrument. Paragraph (a)(1) governs the effect of that
release on the principal obligor's duties to the secondary obligor; paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) govern the effect of
that release on the secondary obligor's duties to the person entitled to enforce the instrument.
With respect to the duties of the principal obligor, the release of course cannot affect obligations of the principal
obligor with respect to payments that the secondary obligor already has made. But with respect to future payments
by the secondary obligor, paragraph (a)(1) (based on Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 39(a)) provides
that the principal obligor is discharged, to the extent of the release, from any other duties to the secondary obligor.
That rule is appropriate because otherwise the discharge granted to the principal obligor would be illusory: it would
have obtained a release from a person entitled to enforce that instrument, but it would be directly liable for the same
sum to the secondary obligor if the secondary obligor later complied with its secondary obligation to pay the
instrument. This discharge does not occur, though, if the terms of the release effect a "preservation of recourse" as
described in subsection (g). See Comment 10, below.
The discharge under paragraph (a)(1) of the principal obligor's duties to the secondary obligor is broad, applying
to all duties under this article. This includes not only the principal obligor's liability as a party to an instrument (as a
maker, drawer or indorser under Sections 3-412 through 3-415) but also obligations under Sections 3-116 and 3-
419.
Paragraph (a)(2) is based closely on Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 39(b). It articulates a default rule
that the release of a principal obligor also discharges the secondary obligor, to the extent of the release granted to
the principal obligor, from any unperformed portion of its obligation on the instrument. The discharge of the
secondary obligor under paragraph (a)(2) is phrased more narrowly than the discharge of the principal obligor is
phrased under paragraph (a)(1) because, unlike principal obligors, the only obligations of secondary obligors in
Article 3 are "on the instrument" as makers or indorsers.
The parties can opt out of that rule by including a contrary statement in the terms of the release. The provision
does not contemplate that any "magic words" are necessary. Thus, discharge of the secondary obligor under
paragraph (a)(2) is avoided not only if the terms of the release track the statutory language (e.g., the person entitled
§ 3-605. DISCHARGE OF SECONDARY OBLIGORS
Page 5 of 9
to enforce the instrument "retains the right to enforce the instrument" against the secondary obligor), or if the terms
of the release effect a preservation of recourse under subsection (g), but also if the terms of the release include a
simple statement that the parties intend to "release the principal obligor but not the secondary obligor" or that the
person entitled to enforce the instrument "reserves its rights" against the secondary obligor. At the same time,
because paragraph (a)(2) refers to the "terms of the release," extrinsic circumstances cannot be used to establish
that the parties intended the secondary obligor to remain obligated. If a release of the principal obligor includes
such a provision, the secondary obligor is, nonetheless, discharged to the extent of the consideration that is paid for
the release; that consideration is treated as a payment in partial satisfaction of the instrument.
Notwithstanding language in the release that prevents discharge of the secondary obligor under paragraph (a)(2),
paragraph (a)(3) discharges the secondary obligor from its obligation to a person entitled to enforce the instrument
to the extent that the release otherwise would cause the secondary obligor a loss. The rationale for that provision is
that a release of the principal obligor changes the economic risk for which the secondary obligor contracted. This
risk may be increased in two ways. First, by releasing the principal obligor, the person entitled to enforce the
instrument has eliminated the likelihood of future payments by the principal obligor that would lessen the obligation
of the secondary obligor. Second, unless the release effects a preservation of the secondary obligor's recourse, the
release eliminates the secondary obligor's claims against the principal obligor with respect to any future payment by
the secondary obligor. The discharge provided by this paragraph prevents that increased risk from causing the
secondary obligor a loss. Moreover, permitting releases to be negotiated between the principal obligor and the
person entitled to enforce the instrument without regard to the consequences to the secondary obligor would create
an undue risk of opportunistic behavior by the obligee and principal obligor. That concern is lessened, and the
discharge is not provided by paragraph (a)(3), if the secondary obligor has consented to the release or is deemed to
have consented to it under subsection (f) (which presumes consent by a secondary obligor to actions taken by a
principal obligor if the secondary obligor controls the principal obligor or deals with the person entitled to enforce the
instrument on behalf of the principal obligor). See Comment 9, below.
Subsection (a) (and Restatement Section 39(b), the concepts of which it follows quite closely) is designed to
facilitate negotiated workouts between a creditor and a principal obligor, so long as they are not at the expense of a
secondary obligor who has not consented to the arrangement (either specifically or by waiving its rights to
discharge under this section). Thus, for example, the provision facilitates an arrangement in which the principal
obligor pays some portion of a guaranteed obligation, the person entitled to enforce the instrument grants a release
to the principal obligor in exchange for that payment, and the person entitled to enforce the instrument pursues the
secondary obligor for the remainder of the obligation. Under paragraph (a)(2), the person entitled to enforce the
instrument may pursue the secondary obligor despite the release of the principal obligor so long as the terms of the
release provide for this result. Under paragraph (a)(3), though, the secondary obligor will be protected against any
loss it might suffer by reason of that release (if the secondary obligor has not waived discharge under subsection
(f)). It should be noted that the obligee may be able to minimize the risk of such loss (and, thus, of the secondary
obligor's discharge) by giving the secondary obligor prompt notice of the release even though such notice is not
required.
The foregoing principles are illustrated by the following cases:
Case 1. D borrows $ 1000 from C. The repayment obligation is evidenced by a note issued by D, payable to the
order of C. S is an accommodation indorser of the note. As the due date of the note approaches, it becomes
obvious that D cannot pay the full amount of the note and may soon be facing bankruptcy. C, in order to collect as
much as possible from D and lessen the need to seek recovery from S, agrees to release D from its obligation
under the note in exchange for $ 100 in cash. The agreement to release D is silent as to the effect of the release on
S. Pursuant to Section 3-605(a)(2), the release of D discharges S from its obligations to C on the note.
Case 2. Same facts as Case 1, except that the terms of the release provide that C retains its rights to enforce the
instrument against S. D is discharged from its obligations to S pursuant to Section 3-605(a)(1), but S is not
discharged from its obligations to C pursuant to Section 3-605(a)(2). However, if S could have recovered from D
any sum it paid to C (had D not been discharged from its obligation to S), S has been harmed by the release and is
discharged pursuant to Section 3-605(a)(3) to the extent of that harm.
§ 3-605. DISCHARGE OF SECONDARY OBLIGORS
Page 6 of 9
Case 3. Same facts as Case 1, except that the terms of the release provide that C retains its rights to enforce the
instrument against S and that S retains its recourse against D. Under subsection (g), the release effects a
preservation of recourse. Thus, S is not discharged from its obligations to C pursuant to Section 3-605(a)(2) and D
is not discharged from its obligations to S pursuant to Section 3-605(a)(1). Because S's claims against D are
preserved, S will not suffer the kind of loss described in Case 2. If no other loss is suffered by S as a result of the
release, S is not discharged pursuant to this section.
Case 4. Same facts as Case 3, except that D had made arrangements to work at a second job in order to earn
the money to fulfill its obligations on the note. When C released D, however, D canceled the plans for the second
job. While S still retains its recourse against D, S may be discharged from its obligation under the instrument to the
extent that D's decision to forgo the second job causes S a loss because forgoing the job renders D unable to fulfill
its obligations to S under Section 3-419.
Subsection (a) reflects a change from former Section 3-605(b), which provided categorically that the release of a
principal obligor by the person entitled to enforce the instrument did not discharge a secondary obligor's obligation
on the instrument and assumed that the release also did not discharge the principal obligor's obligations to the
secondary obligor under Section 3-419. The rule under subsection (a) is much closer to the policy of the
Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty than was former Section 3-605(b). The change, however, is likely to affect
only a narrow category of cases. First, as discussed above, Section 3-605 applies only to transactions in which the
payment obligation is represented by a negotiable instrument, and, within that set of transactions, only to those
transactions in which the secondary obligation is incurred by indorsement or cosigning, not to transactions that
involve a separate document of guaranty. See Comment 2, above. Second, as provided in subsection (f),
secondary obligors cannot obtain a discharge under subsection (a) in any transaction in which they have consented
to the challenged conduct. Thus, subsection (a) will not apply to any transaction that includes a provision waiving
suretyship defenses (a provision that is almost universally included in commercial loan documentation) or to any
transaction in which the creditor obtains the consent of the secondary obligor at the time of the release.
The principal way in which subsection (a) goes beyond the policy of Restatement § 39 is with respect to the
liability of indorsers of checks. Specifically, the last sentence of paragraph (a)(2) provides that a release of a
principal obligor grants a complete discharge to the indorser of a check, without requiring the indorser to prove
harm. In that particular context, it seems likely that continuing responsibility for the indorser often would be so
inconsistent with the expectations of the parties as to create a windfall for the creditor and an unfair surprise for the
indorser. Thus, the statute implements a simple rule that grants a complete discharge. The creditor, of course, can
avoid that rule by contracting with the secondary obligor for a different result at the time that the creditor grants the
release to the principal obligor.
5. Subsection (b) is based on Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 40 and relates to extensions of the due
date of the instrument. An extension of time to pay a note is often beneficial to the secondary obligor because the
additional time may enable the principal obligor to obtain the funds to pay the instrument. In some cases, however,
the extension may cause loss to the secondary obligor, particularly if deterioration of the financial condition of the
principal obligor reduces the amount that the secondary obligor is able to recover on its right of recourse when
default occurs. For example, suppose that the instrument is an installment note and the principal debtor is
temporarily short of funds to pay a monthly installment. The payee agrees to extend the due date of the installment
for a month or two to allow the debtor to pay when funds are available. Paragraph (b)(2) provides that an extension
of time results in a discharge of the secondary obligor, but only to the extent that the secondary obligor proves that
the extension caused loss. See subsection (h) (discussing the burden of proof under Section 3-605). Thus, if the
extension is for a long period, the secondary obligor might be able to prove that during the period of extension the
principal obligor became insolvent, reducing the value of the right of recourse of the secondary obligor. In such a
case, paragraph (b)(2) discharges the secondary obligor to the extent of that harm. Although not required to notify
the secondary obligor of the extension, the payee can minimize the risk of loss by the secondary obligor by giving
the secondary obligor prompt notice of the extension; prompt notice can enhance the likelihood that the secondary
obligor's right of recourse can remain valuable, and thus can limit the likelihood that the secondary obligor will suffer
a loss because of the extension. See Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty Section 38 comment b.
§ 3-605. DISCHARGE OF SECONDARY OBLIGORS
Page 7 of 9
If the secondary obligor is not discharged under paragraph (b)(2) (either because it would not suffer a loss by
reason of the extension or because it has waived its right to discharge pursuant to subsection (f)), it is important to
understand the effect of the extension on the rights and obligations of the secondary obligor. Consider the following
cases:
Case 5. A borrows money from Lender and issues a note payable to the order of Lender that is due on April 1,
2002. B signs the note for accommodation at the request of Lender. B signed the note either as co-maker or as an
anomalous indorser. In either case Lender subsequently makes an agreement with A extending the due date of A's
obligation to pay the note to July 1, 2002. In either case B did not agree to the extension, and the extension did not
address Lender's rights against B. Under paragraph (b)(1), A's obligations to B under this article are also extended
to July 1, 2002. Under paragraph (b)(3), if B is not discharged, B may treat its obligations to Lender as also
extended, or may pay the instrument on the original due date.
Case 6. Same facts as Case 5, except that the extension agreement includes a statement that the Lender retains
its right to enforce the note against B on its original terms. Under paragraph (b)(3), B is liable on the original due
date, but under paragraph (b)(1), A's obligations to B under Section 3-419 are not due until July 1, 2002.
Case 7. Same facts as Case 5, except that the extension agreement includes a statement that the Lender retains
its right to enforce the note against B on its original terms and B retains its recourse against A as though no
extension had been granted. Under paragraph (b)(3), B is liable on the original due date. Under paragraph (b)(1),
A's obligations to B under Section 3-419 are not extended.
Under section 3-605(b), the results in Case 5 and Case 7 are identical to the results that follow from the law of
suretyship and guaranty. See Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 40. The situation in Case 6 is not
specifically addressed in the Restatement, but the resolution in this Section is consistent with the concepts of
suretyship and guaranty law as reflected in the Restatement. If the secondary obligor is called upon to pay on the
due date, it may be difficult to quantify the extent to which the extension has impaired the right of recourse of the
secondary obligor at that time. Still, the secondary obligor does have a right to make a claim against the obligee at
that time. As a practical matter a suit making such a claim should establish the facts relevant to the extent of the
impairment. See Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 37(4).
As a practical matter, an extension of the due date will normally occur only when the principal obligor is unable to
pay on the due date. The interest of the secondary obligor normally is to acquiesce in the willingness of the person
entitled to enforce the instrument to wait for payment from the principal obligor rather than to pay right away and
rely on an action against the principal obligor that may have little or no value. But in unusual cases the secondary
obligor may prefer to pay the holder on the original due date so as to avoid continuing accrual of interest. In such
cases, the secondary obligor may do so. See paragraph (b)(3). If the terms of the extension provide that the person
entitled to enforce the instrument retains its right to enforce the instrument against the secondary obligor on the
original due date, though, those terms are effective and the secondary obligor may not delay payment until the
extended due date. Unless the extension agreement effects a preservation of recourse, however, the secondary
obligor may not proceed against the principal obligor under Section 3-419 until the extended due date. See
paragraph (b)(1). To the extent that delay causes loss to the secondary obligor it is discharged under paragraph
(b)(2).
Even in those cases in which a secondary obligor does not have a duty to pay the instrument on the original due
date, it always has the right to pay the instrument on that date, and perhaps minimize its loss by doing so. The
secondary obligor is not precluded, however, from asserting its rights to discharge under Section 3-605(b)(2) if it
does not exercise that option. The critical issue is whether the extension caused the secondary obligor a loss by
increasing the difference between its cost of performing its obligation on the instrument and the amount recoverable
from the principal obligor under this Article. The decision by the secondary obligor not to exercise its option to pay
on the original due date may, under the circumstances, be a factor to be considered in the determination of that
issue, especially if the secondary obligor has been given prompt notice of the extension (as discussed above).
§ 3-605. DISCHARGE OF SECONDARY OBLIGORS
Page 8 of 9
6. Subsection (c) is based on Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 41. It is a residual provision, which
applies to modifications of the obligation of the principal obligor that are not covered by subsections (a) and (b).
Under subsection (c)(1), a modification of the obligation of the principal obligor on the instrument (other than a
release covered by subsection (a) or an extension of the due date covered by subsection (b)), will correspondingly
modify the duties of the principal obligor to the secondary obligor. Under subsection (c)(2), such a modification also
will result in discharge of the secondary obligor to the extent the modification causes loss to the secondary obligor.
To the extent that the secondary obligor is not discharged and the obligation changes the amount of money payable
on the instrument, or the timing of such payment, subsection (c)(3) provides the secondary obligor with a choice: it
may satisfy its obligation on the instrument as if the modification had not occurred, or it may treat its obligation to
pay the instrument as having been modified in a manner corresponding to the modification of the principal obligor's
obligation.
The following cases illustrate the application of subsection (c):
Case 8. Corporation borrows money from Lender and issues a note payable to Lender. X signs the note as an
accommodation party for Corporation. The note refers to a loan agreement under which the note was issued, which
states various events of default that allow Lender to accelerate the due date of the note. Among the events of
default are breach of covenants not to incur debt beyond specified limits and not to engage in any line of business
substantially different from that currently carried on by Corporation. Without consent of X, Lender agrees to modify
the covenants to allow Corporation to enter into a new line of business that X considers to be risky, and to incur
debt beyond the limits specified in the loan agreement to finance the new venture. This modification discharges X to
the extent that the modification otherwise would cause X a loss.
Case 9. Corporation borrows money from Lender and issues a note payable to Lender in the amount of $
100,000. X signs the note as an accommodation party for Corporation. The note calls for 60 equal monthly
payments of interest and principal. Before the first payment is made, Corporation and Lender agree to modify the
note by changing the repayment schedule to require four annual payments of interest only, followed by a fifth
payment of interest and the entire $ 100,000 principal balance. To the extent that the modification does not
discharge X, X has the option of fulfilling its obligation on the note in accordance with the original terms or the
modified terms.
7. Subsection (d) is based on Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 42 and deals with the discharge of
secondary obligors by impairment of collateral. The last sentence of subsection (d) states four common examples of
what is meant by impairment. Because it uses the term "includes," the provision allows a court to find impairment in
other cases as well. There is extensive case law on impairment of collateral. The secondary obligor is discharged to
the extent that the secondary obligor proves that impairment was caused by a person entitled to enforce the
instrument. For example, assume that the payee of a secured note fails to perfect the security interest. The
collateral is owned by the principal obligor who subsequently files in bankruptcy. As a result of the failure to perfect,
the security interest is not enforceable in bankruptcy. If the payee were to obtain payment from the secondary
obligor, the secondary obligor would be subrogated to the payee's security interest in the collateral under Section 3-
419 and general principles of suretyship law. See Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 28(1)(c). In this
situation, though, the value of the security interest is impaired completely because the security interest is
unenforceable. Thus, the secondary obligor is discharged from its obligation on the note to the extent of that
impairment. If the value of the collateral impaired is as much or more than the amount of the note, and if there will
be no recovery on the note as an unsecured claim, there is a complete discharge. Subsection (d) applies whether
the collateral is personalty or realty, whenever the obligation in question is in the form of a negotiable instrument.
8. Subsection (e) is based on the former Section 3-605(h). The requirement of knowledge in the first clause is
consistent with Section 9-628. The requirement of notice in the second clause is consistent with Section 3-419(c).
9. The importance of the suretyship defenses provided in Section 3-605 is greatly diminished by the fact that the
right to discharge can be waived as provided in subsection (f). The waiver can be effectuated by a provision in the
instrument or in a separate agreement. It is standard practice to include such a waiver of suretyship defenses in
notes prepared by financial institutions or other commercial creditors. Thus, Section 3-605 will result in the
§ 3-605. DISCHARGE OF SECONDARY OBLIGORS
Page 9 of 9
discharge of an accommodation party on a note only in the occasional case in which the note does not include such
a waiver clause and the person entitled to enforce the note nevertheless takes actions that would give rise to a
discharge under this section without obtaining the consent of the secondary obligor.
Because subsection (f) by its terms applies only to a discharge "under this section," subsection (f) does not
operate to waive a defense created by other law (such as the law governing enforcement of security interests under
Article 9) that cannot be waived under that law. See, e.g., Section 9-602.
The last sentence of subsection (f) creates an inference of consent on the part of the secondary obligor whenever
the secondary obligor controls the principal obligor or deals with the creditor on behalf of the principal obligor. That
sentence is based on Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 48(2).
10. Subsection (g) explains the criteria for determining whether the terms of a release or extension preserve the
secondary obligor's recourse, a concept of importance in the application of subsections (a) and (b). First, the terms
of the release or extension must provide that the person entitled to enforce the instrument retains the right to
enforce the instrument against the secondary obligor. Second, the terms of the release or extension must provide
that the recourse of the secondary obligor against the principal obligor continues as though the release or extension
had not been granted. Those requirements are drawn from Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 38.
11. Subsections (h) and (i) articulate rules for the burden of persuasion under Section 3-605. Those rules are
based on Restatement of Suretyship and Guaranty § 49.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 6 § 4
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE A [Including repeal of Article 6]
§ 4. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
Rights and obligations that arose under Article 6 and Section 9-111 of the Uniform Commercial Code before their
repeal remain valid and may be enforced as though those statutes had not been repealed.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-101. SHORT TITLE
This Article may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code--Bank Deposits and Collections.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The great number of checks handled by banks and the country-wide nature of the bank collection process
require uniformity in the law of bank collections. There is needed a uniform statement of the principal rules of the
bank collection process with ample provision for flexibility to meet the needs of the large volume handled and the
changing needs and conditions that are bound to come with the years. This Article meets that need.
2. In 1950 at the time Article 4 was drafted, 6.7 billion checks were written annually. By the time of the 1990
revision of Article 4 annual volume was estimated by the American Bankers Association to be about 50 billion
checks. The banking system could not have coped with this increase in check volume had it not developed in the
late 1950s and early 1960s an automated system for check collection based on encoding checks with machinereadable
information by Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR). An important goal of the 1990 revision of
Article 4 is to promote the efficiency of the check collection process by making the provisions of Article 4 more
compatible with the needs of an automated system and, by doing so, increase the speed and lower the cost of
check collection for those who write and receive checks. An additional goal of the 1990 revision of Article 4 is to
remove any statutory barriers in the Article to the ultimate adoption of programs allowing the presentment of checks
to payor banks by electronic transmission of information captured from the MICR line on the checks. The potential
of these programs for saving the time and expense of transporting the huge volume of checks from depositary to
payor banks is evident.
3. Article 4 defines rights between parties with respect to bank deposits and collections. It is not a regulatory
statute. It does not regulate the terms of the bank-customer agreement, nor does it prescribe what constraints
different jurisdictions may wish to impose on that relationship in the interest of consumer protection. The revisions in
Article 4 are intended to create a legal framework that accommodates automation and truncation for the benefit of
all bank customers. This may raise consumer problems which enacting jurisdictions may wish to address in
individual legislation. For example, with respect to Section 4-401(c), jurisdictions may wish to examine their unfair
and deceptive practices laws to determine whether they are adequate to protect drawers who postdate checks from
unscrupulous practices that may arise on the part of persons who induce drawers to issue postdated checks in the
erroneous belief that the checks will not be immediately payable. Another example arises from the fact that under
various truncation plans customers will no longer receive their cancelled checks and will no longer have the
cancelled check to prove payment. Individual legislation might provide that a copy of a bank statement along with a
copy of the check is prima facie evidence of payment.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 4-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-102. APPLICABILITY
(a) To the extent that items within this Article are also within Articles 3 and 8, they are subject to those
Articles. If there is conflict, this Article governs Article 3, but Article 8 governs this Article.
(b) The liability of a bank for action or non-action with respect to an item handled by it for purposes of
presentment, payment, or collection is governed by the law of the place where the bank is located. In the
case of action or non-action by or at a branch or separate office of a bank, its liability is governed by the law
of the place where the branch or separate office is located.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The rules of Article 3 governing negotiable instruments, their transfer, and the contracts of the parties thereto
apply to the items collected through banking channels wherever no specific provision is found in this Article. In the
case of conflict, this Article governs. See Section 3-102(b).
Bonds and like instruments constituting investment securities under Article 8 may also be handled by banks for
collection purposes. Various sections of Article 8 prescribe rules of transfer some of which (see Sections 8-108 and
8-304) may conflict with provisions of this Article (Sections 4-205, 4-207, and 4-208). In the case of conflict, Article 8
governs. Amendments approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 4,
1995.
Section 4-210 deals specifically with overlapping problems and possible conflicts between this Article and Article
9. However, similar reconciling provisions are not necessary in the case of Articles 5 and 7. Sections 4-301 and 4-
302 are consistent with Section 5-112. In the case of Article 7 documents of title frequently accompany items but
they are not themselves items. See Section 4-104(a)(9).
In Clearfield Trust Co. v. United States, 318 U.S. 363 (1943), the Court held that if the United States is a party to
an instrument, its rights and duties are governed by federal common law in the absence of a specific federal statute
or regulation. In United States v. Kimbell Foods, Inc., 440 U.S. 715 (1979), the Court stated a three-pronged test to
ascertain whether the federal common-law rule should follow the state rule. In most instances courts under the
Kimbell test have shown a willingness to adopt UCC rules in formulating federal common law on the subject. In
Kimbell the Court adopted the priorities rules of Article 9.
In addition, applicable federal law may supersede provisions of this Article. One federal law that does so is the
Expedited Funds Availability Act, 12 U.S.C. § 4001 et seq., and its implementing Regulation CC, 12 CFR Pt. 229. In
some instances this law is alluded to in the statute, e.g., Section 4-215(e) and (f). In other instances, although not
referred to in this Article, the provisions of the EFAA and Regulation CC control with respect to checks. For
example, except between the depositary bank and its customer, all settlements are final and not provisional
(Regulation CC, Section 229.36(d)), and the midnight deadline may be extended (Regulation CC, Section
229.30(c)). The comments to this Article suggest in most instances the relevant Regulation CC provisions.
§ 4-102. APPLICABILITY
Page 2 of 2
2. Subsection (b) is designed to state a workable rule for the solution of otherwise vexatious problems of the
conflicts of laws:
a. The routine and mechanical nature of bank collections makes it imperative that one law govern the activities of
one office of a bank. The requirement found in some cases that to hold an indorser notice must be given in
accordance with the law of the place of indorsement, since that method of notice became an implied term of the
indorser's contract, is more theoretical than practical.
b. Adoption of what is in essence a tort theory of the conflict of laws is consistent with the general theory of this
Article that the basic duty of a collecting bank is one of good faith and the exercise of ordinary care. Justification lies
in the fact that, in using an ambulatory instrument, the drawer, payee, and indorsers must know that action will be
taken with respect to it in other jurisdictions. This is especially pertinent with respect to the law of the place of
payment.
c. The phrase "action or non-action with respect to any item handled by it for purposes of presentment, payment,
or collection" is intended to make the conflicts rule of subsection (b) apply from the inception of the collection
process of an item through all phases of deposit, forwarding, presentment, payment and remittance or credit of
proceeds. Specifically the subsection applies to the initial act of a depositary bank in receiving an item and to the
incidents of such receipt. The conflicts rule of Weissman v. Banque De Bruxelles, 254 N.Y. 488, 173 N.E. 835
(1930), is rejected. The subsection applies to questions of possible vicarious liability of a bank for action or nonaction
of sub-agents (see Section 4-202(c)), and tests these questions by the law of the state of the location of the
bank which uses the sub-agent. The conflicts rule of St. Nicholas Bank of New York v. State Nat. Bank, 128 N.Y.
26, 27 N.E. 849, 13 L.R.A. 241 (1891), is rejected. The subsection applies to action or non-action of a payor bank in
connection with handling an item (see Sections 4-215(a), 4-301, 4-302, 4-303) as well as action or non-action of a
collecting bank (Sections 4-201 through 4-216); to action or non-action of a bank which suspends payment or is
affected by another bank suspending payment (Section 4-216); to action or non-action of a bank with respect to an
item under the rule of Part 4 of Article 4.
d. In a case in which subsection (b) makes this Article applicable, Section 4-103(a) leaves open the possibility of
an agreement with respect to applicable law. This freedom of agreement follows the general policy of Section 1-
105.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-103. VARIATION BY AGREEMENT; MEASURE OF DAMAGES; ACTION
CONSTITUTING ORDINARY CARE
(a) The effect of the provisions of this Article may be varied by agreement, but the parties to the agreement
cannot disclaim a bank's responsibility for its lack of good faith or failure to exercise ordinary care or limit
the measure of damages for the lack or failure. However, the parties may determine by agreement the
standards by which the bank's responsibility is to be measured if those standards are not manifestly
unreasonable.
(b) Federal Reserve regulations and operating circulars, clearing-house rules, and the like have the effect
of agreements under subsection (a), whether or not specifically assented to by all parties interested in items
handled.
(c) Action or non-action approved by this Article or pursuant to Federal Reserve regulations or operating
circulars is the exercise of ordinary care and, in the absence of special instructions, action or non-action
consistent with clearing-house rules and the like or with a general banking usage not disapproved by this
Article, is prima facie the exercise of ordinary care.
(d) The specification or approval of certain procedures by this Article is not disapproval of other procedures
that may be reasonable under the circumstances.
(e) The measure of damages for failure to exercise ordinary care in handling an item is the amount of the
item reduced by an amount that could not have been realized by the exercise of ordinary care. If there is
also bad faith it includes any other damages the party suffered as a proximate consequence.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 1-102 states the general principles and rules for variation of the effect of this Act by agreement and the
limitations to this power. Section 4-103 states the specific rules for variation of Article 4 by agreement and also
certain standards of ordinary care. In view of the technical complexity of the field of bank collections, the enormous
number of items handled by banks, the certainty that there will be variations from the normal in each day's work in
each bank, the certainty of changing conditions and the possibility of developing improved methods of collection to
speed the process, it would be unwise to freeze present methods of operation by mandatory statutory rules. This
section, therefore, permits within wide limits variation of the effect of provisions of the Article by agreement.
2. Subsection (a) confers blanket power to vary all provisions of the Article by agreements of the ordinary kind.
The agreements may not disclaim a bank's responsibility for its own lack of good faith or failure to exercise ordinary
care and may not limit the measure of damages for the lack or failure, but this subsection like Section 1-102(3)
approves the practice of parties determining by agreement the standards by which the responsibility is to be
measured. In the absence of a showing that the standards manifestly are unreasonable, the agreement controls.
Owners of items and other interested parties are not affected by agreements under this subsection unless they are
parties to the agreement or are bound by adoption, ratification, estoppel or the like.
§ 4-103. VARIATION BY AGREEMENT; MEASURE OF DAMAGES; ACTION CONSTITUTING ORDINARY
CARE
Page 2 of 4
As here used "agreement" has the meaning given to it by Section 1-201(3). The agreement may be direct, as
between the owner and the depositary bank; or indirect, as in the case in which the owner authorizes a particular
type of procedure and any bank in the collection chain acts pursuant to such authorization. It may be with respect to
a single item; or to all items handled for a particular customer, e.g., a general agreement between the depositary
bank and the customer at the time a deposit account is opened. Legends on deposit tickets, collection letters and
acknowledgments of items, coupled with action by the affected party constituting acceptance, adoption, ratification,
estoppel or the like, are agreements if they meet the tests of the definition of "agreement." See Section 1-201(3).
First Nat. Bank of Denver v. Federal Reserve Bank, 6 F.2d 339 (8th Cir.1925) (deposit slip); Jefferson County Bldg.
Ass'n v. Southern Bank & Trust Co., 225 Ala. 25, 142 So. 66 (1932) (signature card and deposit slip); Semingson v.
Stock Yards Nat. Bank, 162 Minn. 424, 203 N.W. 412 (1925) (passbook); Farmers State Bank v. Union Nat. Bank,
42 N.D. 449, 454, 173 N.W. 789, 790 (1919) (acknowledgment of receipt of item).
3. Subsection (a) (subject to its limitations with respect to good faith and ordinary care) goes far to meet the
requirements of flexibility. However, it does not by itself confer fully effective flexibility. Since it is recognized that
banks handle a great number of items every business day and that the parties interested in each item include the
owner of the item, the drawer (if it is a check), all nonbank indorsers, the payor bank and from one to five or more
collecting banks, it is obvious that it is impossible, practically, to obtain direct agreements from all of these parties
on all items. In total, the interested parties constitute virtually every adult person and business organization in the
United States. On the other hand they may become bound to agreements on the principle that collecting banks
acting as agents have authority to make binding agreements with respect to items being handled. This conclusion
was assumed but was not flatly decided in Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond v. Malloy, 264 U.S. 160, at 167, 44
S.Ct. 296, at 298, 68 L.Ed. 617, 31 A.L.R. 1261 (1924).
To meet this problem subsection (b) provides that official or quasi-official rules of collection, that is Federal
Reserve regulations and operating circulars, clearing-house rules, and the like, have the effect of agreements under
subsection (a), whether or not specifically assented to by all parties interested in items handled. Consequently,
such official or quasi-official rules may, standing by themselves but subject to the good faith and ordinary care
limitations, vary the effect of the provisions of Article 4.
Federal Reserve regulations. Various sections of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. § 221 et seq.) authorize the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to direct the Federal Reserve banks to exercise bank collection
functions. For example, Section 16 (12 U.S.C. § 248(o)) authorizes the Board to require each Federal Reserve
bank to exercise the functions of a clearing house for its members and Section 13 (12 U.S.C. § 342) authorizes
each Federal Reserve bank to receive deposits from nonmember banks solely for the purposes of exchange or of
collection. Under this statutory authorization the Board has issued Regulation J (Subpart A--Collection of Checks
and Other Items). Under the supremacy clause of the Constitution, federal regulations prevail over state statutes.
Moreover, the Expedited Funds Availability Act, 12 U.S.C. Section 4007(b) provides that the Act and Regulation
CC, 12 CFR 229, supersede "any provision of the law of any State, including the Uniform Commercial Code as in
effect in such State, which is inconsistent with this chapter or such regulations." See Comment 1 to Section 4-102.
Federal Reserve operating circulars. The regulations of the Federal Reserve Board authorize the Federal
Reserve banks to promulgate operating circulars covering operating details. Regulation J, for example, provides
that "Each Reserve Bank shall receive and handle items in accordance with this subpart, and shall issue operating
circulars governing the details of its handling of items and other matters deemed appropriate by the Reserve Bank."
This Article recognizes that "operating circulars" issued pursuant to the regulations and concerned with operating
details as appropriate may, within their proper sphere, vary the effect of the Article.
Clearing-House Rules. Local clearing houses have long issued rules governing the details of clearing; hours of
clearing, media of remittance, time for return of mis-sent items and the like. The case law has recognized these
rules, within their proper sphere, as binding on affected parties and as appropriate sources for the courts to look to
in filling out details of bank collection law. Subsection (b) in recognizing clearing-house rules as a means of
preserving flexibility continues the sensible approach indicated in the cases. Included in the term "clearing houses"
§ 4-103. VARIATION BY AGREEMENT; MEASURE OF DAMAGES; ACTION CONSTITUTING ORDINARY
CARE
Page 3 of 4
are county and regional clearing houses as well as those within a single city or town. There is, of course, no
intention of authorizing a local clearing house or a group of clearing houses to rewrite the basic law generally. The
term "clearing-house rules" should be understood in the light of functions the clearing houses have exercised in the
past.
And the like. This phrase is to be construed in the light of the foregoing. "Federal Reserve regulations and
operating circulars" cover rules and regulations issued by public or quasi-public agencies under statutory authority.
"Clearing-house rules" cover rules issued by a group of banks which have associated themselves to perform
through a clearing house some of their collection, payment and clearing functions. Other agencies or associations
of this kind may be established in the future whose rules and regulations could be appropriately looked on as
constituting means of avoiding absolute statutory rigidity. The phrase "and the like" leaves open possibilities for
future development. An agreement between a number of banks or even all the banks in an area simply because
they are banks, would not of itself, by virtue of the phrase "and the like," meet the purposes and objectives of
subsection (b).
4. Under this Article banks come under the general obligations of the use of good faith and the exercise of
ordinary care. "Good faith" is defined in Section 1-201(b)(20). The term "ordinary care" is defined in Section 3-
103(a)(7). These definitions are made to apply to Article 4 by Section 4-104(c). Section 4-202 states respects in
which collecting banks must use ordinary care. Subsection (c) of Section 4-103 provides that action or non-action
approved by the Article or pursuant to Federal Reserve regulations or operating circulars constitutes the exercise of
ordinary care. Federal Reserve regulations and operating circulars constitute an affirmative standard of ordinary
care equally with the provisions of Article 4 itself.
Subsection (c) further provides that, absent special instructions, action or non-action consistent with clearinghouse
rules and the like or with a general banking usage not disapproved by the Article, prima facie constitutes the
exercise of ordinary care. Clearing-house rules and the phrase "and the like" have the significance set forth above
in these Comments. The term "general banking usage" is not defined but should be taken to mean a general usage
common to banks in the area concerned. See Section 1-205(2). In a case in which the adjective "general" is used,
the intention is to require a usage broader than a mere practice between two or three banks but it is not intended to
require a usage broader than a mere practice between two or three banks but it is not intended to require anything
as broad as a country-wide usage. A usage followed generally throughout a state, a substantial portion of a state, a
metropolitan area or the like would certainly be sufficient. Consistently with the principle of Section 1-205(3), action
or non-action consistent with clearing-house rules or the like or with banking usages prima facie constitutes the
exercise of ordinary care. However, the phrase "in the absence of special instructions" affords owners of items an
opportunity to prescribe other standards and although there may be no direct supervision or control of clearing
houses or banking usages by official supervisory authorities, the confirmation of ordinary care by compliance with
these standards is prima facie only, thus conferring on the courts the ultimate power to determine ordinary care in
any case in which it should appear desirable to do so. The prima facie rule does, however, impose on the party
contesting the standards to establish that they are unreasonable, arbitrary or unfair as used by the particular bank.
5. Subsection (d), in line with the flexible approach required for the bank collection process is designed to make
clear that a novel procedure adopted by a bank is not to be considered unreasonable merely because that
procedure is not specifically contemplated by this Article or by agreement, or because it has not yet been generally
accepted as a bank usage. Changing conditions constantly call for new procedures and someone has to use the
new procedure first. If this procedure is found to be reasonable under the circumstances, provided, of course, that it
is not inconsistent with any provision of the Article or other law or agreement, the bank which has followed the new
procedure should not be found to have failed in the exercise of ordinary care.
6. Subsection (e) sets forth a rule for determining the measure of damages for failure to exercise ordinary care
which, under subsection (a), cannot be limited by agreement. In the absence of bad faith the maximum recovery is
the amount of the item concerned. The term "bad faith" is not defined; the connotation is the absence of good faith
(Section 3-103). When it is established that some part or all of the item could not have been collected even by the
use of ordinary care the recovery is reduced by the amount that would have been in any event uncollectible. This
limitation on recovery follows the case law. Finally, if bad faith is established the rule opens to allow the recovery of
§ 4-103. VARIATION BY AGREEMENT; MEASURE OF DAMAGES; ACTION CONSTITUTING ORDINARY
CARE
Page 4 of 4
other damages, whose "proximateness" is to be tested by the ordinary rules applied in comparable cases. Of
course, it continues to be as necessary under subsection (e) as it has been under ordinary common law principles
that, before the damage rule of the subsection becomes operative, liability of the bank and some loss to the
customer or owner must be established.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-104. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
(a) In this Article, unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) "Account" means any deposit or credit account with a bank, including a demand, time, savings,
passbook, share draft, or like account, other than an account evidenced by a certificate of deposit;
(2) "Afternoon" means the period of a day between noon and midnight;
(3) "Banking day" means the part of a day on which a bank is open to the public for carrying on
substantially all of its banking functions;
(4) "Clearing house" means an association of banks or other payors regularly clearing items;
(5) "Customer" means a person having an account with a bank or for whom a bank has agreed to
collect items, including a bank that maintains an account at another bank;
(6) "Documentary draft" means a draft to be presented for acceptance or payment if specified
documents, certificated securities ( Section 8-102) or instructions for uncertificated securities ( Section
8-102), or other certificates, statements, or the like are to be received by the drawee or other payor
before acceptance or payment of the draft;
(7) "Draft" means a draft as defined in Section 3-104 or an item, other than an instrument, that is an
order;
(8) "Drawee" means a person ordered in a draft to make payment;
(9) "Item" means an instrument or a promise or order to pay money handled by a bank for collection or
payment. The term does not include a payment order governed by Article 4A or a credit or debit card
slip;
(10) "Midnight deadline" with respect to a bank is midnight on its next banking day following the
banking day on which it receives the relevant item or notice or from which the time for taking action
commences to run, whichever is later;
(11) "Settle" means to pay in cash, by clearing-house settlement, in a charge or credit or by remittance,
or otherwise as agreed. A settlement may be either provisional or final;
(12) "Suspends payments" with respect to a bank means that it has been closed by order of the
supervisory authorities, that a public officer has been appointed to take it over, or that it ceases or
refuses to make payments in the ordinary course of business.
(b) Other definitions applying to this Article and the sections in which they appear are:
"Agreement for electronic presentment" Section 4-110.
"Collecting bank" Section 4-105.
"Depositary bank" Section 4-105.
"Intermediary bank" Section 4-105.
"Payor bank" Section 4-105.
"Presenting bank" Section 4-105.
"Presentment notice" Section 4-110.
(c) "Control" as provised in Section 7-106 and the following definitions in other Articles apply to this Article:
"Acceptance" Section 3-409.
§ 4-104. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 3
"Alteration" Section 3-407.
"Cashier's check" Section 3-104.
"Certificate of deposit" Section 3-104.
"Certified check" Section 3-409.
"Check" Section 3-104.
"Good faith" Section 3-103.
"Holder in due course" Section 3-302.
"Instrument" Section 3-104.
"Notice of dishonor" Section 3-503.
"Order" Section 3-103.
"Ordinary care" Section 3-103.
"Person entitled to enforce" Section 3-301.
"Presentment" Section 3-501.
"Promise" Section 3-103.
"Prove" Section 3-103.
"Record" Section 3-103.
"Remotely-Created consumer item" Section 3-103.
"Teller's check" Section 3-104.
"Unauthorized signature" Section 3-403.
(d) In addition, Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation
applicable throughout this Article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Paragraph (a)(1): "Account" is defined to include both asset accounts in which a customer has deposited
money and accounts from which a customer may draw on a line of credit. The limiting factor is that the account
must be in a bank.
2. Paragraph (a)(3): "Banking day." Under this definition that part of a business day when a bank is open only for
limited functions, e.g., to receive deposits and cash checks, but with loan, bookkeeping and other departments
closed, is not part of a banking day.
3. Paragraph (a)(4): "Clearing house." Occasionally express companies, governmental agencies and other
nonbanks deal directly with a clearing house; hence the definition does not limit the term to an association of banks.
4. Paragraph (a)(5): "Customer." It is to be noted that this term includes a bank carrying an account with another
bank as well as the more typical nonbank customer or depositor.
5. Paragraph (a)(6): "Documentary draft" applies even though the documents do not accompany the draft but are
to be received by the drawee or other payor before acceptance or payment of the draft. Documents may be either
in electronic or tangible form. See Article 5, Section 5-102, Comment 2 and Article 1, Section 1-201 (definition of
"document of title").
6. Paragraph (a)(7): "Draft" is defined in Section 3-104 as a form of instrument. Since Article 4 applies to items
that may not fall within the definition of instrument, the term is defined here to include an item that is a written order
to pay money, even though the item may not qualify as an instrument. The term "order" is defined in Section 3-103.
7. Paragraph (a)(8): "Drawee" is defined in Section 3-103 in terms of an Article 3 draft which is a form of
instrument. Here "drawee" is defined in terms of an Article 4 draft which includes items that may not be instruments.
8. Paragraph (a)(9): "Item" is defined broadly to include an instrument, as defined in Section 3-104, as well as
promises or orders that may not be within the definition of "instrument." The terms "promise" and "order" are
§ 4-104. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 3 of 3
defined in Section 3-103. A promise is a written undertaking to pay money. An order is a written instruction to pay
money. But see Section 4-110(c). Since bonds and other investment securities under Article 8 may be within the
term "instrument" or "promise," they are items and when handled by banks for collection are subject to this Article.
See Comment 1 to Section 4-102. The functional limitation on the meaning of this term is the willingness of the
banking system to handle the instrument, undertaking or instruction for collection or payment.
9. Paragraph (a)(10): "Midnight deadline." The use of this phrase is an example of the more mechanical approach
used in this Article. Midnight is selected as a termination point or time limit to obtain greater uniformity and
definiteness than would be possible from other possible terminating points, such as the close of the banking day or
business day.
10. Paragraph (a)(11): The term "settle" has substantial importance throughout Article 4. In the American Bankers
Association Bank Collection Code, in deferred posting statutes, in Federal Reserve regulations and operating
circulars, in clearing-house rules, in agreements between banks and customers and in legends on deposit tickets
and collection letters, there is repeated reference to "conditional" or "provisional" credits or payments. Tied in with
this concept of creditors or payments being in some way tentative, has been a related but somewhat different
problem as to when an item is "paid" or "finally paid" either to determine the relative priority of the item as against
attachments, stop-payment orders and the like or in insolvency situations. There has been extensive litigation in the
various states on these problems. To a substantial extent the confusion, the litigation and even the resulting court
decisions fail to take into account that in the collection process some debits or credits are provisional or tentative
and others are final and that very many debits or credits are provisional or tentative for awhile but later become
final. Similarly, some cases fail to recognize that within a single bank, particularly a payor bank, each item goes
through a series of processes and that in a payor bank most of these processes are preliminary to the basic act of
payment or "final payment."
The term "settle" is used as a convenient term to characterize a broad variety of conditional, provisional, tentative
and also final payments of items. Such a comprehensive term is needed because it is frequently difficult or
unnecessary to determine whether a particular action is tentative or final or when a particular credit shifts from the
tentative class to the final class. Therefore, its use throughout the Article indicates that in that particular context it is
unnecessary or unwise to determine whether the debit or the credit or the payment is tentative or final. However, if
qualified by the adjective "provisional" its tentative nature is intended, and if qualified by the adjective "final" its
permanent nature is intended.
Examples of the various types of settlement contemplated by the term include payments in cash; the efficient but
somewhat complicated process of payment through the adjustment and offsetting of balances through clearing
houses; debit or credit entries in accounts between banks; the forwarding of various types of remittance
instruments, sometimes to cover a particular item but more frequently to cover an entire group of items received on
a particular day.
11. Paragraph (a)(12): "Suspends payments." This term is designed to afford an objective test to determine when
a bank is no longer operating as a part of the banking system.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-105. DEFINITIONS OF TYPES OF BANKS
In this Article:
(1) ["Bank" means a person engaged in the business of banking, including a savings bank, savings
and loan association, credit union, or trust company;]
(2) "Depositary bank" means the first bank to take an item even though it is also the payor bank,
unless the item is presented for immediate payment over the counter;
(3) "Payor bank" means a bank that is the drawee of a draft;
(4) "Intermediary bank" means a bank to which an item is transferred in course of collection except the
depositary or payor bank;
(5) "Collecting bank" means a bank handling an item for collection except the payor bank;
(6) "Presenting bank" means a bank presenting an item except a payor bank.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: A jurisdiction that enacts this statute that has not yet enacted the revised version of UCC Article
1 should leave the definition of "Bank" in Section 4-105(1). Section 4-105(1) is reserved for that purpose. A
jurisdiction that has adopted or simultaneously adopts the revised Article 1 should delete the definition of "Bank"
from Section 4-105(1), but should leave those numbers "reserved." If jurisdictions follow the numbering suggested
here, the subsections will have the same numbering in all jurisdictions that have adopted these amendments
(whether they have or have not adopted the revised version of UCC Article 1). In either case, they should change
the title of the section, as indicated in these revisions, so that all jurisdictions will have the same title for the section.
1. The definitions in general exclude a bank to which an item is issued, as this bank does not take by transfer
except in the particular case covered in which the item is issued to a payee for collection, as in the case in which a
corporation is transferring balances from one account to another. Thus, the definition of "depositary bank" does not
include the bank to which a check is made payable if a check is given in payment of a mortgage. This bank has the
status of a payee under Article 3 on Negotiable Instruments and not that of a collecting bank.
2. Paragraph (1): "Bank" is defined in Section 1-201(4) as meaning "any person engaged in the business of
banking." The definition in paragraph (1) makes clear that "bank" includes savings banks, savings and loan
associations, credit unions and trust companies, in addition to the commercial banks commonly denoted by use of
the term "bank."
3. Paragraph (2): A bank that takes an "on us" item for collection, for application to a customer's loan, or first
handles the item for other reasons is a depositary bank even though it is also the payor bank. However, if the holder
presents the item for immediate payment over the counter, the payor bank is not a depositary bank.
§ 4-105. DEFINITIONS OF TYPES OF BANKS
Page 2 of 2
4. Paragraph (3): The definition of "payor bank" is clarified by use of the term "drawee." That term is defined in
Section 4-104 as meaning "a person ordered in a draft to make payment." An "order" is defined in Section 3-103 as
meaning "a written instruction to pay money… An authorization to pay is not an order unless the person authorized
to pay is also instructed to pay." The definition of order is incorporated into Article 4 by Section 4-104(c). Thus a
payor bank is one instructed to pay in the item. A bank does not become a payor bank by being merely authorized
to pay or by being given an instruction to pay not contained in the item.
5. Paragraph (4): The term "intermediary bank" includes the last bank in the collection process if the drawee is not
a bank. Usually the last bank is also a presenting bank.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-106. PAYABLE THROUGH OR PAYABLE AT BANK: COLLECTING BANK
(a) If an item states that it is "payable through" a bank identified in the item, (i) the item designates the
bank as a collecting bank and does not by itself authorize the bank to pay the item, and (ii) the item may be
presented for payment only by or through the bank.
ALTERNATIVE A
(b) If an item states that it is "payable at" a bank identified in the item, the item is equivalent to a draft
drawn on the bank.
ALTERNATIVE B
(b) If an item states that it is "payable at" a bank identified in the item, (i) the item designates the bank as a
collecting bank and does not by itself authorize the bank to pay the item, and (ii) the item may be presented
for payment only by or through the bank.
(c) If a draft names a nonbank drawee and it is unclear whether a bank named in the draft is a co-drawee
or a collecting bank, the bank is a collecting bank.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section replaces former Sections 3-120 and 3-121. Some items are made "payable through" a particular
bank. Subsection (a) states that such language makes the bank a collecting bank and not a payor bank. An item
identifying a "payable through" bank can be presented for payment to the drawee only by the "payable through"
bank. The item cannot be presented to the drawee over the counter for immediate payment or by a collecting bank
other than the "payable through" bank.
2. Subsection (b) retains the alternative approach of the present law. Under Alternative A a note payable at a
bank is the equivalent of a draft drawn on the bank and the midnight deadline provisions of Sections 4-301 and 4-
302 apply. Under Alternative B a "payable at" bank is in the same position as a "payable through" bank under
subsection (a).
3. Subsection (c) rejects the view of some cases that a bank named below the name of a drawee is itself a
drawee. The commercial understanding is that this bank is a collecting bank and is not accountable under Section
4-302 for holding an item beyond its deadline. The liability of the bank is governed by Sections 4-202(a) and 4-
103(e).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-107. SEPARATE OFFICE OF BANK
A branch or separate office of a bank is a separate bank for the purpose of computing the time within which and
determining the place at or to which action may be taken or notices or orders shall be given under this Article and
under Article 3.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. A rule with respect to the status of a branch or separate office of a bank as a part of any statute on bank
collections is highly desirable if not absolutely necessary. However, practices in the operations of branches and
separate offices vary substantially in the different states and it has not been possible to find any single rule that is
logically correct, fair in all situations and workable under all different types of practices. The decision not to draft the
section with greater specificity leaves to the courts the resolution of the issues arising under this section on the
basis of the facts of each case.
2. In many states and for many purposes a branch or separate office of the bank should be treated as a separate
bank. Many branches function as separate banks in the handling and payment of items and require time for doing
so similar to that of a separate bank. This is particularly true if branch banking is permitted throughout a state or in
different towns and cities. Similarly, if there is this separate functioning a particular branch or separate office is the
only proper place for various types of action to be taken or orders or notices to be given. Examples include the
drawing of a check on a particular branch by a customer whose account is carried at that branch; the presentment
of that same check at that branch; the issuance of an order to the branch to stop payment on the check.
3. Section 1 of the American Bankers Association Bank Collection Code provided simply: "A branch or office of
any such bank shall be deemed a bank." Although this rule appears to be brief and simple, as applied to particular
sections of the ABA Code it produces illogical and, in some cases, unreasonable results. For example, under
Section 11 of the ABA Code it seems anomalous for one branch of a bank to have charged an item to the account
of the drawer and another branch to have the power to elect to treat the item as dishonored. Similar logical
problems would flow from applying the same rule to Article 4. Warranties by one branch to another branch under
Sections 4-207 and 4-208 (each considered a separate bank) do not make sense.
4. Assuming that it is not desirable to make each branch a separate bank for all purposes, this section provides
that a branch or separate office is a separate bank for certain purposes. In so doing the single legal entity of the
bank as a whole is preserved, thereby carrying with it the liability of the institution as a whole on such obligations as
it may be under. On the other hand, in cases in which the Article provides a number of time limits for different types
of action by banks, if a branch functions as a separate bank, it should have the time limits available to a separate
bank. Similarly if in its relations to customers a branch functions as a separate bank, notices and orders with
respect to accounts of customers of the branch should be given at the branch. For example, whether a branch has
notice sufficient to affect its status as a holder in due course of an item taken by it should depend upon what notice
that branch has received with respect to the item. Similarly the receipt of a stop-payment order at one branch
should not be notice to another branch so as to impair the right of the second branch to be a holder in due course of
§ 4-107. SEPARATE OFFICE OF BANK
Page 2 of 2
the item, although in circumstances in which ordinary care requires the communication of a notice or order to the
proper branch of a bank, the notice or order would be effective at the proper branch from the time it was or should
have been received. See Section 1-201(27).
5. The bracketed language ("maintaining its own deposit ledger") in former Section 4-106 is deleted. Today banks
keep records on customer accounts by electronic data storage. This has led most banks with branches to centralize
to some degree their record keeping. The place where records are kept has little meaning if the information is
electronically stored and is instantly retrievable at all branches of the bank. Hence, the inference to be drawn from
the deletion of the bracketed language is that where record keeping is done is no longer an important factor in
determining whether a branch is a separate bank.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-108
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-108. TIME OF RECEIPT OF ITEMS
(a) For the purpose of allowing time to process items, prove balances, and make the necessary entries on
its books to determine its position for the day, a bank may fix an afternoon hour of 2 P.M. or later as a cutoff
hour for the handling of money and items and the making of entries on its books.
(b) An item or deposit of money received on any day after a cutoff hour so fixed or after the close of the
banking day may be treated as being received at the opening of the next banking day.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Each of the huge volume of checks processed each day must go through a series of accounting procedures
that consume time. Many banks have found it necessary to establish a cutoff hour to allow time for these
procedures to be completed within the time limits imposed by Article 4. Subsection (a) approves a cutoff hour of this
type provided it is not earlier than 2 P.M. Subsection (b) provides that if such a cutoff hour is fixed, items received
after the cutoff hour may be treated as being received at the opening of the next banking day. If the number of items
received either through the mail or over the counter tends to taper off radically as the afternoon hours progress, a 2
P.M. cutoff hour does not involve a large portion of the items received but at the same time permits a bank using
such a cutoff hour to leave its doors open later in the afternoon without forcing into the evening the completion of its
settling and proving process.
2. The provision in subsection (b) that items or deposits received after the close of the banking day may be
treated as received at the opening of the next banking day is important in cases in which a bank closes at twelve or
one o'clock, e.g., on a Saturday, but continues to receive some items by mail or over the counter if, for example, it
opens Saturday evening for the limited purpose of receiving deposits and cashing checks.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-109
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-109. DELAYS
(a) Unless otherwise instructed, a collecting bank in a good faith effort to secure payment of a specific item
drawn on a payor other than a bank, and with or without the approval of any person involved, may waive,
modify, or extend time limits imposed or permitted by this [Act] for a period not exceeding two additional
banking days without discharge of drawers or indorsers or liability to its transferor or a prior party.
(b) Delay by a collecting bank or payor bank beyond time limits prescribed or permitted by this [Act] or by
instructions is excused if (i) the delay is caused by interruption of communication or computer facilities,
suspension of payments by another bank, war, emergency conditions, failure of equipment, or other
circumstances beyond the control of the bank, and (ii) the bank exercises such diligence as the
circumstances require.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Sections 4-202(b), 4-214, 4-301, and 4-302 prescribe various time limits for the handling of items. These are
the limits of time within which a bank, in fulfillment of its obligation to exercise ordinary care, must handle items
entrusted to it for collection or payment. Under Section 4-103 they may be varied by agreement or by Federal
Reserve regulations or operating circular, clearing-house rules, or the like. Subsection (a) permits a very limited
extension of these time limits. It authorizes a collecting bank to take additional time in attempting to collect drafts
drawn on nonbank payors with or without the approval of any interested party. The right of a collecting bank to
waive time limits under subsection (a) does not apply to checks. The two-day extension can only be granted in a
good faith effort to secure payment and only with respect to specific items. It cannot be exercised if the customer
instructs otherwise. Thus limited the escape provision should afford a limited degree of flexibility in special cases
but should not interfere with the overall requirement and objective of speedy collections.
2. An extension granted under subsection (a) is without discharge of drawers or indorsers. It therefore extends the
times for presentment or payment as specified in Article 3.
3. Subsection (b) is another escape clause from time limits. This clause operates not only with respect to time
limits imposed by the Article itself but also time limits imposed by special instructions, by agreement or by Federal
regulations or operating circulars, clearing-house rules or the like. The latter time limits are "permitted" by the Code.
For example, a payor bank that fails to make timely return of a dishonored item may be accountable for the amount
of the item. Subsection (b) excuses a bank from this liability when its failure to meet its midnight deadline resulted
from, for example, a computer breakdown that was beyond the control of the bank, so long as the bank exercised
the degree of diligence that the circumstances required. In Port City State Bank v. American National Bank, 486
F.2d 196 (10th Cir. 1973), the court held that a bank exercised sufficient diligence to be excused under this
subsection. If delay is sought to be excused under this subsection, the bank has the burden of proof on the issue of
whether it exercised "such diligence as the circumstances require." The subsection is consistent with Regulation
CC, Section 229.38(e).
§ 4-109. DELAYS
Page 2 of 2
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-110
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-110. ELECTRONIC PRESENTMENT
(a) "Agreement for electronic presentment" means an agreement, clearing-house rule, or Federal Reserve
regulation or operating circular, providing that presentment of an item may be made by transmission of an
image of an item or information describing the item ("presentment notice") rather than delivery of the item
itself. The agreement may provide for procedures governing retention, presentment, payment, dishonor,
and other matters concerning items subject to the agreement.
(b) Presentment of an item pursuant to an agreement for presentment is made when the presentment
notice is received.
(c) If presentment is made by presentment notice, a reference to "item" or "check" in this Article means the
presentment notice unless the context otherwise indicates.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. "An agreement for electronic presentment" refers to an agreement under which presentment may be made to a
payor bank by a presentment notice rather than by presentment of the item. Under imaging technology now under
development, the presentment notice might be an image of the item. The electronic presentment agreement may
provide that the item may be retained by a depositary bank, other collecting bank, or even a customer of the
depositary bank, or it may provide that the item will follow the presentment notice. The identifying characteristic of
an electronic presentment agreement is that presentment occurs when the presentment notice is received. "An
agreement for electronic presentment" does not refer to the common case of retention of items by payor banks
because the item itself is presented to the payor bank in these cases. Payor bank check retention is a matter of
agreement between payor banks and their customers. Provisions on payor bank check retention are found in
Section 4-406(b).
2. The assumptions under which the electronic presentment amendments are based are as follows: No bank will
participate in an electronic presentment program without an agreement. These agreements may be either bilateral
(Section 4-103(a)), under which two banks that frequently do business with each other may agree to depositary
bank check retention, or multilateral (Section 4-103(b)), in which large segments of the banking industry may
participate in such a program. In the latter case, federal or other uniform regulatory standards would likely supply
the substance of the electronic presentment agreement, the application of which could be triggered by the use of
some form of identifier on the item. Regulation CC, Section 229.36(c) authorizes truncation agreements but forbids
them from extending return times or otherwise varying requirements of the part of Regulation CC governing check
collection without the agreement of all parties interested in the check. For instance, an extension of return time
could damage a depositary bank which must make funds available to its customers under mandatory availability
schedules. The Expedited Funds Availability Act, 12 U.S.C. Section 4008(b)(2), directs the Federal Reserve Board
to consider requiring that banks provide for check truncation.
3. The parties affected by an agreement for electronic presentment, with the exception of the customer, can be
expected to protect themselves. For example, the payor bank can probably be expected to limit its risk of loss from
§ 4-110. ELECTRONIC PRESENTMENT
Page 2 of 2
drawer forgery by limiting the dollar amount of eligible items (Federal Reserve program), by reconcilement
agreements (ABA Safekeeping program), by insurance (credit union share draft program), or by other means.
Because agreements will exist, only minimal amendments are needed to make clear that the UCC does not prohibit
electronic presentment.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-111
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-111. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
An action to enforce an obligation, duty, or right arising under this Article must be commenced within three years
after the [cause of action] accrues.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section conforms to the period of limitations set by Section 3-118(g) for actions for breach of warranty and to
enforce other obligations, duties or rights arising under Article 3. Bracketing "cause of action" recognizes that some
states use a different term, such as "claim for relief."
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-201
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-201. STATUS OF COLLECTING BANK AS AGENT AND PROVISIONAL
STATUS OF CREDITS; APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE; ITEM INDORSED "PAY
ANY BANK"
(a) Unless a contrary intent clearly appears and before the time that a settlement given by a collecting
bank for an item is or becomes final, the bank, with respect to an item, is an agent or sub-agent of the
owner of the item and any settlement given for the item is provisional. This provision applies regardless of
the form of indorsement or lack of indorsement and even though credit given for the item is subject to
immediate withdrawal as of right or is in fact withdrawn; but the continuance of ownership of an item by its
owner and any rights of the owner to proceeds of the item are subject to rights of a collecting bank, such as
those resulting from outstanding advances on the item and rights of recoupment or setoff. If an item is
handled by banks for purposes of presentment, payment, collection, or return, the relevant provisions of this
Article apply even though action of the parties clearly establishes that a particular bank has purchased the
item and is the owner of it.
(b) After an item has been indorsed with the words "pay any bank" or the like, only a bank may acquire the
rights of a holder until the item has been:
(1) returned to the customer initiating collection; or
(2) specially indorsed by a bank to a person who is not a bank.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section states certain basic rules of the bank collection process. One basic rule, appearing in the last
sentence of subsection (a), is that, to the extent applicable, the provisions of the Article govern without regard to
whether a bank handling an item owns the item or is an agent for collection. Historically, much time has been spent
and effort expended in determining or attempting to determine whether a bank was a purchaser of an item or
merely an agent for collection. See discussion of this subject and cases cited in 11 A.L.R. 1043, 16 A.L.R. 1084, 42
A.L.R. 492, 68 A.L.R. 725, 99 A.L.R. 486. See also Section 4 of the American Bankers Association Bank Collection
Code. The general approach of Article 4, similar to that of other articles, is to provide, within reasonable limits, rules
or answers to major problems known to exist in the bank collection process without regard to questions of status
and ownership but to keep general principles such as status and ownership available to cover residual areas not
covered by specific rules. In line with this approach, the last sentence of subsection (a) says in effect that Article 4
applies to practically every item moving through banks for the purpose of presentment, payment or collection.
2. Within this general rule of broad coverage, the first two sentences of subsection (a) state a rule of agency
status. "Unless a contrary intent clearly appears" the status of a collecting bank is that of an agent or sub-agent for
the owner of the item. Although as indicated in Comment 1 it is much less important under Article 4 to determine
status than has been the case heretofore, status may have importance in some residual areas not covered by
specific rules. Further, since status has been considered so important in the past, to omit all reference to it might
§ 4-201. STATUS OF COLLECTING BANK AS AGENT AND PROVISIONAL STATUS OF CREDITS;
APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE; ITEM INDORSED "PAY ANY BANK"
Page 2 of 3
cause confusion. The status of agency "applies regardless of the form of indorsement or lack of indorsement and
even though credit given for the item is subject to immediate withdrawal as of right or is in fact withdrawn." Thus
questions heretofore litigated as to whether ordinary indorsements "for deposit," "for collection" or in blank have the
effect of creating an agency status or a purchase, no longer have significance in varying the prima facie rule of
agency. Similarly, the nature of the credit given for an item or whether it is subject to immediate withdrawal as of
right or is in fact withdrawn, does not alter the agency status. See A.L.R. references supra in Comment 1.
A contrary intent can change agency status but this must be clear. An example of a clear contrary intent would be
if collateral papers established or the item bore a legend stating that the item was sold absolutely to the depositary
bank.
3. The prima facie agency status of collecting banks is consistent with prevailing law and practice today. Section 2
of the American Bankers Association Bank Collection Code so provided. Legends on deposit tickets, collection
letters and acknowledgments of items and Federal Reserve operating circulars consistently so provide. The status
is consistent with rights of charge-back (Section 4-214 and Section 11 of the ABA Code) and risk of loss in the
event of insolvency (Section 4-216 and Section 13 of the ABA Code). The right of charge-back with respect to
checks is limited by Regulation CC, Section 226.36(d).
4. Affirmative statement of a prima facie agency status for collecting banks requires certain limitations and
qualifications. Under current practices substantially all bank collections sooner or later merge into bank credits, at
least if collection is effected. Usually, this takes place within a few days of the initiation of collection. An intermediary
bank receives final collection and evidences the result of its collection by a "credit" on its books to the depositary
bank. The depositary bank evidences the results of its collection by a "credit" in the account of its customer. As
used in these instances the term "credit" clearly indicates a debtor-creditor relationship. At some stage in the bank
collection process the agency status of a collecting bank changes to that of debtor, a debtor of its customer. Usually
at about the same time it also becomes a creditor for the amount of the item, a creditor of some intermediary, payor
or other bank. Thus the collection is completed, all agency aspects are terminated and the identity of the item has
become completely merged in bank accounts, that of the customer with the depositary bank and that of one bank
with another.
Although Section 4-215(a) provides that an item is finally paid when the payor bank takes or fails to take certain
action with respect to the item, the final payment of the item may or may not result in the simultaneous final
settlement for the item in the case of all prior parties. If a series of provisional debits and credits for the item have
been entered in accounts between banks, the final payment of the item by the payor bank may result in the
automatic firming up of all these provisional debits and credits under Section 4-215(c), and the consequent receipt
of final settlement for the item by each collecting bank and the customer of the depositary bank simultaneously with
such action of the payor bank. However, if the payor bank or some intermediary bank accounts for the item with a
remittance draft, the next prior bank usually does not receive final settlement for the item until the remittance draft
finally clears. See Section 4-213(c). The first sentence of subsection (a) provides that the agency status of a
collecting bank (whether intermediary or depositary) continues until the settlement given by it for the item is or
becomes final. In the case of the series of provisional credits covered by Section 4-215(c), this could be
simultaneously with the final payment of the item by the payor bank. In cases in which remittance drafts are used or
in straight noncash collections, this would not be until the times specified in Sections 4-213(c) and 4-215(d). With
respect to checks Regulation CC Sections 229.31(c), 229.32(b) and 229.36(d) provide that all settlements between
banks are final in both the forward collection and return of checks.
Under Section 4-213(a) settlements for items may be made by any means agreed to by the parties. Since it is
impossible to contemplate all the kinds of settlements that will be utilized, no attempt is made in Article 4 to provide
when settlement is final in all cases. The guiding principle is that settlements should be final when the presenting
person has received usable funds. Section 4-213(c) and (d) and Section 4-215(c) provide when final settlement
occurs with respect to certain kinds of settlement, but these provisions are not intended to be exclusive.
A number of practical results flow from the rule continuing the agency status of a collecting bank until its
settlement for the item is or becomes final, some of which are specifically set forth in this Article. One is that risk of
§ 4-201. STATUS OF COLLECTING BANK AS AGENT AND PROVISIONAL STATUS OF CREDITS;
APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE; ITEM INDORSED "PAY ANY BANK"
Page 3 of 3
loss continues in the owner of the item rather than the agent bank. See Section 4-214. Offsetting rights favorable to
the owner are that pending such final settlement, the owner has the preference rights of Section 4-216 and the
direct rights of Section 4-302 against the payor bank. It also follows from this rule that the dollar limitations of
Federal Deposit Insurance are measured by the claim of the owner of the item rather than that of the collecting
bank. With respect to checks, rights of the parties in insolvency are determined by Regulation CC Section 229.39
and the liability of a bank handling a check to a subsequent bank that does not receive payment because of
suspension of payments by another bank is stated in Regulation CC Section 229.35(b).
5. In those cases in which some period of time elapses between the final payment of the item by the payor bank
and the time that the settlement of the collecting bank is or becomes final, e.g., if the payor bank or an intermediary
bank accounts for the item with a remittance draft or in straight noncash collections, the continuance of the agency
status of the collecting bank necessarily carries with it the continuance of the owner's status as principal. The
second sentence of subsection (a) provides that whatever rights the owner has to proceeds of the item are subject
to the rights of collecting banks for outstanding advances on the item and other valid rights, if any. The rule provides
a sound rule to govern cases of attempted attachment of proceeds of a non-cash item in the hands of the payor
bank as property of the absent owner. If a collecting bank has made an advance on an item which is still
outstanding, its right to obtain reimbursement for this advance should be superior to the rights of the owner to the
proceeds or to the rights of a creditor of the owner. An intentional crediting of proceeds of an item to the account of
a prior bank known to be insolvent, for the purpose of acquiring a right of setoff, would not produce a valid setoff.
See 8 Zollman, Banks and Banking (1936) Sec. 5443.
6. This section and Article 4 as a whole represent an intentional abandonment of the approach to bank collection
problems appearing in Section 4 of the American Bankers Association Bank Collection Code. Because the
tremendous volume of items handled makes impossible the examination by all banks of all indorsements on all
items and thus in fact this examination is not made, except perhaps by depositary banks, it is unrealistic to base the
rights and duties of all banks in the collection chain on variations in the form of indorsements. It is anomalous to
provide throughout the ABA Code that the prima facie status of collecting banks is that of agent or sub-agent but in
Section 4 to provide that subsequent holders (sub-agents) shall have the right to rely on the presumption that the
bank of deposit (the primary agent) is the owner of the item. It is unrealistic, particularly in this background, to base
rights and duties on status of agent or owner. Thus Section 4-201 makes the pertinent provisions of Article 4
applicable to substantially all items handled by banks for presentment, payment or collection, recognizes the prima
facie status of most banks as agents, and then seeks to state appropriate limits and some attributes to the general
rules so expressed.
7. Subsection (b) protects the ownership rights with respect to an item indorsed "pay any bank or banker" or in
similar terms of a customer initiating collection or of any bank acquiring a security interest under Section 4-210, in
the event the item is subsequently acquired under improper circumstances by a person who is not a bank and
transferred by that person to another person, whether or not a bank. Upon return to the customer initiating collection
of an item so indorsed, the indorsement may be cancelled (Section 3-207). A bank holding an item so indorsed may
transfer the item out of banking channels by special indorsement; however, under Section 4-103(e), the bank would
be liable to the owner of the item for any loss resulting therefrom if the transfer had been made in bad faith or with
lack of ordinary care. If briefer and more simple forms of bank indorsements are developed under Section 4-206
(e.g., the use of bank transit numbers in lieu of present lengthy forms of bank indorsements), a depositary bank
having the transit number "X100" could make subsection (b) operative by indorsements such as "Pay any bank--
X100." Regulation CC Section 229.35(c) states the effect of an indorsement on a check by a bank.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-202
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-202. RESPONSIBILITY FOR COLLECTION OR RETURN; WHEN ACTION
TIMELY
(a) A collecting bank must exercise ordinary care in:
(1) presenting an item or sending it for presentment;
(2) sending notice of dishonor or nonpayment or returning an item other than a documentary draft to
the bank's transferor after learning that the item has not been paid or accepted, as the case may be;
(3) settling for an item when the bank receives final settlement; and
(4) notifying its transferor of any loss or delay in transit within a reasonable time after discovery thereof.
(b) A collecting bank exercises ordinary care under subsection (a) by taking proper action before its
midnight deadline following receipt of an item, notice, or settlement. Taking proper action within a
reasonably longer time may constitute the exercise of ordinary care, but the bank has the burden of
establishing timeliness.
(c) Subject to subsection (a)(1), a bank is not liable for the insolvency, neglect, misconduct, mistake, or
default of another bank or person or for loss or destruction of an item in the possession of others or in
transit.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) states the basic responsibilities of a collecting bank. Of course, under Section 1-203 a collecting
bank is subject to the standard requirement of good faith. By subsection (a) it must also use ordinary care in the
exercise of its basic collection tasks. By Section 4-103(a) neither requirement may be disclaimed.
2. If the bank makes presentment itself, subsection (a)(1) requires ordinary care with respect both to the time and
manner of presentment. (Sections 3-501 and 4-212.) If it forwards the item to be presented the subsection requires
ordinary care with respect to routing (Section 4-204), and also in the selection of intermediary banks or other
agents.
3. Subsection (a) describes types of basic action with respect to which a collecting bank must use ordinary care.
Subsection (b) deals with the time for taking action. It first prescribes the general standard for timely action, namely,
for items received on Monday, proper action (such as forwarding or presenting) on Monday or Tuesday is timely.
Although under current "production line" operations banks customarily move items along on regular schedules
substantially briefer than two days, the subsection states an outside time within which a bank may know it has taken
timely action. To provide flexibility from this standard norm, the subsection further states that action within a
reasonably longer time may be timely but the bank has the burden of proof. In the case of time items, action after
the midnight deadline, but sufficiently in advance of maturity for proper presentation, is a clear example of a
"reasonably longer time" that is timely. The standard of requiring action not later than Tuesday in the case of
Monday items is also subject to possibilities of variation under the general provisions of Section 4-103, or under the
§ 4-202. RESPONSIBILITY FOR COLLECTION OR RETURN; WHEN ACTION TIMELY
Page 2 of 2
special provisions regarding time of receipt of items (Section 4-108), and regarding delays (Section 4-109). This
subsection (b) deals only with collecting banks. The time limits applicable to payor banks appear in Sections 4-301
and 4-302.
4. At common law the so-called New York collection rule subjected the initial collecting bank to liability for the
actions of subsequent banks in the collection chain; the so-called Massachusetts rule was that each bank, subject
to the duty of selecting proper intermediaries, was liable only for its own negligence. Subsection (c) adopts the
Massachusetts rule. But since this is stated to be subject to subsection (a)(1) a collecting bank remains responsible
for using ordinary care in selecting properly qualified intermediary banks and agents and in giving proper
instructions to them. Regulation CC Section 229.36(d) states the liability of a bank during the forward collection of
checks.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-203
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-203. EFFECT OF INSTRUCTIONS
Subject to Article 3 concerning conversion of instruments ( Section 3-420) and restrictive indorsements ( Section 3-
206), only a collecting bank's transferor can give instructions that affect the bank or constitute notice to it, and a
collecting bank is not liable to prior parties for any action taken pursuant to the instructions or in accordance with
any agreement with its transferor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section adopts a "chain of command" theory which renders it unnecessary for an intermediary or collecting
bank to determine whether its transferor is "authorized" to give the instructions. Equally the bank is not put on notice
of any "revocation of authority" or "lack of authority" by notice received from any other person. The desirability of
speed in the collection process and the fact that, by reason of advances made, the transferor may have the
paramount interest in the item requires the rule.
The section is made subject to the provisions of Article 3 concerning conversion of instruments (Section 3-420)
and restrictive indorsements (Section 3-206). Of course instructions from or an agreement with its transferor does
not relieve a collecting bank of its general obligation to exercise good faith and ordinary care. See Section 4-103(a).
If in any particular case a bank has exercised good faith and ordinary care and is relieved of responsibility by
reason of instructions of or an agreement with its transferor, the owner of the item may still have a remedy for loss
against the transferor (another bank) if such transferor has given wrongful instructions.
The rules of the section are applied only to collecting banks. Payor banks always have the problem of making
proper payment of an item; whether such payment is proper should be based upon all of the rules of Articles 3 and
4 and all of the facts of any particular case, and should not be dependent exclusively upon instructions from or an
agreement with a person presenting the item.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-204
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-204. METHODS OF SENDING AND PRESENTING; SENDING DIRECTLY
TO PAYOR BANK
(a) A collecting bank shall send items by a reasonably prompt method, taking into consideration relevant
instructions, the nature of the item, the number of those items on hand, the cost of collection involved, and
the method generally used by it or others to present those items.
(b) A collecting bank may send:
(1) an item directly to the payor bank;
(2) an item to a nonbank payor if authorized by its transferor; and
(3) an item other than documentary drafts to a nonbank payor, if authorized by Federal Reserve
regulation or operating circular, clearing-house rule, or the like.
(c) Presentment may be made by a presenting bank at a place where the payor bank or other payor has
requested that presentment be made.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) prescribes the general standards applicable to proper sending or forwarding of items. Because
of the many types of methods available and the desirability of preserving flexibility any attempt to prescribe limited
or precise methods is avoided.
2. Subsection (b)(1) codifies the practice of direct mail, express, messenger or like presentment to payor banks.
The practice is now country-wide and is justified by the need for speed, the general responsibility of banks, Federal
Deposit Insurance protection and other reasons.
3. Full approval of the practice of direct sending is limited to cases in which a bank is a payor. Since nonbank
drawees or payors may be of unknown responsibility, substantial risks may be attached to placing in their hands the
instruments calling for payments from them. This is obviously so in the case of documentary drafts. However, in
some cities practices have long existed under clearing-house procedures to forward certain types of items to certain
nonbank payors. Examples include insurance loss drafts drawn by field agents on home offices. For the purpose of
leaving the door open to legitimate practices of this kind, subsection (b)(3) affirmatively approves direct sending of
any item other than documentary drafts to any nonbank payor, if authorized by Federal Reserve regulation or
operating circular, clearing-house rule or the like.
On the other hand subsection (b)(2) approves sending any item directly to a nonbank payor if authorized by a
collecting bank's transferor. This permits special instructions or agreements out of the norm and is consistent with
the "chain of command" theory of Section 4-203. However, if a transferor other than the owner of the item, e.g., a
prior collecting bank, authorizes a direct sending to a nonbank payor, such transferor assumes responsibility for the
propriety or impropriety of such authorization.
§ 4-204. METHODS OF SENDING AND PRESENTING; SENDING DIRECTLY TO PAYOR BANK
Page 2 of 2
4. Section 3-501(b) provides where presentment may be made. This provision is expressly subject to Article 4.
Section 4-204(c) specifically approves presentment by a presenting bank at any place requested by the payor bank
or other payor. The time when a check is received by a payor bank for presentment is governed by Regulation CC
Section 229.36(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-205
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-205. DEPOSITARY BANK HOLDER OF UNINDORSED ITEM
If a customer delivers an item to a depositary bank for collection:
(1) the depositary bank becomes a holder of the item at the time it receives the item for collection if the
customer at the time of delivery was a holder of the item, whether or not the customer indorses the
item, and, if the bank satisfies the other requirements of Section 3-302, it is a holder in due course; and
(2) the depositary bank warrants to collecting banks, the payor bank or other payor, and the drawer
that the amount of the item was paid to the customer or deposited to the customer's account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Section 3-201(b) provides that negotiation of an instrument payable to order requires indorsement by the holder.
The rule of former Section 4-205(1) was that the depositary bank may supply a missing indorsement of its customer
unless the item contains the words "payee's indorsement required" or the like. The cases have differed on the
status of the depositary bank as a holder if it fails to supply its customer's indorsement. Marine Midland Bank, N.A.
v. Price, Miller, Evans & Flowers, 446 N.Y.S.2d 797 (N.Y.App.Div. 4th Dept. 1981), rev'd, 455 N.Y.S.2d 565
(N.Y.1982). It is common practice for depositary banks to receive unindorsed checks under so-called "lock-box"
agreements from customers who receive a high volume of checks. No function would be served by requiring a
depositary bank to run these items through a machine that would supply the customer's indorsement except to
afford the drawer and the subsequent banks evidence that the proceeds of the item reached the customer's
account. Paragraph (1) provides that the depositary bank becomes a holder when it takes the item for deposit if the
depositor is a holder. Whether it supplies the customer's indorsement is immaterial. Paragraph (2) satisfies the
need for a receipt of funds by the depositary bank by imposing on that bank a warranty that it paid the customer or
deposited the item to the customer's account. This warranty runs not only to collecting banks and to the payor bank
or nonbank drawee but also to the drawer, affording protection to these parties that the depositary bank received
the item and applied it to the benefit of the holder.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-206
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-206. TRANSFER BETWEEN BANKS
Any agreed method that identifies the transferor bank is sufficient for the item's further transfer to another bank.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section is designed to permit the simplest possible form of transfer from one bank to another, once an item
gets in the bank collection chain, provided only identity of the transferor bank is preserved. This is important for
tracing purposes and if recourse is necessary. However, since the responsibilities of the various banks appear in
the Article it becomes unnecessary to have liability or responsibility depend on more formal indorsements.
Simplicity in the form of transfer is conducive to speed. If the transfer is between banks, this section takes the place
of the more formal requirements of Section 3-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-207
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-207. TRANSFER WARRANTIES
(a) A customer or collecting bank that transfers an item and receives a settlement or other consideration
warrants to the transferee and to any subsequent collecting bank that:
(1) the warrantor is a person entitled to enforce the item;
(2) all signatures on the item are authentic and authorized;
(3) the item has not been altered;
(4) the item is not subject to a defense or claim in recoupment ( Section 3-305(a)) of any party that can
be asserted against the warrantor;
(5) the warrantor has no knowledge of any insolvency proceeding commenced with respect to the
maker or acceptor or, in the case of an unaccepted draft, the drawer; and
(6) with respect to any remotely-created consumer item, that the person on whose account the item is
drawn authorized the issuance of the item in the amount for which the item is drawn.
(b) If an item is dishonored, a customer or collecting bank transferring the item and receiving settlement or
other consideration is obliged to pay the amount due on the item (i) according to the terms of the item at the
time it was transferred, or (ii) if the transfer was of an incomplete item, according to its terms when
completed as stated in Sections 3-115 and 3-407. The obligation of a transferor is owed to the transferee
and to any subsequent collecting bank that takes the item in good faith. A transferor cannot disclaim its
obligation under this subsection by an indorsement stating that it is made "without recourse" or otherwise
disclaiming liability.
(c) A person to whom the warranties under subsection (a) are made and who took the item in good faith
may recover from the warrantor as damages for breach of warranty an amount equal to the loss suffered as
a result of the breach, but not more than the amount of the item plus expenses and loss of interest incurred
as a result of the breach.
(d) The warranties stated in subsection (a) cannot be disclaimed with respect to checks. Unless notice of a
claim for breach of warranty is given to the warrantor within 30 days after the claimant has reason to know
of the breach and the identity of the warrantor, the warrantor is discharged to the extent of any loss caused
by the delay in giving notice of the claim.
(e) A cause of action for breach of warranty under this section accrues when the claimant has reason to
know of the breach.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Except for subsection (b), this section conforms to Section 3-416 and extends its coverage to items. The
substance of this section is discussed in the Comment to Section 3-416. Subsection (b) provides that customers or
§ 4-207. TRANSFER WARRANTIES
Page 2 of 2
collecting banks that transfer items, whether by indorsement or not, undertake to pay the item if the item is
dishonored. This obligation cannot be disclaimed by a "without recourse" indorsement or otherwise. With respect to
checks, Regulation CC Section 229.34 states the warranties made by paying and returning banks.
2. For an explanation of subsection (a)(6), see comment 8 to Section 3-416.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-208
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-208. PRESENTMENT WARRANTIES
(a) If an unaccepted draft is presented to the drawee for payment or acceptance and the drawee pays or
accepts the draft, (i) the person obtaining payment or acceptance, at the time of presentment, and (ii) a
previous transferor of the draft, at the time of transfer, warrant to the drawee that pays or accepts the draft
in good faith that:
(1) the warrantor is, or was, at the time the warrantor transferred the draft, a person entitled to enforce
the draft or authorized to obtain payment or acceptance of the draft on behalf of a person entitled to
enforce the draft;
(2) the draft has not been altered; and
(3) the warrantor has no knowledge that the signature of the purported drawer of the draft is
unauthorized; and
(4) with respect to any remotely-created consumer item, that the person on whose account the item is
drawn authorized the issuance of the item in the amount for which the item is drawn.
(b) A drawee making payment may recover from a warrantor damages for breach of warranty equal to the
amount paid by the drawee less the amount the drawee received or is entitled to receive from the drawer
because of the payment. In addition, the drawee is entitled to compensation for expenses and loss of
interest resulting from the breach. The right of the drawee to recover damages under this subsection is not
affected by any failure of the drawee to exercise ordinary care in making payment. If the drawee accepts
the draft (i) breach of warranty is a defense to the obligation of the acceptor, and (ii) if the acceptor makes
payment with respect to the draft, the acceptor is entitled to recover from a warrantor for breach of warranty
the amounts stated in this subsection.
(c) If a drawee asserts a claim for breach of warranty under subsection (a) based on an unauthorized
indorsement of the draft or an alteration of the draft, the warrantor may defend by proving that the
indorsement is effective under Section 3-404 or 3-405 or the drawer is precluded under Section 3-406 or 4-
406 from asserting against the drawee the unauthorized indorsement or alteration.
(d) If (i) a dishonored draft is presented for payment to the drawer or an indorser or (ii) any other item is
presented for payment to a party obliged to pay the item, and the item is paid, the person obtaining
payment and a prior transferor of the item warrant to the person making payment in good faith that the
warrantor is, or was, at the time the warrantor transferred the item, a person entitled to enforce the item or
authorized to obtain payment on behalf of a person entitled to enforce the item. The person making
payment may recover from any warrantor for breach of warranty an amount equal to the amount paid plus
expenses and loss of interest resulting from the breach.
(e) The warranties stated in subsections (a) and (d) cannot be disclaimed with respect to checks. Unless
notice of a claim for breach of warranty is given to the warrantor within 30 days after the claimant has
reason to know of the breach and the identity of the warrantor, the warrantor is discharged to the extent of
any loss caused by the delay in giving notice of the claim.
(f) A cause of action for breach of warranty under this section accrues when the claimant has reason to
know of the breach.
Annotations
§ 4-208. PRESENTMENT WARRANTIES
Page 2 of 2
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section conforms to Section 3-417 and extends its coverage to items. The substance of this section is
discussed in the Comment to Section 3-417. "Draft" is defined in Section 4-104 as including an item that is an order
to pay so as to make clear that the term "draft" in Article 4 may include items that are not instruments within Section
3-104.
2. For an explanation of subsection (a)(4), see comment 8 to Section 3-416.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-209
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-209. ENCODING AND RETENTION WARRANTIES
(a) A person who encodes information on or with respect to an item after issue warrants to any subsequent
collecting bank and to the payor bank or other payor that the information is correctly encoded. If the
customer of a depositary bank encodes, that bank also makes the warranty.
(b) A person who undertakes to retain an item pursuant to an agreement for electronic presentment
warrants to any subsequent collecting bank and to the payor bank or other payor that retention and
presentment of the item comply with the agreement. If a customer of a depositary bank undertakes to retain
an item, that bank also makes this warranty.
(c) A person to whom warranties are made under this section and who took the item in good faith may
recover from the warrantor as damages for breach of warranty an amount equal to the loss suffered as a
result of the breach, plus expenses and loss of interest incurred as a result of the breach.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Encoding and retention warranties are included in Article 4 because they are unique to the bank collection
process. These warranties are breached only by the person doing the encoding or retaining the item and not by
subsequent banks handling the item. Encoding and check retention may be done by customers who are payees of
a large volume of checks; hence, this section imposes warranties on customers as well as banks. If a customer
encodes or retains, the depositary bank is also liable for any breach of this warranty.
2. A misencoding of the amount on the MICR line is not an alteration under Section 3-407(a) which defines
alteration as changing the contract of the parties. If a drawer wrote a check for $ 2,500 and the depositary bank
encoded $ 25,000 on the MICR line, the payor bank could debit the drawer's account for only $ 2,500. This
subsection would allow the payor bank to hold the depositary bank liable for the amount paid out over $ 2,500
without first pursuing the person who received payment. Intervening collecting banks would not be liable to the
payor bank for the depositary bank's error. If a drawer wrote a check for $ 25,000 and the depositary bank encoded
$ 2,500, the payor bank becomes liable for the full amount of the check. The payor bank's rights against the
depositary bank depend on whether the payor bank has suffered a loss. Since the payor bank can debit the
drawer's account for $ 25,000, the payor bank has a loss only to the extent that the drawer's account is less than
the full amount of the check. There is no requirement that the payor bank pursue collection against the drawer
beyond the amount in the drawer's account as a condition to the payor bank's action against the depositary bank for
breach of warranty. See Georgia Railroad Bank & Trust Co. v. First National Bank & Trust, 229 S.E.2d 482
(Ga.App.1976), aff'd, 235 S.E.2d 1 (Ga.1977), and First National Bank of Boston v. Fidelity Bank, National
Association, 724 F.Supp. 1168 (E.D.Pa. 1989).
3. A person retaining items under an electronic presentment agreement (Section 4-110) warrants that it has
complied with the terms of the agreement regarding its possession of the item and its sending a proper presentment
notice. If the keeper is a customer, its depositary bank also makes this warranty.
§ 4-209. ENCODING AND RETENTION WARRANTIES
Page 2 of 2
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-210
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-210. SECURITY INTEREST OF COLLECTING BANK IN ITEMS,
ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS AND PROCEEDS
(a) A collecting bank has a security interest in an item and any accompanying documents or the proceeds
of either:
(1) in case of an item deposited in an account, to the extent to which credit given for the item has been
withdrawn or applied;
(2) in case of an item for which it has given credit available for withdrawal as of right, to the extent of
the credit given, whether or not the credit is drawn upon or there is a right of charge-back; or
(3) if it makes an advance on or against the item.
(b) If credit given for several items received at one time or pursuant to a single agreement is withdrawn or
applied in part, the security interest remains upon all the items, any accompanying documents or the
proceeds of either. For the purpose of this section, credits first given are first withdrawn.
(c) Receipt by a collecting bank of a final settlement for an item is a realization on its security interest in the
item, accompanying documents, and proceeds. So long as the bank does not receive final settlement for
the item or give up possession of the item or possession or control of the accompanying documents for
purposes other than collection, the security interest continues to that extent and is subject to Article 9, but:
(1) no security agreement is necessary to make the security interest enforceable ( Section 9-
203(b)(3)(A));
(2) no filing is required to perfect the security interest; and
(3) the security interest has priority over conflicting perfected security interests in the item,
accompanying documents, or proceeds.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) states a rational rule for the interest of a bank in an item. The customer of the depositary bank is
normally the owner of the item and the several collecting banks are agents of the customer (Section 4-201). A
collecting agent may properly make advances on the security of paper held for collection, and acquires at common
law a possessory lien for these advances. Subsection (a) applies an analogous principle to a bank in the collection
chain which extends credit on items in the course of collection. The bank has a security interest to the extent stated
in this section. To the extent of its security interest it is a holder for value (Sections 3-303, 4-211) and a holder in
due course if it satisfies the other requirements for that status (Section 3-302). Subsection (a) does not derogate
from the banker's general common law lien or right of setoff against indebtedness owing in deposit accounts. See
Section 1-103. Rather subsection (a) specifically implements and extends the principle as a part of the bank
collection process.
§ 4-210. SECURITY INTEREST OF COLLECTING BANK IN ITEMS, ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS AND
PROCEEDS
Page 2 of 2
2. Subsection (b) spreads the security interest of the bank over all items in a single deposit or received under a
single agreement and a single giving of credit. It also adopts the "first-in, first-out" rule.
3. Collection statistics establish that the vast majority of items handled for collection are in fact collected. The first
sentence of subsection (c) reflects the fact that in the normal case the bank's security interest is self-liquidating. The
remainder of the subsection correlates the security interest with the provisions of Article 9, particularly for use in the
cases of noncollection in which the security interest may be important.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-211
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-211. WHEN BANK GIVES VALUE FOR PURPOSES OF HOLDER IN DUE
COURSE
For purposes of determining its status as a holder in due course, a bank has given value to the extent it has a
security interest in an item, if the bank otherwise complies with the requirements of Section 3-302 on what
constitutes a holder in due course.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
The section completes the thought of the previous section and makes clear that a security interest in an item is
"value" for the purpose of determining the holder's status as a holder in due course. The provision is in accord with
the prior law (N.I.L. Section 27) and with Article 3 (Section 3-303). The section does not prescribe a security interest
under Section 4-210 as a test of "value" generally because the meaning of "value" under other Articles is
adequately defined in Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-212
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-212. PRESENTMENT BY NOTICE OF ITEM NOT PAYABLE BY, THROUGH,
OR AT BANK; LIABILITY OF DRAWER OR INDORSER
(a) Unless otherwise instructed, a collecting bank may present an item not payable by, through, or at a
bank by sending to the party to accept or pay a record providing notice that the bank holds the item for
acceptance or payment. The notice must be sent in time to be received on or before the day when
presentment is due and the bank must meet any requirement of the party to accept or pay under Section 3-
501 by the close of the bank's next banking day after it knows of the requirement.
(b) If presentment is made by notice and payment, acceptance, or request for compliance with a
requirement under Section 3-501 is not received by the close of business on the day after maturity or, in the
case of demand items, by the close of business on the third banking day after notice was sent, the
presenting bank may treat the item as dishonored and charge any drawer or indorser by sending it notice of
the facts.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section codifies a practice extensively followed in presentation of trade acceptances and documentary and
other drafts drawn on nonbank payors. It imposes a duty on the payor to respond to the notice of the item if the item
is not to be considered dishonored. Notice of such a dishonor charges drawers and indorsers. Presentment under
this section is good presentment under Article 3. See Section 3-501.
2. A drawee not receiving notice is not, of course, liable to the drawer for wrongful dishonor.
3. A bank so presenting an instrument must be sufficiently close to the drawee to be able to exhibit the instrument
on the day it is requested to do so or the next business day at the latest.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-213
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-213. MEDIUM AND TIME OF SETTLEMENT BY BANK
(a) With respect to settlement by a bank, the medium and time of settlement may be prescribed by Federal
Reserve regulations or circulars, clearing-house rules, and the like, or agreement. In the absence of such
prescription:
(1) the medium of settlement is cash or credit to an account in a Federal Reserve bank of or specified
by the person to receive settlement; and
(2) the time of settlement, is:
(i) with respect to tender of settlement by cash, a cashier's check, or teller's check, when the cash
or check is sent or delivered;
(ii) with respect to tender of settlement by credit in an account in a Federal Reserve Bank, when
the credit is made;
(iii) with respect to tender of settlement by a credit or debit to an account in a bank, when the
credit or debit is made or, in the case of tender of settlement by authority to charge an account,
when the authority is sent or delivered; or
(iv) with respect to tender of settlement by a funds transfer, when payment is made pursuant to
Section 4A-406(a) to the person receiving settlement.
(b) If the tender of settlement is not by a medium authorized by subsection (a) or the time of settlement is
not fixed by subsection (a), no settlement occurs until the tender of settlement is accepted by the person
receiving settlement.
(c) If settlement for an item is made by cashier's check or teller's check and the person receiving
settlement, before its midnight deadline:
(1) presents or forwards the check for collection, settlement is final when the check is finally paid; or
(2) fails to present or forward the check for collection, settlement is final at the midnight deadline of the
person receiving settlement.
(d) If settlement for an item is made by giving authority to charge the account of the bank giving settlement
in the bank receiving settlement, settlement is final when the charge is made by the bank receiving
settlement if there are funds available in the account for the amount of the item.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) sets forth the medium of settlement that the person receiving settlement must accept. In nearly
all cases the medium of settlement will be determined by agreement or by Federal Reserve regulations and
circulars, clearing-house rules, and the like. In the absence of regulations, rules or agreement, the person receiving
settlement may demand cash or credit in a Federal Reserve bank. If the person receiving settlement does not have
§ 4-213. MEDIUM AND TIME OF SETTLEMENT BY BANK
Page 2 of 2
an account in a Federal Reserve bank, it may specify the account of another bank in a Federal Reserve bank. In
the unusual case in which there is no agreement on the medium of settlement and the bank making settlement
tenders settlement other than cash or Federal Reserve bank credit, no settlement has occurred under subsection
(b) unless the person receiving settlement accepts the settlement tendered. For example, if a payor bank, without
agreement, tenders a teller's check, the bank receiving the settlement may reject the check and return it to the
payor bank or it may accept the check as settlement.
2. In several provisions of Article 4 the time that a settlement occurs is relevant. Subsection (a) sets out a general
rule that the time of settlement, like the means of settlement, may be prescribed by agreement. In the absence of
agreement, the time of settlement for tender of the common agreed media of settlement is that set out in subsection
(a)(2). The time of settlement by cash, cashier's or teller's check or authority to charge an account is the time the
cash, check or authority is sent, unless presentment is over the counter in which case settlement occurs upon
delivery to the presenter. If there is no agreement on the time of settlement and the tender of settlement is not
made by one of the media set out in subsection (a), under subsection (b) the time of settlement is the time the
settlement is accepted by the person receiving settlement.
3. Subsections (c) and (d) are special provisions for settlement by remittance drafts and authority to charge an
account in the bank receiving settlement. The relationship between final settlement and final payment under Section
4-215 is addressed in subsection (b) of Section 4-215. With respect to settlement by cashier's checks or teller's
checks, other than in response to over-the-counter presentment, the bank receiving settlement can keep the risk
that the check will not be paid on the bank tendering the check in settlement by acting to initiate collection of the
check within the midnight deadline of the bank receiving settlement. If the bank fails to initiate settlement before its
midnight deadline, final settlement occurs at the midnight deadline, and the bank receiving settlement assumes the
risk that the check will not be paid. If there is no agreement that permits the bank tendering settlement to tender a
cashier's or teller's check, subsection (b) allows the bank receiving the check to reject it, and, if it does, no
settlement occurs. However, if the bank accepts the check, settlement occurs and the time of final settlement is
governed by subsection (c).
With respect to settlement by tender of authority to charge the account of the bank making settlement in the bank
receiving settlement, subsection (d) provides that final settlement does not take place until the account charged has
available funds to cover the amount of the item. If there is no agreement that permits the bank tendering settlement
to tender an authority to charge an account as settlement, subsection (b) allows the bank receiving the tender to
reject it. However, if the bank accepts the authority, settlement occurs and the time of final settlement is governed
by subsection (d).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-214
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-214. RIGHT OF CHARGE - BACK OR REFUND; LIABILITY OF
COLLECTING BANK; RETURN OF ITEM
(a) If a collecting bank has made provisional settlement with its customer for an item and fails by reason of
dishonor, suspension of payments by a bank, or otherwise to receive settlement for the item which is or
becomes final, the bank may revoke the settlement given by it, charge back the amount of any credit given
for the item to its customer's account, or obtain refund from its customer, whether or not it is able to return
the item, if by its midnight deadline or within a longer reasonable time after it learns the facts it returns the
item or sends notification of the facts. If the return or notice is delayed beyond the bank's midnight deadline
or a longer reasonable time after it learns the facts, the bank may revoke the settlement, charge back the
credit, or obtain refund from its customer, but it is liable for any loss resulting from the delay. These rights to
revoke, charge back, and obtain refund terminate if and when a settlement for the item received by the
bank is or becomes final.
(b) A collecting bank returns an item when it is sent or delivered to the bank's customer or transferor or
pursuant to its instructions.
(c) A depositary bank that is also the payor may charge back the amount of an item to its customer's
account or obtain refund in accordance with the section governing return of an item received by a payor
bank for credit on its books ( Section 4-301).
(d) The right to charge back is not affected by:
(1) previous use of a credit given for the item; or
(2) failure by any bank to exercise ordinary care with respect to the item, but a bank so failing remains
liable.
(e) A failure to charge back or claim refund does not affect other rights of the bank against the customer or
any other party.
(f) If credit is given in dollars as the equivalent of the value of an item payable in foreign money, the dollar
amount of any charge-back or refund must be calculated on the basis of the bank-offered spot rate for the
foreign money prevailing on the day when the person entitled to the charge-back or refund learns that it will
not receive payment in ordinary course.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Under current bank practice, in a major portion of cases banks make provisional settlement for items when they
are first received and then await subsequent determination of whether the item will be finally paid. This is the
principal characteristic of what are referred to in banking parlance as "cash items." Statistically, this practice of
settling provisionally first and then awaiting final payment is justified because the vast majority of such cash items
are finally paid, with the result that in this great preponderance of cases it becomes unnecessary for the banks
§ 4-214. RIGHT OF CHARGE - BACK OR REFUND; LIABILITY OF COLLECTING BANK; RETURN OF ITEM
Page 2 of 2
making the provisional settlements to make any further entries. In due course the provisional settlements become
final simply with the lapse of time. However, in those cases in which the item being collected is not finally paid or if
for various reasons the bank making the provisional settlement does not itself receive final payment, provision is
made in subsection (a) for the reversal of the provisional settlements, charge-back of provisional credits and the
right to obtain refund.
2. Various causes of a bank's not receiving final payment, with the resulting right of charge-back or refund, are
stated or suggested in subsection (a). These include dishonor of the original item; dishonor of a remittance
instrument given for it; reversal of a provisional credit for the item; suspension of payments by another bank. The
causes stated are illustrative; the right of charge-back or refund is stated to exist whether the failure to receive final
payment in ordinary course arises through one of them "or otherwise."
3. The right of charge-back or refund exists if a collecting bank has made a provisional settlement for an item with
its customer but terminates if and when a settlement received by the bank for the item is or becomes final. If the
bank fails to receive such a final settlement the right of charge-back or refund must be exercised promptly after the
bank learns the facts. The right exists (if so promptly exercised) whether or not the bank is able to return the item.
The second sentence of subsection (a) adopts the view of Appliance Buyers Credit Corp. v. Prospect National
Bank, 708 F.2d 290 (7th Cir. 1983), that if the midnight deadline for returning an item or giving notice is not met, a
collecting bank loses its rights only to the extent of damages for any loss resulting from the delay.
4. Subsection (b) states when an item is returned by a collecting bank. Regulation CC, Section 229.31 preempts
this subsection with respect to checks by allowing direct return to the depositary bank. Because a returned check
may follow a different path than in forward collection, settlement given for the check is final and not provisional
except as between the depositary bank and its customer. Regulation CC Section 229.36(d). See also Regulations
CC Sections 229.31(c) and 229.32(b). Thus owing to the federal preemption, this subsection applies only to
noncheck items.
5. The rule of subsection (d) relating to charge-back (as distinguished from claim for refund) applies irrespective
of the cause of the nonpayment, and of the person ultimately liable for nonpayment. Thus charge-back is permitted
even if nonpayment results from the depositary bank's own negligence. Any other rule would result in litigation
based upon a claim for wrongful dishonor of other checks of the customer, with potential damages far in excess of
the amount of the item. Any other rule would require a bank to determine difficult questions of fact. The customer's
protection is found in the general obligation of good faith (Sections 1-203 and 4-103). If bad faith is established the
customer's recovery "includes other damages, if any, suffered by the party as a proximate consequence" (Section
4-103(e); see also Section 4-402).
6. It is clear that the charge-back does not relieve the bank from any liability for failure to exercise ordinary care in
handling the item. The measure of damages for such failure is stated in Section 4-103(e).
7. Subsection (f) states a rule fixing the time for determining the rate of exchange if there is a charge-back or
refund of a credit given in dollars for an item payable in a foreign currency. Compare Section 3-107. Fixing such a
rule is desirable to avoid disputes. If in any case the parties wish to fix a different time for determining the rate of
exchange, they may do so by agreement.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-215
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-215. FINAL PAYMENT OF ITEM BY PAYOR BANK; WHEN PROVISIONAL
DEBITS AND CREDITS BECOME FINAL; WHEN CERTAIN CREDITS BECOME
AVAILABLE FOR WITHDRAWAL
(a) An item is finally paid by a payor bank when the bank has first done any of the following:
(1) paid the item in cash;
(2) settled for the item without having a right to revoke the settlement under statute, clearing-house
rule, or agreement; or
(3) made a provisional settlement for the item and failed to revoke the settlement in the time and
manner permitted by statute, clearing-house rule, or agreement.
(b) If provisional settlement for an item does not become final, the item is not finally paid.
(c) If provisional settlement for an item between the presenting and payor banks is made through a
clearing house or by debits or credits in an account between them, then to the extent that provisional debits
or credits for the item are entered in accounts between the presenting and payor banks or between the
presenting and successive prior collecting banks seriatim, they become final upon final payment of the item
by the payor bank.
(d) If a collecting bank receives a settlement for an item which is or becomes final, the bank is accountable
to its customer for the amount of the item and any provisional credit given for the item in an account with its
customer becomes final.
(e) Subject to (i) applicable law stating a time for availability of funds and (ii) any right of the bank to apply
the credit to an obligation of the customer, credit given by a bank for an item in a customer's account
becomes available for withdrawal as of right:
(1) if the bank has received a provisional settlement for the item, when the settlement becomes final
and the bank has had a reasonable time to receive return of the item and the item has not been
received within that time;
(2) if the bank is both the depositary bank and the payor bank, and the item is finally paid, at the
opening of the bank's second banking day following receipt of the item.
(f) Subject to applicable law stating a time for availability of funds and any right of a bank to apply a deposit
to an obligation of the depositor, a deposit of money becomes available for withdrawal as of right at the
opening of the bank's next banking day after receipt of the deposit.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. By the definition and use of the term "settle" (Section 4-104(a)(11)) this Article recognizes that various debits or
credits, remittances, settlements or payments given for an item may be either provisional or final, that settlements
§ 4-215. FINAL PAYMENT OF ITEM BY PAYOR BANK; WHEN PROVISIONAL DEBITS AND CREDITS
BECOME FINAL; WHEN CERTAIN CREDITS BECOME AVAILABLE FOR WITHDRAWAL
Page 2 of 4
sometimes are provisional and sometimes are final and sometimes are provisional for awhile but later become final.
Subsection (a) defines when settlement for an item constitutes final payment.
Final payment of an item is important for a number of reasons. It is one of several factors determining the relative
priorities between items and notices, stop-payment orders, legal process and setoffs (Section 4-303). It is the "end
of the line" in the collection process and the "turn around" point commencing the return flow of proceeds. It is the
point at which many provisional settlements become final. See Section 4-215(c). Final payment of an item by the
payor bank fixes preferential rights under Section 4-216.
2. If an item being collected moves through several states, e.g., is deposited for collection in California, moves
through two or three California banks to the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, to the Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston, to a payor bank in Maine, the collection process involves the eastward journey of the item from California
to Maine and the westward journey of the proceeds from Maine to California. Subsection (a) recognizes that final
payment does not take place, in this hypothetical case, on the journey of the item eastward. It also adopts the view
that neither does final payment occur on the journey westward because what in fact is journeying westward are
proceeds of the item.
3. Traditionally and under various decisions payment in cash of an item by a payor bank has been considered
final payment. Subsection (a)(1) recognizes and provides that payment of an item in cash by a payor bank is final
payment.
4. Section 4-104(a)(11) defines "settle" as meaning "to pay in cash, by clearing-house settlement, in a charge or
credit or by remittance, or otherwise as agreed. A settlement may be either provisional or final." Subsection (a)(2) of
Section 4-215 provides that an item is finally paid by a payor bank when the bank has "settled for the item without
having a right to revoke the settlement under statute, clearing-house rule or agreement." Former subsection (1)(b)
is modified by subsection (a)(2) to make clear that a payor bank cannot make settlement provisional by unilaterally
reserving a right to revoke the settlement. The right must come from a statute (e.g., Section 4-301), clearing-house
rule or other agreement. Subsection (a)(2) provides in effect that if the payor bank finally settles for an item this
constitutes final payment of the item. The subsection operates if nothing has occurred and no situation exists
making the settlement provisional. If under statute, clearing-house rule or agreement, a right of revocation of the
settlement exists, the settlement is provisional. Conversely, if there is an absence of a right to revoke under statute,
clearing-house rule or agreement, the settlement is final and such final settlement constitutes final payment of the
item.
A primary example of a statutory right on the part of the payor bank to revoke a settlement is the right to revoke
conferred by Section 4-301. The underlying theory and reason for deferred posting statutes (Section 4-301) is to
require a settlement on the date of receipt of an item but to keep that settlement provisional with the right to revoke
prior to the midnight deadline. In any case in which Section 4-301 is applicable, any settlement by the payor bank is
provisional solely by virtue of the statute, subsection (a)(2) of Section 4-215 does not operate, and such provisional
settlement does not constitute final payment of the item. With respect to checks, Regulation CC Section 229.36(d)
provides that settlement between banks for the forward collection of checks is final. The relationship of this
provision to Article 4 is discussed in the Commentary to that section.
A second important example of a right to revoke a settlement is that arising under clearing-house rules. It is very
common for clearing-house rules to provide that items exchanged and settled for in a clearing (e.g., before 10:00
a.m. on Monday) may be returned and the settlements revoked up to but not later than 2:00 p.m. on the same day
(Monday) or under deferred posting at some hour on the next business day (e.g., 2:00 p.m. Tuesday). Under this
type of rule the Monday morning settlement is provisional and being provisional does not constitute a final payment
of the item.
An example of an agreement allowing the payor bank to revoke a settlement is a case in which the payor bank is
also the depositary bank and has signed a receipt or duplicate deposit ticket or has made an entry in a passbook
acknowledging receipt, for credit to the account of A, of a check drawn on it by B. If the receipt, deposit ticket,
passbook or other agreement with A is to the effect that any credit so entered is provisional and may be revoked
pending the time required by the payor bank to process the item to determine if it is in good form and there are
§ 4-215. FINAL PAYMENT OF ITEM BY PAYOR BANK; WHEN PROVISIONAL DEBITS AND CREDITS
BECOME FINAL; WHEN CERTAIN CREDITS BECOME AVAILABLE FOR WITHDRAWAL
Page 3 of 4
funds to cover it, the agreement keeps the receipt or credit provisional and avoids its being either final settlement or
final payment.
The most important application of subsection (a)(2) is that in which presentment of an item has been made over
the counter for immediate payment. In this case Section 4-301(a) does not apply to make the settlement
provisional, and final payment has occurred unless a rule or agreement provides otherwise.
5. Former Section 4-213(1)(c) provided that final payment occurred when the payor bank completed the "process
of posting." The term was defined in former Section 4-109. In the present Article, Section 4-109 has been deleted
and the process-of-posting test has been abandoned in Section 4-215(a) for determining when final payment is
made. Difficulties in determining when the events described in former Section 4-109 take place make the processof-
posting test unsuitable for a system of automated check collection or electronic presentment.
6. The last sentence of former Section 4-213(1) is deleted as an unnecessary source of confusion. Initially the
view that payor bank may be accountable for, that is, liable for the amount of, an item that it has already paid seems
incongruous. This is particularly true in the light of the language formerly found in Section 4-302 stating that the
payor bank can defend against liability for accountability by showing that it has already settled for the item. But, at
least with respect to former Section 4-213(1)(c), such a provision was needed because under the process-ofposting
test a payor bank may have paid an item without settling for it. Now that Article 4 has abandoned the
process-of-posting test, the sentence is no longer needed. If the payor bank has neither paid the item nor returned it
within its midnight deadline, the payor bank is accountable under Section 4-302.
7. Subsection (a)(3) covers the situation in which the payor bank makes a provisional settlement for an item, and
this settlement becomes final at a later time by reason of the failure of the payor bank to revoke it in the time and
manner permitted by statute, clearing-house rule or agreement. An example of this type of situation is the clearinghouse
settlement referred to in Comment 4. In the illustration there given if the time limit for the return of items
received in the Monday morning clearing is 2:00 p.m. on Tuesday and the provisional settlement has not been
revoked at that time in a manner permitted by the clearing-house rules, the provisional settlement made on Monday
morning becomes final at 2:00 p.m. on Tuesday. Subsection (a)(3) provides specifically that in this situation the item
is finally paid at 2:00 p.m. Tuesday. If on the other hand a payor bank receives an item in the mail on Monday and
makes some provisional settlement for the item on Monday, it has until midnight on Tuesday to return the item or
give notice and revoke any settlement under Section 4-301. In this situation subsection (a)(3) of Section 4-215
provides that if the provisional settlement made on Monday is not revoked before midnight on Tuesday as permitted
by Section 4-301, the item is finally paid at midnight on Tuesday. With respect to checks, Regulation CC Section
229.30(c) allows an extension of the midnight deadline under certain circumstances. If a bank does not
expeditiously return a check liability may accrue under Regulation CC Section 229.38. For the relationship of that
liability to responsibility under this Article, see Regulation CC Sections 229.30 and 229.38.
8. Subsection (b) relates final settlement to final payment under Section 4-215. For example, if a payor bank
makes provisional settlement for an item by sending a cashier's or teller's check and that settlement fails to become
final under Section 4-213(c), subsection (b) provides that final payment has not occurred. If the item is not paid, the
drawer remains liable, and under Section 4-302(a) the payor bank is accountable unless it has returned the item
before its midnight deadline. In this regard, subsection (b) is an exception to subsection (a)(3). Even if the payor
bank has not returned an item by its midnight deadline there is still no final payment if provisional settlement had
been made and settlement failed to become final. However, if presentment of the item was over the counter for
immediate payment, final payment has occurred under Section 4-215(a)(2). Subsection (b) does not apply because
the settlement was not provisional. Section 4-301(a). In this case the presenting person, often the payee of the
item, has the right to demand cash or the cash equivalent of federal reserve credit. If the presenting person accepts
another medium of settlement such as a cashier's or teller's check, the presenting person takes the risk that the
payor bank may fail to pay a cashier's check because of insolvency or that the drawee of a teller's check may
dishonor it.
9. Subsection (c) states the country-wide usage that when the item is finally paid by the payor bank under
subsection (a) this final payment automatically without further action "firms up" other provisional settlements made
§ 4-215. FINAL PAYMENT OF ITEM BY PAYOR BANK; WHEN PROVISIONAL DEBITS AND CREDITS
BECOME FINAL; WHEN CERTAIN CREDITS BECOME AVAILABLE FOR WITHDRAWAL
Page 4 of 4
for it. However, the subsection makes clear that this "firming up" occurs only if the settlement between the
presenting and payor banks was made either through a clearing house or by debits and credits in accounts
between them. It does not take place if the payor bank remits for the item by sending some form of remittance
instrument. Further, the "firming up" continues only to the extent that provisional debits and credits are entered
seriatim in accounts between banks which are successive to the presenting bank. The automatic "firming up" is
broken at any time that any collecting bank remits for the item by sending a remittance draft, because final payment
to the remittee then usually depends upon final payment of the remittance draft.
10. Subsection (d) states the general rule that if a collecting bank receives settlement for an item which is or
becomes final, the bank is accountable to its customer for the amount of the item. One means of accounting is to
remit to its customer the amount it has received on the item. If previously it gave to its customer a provisional credit
for the item in an account its receipt of final settlement for the item "firms up" this provisional credit and makes it
final. When this credit given by it so becomes final, in the usual case its agency status terminates and it becomes a
debtor to its customer for the amount of the item. See Section 4-201(a). If the accounting is by a remittance
instrument or authorization to charge further time will usually be required to complete its accounting (Section 4-
213).
11. Subsection (e) states when certain credits given by a bank to its customer become available for withdrawal as
of right. Subsection (e)(1) deals with the situation in which a bank has given a credit (usually provisional) for an item
to its customer and in turn has received a provisional settlement for the item from an intermediary or payor bank to
which it has forwarded the item. In this situation before the provisional credit entered by the collecting bank in the
account of its customer becomes available for withdrawal as of right, it is not only necessary that the provisional
settlement received by the bank for the item becomes final but also that the collecting bank has a reasonable time
to receive return of the item and the item has not been received within that time. How much time is "reasonable" for
these purposes will of course depend on the distance the item has to travel and the number of banks through which
it must pass (having in mind not only travel time by regular lines of transmission but also the successive midnight
deadlines of the several banks) and other pertinent facts. Also, if the provisional settlement received is some form
of a remittance instrument or authorization to charge, the "reasonable" time depends on the identity and location of
the payor of the remittance instrument, the means for clearing such instrument, and other pertinent facts. With
respect to checks Regulation CC Sections 229.10-229.13 or similar applicable state law (Section 229.20) control.
This is also time for the situation described in Comment 12.
12. Subsection (e)(2) deals with the situation of a bank that is both a depositary bank and a payor bank. The
subsection recognizes that if A and B are both customers of a depositary-payor bank and A deposits B's check on
the depositary-payor in A's account on Monday, time must be allowed to permit the check under the deferred
posting rules of Section 4-301 to reach the bookkeeper for B's account at some time on Tuesday, and, if there are
insufficient funds in B's account, to reverse or charge back the provisional credit in A's account. Consequently this
provisional credit in A's account does not become available for withdrawal as of right until the opening of business
on Wednesday. If it is determined on Tuesday that there are insufficient funds in B's account to pay the check, the
credit to A's account can be reversed on Tuesday. On the other hand if the item is in fact paid on Tuesday, the rule
of subsection (e)(2) is desirable to avoid uncertainty and possible disputes between the bank and its customer as to
exactly what hour within the day the credit is available.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-216
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 2. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: DEPOSITARY AND COLLECTING BANKS
§ 4-216. INSOLVENCY AND PREFERENCE
(a) If an item is in or comes into the possession of a payor or collecting bank that suspends payment and
the item has not been finally paid, the item must be returned by the receiver, trustee, or agent in charge of
the closed bank to the presenting bank or the closed bank's customer.
(b) If a payor bank finally pays an item and suspends payments without making a settlement for the item
with its customer or the presenting bank which settlement is or becomes final, the owner of the item has a
preferred claim against the payor bank.
(c) If a payor bank gives or a collecting bank gives or receives a provisional settlement for an item and
thereafter suspends payments, the suspension does not prevent or interfere with the settlement's becoming
final if the finality occurs automatically upon the lapse of certain time or the happening of certain events.
(d) If a collecting bank receives from subsequent parties settlement for an item, which settlement is or
becomes final and the bank suspends payments without making a settlement for the item with its customer
which settlement is or becomes final, the owner of the item has a preferred claim against the collecting
bank.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The underlying purpose of the provisions of this section is not to confer upon banks, holders of items or anyone
else preferential positions in the event of bank failures over general depositors or any other creditors of the failed
banks. The purpose is to fix as definitely as possible the cut-off point of time for the completion or cessation of the
collection process in the case of items that happen to be in the process at the time a particular bank suspends
payments. It must be remembered that in bank collections as a whole and in the handling of items by an individual
bank, items go through a whole series of processes. It must also be remembered that at any particular point of time
a particular bank (at least one of any size) is functioning as a depositary bank for some items, as an intermediary
bank for others, as a presenting bank for still others and as a payor bank for still others, and that when it suspends
payments it will have close to its normal load of items working through its various processes. For the convenience
of receivers, owners of items, banks, and in fact substantially everyone concerned, it is recognized that at the
particular moment of time that a bank suspends payment, a certain portion of the items being handled by it have
progressed far enough in the bank collection process that it is preferable to permit them to continue the remaining
distance, rather than to send them back and reverse the many entries that have been made or the steps that have
been taken with respect to them. Therefore, having this background and these purposes in mind, the section states
what items must be turned backward at the moment suspension intervenes and what items have progressed far
enough that the collection process with respect to them continues, with the resulting necessary statement of rights
of various parties flowing from this prescription of the cut-off time.
2. The rules stated are similar to those stated in the American Bankers Association Bank Collection Code, but
with the abandonment of any theory of trust. On the other hand, some law previous to this Act may be relevant. See
Note, Uniform Commercial Code: Stopping Payment of an Item Deposited with an Insolvent Depositary Bank, 40
§ 4-216. INSOLVENCY AND PREFERENCE
Page 2 of 2
Okla.L.Rev. 689 (1987). Although for practical purposes Federal Deposit Insurance affects materially the result of
bank failures on holders of items and banks, no attempt is made to vary the rules of the section by reason of such
insurance.
3. It is recognized that in view of Jennings v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 294 U.S. 216, 55 S.Ct. 394,
79 L.Ed. 869, 99 A.L.R. 1248 (1935), amendment of the National Bank Act would be necessary to have this section
apply to national banks. But there is no reason why it should not apply to others. See Section 1-108.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-301
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 3. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: PAYOR BANKS
§ 4-301. POSTING; RECOVERY OF PAYMENT BY RETURN OF ITEMS; TIME
OF DISHONOR; RETURN OF ITEMS BY PAYOR BANK
(a) If a payor bank settles for a demand item other than a documentary draft presented otherwise than for
immediate payment over the counter before midnight of the banking day of receipt, the payor bank may
revoke the settlement and recover the settlement if, before it has made final payment and before its
midnight deadline, it
(1) returns the item;
(2) returns an image of the item, if the party to which the return is made has entered into an agreement
to accept an image as a return of the item and the image is returned in accordance with that
agreement; or
(3) sends a record providing notice of dishonor or nonpayment if the item is unavailable for return.
(b) If a demand item is received by a payor bank for credit on its books, it may return the item or send
notice of dishonor and may revoke any credit given or recover the amount thereof withdrawn by its
customer, if it acts within the time limit and in the manner specified in subsection (a).
(c) Unless previous notice of dishonor has been sent, an item is dishonored at the time when for purposes
of dishonor it is returned or notice sent in accordance with this section.
(d) An item is returned:
(1) as to an item presented through a clearing house, when it is delivered to the presenting or last
collecting bank or to the clearing house or is sent or delivered in accordance with clearing-house rules;
or
(2) in all other cases, when it is sent or delivered to the bank's customer or transferor or pursuant to
instructions.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The term "deferred posting" appears in the caption of Section 4-301. This refers to the practice permitted by
statute in most of the states before the UCC under which a payor bank receives items on one day but does not post
the items to the customer's account until the next day. Items dishonored were then returned after the posting on the
day after receipt. Under Section 4-301 the concept of "deferred posting" merely allows a payor bank that has settled
for an item on the day of receipt to return a dishonored item on the next day before its midnight deadline, without
regard to when the item was actually posted. With respect to checks Regulation CC Section 229.30(c) extends the
midnight deadline under the UCC under certain circumstances. See the Commentary to Regulation CC Section
229.38(d) on the relationship between the UCC and Regulation CC on settlement.
§ 4-301. POSTING; RECOVERY OF PAYMENT BY RETURN OF ITEMS; TIME OF DISHONOR; RETURN OF
ITEMS BY PAYOR BANK
Page 2 of 3
2. The function of this section is to provide the circumstances under which a payor bank that has made timely
settlement for an item may return the item and revoke the settlement so that it may recover any settlement made.
These circumstances are: (1) the item must be a demand item other than a documentary draft; (2) the item must be
presented otherwise than for immediate payment over the counter; and (3) the payor bank must return the item (or
give notice if the item is unavailable for return) before its midnight deadline and before it has paid the item. With
respect to checks, see Regulation CC Section 229.31(f) on notice in lieu of return and Regulation CC Section
229.33 as to the different requirement of notice of nonpayment. An instance of when an item may be unavailable for
return arises under a collecting bank check retention plan under which presentment is made by a presentment
notice and the item is retained by the collecting bank. Section 4-215(a)(2) provides that final payment occurs if the
payor bank has settled for an item without a right to revoke the settlement under statute, clearing-house rule or
agreement. In any case in which Section 4-301(a) is applicable, the payor bank has a right to revoke the settlement
by statute; therefore, Section 4-215(a)(2) is inoperable, and the settlement is provisional. Hence, if the settlement is
not over the counter and the payor bank settles in a manner that does not constitute final payment, the payor bank
can revoke the settlement by returning the item before its midnight deadline.
3. The relationship of Section 4-301(a) to final settlement and final payment under Section 4-215 is illustrated by
the following case. Depositary Bank sends by mail an item to Payor Bank with instructions to settle by remitting a
teller's check drawn on a bank in the city where Depositary Bank is located. Payor Bank sends the teller's check on
the day the item was presented. Having made timely settlement, under the deferred posting provisions of Section 4-
301(a), Payor Bank may revoke that settlement by returning the item before its midnight deadline. If it fails to return
the item before its midnight deadline, it has finally paid the item if the bank on which the teller's check was drawn
honors the check. But if the teller's check is dishonored there has been no final settlement under Section 4-213(c)
and no final payment under Section 4-215(b). Since the Payor Bank has neither paid the item nor made timely
return, it is accountable for the item under Section 4-302(a).
4. The time limits for action imposed by subsection (a) are adopted by subsection (b) for cases in which the payor
bank is also the depositary bank, but in this case the requirement of a settlement on the day of receipt is omitted.
5. Subsection (c) fixes a base point from which to measure the time within which notice of dishonor must be
given. See Section 3-503.
6. Subsection (d) leaves banks free to agree upon the manner of returning items but establishes a precise time
when an item is "returned." For definition of "sent" as used in paragraphs (1) and (2) see Section 1-201(38).
Obviously the subsection assumes that the item has not been "finally paid" under Section 4-215(a). If it has been,
this provision has no operation.
7. The fact that an item has been paid under proposed Section 4-215 does not preclude the payor bank from
asserting rights of restitution or revocation under Section 3-418. National Savings and Trust Co. v. Park Corp., 722
F.2d 1303 (6th Cir.1983), cert. denied, 466 U.S. 939 (1984), is the correct interpretation of the present law on this
issue.
8. Paragraph (a)(2) is designed to facilitate electronic check-processing by authorizing the payor bank to return an
image of the item instead of the actual item. It applies only when the payor bank and the party to which the return
has been made have agreed that the payor bank can make such a return and when the return complies with the
agreement. The purpose of the paragraph is to prevent third parties (such as the depositor of the check) from
contending that the payor bank missed its midnight deadline because it failed to return the actual item in a timely
manner. If the payor bank missed its midnight deadline, payment would have become final under Section 4-215 and
the depositary bank would have lost its right of chargeback under Section 4-214. Of course, the depositary bank
might enter into an agreement with its depositor to resolve that problem, but it is not clear that agreements by banks
with their customers can resolve all such issues. In any event, paragraph (a)(2) should eliminate the need for such
agreements. The provision rests on the premise that it is inappropriate to penalize a payor bank simply because it
returns the actual item a few business days after the midnight deadline of the payor bank sent notice before that
deadline to a collecting bank that had agreed to accept such notices..
§ 4-301. POSTING; RECOVERY OF PAYMENT BY RETURN OF ITEMS; TIME OF DISHONOR; RETURN OF
ITEMS BY PAYOR BANK
Page 3 of 3
Nothing in paragraph (a)(2) authorizes the payor bank to destroy the check.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-302
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 3. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: PAYOR BANKS
§ 4-302. PAYOR'S BANK RESPONSIBILITY FOR LATE RETURN OF ITEM
(a) If an item is presented to and received by a payor bank, the bank is accountable for the amount of:
(1) a demand item, other than a documentary draft, whether properly payable or not, if the bank, in any
case in which it is not also the depositary bank, retains the item beyond midnight of the banking day of
receipt without settling for it or, whether or not it is also the depositary bank, does not pay or return the
item or send notice of dishonor until after its midnight deadline; or
(2) any other properly payable item unless, within the time allowed for acceptance or payment of that
item, the bank either accepts or pays the item or returns it and accompanying documents.
(b) The liability of a payor bank to pay an item pursuant to subsection (a) is subject to defenses based on
breach of a presentment warranty ( Section 4-208) or proof that the person seeking enforcement of the
liability presented or transferred the item for the purpose of defrauding the payor bank.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a)(1) continues the former law distinguishing between cases in which the payor bank is not also
the depositary bank and those in which the payor bank is also the depositary bank ("on us" items). For "on us"
items the payor bank is accountable if it retains the item beyond its midnight deadline without settling for it. If the
payor bank is not the depositary bank it is accountable if it retains the item beyond midnight of the banking day of
receipt without settling for it. It may avoid accountability either by settling for the item on the day of receipt and
returning the item before its midnight deadline under Section 4-301 or by returning the item on the day of receipt.
This rule is consistent with the deferred posting practice authorized by Section 4-301 which allows the payor bank
to make provisional settlement for an item on the day of receipt and to revoke that settlement by returning the item
on the next day. With respect to checks, Regulation CC Section 229.36(d) provides that settlements between banks
for forward collection of checks are final when made. See the Commentary on that provision for its effect on the
UCC.
2. If the settlement given by the payor bank does not become final, there has been no payment under Section 4-
215(b), and the payor bank giving the failed settlement is accountable under subsection (a)(1) of Section 4-302. For
instance, the payor bank makes provisional settlement by sending a teller's check that is dishonored. In such a
case settlement is not final under Section 4-213(c) and no payment occurs under Section 4-215(b). Payor bank is
accountable on the item. The general principle is that unless settlement provides the presenting bank with usable
funds, settlement has failed and the payor bank is accountable for the amount of the item. On the other hand, if the
payor bank makes a settlement for the item that becomes final under Section 4-215, the item has been paid and
thus the payor bank is not accountable for the item under this Section. Amendments approved by the Permanent
Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code November 2, 2002.
3. Subsection (b) is an elaboration of the deleted introductory language of former Section 4-302: "In the absence
of a valid defense such as breach of a presentment warranty (subsection (1) of Section 4-207), settlement effected
§ 4-302. PAYOR'S BANK RESPONSIBILITY FOR LATE RETURN OF ITEM
Page 2 of 2
or the like...." A payor bank can defend an action against it based on accountability by showing that the item
contained a forged indorsement or a fraudulent alteration. Subsection (b) drops the ambiguous "or the like"
language and provides that the payor bank may also raise the defense of fraud. Decisions that hold an accountable
bank's liability to be "absolute" are rejected. A payor bank that makes a late return of an item should not be liable to
a defrauder operating a check kiting scheme. In Bank of Leumi Trust Co. v. Bally's Park Place Inc., 528 F.Supp.
349 (S.D.N.Y.1981), and American National Bank v. Foodbasket, 497 P.2d 546 (Wyo.1972), banks that were
accountable under Section 4-302 for missing their midnight deadline were successful in defending against parties
who initiated collection knowing that the check would not be paid. The "settlement effected" language is deleted as
unnecessary. If a payor bank is accountable for an item it is liable to pay it. If it has made final payment for an item,
it is no longer accountable for the item.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-303
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 3. COLLECTION OF ITEMS: PAYOR BANKS
§ 4-303. WHEN ITEMS SUBJECT TO NOTICE, STOP-PAYMENT ORDER,
LEGAL PROCESS, OR SETOFF; ORDER IN WHICH ITEMS MAY BE
CHANGED OR CERTIFIED
(a) Any knowledge, notice, or stop-payment order received by, legal process served upon, or setoff
exercised by a payor bank comes too late to terminate, suspend, or modify the bank's right or duty to pay
an item or to charge its customer's account for the item if the knowledge, notice, stop-payment order, or
legal process is received or served and a reasonable time for the bank to act thereon expires or the setoff is
exercised after the earliest of the following:
(1) the bank accepts or certifies the item;
(2) the bank pays the item in cash;
(3) the bank settles for the item without having a right to revoke the settlement under statute, clearinghouse
rule, or agreement;
(4) the bank becomes accountable for the amount of the item under Section 4-302 dealing with the
payor bank's responsibility for late return of items; or
(5) with respect to checks, a cutoff hour no earlier than one hour after the opening of the next banking
day after the banking day on which the bank received the check and no later than the close of that next
banking day or, if no cutoff hour is fixed, the close of the next banking day after the banking day on
which the bank received the check.
(b) Subject to subsection (a), items may be accepted, paid, certified, or charged to the indicated account of
its customer in any order.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. While a payor bank is processing an item presented for payment, it may receive knowledge or a legal notice
affecting the item, such as knowledge or a notice that the drawer has filed a petition in bankruptcy or made an
assignment for the benefit of creditors; may receive an order of the drawer stopping payment on the item; may have
served on it an attachment of the account of the drawer; or the bank itself may exercise a right of setoff against the
drawer's account. Each of these events affects the account of the drawer and may eliminate or freeze all or part of
whatever balance is available to pay the item. Subsection (a) states the rule for determining the relative priorities
between these various legal events and the item.
2. The rule is that if any one of several things has been done to the item or if it has reached any one of several
stages in its processing at the time the knowledge, notice, stop-payment order or legal process is received or
served and a reasonable time for the bank to act thereon expires or the setoff is exercised, the knowledge, notice,
stop-payment order, legal process or setoff comes too late, the item has priority and a charge to the customer's
account may be made and is effective. With respect to the effect of the customer's bankruptcy, the bank's rights are
§ 4-303. WHEN ITEMS SUBJECT TO NOTICE, STOP-PAYMENT ORDER, LEGAL PROCESS, OR SETOFF;
ORDER IN WHICH ITEMS MAY BE CHANGED OR CERTIFIED
Page 2 of 2
governed by Bankruptcy Code Section 542(c) which codifies the result of Bank of Marin v. England, 385 U.S. 99
(1966). Section 4-405 applies to the death or incompetence of the customer.
3. Once a payor bank has accepted or certified an item or has paid the item in cash, the event has occurred that
determines priorities between the item and the various legal events usually described as the "four legals."
Paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) so provide. If a payor bank settles for an item presented over the counter
for immediate payment by a cashier's check or teller's check which the presenting person agrees to accept,
paragraph (3) of subsection (a) would control and the event determining priority has occurred. Because
presentment was over the counter, Section 4-301(a) does not apply to give the payor bank the statutory right to
revoke the settlement. Thus the requirements of paragraph (3) have been met unless a clearing-house rule or
agreement of the parties provides otherwise.
4. In the usual case settlement for checks is by entries in bank accounts. Since the process-of-posting test has
been abandoned as inappropriate for automated check collection, the determining event for priorities is a given hour
on the day after the item is received. (Paragraph (5) of subsection (a).) The hour may be fixed by the bank no
earlier than one hour after the opening on the next banking day after the bank received the check and no later than
the close of that banking day. If an item is received after the payor bank's regular Section 4-108 cutoff hour, it is
treated as received the next banking day. If a bank receives an item after its regular cutoff hour on Monday and an
attachment is levied at noon on Tuesday, the attachment is prior to the item if the bank had not before that hour
taken the action described in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a). The Commentary to Regulation CC
Section 229.36(d) explains that even though settlement by a paying bank for a check is final for Regulation CC
purposes, the paying bank's right to return the check before its midnight deadline under the UCC is not affected.
5. Another event conferring priority for an item and a charge to the customer's account based upon the item is
stated by the language "become accountable for the amount of the item under Section 4-302 dealing with the payor
bank's responsibility for late return of items." Expiration of the deadline under Section 4-302 with resulting
accountability by the payor bank for the amount of the item, establishes priority of the item over notices, stoppayment
orders, legal process or setoff.
6. In the case of knowledge, notice, stop-payment orders and legal process the effective time for determining
whether they were received too late to affect the payment of an item and a charge to the customer's account by
reason of such payment, is receipt plus a reasonable time for the bank to act on any of these communications.
Usually a relatively short time is required to communicate to the accounting department advice of one of these
events but certainly some time is necessary. Compare Sections 1-201(27) and 4-403. In the case of setoff the
effective time is when the setoff is actually made.
7. As between one item and another no priority rule is stated. This is justified because of the impossibility of
stating a rule that would be fair in all cases, having in mind the almost infinite number of combinations of large and
small checks in relation to the available balance on hand in the drawer's account; the possible methods of receipt;
and other variables. Further, the drawer has drawn all the checks, the drawer should have funds available to meet
all of them and has no basis for urging one should be paid before another; and the holders have no direct right
against the payor bank in any event, unless of course, the bank has accepted, certified or finally paid a particular
item, or has become liable for it under Section 4-302. Under subsection (b) the bank has the right to pay items for
which it is itself liable ahead of those for which it is not.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-401
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 4. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAYOR BANK AND ITS CUSTOMER
§ 4-401. WHEN BANK MAY CHARGE CUSTOMER'S ACCOUNT
(a) A bank may charge against the account of a customer an item that is properly payable from the account
even though the charge creates an overdraft. An item is properly payable if it is authorized by the customer
and is in accordance with any agreement between the customer and bank.
(b) A customer is not liable for the amount of an overdraft if the customer neither signed the item nor
benefited from the proceeds of the item.
(c) A bank may charge against the account of a customer a check that is otherwise properly payable from
the account, even though payment was made before the date of the check, unless the customer has given
notice to the bank of the postdating describing the check with reasonable certainty. The notice is effective
for the period stated in Section 4-403(b) for stop-payment orders, and must be received at such time and in
such manner as to afford the bank a reasonable opportunity to act on it before the bank takes any action
with respect to the check described in Section 4-303. If a bank charges against the account of a customer a
check before the date stated in the notice of postdating, the bank is liable for damages for the loss resulting
from its act. The loss may include damages for dishonor of subsequent items under Section 4-402.
(d) A bank that in good faith makes payment to a holder may charge the indicated account of its customer
according to:
(1) the original terms of the altered item; or
(2) the terms of the completed item, even though the bank knows the item has been completed unless
the bank has notice that the completion was improper.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. An item is properly payable from a customer's account if the customer has authorized the payment and the
payment does not violate any agreement that may exist between the bank and its customer. For an example of a
payment held to violate an agreement with a customer, see Torrance National Bank v. Enesco Federal Credit
Union, 285 P.2d 737 (Cal.App.1955). An item drawn for more than the amount of a customer's account may be
properly payable. Thus under subsection (a) a bank may charge the customer's account for an item even though
payment results in an overdraft. An item containing a forged drawer's signature or forged indorsement is not
properly payable. Concem has arisen whether a bank may require a customer to execute a stop-payment order
when the customer notifies the bank of the loss of an unindorsed or specially indorsed check. Since such a check
cannot be properly payable from the customer's account, it is inappropriate for a bank to require stop-payment
order in such a case.
2. Subsection (b) adopts the view of case authority holding that if there is more than one customer who can draw
on an account, the nonsigning customer is not liable for an overdraft unless that person benefits from the proceeds
of the item.
§ 4-401. WHEN BANK MAY CHARGE CUSTOMER'S ACCOUNT
Page 2 of 2
3. Subsection (c) is added because the automated check collection system cannot accommodate postdated
checks. A check is usually paid upon presentment without respect to the date of the check. Under the former law, if
a payor bank paid a postdated check before its stated date, it could not charge the customer's account because the
check was not "properly payable." Hence, the bank might have been liable for wrongfully dishonoring subsequent
checks of the drawer that would have been paid had the postdated check not been prematurely paid. Under
subsection (c) a customer wishing to postdate a check must notify the payor bank of its postdating in time to allow
the bank to act on the customer's notice before the bank has to commit itself to pay the check. If the bank fails to
act on the customer's timely notice, it may be liable for damages for the resulting loss which may include damages
for dishonor of subsequent items. This Act does not regulate fees that banks charge their customers for a notice of
postdating or other services covered by the Act, but under principles of law such as unconscionability or good faith
and fair dealing, courts have reviewed fees and the bank's exercise of a discretion to set fees. Perdue v. Crocker
National Bank, 38 Cal.3d 913 (1985) (unconscionability); Best v. United Bank of Oregon, 739 P.2d 554, 562-566
(1987) (good faith and fair dealing). In addition, Section 1-203 provides that every contract or duty within this Act
imposes an obligation of good faith in its performance or enforcement.
4. Section 3-407(c) states that a payor bank or drawee which pays a fraudulently altered instrument in good faith
and without notice of the alteration may enforce rights with respect to the instrument according to its original terms
or, in the case of an incomplete instrument altered by unauthorized completion, according to its terms as
completed. Section 4-401(d) follows the rule stated in Section 3-407(c) by applying it to an altered item and allows
the bank to enforce rights with respect to the altered item by charging the customer's account.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-402
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 4. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAYOR BANK AND ITS CUSTOMER
§ 4-402. BANK'S LIABILITY TO CUSTOMER FOR WRONGFUL DISHONOR,
TIME OF DETERMINING INSUFFICIENT OF ACCOUNT
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this Article, a payor bank wrongfully dishonors an item if it dishonors
an item that is properly payable, but a bank may dishonor an item that would create an overdraft unless it
has agreed to pay the overdraft.
(b) A payor bank is liable to its customer for damages proximately caused by the wrongful dishonor of an
item. Liability is limited to actual damages proved and may include damages for an arrest or prosecution of
the customer or other consequential damages. Whether any consequential damages are proximately
caused by the wrongful dishonor is a question of fact to be determined in each case.
(c) A payor bank's determination of the customer's account balance on which a decision to dishonor for
insufficiency of available funds is based may be made at any time between the time the item is received by
the payor bank and the time that the payor bank returns the item or gives notice in lieu of return, and no
more than one determination need be made. If, at the election of the payor bank, a subsequent balance
determination is made for the purpose of reevaluating the bank's decision to dishonor the item, the account
balance at that time is determinative of whether a dishonor for insufficiency of available funds is wrongful.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) states positively what has been assumed under the original Article: that if a bank fails to honor a
properly payable item it may be liable to its customer for wrongful dishonor. Under subsection (b) the payor bank's
wrongful dishonor of an item gives rise to a statutory cause of action. Damages may include consequential
damages. Confusion has resulted from the attempts of courts to reconcile the first and second sentences of former
Section 4-402. The second sentence implied that the bank was liable for some form of damages other than those
proximately caused by the dishonor if the dishonor was other than by mistake. But nothing in the section described
what these noncompensatory damages might be. Some courts have held that in distinguishing between mistaken
dishonors and nonmistaken dishonors, the so-called "trader" rule has been retained that allowed a "merchant or
trader" to recover substantial damages for wrongful dishonor without proof of damages actually suffered. Comment
3 to former Section 4-402 indicated that this was not the intent of the drafters. White & Summers, Uniform
Commercial Code, Section 18-4 (1988), states: "The negative implication is that when wrongful dishonors occur not
'through mistake' but willfully, the court may impose damages greater than 'actual damages'… Certainly the
reference to 'mistake' in the second sentence of 4-402 invites a court to adopt the relevant pre-Code distinction."
Subsection (b) by deleting the reference to mistake in the second sentence precludes any inference that Section 4-
402 retains the "trader" rule. Whether a bank is liable for noncompensatory damages, such as punitive damages,
must be decided by Section 1-103 and Section 1-106 ("by other rule of law").
2. Wrongful dishonor is different from "failure to exercise ordinary care in handling an item," and the measure of
damages is that stated in this section, not that stated in Section 4-103(e). By the same token, if a dishonor comes
within this section, the measure of damages of this section applies and not another measure of damages. If the
§ 4-402. BANK'S LIABILITY TO CUSTOMER FOR WRONGFUL DISHONOR, TIME OF DETERMINING
INSUFFICIENT OF ACCOUNT
Page 2 of 2
wrongful refusal of the beneficiary's bank to make funds available from a funds transfer causes the beneficiary's
check to be dishonored, no specific guidance is given as to whether recovery is under this section or Article 4A. In
each case this issue must be viewed in its factual context, and it was thought unwise to seek to establish certainty
at the cost of faimess.
3. The second and third sentences of subsection (b) reject decisions holding that as a matter of law the dishonor
of a check is not the "proximate cause" of the arrest and prosecution of the customer and leave to determination in
each case as a question of fact whether the dishonor is or may be the "proximate cause."
4. Banks commonly determine whether there are sufficient funds in an account to pay an item after the close of
banking hours on the day of presentment when they post debit and credit items to the account. The determination is
made on the basis of credits available for withdrawal as of right or made available for withdrawal by the bank as an
accommodation to its customer. When it is determined that payment of the item would overdraw the account, the
item may be returned at any time before the bank's midnight deadline the following day. Before the item is returned
new credits that are withdrawable as of right may have been added to the account. Subsection (c) eliminates
uncertainty under Article 4 as to whether the failure to make a second determination before the item is returned on
the day following presentment is a wrongful dishonor if new credits were added to the account on that day that
would have covered the amount of the check.
5. Section 4-402 has been construed to preclude an action for wrongful dishonor by a plaintiff other than the
bank's customer. Loucks v. Albuquerque National Bank, 418 P.2d 191 (N.Mex.1966). Some courts have allowed a
plaintiff other than the customer to sue when the customer is a business entity that is one and the same with the
individual or individuals operating it. Murdaugh Volkswagen, Inc. v. First National Bank, 801 F.2d 719 (4th
Cir.1986) and Karsh v. American City Bank, 113 Cal.App.3d 419, 169 Cal.Rptr. 851 (1980). However, where the
wrongful dishonor impugns the reputation of an operator of the business, the issue is not merely, as the court in
Koger v. East First National Bank, 443 So.2d 141 (Fla.App.1983), put it, one of a literal versus a liberal
interpretation of Section 4-402. Rather the issue is whether the statutory cause of action in Section 4-402 displaces,
in accordance with Section 1-103, any cause of action that existed at common law in a person who is not the
customer whose reputation was damaged. See Marcum v. Security Trust and Savings Co., 221 Ala. 419, 129 So.
74 (1930). While Section 4-402 should not be interpreted to displace the latter cause of action, the section itself
gives no cause of action to other than a "customer," however that definition is construed, and thus confers no cause
of action on the holder of a dishonored item. First American National Bank v. Commerce Union Bank, 692 S.W.2d
642 (Tenn.App. 1985).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-403
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 4. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAYOR BANK AND ITS CUSTOMER
§ 4-403. CUSTOMER'S RIGHT TO STOP PAYMENT; BURDEN OF PROOF OF
LOSS
(a) A customer or any person authorized to draw on the account if there is more than one person may stop
payment of any item drawn on the customer's account or close the account by an order to the bank
describing the item or account with reasonable certainty received at a time and in a manner that affords the
bank a reasonable opportunity to act on it before any action by the bank with respect to the item described
in Section 4-303. If the signature of more than one person is required to draw on an account, any of these
persons may stop payment or close the account.
(b) A stop-payment order is effective for six months, but it lapses after 14 calendar days if the original order
was oral and was not confirmed in a record within that period. A stop-payment order may be renewed for
additional six-month periods by a record given to the bank within a period during which the stop-payment
order is effective.
(c) The burden of establishing the fact and amount of loss resulting from the payment of an item contrary
to a stop-payment order or order to close an account is on the customer. The loss from payment of an item
contrary to a stop-payment order may include damages for dishonor of subsequent items under Section 4-
402.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The position taken by this section is that stopping payment or closing an account is a service which depositors
expect and are entitled to receive from banks notwithstanding its difficulty, inconvenience and expense. The
inevitable occasional losses through failure to stop or close should be borne by the banks as a cost of the business
of banking.
2. Subsection (a) follows the decisions holding that a payee or indorsee has no right to stop payment. This is
consistent with the provision governing payment or satisfaction. See Section 3-602. The sole exception to this rule
is found in Section 4-405 on payment after notice of death, by which any person claiming an interest in the account
can stop payment.
3. Payment is commonly stopped only on checks; but the right to stop payment is not limited to checks, and
extends to any item payable by any bank. If the maker of a note payable at a bank is in a position analogous to that
of a drawer (Section 4-106) the maker may stop payment of the note. By analogy the rule extends to drawees other
than banks.
4. A cashier's check or teller's check purchased by a customer whose account is debited in payment for the check
is not a check drawn on the customer's account within the meaning of subsection (a); hence, a customer
purchasing a cashier's check or teller's check has no right to stop payment of such a check under subsection (a). If
a bank issuing a cashier's check or teller's check refuses to pay the check as an accommodation to its customer or
for other reasons, its liability on the check is governed by Section 3-411. There is no right to stop payment after
§ 4-403. CUSTOMER'S RIGHT TO STOP PAYMENT; BURDEN OF PROOF OF LOSS
Page 2 of 2
certification of a check or other acceptance of a draft, and this is true no matter who procures the certification. See
Sections 3-411 and 4-303. The acceptance is the drawee's own engagement to pay, and it is not required to impair
its credit by refusing payment for the convenience of the drawer.
5. Subsection (a) makes clear that if there is more than one person authorized to draw on a customer's account
any one of them can stop payment of any check drawn on the account or can order the account closed. Moreover, if
there is a customer, such as a corporation, that requires its checks to bear the signatures of more than one person,
any of these persons may stop payment on a check. In describing the item, the customer, in the absence of a
contrary agreement, must meet the standard of what information allows the bank under the technology then existing
to identify the item with reasonable certainty.
6. Under subsection (b), a stop-payment order is effective after the order, whether written or oral, is received by
the bank and the bank has a reasonable opportunity to act on it. If the order is written it remains in effect for six
months from that time. If the order is oral it lapses after 14 days unless there is written confirmation. If there is
written confirmation within the 14-day period, the six-month period dates from the giving of the oral order. A stoppayment
order may be renewed any number of times by written notice given during a six-month period while a stop
order is in effect. A new stop-payment order may be given after a six-month period expires, but such a notice takes
effect from the date given. When a stop-payment order expires it is as though the order had never been given, and
the payor bank may pay the item in good faith under Section 4-404 even though a stop-payment order had once
been given.
7. A payment in violation of an effective direction to stop payment is an improper payment, even though it is made
by mistake or inadvertence. Any agreement to the contrary is invalid under Section 4-103(a) if in paying the item
over the stop-payment order the bank has failed to exercise ordinary care. An agreement to the contrary which is
imposed upon a customer as part of a standard form contract would have to be evaluated in the light of the general
obligation of good faith. Sections 1-203 and 4-104(c). The drawee is, however, entitled to subrogation to prevent
unjust enrichment (Section 4-407); retains common law defenses, e.g., that by conduct in recognizing the payment
the customer has ratified the bank's action in paying over a stop-payment order (Section 1-103); and retains
common law rights, e.g., to recover money paid under a mistake under Section 3-418. It has sometimes been said
that payment cannot be stopped against a holder in due course, but the statement is inaccurate. The payment can
be stopped but the drawer remains liable on the instrument to the holder in due course (Sections 3-305, 3-414) and
the drawee, if it pays, becomes subrogated to the rights of the holder in due course against the drawer. Section 4-
407. The relationship between Sections 4-403 and 4-407 is discussed in the comments to Section 4-407. Any
defenses available against a holder in due course remain available to the drawer, but other defenses are cut off to
the same extent as if the holder were bringing the action.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-404
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 4. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAYOR BANK AND ITS CUSTOMER
§ 4-404. BANK NOT OBLIGED TO PAY CHECK MORE THAN SIX MONTHS
OLD
A bank is under no obligation to a customer having a checking account to pay a check, other than a certified check,
which is presented more than six months after its date, but it may charge its customer's account for a payment
made thereafter in good faith.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section incorporates a type of statute that had been adopted in 26 jurisdictions before the Code. The time
limit is set at six months because banking and commercial practice regards a check outstanding for longer than that
period as stale, and a bank will normally not pay such a check without consulting the depositor. It is therefore not
required to do so, but is given the option to pay because it may be in a position to know, as in the case of dividend
checks, that the drawer wants payment made.
Certified checks are excluded from the section because they are the primary obligation of the certifying bank
(Sections 3-409 and 3-413). The obligation runs directly to the holder of the check. The customer's account was
presumably charged when the check was certified.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-405
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 4. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAYOR BANK AND ITS CUSTOMER
§ 4-405. DEATH OR INCOMPETENCE OF CUSTOMER
(a) A payor or collecting bank's authority to accept, pay, or collect an item or to account for proceeds of its
collection, if otherwise effective, is not rendered ineffective by incompetence of a customer of either bank
existing at the time the item is issued or its collection is undertaken if the bank does not know of an
adjudication of incompetence. Neither death nor incompetence of a customer revokes the authority to
accept, pay, collect, or account until the bank knows of the fact of death or of an adjudication of
incompetence and has reasonable opportunity to act on it.
(b) Even with knowledge, a bank may for 10 days after the date of death pay or certify checks drawn on or
before that date unless ordered to stop payment by a person claiming an interest in the account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) follows existing decisions holding that a drawee (payor) bank is not liable for the payment of a
check before it has notice of the death or incompetence of the drawer. The justice and necessity of the rule are
obvious. A check is an order to pay which the bank must obey under penalty of possible liability for dishonor.
Further, with the tremendous volume of items handled any rule that required banks to verify the continued life and
competency of drawers would be completely unworkable.
One or both of these same reasons apply to other phases of the bank collection and payment process and the
rule is made wide enough to apply to these other phases. It applies to all kinds of "items"; to "customers" who own
items as well as "customers" who draw or make them; to the function of collecting items as well as the function of
accepting or paying them; to the carrying out of instructions to account for proceeds even though these may involve
transfers to third parties; to depositary and intemediary banks as well as payor banks; and to incompetency existing
at the time of the issuance of an item or the commencement of the collection or payment process as well as to
incompetency occurring thereafter. Further, the requirement of actual knowledge makes inapplicable the rule of
some cases that an adjudication of incompetency is constructive notice to all the world because obviously it is as
impossible for banks to keep posted on such adjudications (in the absence of actual knowledge) as it is to keep
posted as to death of immediate or remote customers.
2. Subsection (b) provides a limited period after death during which a bank may continue to pay checks (as
distinguished from other items) even though it has notice. The purpose of the provision, as of the existing statutes,
is to permit holders of checks drawn and issued shortly before death to cash them without the necessity of filing a
claim in probate. The justification is that these checks normally are given in immediate payment of an obligation,
that there is almost never any reason why they should not be paid, and that filing in probate is a useless formality,
burdensome to the holder, the executor, the court and the bank.
This section does not prevent an executor or administrator from recovering the payment from the holder of the
check. It is not intended to affect the validity of any gift causa mortis or other transfer in contemplation of death, but
merely to relieve the bank of liability for the payment.
§ 4-405. DEATH OR INCOMPETENCE OF CUSTOMER
Page 2 of 2
3. Any surviving relative, creditor or other person who claims an interest in the account may give a direction to the
bank not to pay checks, or not to pay a particular check. Such notice has the same effect as a direction to stop
payment. The bank has not responsibility to determine the validity of the claim or even whether it is "colorable." But
obviously anyone who has an interest in the estate, including the person named as executor in a will, even if the will
has not yet been admitted to probate, is entitled to claim an interest in the account.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-406
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 4. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAYOR BANK AND ITS CUSTOMER
§ 4-406. CUSTOMER'S DUTY TO DISCOVER AND REPORT UNAUTHORIZED
SIGNATURE OR ALTERATION
(a) A bank that sends or makes available to a customer a statement of account showing payment of items
for the account shall either return or make available to the customer the items paid or provide information in
the statement of account sufficient to allow the customer reasonably to identify the items paid. The
statement of account provides sufficient information if the item is described by item number, amount, and
date of payment.
(b) If the items are not returned to the customer, the person retaining the items shall either retain the items
or, if the items are destroyed, maintain the capacity to furnish legible copies of the items until the expiration
of seven years after receipt of the items. A customer may request an item from the bank that paid the item,
and that bank must provide in a reasonable time either the item or, if the item has been destroyed or is not
otherwise obtainable, a legible copy of the item.
(c) If a bank sends or makes available a statement of account or items pursuant to subsection (a), the
customer must exercise reasonable promptness in examining the statement or the items to determine
whether any payment was not authorized because of an alteration of an item or because a purported
signature by or on behalf of the customer was not authorized. If, based on the statement or items provided,
the customer should reasonably have discovered the unauthorized payment, the customer must promptly
notify the bank of the relevant facts.
(d) If the bank proves that the customer failed, with respect to an item, to comply with the duties imposed
on the customer by subsection (c), the customer is precluded from asserting against the bank:
(1) the customer's unauthorized signature or any alteration on the item, if the bank also proves that it
suffered a loss by reason of the failure; and
(2) the customer's unauthorized signature or alteration by the same wrongdoer on any other item paid
in good faith by the bank if the payment was made before the bank received notice from the customer
of the unauthorized signature or alteration and after the customer had been afforded a reasonable
period of time, not exceeding 30 days, in which to examine the item or statement of account and notify
the bank.
(e) If subsection (d) applies and the customer proves that the bank failed to exercise ordinary care in
paying the item and that the failure substantially contributed to loss, the loss is allocated between the
customer precluded and the bank asserting the preclusion according to the extent to which the failure of the
customer to comply with subsection (c) and the failure of the bank to exercise ordinary care contributed to
the loss. If the customer proves that the bank did not pay the item in good faith, the preclusion under
subsection (d) does not apply.
(f) Without regard to care or lack of care of either the customer or the bank, a customer who does not
within one year after the statement or items are made available to the customer (subsection (a)) discover
and report the customer's unauthorized signature on or any alteration on the item is precluded from
asserting against the bank the unauthorized signature or alteration. If there is a preclusion under this
subsection, the payor bank may not recover for breach of warranty under Section 4-208 with respect to the
unauthorized signature or alteration to which the preclusion applies.
§ 4-406. CUSTOMER'S DUTY TO DISCOVER AND REPORT UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE OR
ALTERATION
Page 2 of 4
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Under subsection (a), if a bank that has paid a check or other item for the account of a customer makes
available to the customer a statement of account showing payment of the item, the bank must either return the item
to the customer or provide a description of the item sufficient to allow the customer to identify it. Under subsection
(c), the customer has a duty to exercise reasonable promptness in examining the statement or the returned item to
discover any unauthorized signature of the customer or any alteration and to promptly notify the bank if the
customer should reasonably have discovered the unauthorized signature or alteration.
The duty stated in subsection (c) becomes operative only if the "bank sends or makes available a statement of
account or items pursuant to subsection (a)." A bank is not under a duty to send a statement of account or the paid
items to the customer; but, if it does not do so, the customer does not have any duties under subsection (c).
Under subsection (a), a statement of account must provide information "sufficient to allow the customer
reasonably to identify the items paid." If the bank supplies its customer with an image of the paid item, it complies
with this standard. But a safe harbor rule is provided. The bank complies with the standard of providing "sufficient
information" if "the item is described by item number, amount, and date of payment." This means that the
customer's duties under subsection (c) are triggered if the bank sends a statement of account complying with the
safe harbor rule without returning the paid items. A bank does not have to return the paid items unless it has agreed
with the customer to do so. Whether there is such an agreement depends upon the particular circumstances. See
Section 1-201(3). If the bank elects to provide the minimum information that is "sufficient" under subsection (a) and,
as a consequence, the customer could not "reasonably have discovered the unauthorized payment," there is no
preclusion under subsection (d). If the customer made a record of the issued checks on the check stub or
carbonized copies furnished by the bank in the checkbook, the customer should usually be able to verify the paid
items shown on the statement of account and discover any unauthorized or altered checks. But there could be
exceptional circumstances. For example, if a check is altered by changing the name of the payee, the customer
could not normally detect the fraud unless the customer is given the paid check or the statement of account
discloses the name of the payee of the altered check. If the customer could not "reasonably have discovered the
unauthorized payment" under subsection (c) there would not be a preclusion under subsection (d).
The safe harbor provided by subsection (a) serves to permit a bank, based on the state of existing technology, to
trigger the customer's duties under subsection (c) by providing a "statement of account showing payment of items"
without having to return the paid items, in any case in which the bank has not agreed with the customer to return
the paid items. The safe harbor does not, however, preclude a customer under subsection (d) from asserting its
unauthorized signature or an alteration against a bank in those circumstances in which under subsection (c) the
customer should not "reasonably have discovered the unauthorized payment." Whether the customer has failed to
comply with its duties under subsection (c) is determined on a case-by-case basis.
The provision in subsection (a) that a statement of account contains "sufficient information if the item is described
by item number, amount, and date of payment" is based upon the existing state of technology. This information was
chosen because it can be obtained by the bank's computer from the check's MICR line without examination of the
items involved. The other two items of information that the customer would normally want to know--the name of the
payee and the date of the item--cannot currently be obtained from the MICR line. The safe harbor rule is important
in determining the feasibility of payor or collecting bank check retention plans. A customer who keeps a record of
checks written, e.g., on the check stubs or carbonized copies of the checks supplied by the bank in the checkbook,
will usually have sufficient information to identify the items on the basis of item number, amount, and date of
payment. But customers who do not utilize these record-keeping methods may not. The policy decision is that
accommodating customers who do not keep adequate records is not as desirable as accommodating customers
who keep more careful records. This policy results in less cost to the check collection system and thus to all
§ 4-406. CUSTOMER'S DUTY TO DISCOVER AND REPORT UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE OR
ALTERATION
Page 3 of 4
customers of the system. It is expected that technological advances such as image processing may make it
possible for banks to give customers more information in the future in a manner that is fully compatible with
automation or truncation systems. At that time the Permanent Editorial Board may wish to make recommendations
for an amendment revising the safe harbor requirements in the light of those advances.
2. Subsection (d) states the consequences of a failure by the customer to perform its duty under subsection (c) to
report an alteration or the customer's unauthorized signature. Subsection (d)(1) applies to the unauthorized
payment of the item to which the duty to report under subsection (c) applies. If the bank proves that the customer
"should reasonably have discovered the unauthorized payment" (See Comment 1) and did not notify the bank, the
customer is precluded from asserting against the bank the alteration or the customer's unauthorized signature if the
bank proves that it suffered a loss as a result of the failure of the customer to perform its subsection (c) duty.
Subsection (d)(2) applies to cases in which the customer fails to report an unauthorized signature or alteration with
respect to an item in breach of the subsection (c) duty (See Comment 1) and the bank subsequently pays other
items of the customer with respect to which there is an alteration or unauthorized signature of the customer and the
same wrongdoer is involved. If the payment of the subsequent items occurred after the customer has had a
reasonable time (not exceeding 30 days) to report with respect to the first item and before the bank received notice
of the unauthorized signature or alteration of the first item, the customer is precluded from asserting the alteration or
unauthorized signature with respect to the subsequent items.
If the customer is precluded in a single or multiple item unauthorized payment situation under subsection (d), but
the customer proves that the bank failed to exercise ordinary care in paying the item or items and that the failure
substantially contributed to the loss, subsection (e) provides a comparative negligence test for allocating loss
between the customer and the bank. Subsection (e) also states that, if the customer proves that the bank did not
pay the item in good faith, the preclusion under subsection (d) does not apply.
Subsection (d)(2) changes former subsection (2)(b) by adopting a 30-day period in place of a 14-day period.
Although the 14-day period may have been sufficient when the original version of Article 4 was drafted in the 1950s,
given the much greater volume of checks at the time of the revision, a longer period was viewed as more
appropriate. The rule of subsection (d)(2) follows pre-Code case law that payment of an additional item or items
bearing an unauthorized signature or alteration by the same wrongdoer is a loss suffered by the bank traceable to
the customer's failure to exercise reasonable care (See Comment 1) in examining the statement and notifying the
bank of objections to it. One of the most serious consequences of failure of the customer to comply with the
requirements of subsection (c) is the opportunity presented to the wrongdoer to repeat the misdeeds. Conversely,
one of the best ways to keep down losses in this type of situation is for the customer to promptly examine the
statement and notify the bank of an unauthorized signature or alteration so that the bank will be alerted to stop
paying further items. Hence, the rule of subsection (d)(2) is prescribed, and to avoid dispute a specific time limit, 30
days, is designated for cases to which the subsection applies. These considerations are not present if there are no
losses resulting from the payment of additional items. In these circumstances, a reasonable period for the customer
to comply with its duties under subsection (c) would depend on the circumstances (Section 1-204(2)) and the
subsection (d)(2) time limit should not be imported by analogy into subsection (c).
3. Subsection (b) applies if the items are not returned to the customer. Check retention plans may include a
simple payor bank check retention plan or the kind of check retention plan that would be authorized by a truncation
agreement in which a collecting bank or the payee may retain the items. Even after agreeing to a check retention
plan, a customer may need to see one or more checks for litigation or other purposes. The customer's request for
the check may always be made to the payor bank. Under subsection (b) retaining banks may destroy items but
must maintain the capacity to furnish legible copies for seven years. A legible copy may include an image of an
item. This Act does not define the length of the reasonable period of time for a bank to provide the check or copy of
the check. What is reasonable depends on the capacity of the bank and the needs of the customer. This Act does
not specify sanctions for failure to retain or furnish the items or legible copies; this is left to other laws regulating
banks. See Comment 3 to Section 4-101. Moreover, this Act does not regulate fees that banks charge their
customers for furnishing items or copies or other services covered by the Act, but under principles of law such as
unconscionability or good faith and fair dealing, courts have reviewed fees and the bank's exercise of a discretion to
§ 4-406. CUSTOMER'S DUTY TO DISCOVER AND REPORT UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE OR
ALTERATION
Page 4 of 4
set fees. Perdue v. Crocker National Bank, 38 Cal.3d 913 (1985) (unconscionability); Best v. United Bank of
Oregon, 739 P.2d 554, 562-566 (1987) (good faith and fair dealing). In addition, Section 1-203 provides that every
contract or duty within this Act imposes an obligation of good faith in its performance or enforcement.
4. Subsection (e) replaces former subsection (3) and poses a modified comparative negligence test for
determining liability. See the discussion on this point in the Comments to Sections 3-404, 3-405, and 3-406. The
term "good faith" is defined in Section 1-201(b)(20) as including "observance of reasonable commercial standards
of fair dealing." The connotation of this standard is fairness and not absence of negligence.
The term "ordinary care" used in subsection (e) is defined in Section 3-103(a)(7), made applicable to Article 4 by
Section 4-104(c), to provide that sight examination by a payor bank is not required if its procedure is reasonable
and is commonly followed by other comparable banks in the area. The case law is divided on this issue. The
definition of "ordinary care" in Section 3-103 rejects those authorities that hold, in effect, that failure to use sight
examination is negligence as a matter of law. The effect of the definition of "ordinary care" on Section 4-406 is only
to provide that in the small percentage of cases in which a customer's failure to examine its statement or returned
items has led to loss under subsection (d) a bank should not have to share that loss solely because it has adopted
an automated collection or payment procedure in order to deal with the great volume of items at a lower cost to all
customers.
5. Several changes are made in former Section 4-406(5). First, former subsection (5) is deleted and its substance
is made applicable only to the one-year notice preclusion in former subsection (4) (subsection (f)). Thus if a drawer
has not notified the payor bank of an unauthorized check or material alteration within the one-year period, the payor
bank may not choose to recredit the drawer's account and pass the loss to the collecting banks on the theory of
breach of warranty. Second, the reference in former subsection (4) to unauthorized indorsements is deleted.
Section 4-406 imposes no duties on the drawer to look for unauthorized indorsements. Section 4-111 sets out a
statute of limitations allowing a customer a three-year period to seek a credit to an account improperly charged by
payment of an item bearing an unauthorized indorsement. Third, subsection (c) is added to Section 4-208 to assure
that if a depositary bank is sued for breach of a presentment warranty, it can defend by showing that the drawer is
precluded by Section 3-406 or Section 4-406(c) and (d). Revisions approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for
the Uniform Commercial Code, March 16, 1991.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-407
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 4. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PAYOR BANK AND ITS CUSTOMER
§ 4-407. PAYOR BANK'S RIGHT TO SUBROGATION ON IMPROPER
PAYMENT
If a payor bank has paid an item over the order of the drawer or maker to stop payment, or after an account
has been closed, or otherwise under circumstances giving a basis for objection by the drawer or maker, to
prevent unjust enrichment and only to the extent necessary to prevent loss to the bank by reason of its
payment of the item, the payor bank is subrogated to the rights
(1) of any holder in due course on the item against the drawer or maker;
(2) of the payee or any other holder of the item against the drawer or maker either on the item or under
the transaction out of which the item arose; and
(3) of the drawer or maker against the payee or any other holder of the item with respect to the
transaction out of which the item arose.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Section 4-403 states that a stop-payment order or an order to close an account is binding on a bank. If a bank
pays an item over such an order it is prima facie liable, but under subsection (c) of Section 4-403 the burden of
establishing the fact and amount of loss from such payment is on the customer. A defense frequently interposed by
a bank in an action against it for wrongful payment over a stop-payment order is that the drawer or maker suffered
no loss because it would have been liable to a holder in due course in any event. On this argument some cases
have held that payment cannot be stopped against a holder in due course. Payment can be stopped, but if it is, the
drawer or maker is liable and the sound rule is that the bank is subrogated to the rights of the holder in due course.
The preamble and paragraph (1) of this section state this rule.
2. Paragraph (2) also subrogates the bank to the rights of the payee or other holder against the drawer or maker
either on the item or under the transaction out of which it arose. It may well be that the payee is not a holder in due
course but still has good rights against the drawer. These may be on the check but also may not be as, for
example, where the drawer buys goods from the payee and the goods are partially defective so that the payee is
not entitled to the full price, but the goods are still worth a portion of the contract price. If the drawer retains the
goods it is obligated to pay a part of the agreed price. If the bank has paid the check it should be subrogated to this
claim of the payee against the drawer.
3. Paragraph (3) subrogates the bank to the rights of the drawer or maker against the payee or other holder with
respect to the transaction out of which the item arose. If, for example, the payee was a fraudulent salesman
inducing the drawer to issue a check for defective securities, and the bank pays the check over a stop-payment
order but reimburses the drawer for such payment, the bank should have a basis for getting the money back from
the fraudulent salesman.
4. The limitations of the preamble prevent the bank itself from getting any double recovery or benefits out of its
subrogation rights conferred by the section.
§ 4-407. PAYOR BANK'S RIGHT TO SUBROGATION ON IMPROPER PAYMENT
Page 2 of 2
5. The spelling out of the affirmative rights of the bank in this section does not destroy other existing rights
(Section 1-103). Among others these may include the defense of a payor bank that by conduct in recognizing the
payment a customer has ratified the bank's action in paying in disregard of a stop-payment order or right to recover
money paid under a mistake.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-501
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 5. COLLECTION OF DOCUMENTARY DRAFTS
§ 4-501. HANDLING OF DOCUMENTARY DRAFTS; DUTY TO SEND FOR
PRESENTMENT AND TO NOTIFY CUSTOMER OF DISHONOR
A bank that takes a documentary draft for collection shall present or send the draft and accompanying documents
for presentment and, upon learning that the draft has not been paid or accepted in due course, shall seasonably
notify its customer of the fact even though it may have discounted or bought the draft or extended credit available
for withdrawal as of right.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section states the duty of a bank handling a documentary draft for a customer. "Documentary draft" is
defined in Section 4-104. The duty stated exists even if the bank has bought the draft. This is because to the
customer the draft normally represents an underlying commercial transaction, and if that is not going through as
planned the customer should know it promptly. An electronic document of title may be presented through allowing
access to the document or delivery of the document. Article 1, Section 1-201 (definition of "delivery")
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-502
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 5. COLLECTION OF DOCUMENTARY DRAFTS
§ 4-502. PRESENTMENT OF "ON ARRIVAL" DRAFTS
If a draft or the relevant instructions require presentment "on arrival", "when goods arrive" or the like, the collecting
bank need not present until in its judgment a reasonable time for arrival of the goods has expired. Refusal to pay or
accept because the goods have not arrived is not dishonor; the bank must notify its transferor of the refusal but
need not present the draft again until it is instructed to do so or learns of the arrival of the goods.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
The section is designed to establish a definite rule for "on arrival" drafts. The term includes not only drafts drawn
payable "on arrival" but also drafts forwarded with instructions to present "on arrival." The term refers to the arrival
of the relevant goods. Unless a bank has actual knowledge of the arrival of the goods, as for example, when it is the
"notify" party on the bill of lading, the section only requires the exercise of such judgment in estimating time as a
bank may be expected to have. Commonly the buyer-drawee will want the goods and will therefore call for the
documents and take up the draft when they do arrive.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-503
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 5. COLLECTION OF DOCUMENTARY DRAFTS
§ 4-503. RESPONSIBILITY OF PRESENTING BANK FOR DOCUMENTS AND
GOODS; REPORT OF REASONS FOR DISHONOR; REFEREE IN CASE OF
NEED
Unless otherwise instructed and except as provided in Article 5, a bank presenting a documentary draft:
(1) must deliver the documents to the drawee on acceptance of the draft if it is payable more than
three days after presentment; otherwise, only on payment; and
(2) upon dishonor, either in the case of presentment for acceptance or presentment for payment, may
seek and follow instructions from any referee in case of need designated in the draft or, if the
presenting bank does not choose to utilize the referee's services, it must use diligence and good faith to
ascertain the reason for dishonor, must notify its transferor of the dishonor and of the results of its effort
to ascertain the reasons therefor, and must request instructions.
However the presenting bank is under no obligation with respect to goods represented by the documents
except to follow any reasonable instructions seasonably received; it has a right to reimbursement for any
expense incurred in following instructions and to prepayment of or indemnity for those expenses.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section states the rules governing, in the absence of instructions, the duty of the presenting bank in case
either of honor or of dishonor of a documentary draft. The section should be read in connection with Section 2-514
on when documents are deliverable on acceptance, when on payment. In the case of a dishonor of the draft, the
bank, subject to Section 4-504, must return possession or control of the documents to its principal.
2. If the draft is drawn under a letter of credit, Article 5 controls. See Sections 5-109 through 5-114.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4-504
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4. BANK DEPOSIT >
PART 5. COLLECTION OF DOCUMENTARY DRAFTS
§ 4-504. PRIVILEGE OF PRESENTING BANK TO DEAL WITH GOODS;
SECURITY INTEREST FOR EXPENSES
(a) A presenting bank that, following the dishonor of a documentary draft, has seasonably requested
instructions but does not receive them within a reasonable time may store, sell, or otherwise deal with the
goods in any reasonable manner.
(b) For its reasonable expenses incurred by action under subsection (a) the presenting bank has a lien
upon the goods or their proceeds, which may be foreclosed in the same manner as an unpaid seller's lien.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
The section gives the presenting bank, after dishonor, a privilege to deal with the goods in any commercially
reasonable manner pending instructions from its transferor and, if still unable to communicate with its principal after
a reasonable time, a right to realize its expenditures as if foreclosing on an unpaid seller's lien (Section 2-706). The
provision includes situations in which storage of goods or other action becomes commercially necessary pending
receipt of any requested instructions, even if the requested instructions are later received.
The "reasonable manner" referred to means one reasonable in the light of business factors and the judgment of a
business man.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4A-101. Short Title.
This Article may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code-Funds Transfers.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4A-102. Subject Matter.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 4A-108, this Article applies to funds transfers defined in Section 4A-104.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Article 4A governs a specialized method of payment referred to in the Article as a funds transfer but also commonly
referred to in the commercial community as a wholesale wire transfer. A funds transfer is made by means of one or
more payment orders. The scope of Article 4A is determined by the definitions of "payment order" and "funds
transfer" found in Section 4A-103 and Section 4A-104.
The funds transfer governed by Article 4A is in large part a product of recent and developing technological changes.
Before this Article was drafted there was no comprehensive body of law-statutory or judicial-that defined the
juridical nature of a funds transfer or the rights and obligations flowing from payment orders. Judicial authority with
respect to funds transfers is sparse, undeveloped and not uniform. Judges have had to resolve disputes by
referring to general principles of common law or equity, or they have sought guidance in statutes such as Article 4
which are applicable to other payment methods. But attempts to define rights and obligations in funds transfers by
general principles or by analogy to rights and obligations in negotiable instrument law or the law of check collection
have not been satisfactory.
In the drafting of Article 4A, a deliberate decision was made to write on a clean slate and to treat a funds transfer as
a unique method of payment to be governed by unique rules that address the particular issues raised by this
method of payment. A deliberate decision was also made to use precise and detailed rules to assign responsibility,
define behavioral norms, allocate risks and establish limits on liability, rather than to rely on broadly stated, flexible
principles. In the drafting of these rules, a critical consideration was that the various parties to funds transfers need
to be able to predict risk with certainty, to insure against risk, to adjust operational and security procedures, and to
price funds transfer services appropriately. This consideration is particularly important given the very large amounts
of money that are involved in funds transfers.
Funds transfers involve competing interests-those of the banks that provide funds transfer services and the
commercial and financial organizations that use the services, as well as the public interest. These competing
interests were represented in the drafting process and they were thoroughly considered. The rules that emerged
represent a careful and delicate balancing of those interests and are intended to be the exclusive means of
determining the rights, duties and liabilities of the affected parties in any situation covered by particular provisions of
the Article. Consequently, resort to principles of law or equity outside of Article 4A is not appropriate to create
rights, duties and liabilities inconsistent with those stated in this Article.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 4A-102. Subject Matter.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4A-103. Payment Order-Definitions.
(a) In this Article:
(1) "Payment order" means an instruction of a sender to a receiving bank, transmitted orally,
electronically, or in writing, to pay, or to cause another bank to pay, a fixed or determinable amount of
money to a beneficiary if:
(i) the instruction does not state a condition to payment to the beneficiary other than time of
payment,
(ii) the receiving bank is to be reimbursed by debiting an account of, or otherwise receiving
payment from, the sender, and
(iii) the instruction is transmitted by the sender directly to the receiving bank or to an agent, fundstransfer
system, or communication system for transmittal to the receiving bank.
(2) "Beneficiary" means the person to be paid by the beneficiary's bank.
(3) "Beneficiary's bank" means the bank identified in a payment order in which an account of the
beneficiary is to be credited pursuant to the order or which otherwise is to make payment to the
beneficiary if the order does not provide for payment to an account.
(4) "Receiving bank" means the bank to which the sender's instruction is addressed.
(5) "Sender" means the person giving the instruction to the receiving bank.
(b) If an instruction complying with subsection (a)(1) is to make more than one payment to a beneficiary,
the instruction is a separate payment order with respect to each payment.
(c) A payment order is issued when it is sent to the receiving bank.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
This section is discussed in the Comment following Section 4A-104.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4A-104. Funds Transfer-Definitions.
In this Article:
(a) "Funds transfer" means the series of transactions, beginning with the originator's payment order,
made for the purpose of making payment to the beneficiary of the order. The term includes any
payment order issued by the originator's bank or an intermediary bank intended to carry out the
originator's payment order. A funds transfer is completed by acceptance by the beneficiary's bank of a
payment order for the benefit of the beneficiary of the originator's payment order.
(b) "Intermediary bank" means a receiving bank other than the originator's bank or the beneficiary's
bank.
(c) "Originator" means the sender of the first payment order in a funds transfer.
(d) "Originator's bank" means (i) the receiving bank to which the payment order of the originator is
issued if the originator is not a bank, or (ii) the originator if the originator is a bank.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. Article 4A governs a method of payment in which the person making payment (the "originator") directly transmits
an instruction to a bank either to make payment to the person receiving payment (the "beneficiary") or to instruct
some other bank to make payment to the beneficiary. The payment from the originator to the beneficiary occurs
when the bank that is to pay the beneficiary becomes obligated to pay the beneficiary. There are two basic
definitions: "Payment order" stated in Section 4A-103 and "Funds transfer" stated in Section 4A-104. These
definitions, other related definitions, and the scope of Article 4A can best be understood in the context of specific
fact situations. Consider the following cases:
Case #1. X, which has an account in Bank A, instructs that bank to pay $1,000,000 to Y's account in Bank A. Bank
A carries out X's instruction by making a credit of $1,000,000 to Y's account and notifying Y that the credit is
available for immediate withdrawal. The instruction by X to Bank A is a "payment order" which was issued when it
was sent to Bank A. Section 4A-103(a)(1) and (c). X is the "sender" of the payment order and Bank A is the
"receiving bank." Section 4A-103(a)(5) and (a)(4). Y is the "beneficiary" of the payment order and Bank A is the
"beneficiary's bank." Section 4A-103(a)(2) and (a)(3). When Bank A notified Y of receipt of the payment order,
Bank A "accepted" the payment order. Section 4A-209(b)(1). When Bank A accepted the order it incurred an
obligation to Y to pay the amount of the order. Section 4A-404(a). When Bank A accepted X's order, X incurred an
obligation to pay Bank A the amount of the order. Section 4A-402(b). Payment from X to Bank A would normally
be made by a debit to X's account in Bank A. Section 4A-403(a)(3). At the time Bank A incurred the obligation to
pay Y, payment of $1,000,000 by X to Y was also made. Section 4A-406(a). Bank A paid Y when it gave notice to
Y of a withdrawable credit of $1,000,000 to Y's account. Section 4A-405(a). The overall transaction, which
comprises the acts of X and Bank A, in which the payment by X to Y is accomplished is referred to as the "funds
transfer." Section 4A-104(a). In this case only one payment order was involved in the funds transfer. A one§
4A-104. Funds Transfer-Definitions.
Page 2 of 4
payment-order funds transfer is usually referred to as a "book transfer" because the payment is accomplished by
the receiving bank's debiting the account of the sender and crediting the account of the beneficiary in the same
bank. X, in addition to being the sender of the payment order to Bank A, is the "originator" of the funds transfer.
Section 4A-104(c). Bank A is the "originator's bank" in the funds transfer as well as the beneficiary's bank. Section
4A-104(d).
Case #2. Assume the same facts as in Case #1 except that X instructs Bank A to pay $1,000,000 to Y's account in
Bank B. With respect to this payment order, X is the sender, Y is the beneficiary, and Bank A is the receiving bank.
Bank A carries out X's order by instructing Bank B to pay $1,000,000 to Y's account. This instruction is a payment
order in which Bank A is the sender, Bank B is the receiving bank, and Y is the beneficiary. When Bank A issued
its payment order to Bank B, Bank A "executed" X's order. Section 4A-301(a). In the funds transfer, X is the
originator, Bank A is the originator's bank, and Bank B is the beneficiary's bank. When Bank A executed X's order,
X incurred an obligation to pay Bank A the amount of the order. Section 4A-402(c). When Bank B accepts the
payment order issued to it by Bank A, Bank B incurs an obligation to Y to pay the amount of the order (Section 4A-
404(a)) and Bank A incurs an obligation to pay Bank B. Section 4A-402(b). Acceptance by Bank B also results in
payment of $1,000,000 by X to Y. Section 4A-406(a). In this case two payment orders are involved in the funds
transfer.
Case #3. Assume the same facts as in Case #2 except that Bank A does not execute X's payment order by issuing
a payment order to Bank B. One bank will not normally act to carry out a funds transfer for another bank unless
there is a preexisting arrangement between the banks for transmittal of payment orders and settlement of accounts.
For example, if Bank B is a foreign bank with which Bank A has no relationship, Bank A can utilize a bank that is a
correspondent of both Bank A and Bank B. Assume Bank A issues a payment order to Bank C to pay $1,000,000
to Y's account in Bank B. With respect to this order, Bank A is the sender, Bank C is the receiving bank, and Y is
the beneficiary. Bank C will execute the payment order of Bank A by issuing a payment order to Bank B to pay
$1,000,000 to Y's account in Bank B. With respect to Bank C's payment order, Bank C is the sender, Bank B is the
receiving bank, and Y is the beneficiary. Payment of $1,000,000 by X to Y occurs when Bank B accepts the
payment order issued to it by Bank C. In this case the funds transfer involves three payment orders. In the funds
transfer, X is the originator, Bank A is the originator's bank, Bank B is the beneficiary's bank, and Bank C is an
"intermediary bank." Section 4A-104(b). In some cases there may be more than one intermediary bank, and in
those cases each intermediary bank is treated like Bank C in Case #3.
As the three cases demonstrate, a payment under Article 4A involves an overall transaction, the funds transfer, in
which the originator, X, is making payment to the beneficiary, Y, but the funds transfer may encompass a series of
payment orders that are issued in order to effect the payment initiated by the originator's payment order.
In some cases the originator and the beneficiary may be the same person. This will occur, for example, when a
corporation orders a bank to transfer funds from an account of the corporation in that bank to another account of the
corporation in that bank or in some other bank. In some funds transfers the first bank to issue a payment order is a
bank that is executing a payment order of a customer that is not a bank. In this case the customer is the originator.
In other cases, the first bank to issue a payment order is not acting for a customer, but is making a payment for its
own account. In that event the first bank to issue a payment order is the originator as well as the originator's bank.
2. "Payment order" is defined in Section 4A-103(a)(1) as an instruction to a bank to pay, or to cause another bank
to pay, a fixed or determinable amount of money. The bank to which the instruction is addressed is known as the
"receiving bank." Section 4A-103(a)(4). "Bank" is defined in Section 4A-105(a)(2). The effect of this definition is to
limit Article 4A to payments made through the banking system. A transfer of funds made by an entity outside the
banking system is excluded. A transfer of funds through an entity other than a bank is usually a consumer
transaction involving relatively small amounts of money and a single contract carried out by transfers of cash or a
cash equivalent such as a check. Typically, the transferor delivers cash or a check to the company making the
transfer, which agrees to pay a like amount to a person designated by the transferor. Transactions covered by
Article 4A typically involve very large amounts of money in which several transactions involving several banks may
be necessary to carry out the payment. Payments are normally made by debits or credits to bank accounts.
§ 4A-104. Funds Transfer-Definitions.
Page 3 of 4
Originators and beneficiaries are almost always business organizations and the transfers are usually made to pay
obligations. Moreover, these transactions are frequently done on the basis of very short-term credit granted by the
receiving bank to the sender of the payment order. Wholesale wire transfers involve policy questions that are
distinct from those involved in consumer-based transactions by nonbanks.
3. Further limitations on the scope of Article 4A are found in the three requirements found in subparagraphs (i), (ii),
and (iii) of Section 4A-103(a)(1). Subparagraph (i) states that the instruction to pay is a payment order only if it
"does not state a condition to payment to the beneficiary other than time of payment." An instruction to pay a
beneficiary sometimes is subject to a requirement that the beneficiary perform some act such as delivery of
documents. For example, a New York bank may have issued a letter of credit in favor of X, a California seller of
goods to be shipped to the New York bank's customer in New York. The terms of the letter of credit provide for
payment to X if documents are presented to prove shipment of the goods. Instead of providing for presentment of
the documents to the New York bank, the letter of credit states that they may be presented to a California bank that
acts as an agent for payment. The New York bank sends an instruction to the California bank to pay X upon
presentation of the required documents. The instruction is not covered by Article 4A because payment to the
beneficiary is conditional upon receipt of shipping documents. The function of banks in a funds transfer under
Article 4A is comparable to the role of banks in the collection and payment of checks in that it is essentially
mechanical in nature. The low price and high speed that characterize funds transfers reflect this fact. Conditions to
payment by the California bank other than time of payment impose responsibilities on that bank that go beyond
those in Article 4A funds transfers. Although the payment by the New York bank to X under the letter of credit is not
covered by Article 4A, if X is paid by the California bank, payment of the obligation of the New York bank to
reimburse the California bank could be made by an Article 4A funds transfer. In such a case there is a distinction
between the payment by the New York bank to X under the letter of credit and the payment by the New York bank
to the California bank. For example, if the New York bank pays its reimbursement obligation to the California bank
by a Fedwire naming the California bak as beneficiary (see Comment 1 to Section 4A-107), payment is made to the
California bank rather than to X. That payment is governed by Article 4A and it could be made either before or after
payment by the California bank to X. The payment by the New York bank to X under the letter of credit is not
governed by Article 4A and it occurs when the California bank, as agent of the New York bank, pays X. No
payment order was involved in that transaction. In this example, if the New York bank had erroneously sent an
instruction to the California bank unconditionally instructing payment to X, the instruction would have been an
Article 4A payment order. If the payment order was accepted (Section 4A-209(b)) by the California bank, a
payment by the New York bank to X would have resulted (Section 4A-406(a)). But Article 4A would not prevent
recovery of funds from X on the basis that X was not entitled to retain the funds under the law of mistake and
restitution, letter of credit law or other applicable law.
4. Transfers of funds made through the banking system are commonly referred to as either "credit" transfers or
"debit" transfers. In a credit transfer the instruction to pay is given by the person making payment. In a debit
transfer the instruction to pay is given by the person receiving payment. The purpose of subparagraph (ii) of
subsection (a)(1) of Section 4A-103 is to include credit transfers in Article 4A and to exclude debit transfers. All of
the instructions to pay in the three cases described in Comment 1 fall within subparagraph (ii). Take Case #2 as an
example. With respect to X's instruction given to Bank A, Bank A will be reimbursed by debiting X's account or
otherwise receiving payment from X. With respect to Bank A's instruction to Bank B, Bank B will be reimbursed by
receiving payment from Bank A. In a debit transfer, a creditor, pursuant to authority from the debtor, is enabled to
draw on the debtor's bank account by issuing an instruction to pay to the debtor's bank. If the debtor's bank pays, it
will be reimbursed by the debtor rather than by the person giving the instruction. For example, the holder of an
insurance policy may pay premiums by authorizing the insurance company to order the policyholder's bank to pay
the insurance company. The order to pay may be in the form of a draft covered by Article 3, or it might be an
instruction to pay that is not an instrument under that Article. The bank receives reimbursement by debiting the
policyholder's account. Or, a subsidiary corporation may make payments to its parent by authorizing the parent to
order the subsidiary's bank to pay the parent from the subsidiary's account. These transactions are not covered by
Article 4A because subparagraph (2) is not satisfied. Article 4A is limited to transactions in which the account to be
debited by the receiving bank is that of the person in whose name the instruction is given.
§ 4A-104. Funds Transfer-Definitions.
Page 4 of 4
If the beneficiary of a funds transfer is the originator of the transfer, the transfer is governed by Article 4A if it is a
credit transfer in form. If it is in the form of a debit transfer it is not governed by Article 4A. For example,
Corporation has accounts in Bank A and Bank B. Corporation instructs Bank A to pay to Corporation's account in
Bank B. The funds transfer is governed by Article 4A. Sometimes, Corporation will authorize Bank B to draw on
Corporation's account in Bank A for the purpose of transferring funds into Corporation's account in Bank B. If
Corporation also makes an agreement with Bank A under which Bank A is authorized to follow instructions of Bank
B, as agent of Corporation, to transfer funds from Customer's account in Bank A, the instruction of Bank B is a
payment order of Customer and is governed by Article 4A. This kind of transaction is known in the wire-transfer
business as a "drawdown transfer." If Corporation does not make such an agreement with Bank A and Bank B
instructs Bank A to make the transfer, the order is in form a debit transfer and is not governed by Article 4A. These
debit transfers are normally ACH transactions in which Bank A relies on Bank B's warranties pursuant to ACH rules,
including the warranty that the transfer is authorized.
5. The principal effect of subparagraph (iii) of subsection (a) of Section 4A-103 is to exclude from Article 4A
payments made by check or credit card. In those cases the instruction of the debtor to the bank on which the check
is drawn or to which the credit card slip is to be presented is contained in the check or credit card slip signed by the
debtor. The instruction is not transmitted by the debtor directly to the debtor's bank. Rather, the instruction is
delivered or otherwise transmitted by the debtor to the creditor who then presents it to the bank either directly or
through bank collection channels. These payments are governed by Articles 3 and 4 and federal law. There are,
however, limited instances in which the paper on which a check is printed can be used as the means of transmitting
a payment order that is covered by Article 4A. Assume that Originator instructs Originator's Bank to pay $10,000 to
the account of Beneficiary in Beneficiary's Bank. Since the amount of Originator's payment order is small, if
Originator's Bank and Beneficiary's Bank do not have an account relationship, Originator's Bank may execute
Originator's order by issuing a teller's check payable to Beneficiary's Bank for $10,000 along with instructions to
credit Beneficiary's account in that amount. The instruction to Beneficiary's Bank to credit Beneficiary's account is a
payment order. The check is the means by which Originator's Bank pays its obligation as sender of the payment
order. The instruction of Originator's Bank to Beneficiary's Bank might be given in a letter accompanying the check
or it may be written on the check itself. In either case the instruction to Beneficiary's Bank is a payment order but
the check itself (which is an order to pay addressed to the drawee rather than to Beneficiary's Bank) is an
instrument under Article 3 and is not a payment order. The check can be both the means by which Originator's
Bank pays its obligation under § 4A-402(b) to Beneficiary's Bank and the means by which the instruction to
Beneficiary's Bank is transmitted.
6. Most payments covered by Article 4A are commonly referred to as wire transfers and usually involve some kind
of electronic transmission, but the applicability of Article 4A does not depend upon the means used to transmit the
instruction of the sender. Transmission may be by letter or other written communication, oral communication or
electronic communication. An oral communication is normally given by telephone. Frequently the message is
recorded by the receiving bank to provide evidence of the transaction, but apart from problems of proof there is no
need to record the oral instruction. Transmission of an instruction may be a direct communication between the
sender and the receiving bank or through an intermediary such as an agent of the sender, a communication system
such as international cable, or a funds transfer system such as CHIPS, SWIFT or an automated clearing house.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4A-105. Other Definitions.
(a) In this Article:
(1) "Authorized account" means a deposit account of a customer in a bank designated by the customer
as a source of payment of payment orders issued by the customer to the bank. If a customer does not
so designate an account, any account of the customer is an authorized account if payment of a
payment order from that account is not inconsistent with a restriction on the use of that account.
(2) "Bank" means a person engaged in the business of banking and includes a savings bank, savings
and loan association, credit union, and trust company. A branch or separate office of a bank is a
separate bank for purposes of this Article.
(3) "Customer" means a person, including a bank, having an account with a bank or from whom a bank
has agreed to receive payment orders.
(4) "Funds-transfer business day" of a receiving bank means the part of a day during which the
receiving bank is open for the receipt, processing, and transmittal of payment orders and cancellations
and amendments of payment orders.
(5) "Funds-transfer system" means a wire transfer network, automated clearing house, or other
communication system of a clearing house or other association of banks through which a payment
order by a bank may be transmitted to the bank to which the order is addressed.
(6) "Good faith" means honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair
dealing.
(7) "Prove" with respect to a fact means to meet the burden of establishing the fact ( Section 1-201(8)).
(b) Other definitions applying to this Article and the sections in which they appear are:
"Acceptance" Section 4A-209
"Beneficiary" Section 4A-103
"Beneficiary's bank" Section 4A-103
"Executed" Section 4A-301
"Execution date" Section 4A-301
"Funds transfer" Section 4A-104
"Funds-transfer system rule" Section 4A-501
"Intermediary bank" Section 4A-104
"Originator" Section 4A-104
"Originator's bank" Section 4A-104
"Payment by beneficiary's bank to beneficiary" Section 4A-405
"Payment by originator to beneficiary" Section 4A-406
"Payment by sender to receiving bank" Section 4A-403
"Payment date" Section 4A-401
"Payment order" Section 4A-103
"Receiving bank" Section 4A-103
"Security procedure" Section 4A-201
"Sender" Section 4A-103
(c) The following definitions in Article 4 apply to this Article:
§ 4A-105. Other Definitions.
Page 2 of 3
"Clearing house" Section 4-104
"Item" Section 4-104
"Suspends payments" Section 4-104
(d) In addition Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation
applicable throughout this Article.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. The definition of "bank" in subsection (a)(2) includes some institutions that are not commercial banks. The
definition reflects the fact that many financial institutions now perform functions previously restricted to commercial
banks, including acting on behalf of customers in funds transfers. Since many funds transfers involve payment
orders to or from foreign countries the definition also covers foreign banks. The definition also includes Federal
Reserve Banks. Funds transfers carried out by Federal Reserve Banks are described in Comments 1 and 2 to
Section 4A-107.
2. Funds transfer business is frequently transacted by banks outside of general banking hours. Thus, the definition
of banking day in Section 4-104(1)(c) cannot be used to describe when a bank is open for funds transfer business.
Subsection (a)(4) defines a new term, "funds transfer business day," which is applicable to Article 4A. The
definition states, "is open for the receipt, processing, and transmittal of payment orders and cancellations and
amendments of payment orders." In some cases it is possible to electronically transmit payment orders and other
communications to a receiving bank at any time. If the receiving bank is not open for the processing of an order
when it is received, the communication is stored in the receiving bank's computer for retrieval when the receiving
bank is open for processing. The use of the conjunctive makes clear that the defined term is limited to the period
during which all functions of the receiving bank can be performed, i.e., receipt, processing, and transmittal of
payment orders, cancellations and amendments.
3. Subsection (a)(5) defines "funds transfer system." The term includes a system such as CHIPS which provides for
transmission of a payment order as well as settlement of the obligation of the sender to pay the order. It also
includes automated clearing houses, operated by a clearing house or other association of banks, which process
and transmit payment orders of banks to other banks. In addition the term includes organizations that provide only
transmission services such as SWIFT. The definition also includes the wire transfer network and automated
clearing houses of Federal Reserve Banks. Systems of the Federal Reserve Banks, however, are treated
differently from systems of other associations of banks. Funds transfer systems other than systems of the Federal
Reserve Banks are treated in Article 4A as a means of communication of payment orders between participating
banks. Section 4A-206. The Comment to that section and the Comment to Section 4A-107 explain how Federal
Reserve Banks function under Article 4A. Funds transfer systems are also able to promulgate rules binding on
participating banks that, under Section 4A-501, may supplement or in some cases may even override provisions of
Article 4A.
4. Subsection (d) incorporates definitions stated in Article 1 as well as principles of construction and interpretation
stated in that Article. Included is Section 1-103. The last paragraph of the Comment to Section 4A-102 is
addressed to the issue of the extent to which general principles of law and equity should apply to situations covered
by provisions of Article 4A.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 4A-105. Other Definitions.
Page 3 of 3
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4A-106. Time Payment Order Is Received.
(a) The time of receipt of a payment order or communication cancelling or amending a payment order is
determined by the rules applicable to receipt of a notice stated in Section 1-201(27). A receiving bank may
fix a cut-off time or times on a funds-transfer business day for the receipt and processing of payment orders
and communications cancelling or amending payment orders. Different cut-off times may apply to payment
orders, cancellations, or amendments, or to different categories of payment orders, cancellations, or
amendments. A cut-off time may apply to senders generally or different cut-off times may apply to different
senders or categories of payment orders. If a payment order or communication cancelling or amending a
payment order is received after the close of a funds-transfer business day or after the appropriate cut-off
time on a funds-transfer business day, the receiving bank may treat the payment order or communication
as received at the opening of the next funds-transfer business day.
(b) If this Article refers to an execution date or payment date or states a day on which a receiving bank is
required to take action, and the date or day does not fall on a funds-transfer business day, the next day that
is a funds-transfer business day is treated as the date or day stated, unless the contrary is stated in this
Article.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
The time that a payment order is received by a receiving bank usually defines the payment date or the execution
date of a payment order. Section 4A-401 and Section 4A-301. The time of receipt of a payment order, or
communication cancelling or amending a payment order is defined in subsection (a) by reference to the rules stated
in Section 1-201(27). Thus, time of receipt is determined by the same rules that determine when a notice is
received. Time of receipt, however, may be altered by a cut-off time.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4A-107. Federal Reserve Regulations and Operating Circulars.
Regulations of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and operating circulars of the Federal
Reserve Banks supersede any inconsistent provision of this Article to the extent of the inconsistency.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. Funds transfers under Article 4A may be made, in whole or in part, by payment orders through a Federal
Reserve Bank in what is usually referred to as a transfer by Fedwire. If Bank A, which has an account in Federal
Reserve Bank X, wants to pay $1,000,000 to Bank B, which has an account in Federal Reserve Bank Y, Bank A
can issue an instruction to Reserve Bank X requesting a debit of $1,000,000 to Bank A's Reserve account and an
equal credit to Bank B's Reserve account. Reserve Bank X will debit Bank A's account and will credit the account
of Reserve Bank Y. Reserve Bank X will issue an instruction to Reserve Bank Y requesting a debit of $1,000,000
to the account of Reserve Bank X and an equal credit to Bank B's account in Reserve Bank Y. Reserve Bank Y will
make the requested debit and credit and will give Bank B an advice of credit. The definition of "bank" in Section 4A-
105(a)(2) includes both Reserve Bank X and Reserve Bank Y. Bank A's instruction to Reserve Bank X to pay
money to Bank B is a payment order under Section 4A-103(a)(1). Bank A is the sender and Reserve Bank X is the
receiving bank. Bank B is the beneficiary of Bank A's order and of the funds transfer. Bank A is the originator of
the funds transfer and is also the originator's bank. Section 4A-104(c) and (d). Reserve Bank X, an intermediary
bank under Section 4A-104(b), executes Bank A's order by sending a payment order to Reserve Bank Y instructing
that bank to credit the Federal Reserve account of Bank B. Reserve Bank Y is the beneficiary's bank.
Suppose the transfer of funds from Bank A to Bank B is part of a larger transaction in which Originator, a customer
of Bank A, wants to pay Beneficiary, a customer of Bank B. Originator issues a payment order to Bank A to pay
$1,000,000 to the account of Beneficiary in Bank B. Bank A may execute Originator's order by means of Fedwire
which simultaneously transfers $1,000,000 from Bank A to Bank B and carries a message instructing Bank B to pay
$1,000,000 to the account of Y. The Fedwire transfer is carried out as described in the previous paragraph, except
that the beneficiary of the funds transfer is Beneficiary rather than Bank B. Reserve Bank X and Reserve Bank Y
are intermediary banks. When Reserve Bank Y advises Bank B of the credit to its Federal Reserve account it will
also instruct Bank B to pay to the account of Beneficiary. The instruction is a payment order to Bank B which is the
beneficiary's bank. When Reserve Bank Y advises Bank B of the credit to its Federal Reserve account Bank B
receives payment of the payment order issued to it by Reserve Bank Y. Section 4A-403(a)(1). The payment order
is automatically accepted by Bank B at the time it receives the payment order of Reserve Bank Y. Section 4A-
209(b)(2). At the time of acceptance by Bank B payment by Originator to Beneficiary also occurs. Thus, in a
Fedwire transfer, payment to the beneficiary's bank, acceptance by the beneficiary's bank and payment by the
originator to the beneficiary all occur simultaneously by operation of law at the time the payment order to the
beneficiary's bank is received.
If Originator orders payment to the account of Beneficiary in Bank C rather than Bank B, the analysis is somewhat
modified. Bank A may not have any relationship with Bank C and may not be able to make payment directly to
§ 4A-107. Federal Reserve Regulations and Operating Circulars.
Page 2 of 2
Bank C. In that case, Bank A could send a Fedwire instructing Bank B to instruct Bank C to pay Beneficiary. The
analysis is the same as the previous case except that Bank B is an intermediary bank and Bank C is the
beneficiary's bank.
2. A funds transfer can also be made through a Federal Reserve Bank in an automated clearing house transaction.
In a typical case, Originator instructs Originator's Bank to pay to the account of Beneficiary in Beneficiary's Bank.
Originator's instruction to pay a particular beneficiary is transmitted to Originator's Bank along with many other
instructions for payment to other beneficiaries by many different beneficiary's banks. All of these instructions are
contained in a magnetic tape or other electronic device. Transmission of instructions to the various beneficiary's
banks requires that Originator's instructions be processed and repackaged with instructions of other originators so
that all instructions to a particular beneficiary's bank are transmitted together to that bank. The repackaging is done
in processing centers usually referred to as automated clearing houses. Automated clearing houses are operated
either by Federal Reserve Banks or by other associations of banks. If Originator's Bank chooses to execute
Originator's instructions by transmitting them to a Federal Reserve Bank for processing by the Federal Reserve
Bank, the transmission to the Federal Reserve Bank results in the issuance of payment orders by Originator's Bank
to the Federal Reserve Bank, which is an intermediary bank. Processing by the Federal Reserve Bank will result in
the issuance of payment orders by the Federal Reserve Bank to Beneficiary's Bank as well as payment orders to
other beneficiary's banks making payments to carry out Originator's instructions.
3. Although the terms of Article 4A apply to funds transfers involving Federal Reserve Banks, federal preemption
would make ineffective any Article 4A provision that conflicts with federal law. The payments activities of the
Federal Reserve Banks are governed by regulations of the Federal Reserve Board and by operating circulars
issued by the Reserve Banks themselves. In some instances, the operating circulars are issued pursuant to a
Federal Reserve Board regulation. In other cases, the Reserve Bank issues the operating circular under its own
authority under the Federal Reserve Act, subject to review by the Federal Reserve Board. Section 4A-107 states
that Federal Reserve Board regulations and operating circulars of the Federal Reserve Banks supersede any
inconsistent provision of Article 4A to the extent of the inconsistency. Federal Reserve Board regulations, being
valid exercises of regulatory authority pursuant to a federal statute, take precedence over state law if there is an
inconsistency. Childs v. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 719 F.2d 812 (5th Cir.1983), reh. den. 724 F.2d 127 (5th
Cir.1984). Section 4A-107 treats operating circulars as having the same effect whether issued under the Reserve
Bank's own authority or under a Federal Reserve Board regulation.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-108
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4A-108. RELATIONSHIP TO ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER ACT.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), this Article does not apply to a funds transfer any part of which is
governed by the Electronic Fund Transfer Act of 1978 (Title XX, Public Law 95-630, 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693 et seq.) as amended from time to time.
(b) This Article applies to a funds transfer that is a remittance transfer as defined in the Electronic Fund
Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. Sec. 1693o-1) as amended from time to time, unless the remittance transfer is an
electronic fund transfer as defined in the Electronic Fund Transfer Act ( 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1693a) as
ammended from time to time.
(c) In a funds transfer to which this Article applies, in the event of an inconsistency between an applicable
provision of this Article and an applicable provision of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act, the provision of the
Electronic Fund transfer Act governs to the extent of the inconsistency.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment1. The Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA), implemented by Regulation E, 12 C.F.R. Part 1005,
is a federal statute that covers aspects of electronic fund transfers involving consumers. EFTA also governs
remittance transfers, defined in 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1693o-1, which involve transfers of funds through electronic means
by consumers to recipients in another country through persons or financial institutions that provide such transfers in
the normal course of their business. Not all "remittance transfers" as defined in EFTA, however, qualify as
"electronic fund transfers" as defined under the EFTA, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1693a(7). While Section 4A-108(a) broadly
states that Article 4A does not apply to any funds transfer that is governed in any part by EFTA, subsection (b)
provides an exception. The purpose of Section 4A-108(b) is to allow this Article to apply to a funds transfer as
defined in Section 4A-104(a) (see Section 4A-102) that also is a remittance transfer as defined in EFTA, so long as
that remittance transfer is not an electronic fund transfer as defined in EFTA. If the resulting application of this
Article to an EFTA-defined "remittance transfer" that is not an EFTA-defined "electronic fund transfer" creates an
inconsistency between an applicable provision of this Article and an applicable provision of EFTA, then, as a matter
of federal supremacy, the provision of EFTA governs to the extent of the inconsistency. Section 4A-108(c). Of
course, in the case of a funds transfer that also relates to another jurisdiction, the forum's conflict of laws principles
determine whether it will apply the law in effect in this State (including this Article and EFTA) or the law of another
jurisdiction to all or any part of the funds transfer. See Section 4A-507.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-201
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-201. Security Procedure.
"Security procedure" means a procedure established by agreement of a customer and a receiving bank for the
purpose of (i) verifying that a payment order or communication amending or cancelling a payment order is that of
the customer, or (ii) detecting error in the transmission or the content of the payment order or communication. A
security procedure may require the use of algorithms or other codes, identifying words or numbers, encryption,
callback procedures, or similar security devices. Comparison of a signature on a payment order or communication
with an authorized specimen signature of the customer is not by itself a security procedure.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
A large percentage of payment orders and communications amending or cancelling payment orders are transmitted
electronically and it is standard practice to use security procedures that are designed to assure the authenticity of
the message. Security procedures can also be used to detect error in the content of messages or to detect
payment orders that are transmitted by mistake as in the case of multiple transmission of the same payment order.
Security procedures might also apply to communications that are transmitted by telephone or in writing. Section
4A-201 defines these security procedures. The definition of security procedure limits the term to a procedure
"established by agreement of a customer and a receiving bank." The term does not apply to procedures that the
receiving bank may follow unilaterally in processing payment orders. The question of whether loss that may result
from the transmission of a spurious or erroneous payment order will be borne by the receiving bank or the sender or
purported sender is affected by whether a security procedure was or was not in effect and whether there was or
was not compliance with the procedure. Security procedures are referred to in Sections 4A-202 and 4A-203, which
deal with authorized and verified payment orders, and Section 4A-205, which deals with erroneous payment orders.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-202
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-202. Authorized and Verified Payment Orders.
(a) A payment order received by the receiving bank is the authorized order of the person identified as
sender if that person authorized the order or is otherwise bound by it under the law of agency.
(b) If a bank and its customer have agreed that the authenticity of payment orders issued to the bank in the
name of the customer as sender will be verified pursuant to a security procedure, a payment order received
by the receiving bank is effective as the order of the customer, whether or not authorized, if (i) the security
procedure is a commercially reasonable method of providing security against unauthorized payment orders,
and (ii) the bank proves that it accepted the payment order in good faith and in compliance with the security
procedure and any written agreement or instruction of the customer restricting acceptance of payment
orders issued in the name of the customer. The bank is not required to follow an instruction that violates a
written agreement with the customer or notice of which is not received at a time and in a manner affording
the bank a reasonable opportunity to act on it before the payment order is accepted.
(c) Commercial reasonableness of a security procedure is a question of law to be determined by
considering the wishes of the customer expressed to the bank, the circumstances of the customer known to
the bank, including the size, type, and frequency of payment orders normally issued by the customer to the
bank, alternative security procedures offered to the customer, and security procedures in general use by
customers and receiving banks similarly situated. A security procedure is deemed to be commercially
reasonable if (i) the security procedure was chosen by the customer after the bank offered, and the
customer refused, a security procedure that was commercially reasonable for that customer, and (ii) the
customer expressly agreed in writing to be bound by any payment order, whether or not authorized, issued
in its name and accepted by the bank in compliance with the security procedure chosen by the customer.
(d) The term "sender" in this Article includes the customer in whose name a payment order is issued if the
order is the authorized order of the customer under subsection (a), or it is effective as the order of the
customer under subsection (b).
(e) This section applies to amendments and cancellations of payment orders to the same extent it applies
to payment orders.
(f) Except as provided in this section and in Section 4A-203(a)(1), rights and obligations arising under this
section or Section 4A-203 may not be varied by agreement.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
This section is discussed in the Comment following Section 4A-203.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 4A-202. Authorized and Verified Payment Orders.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-203
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-203. Unenforceability of Certain Verified Payment Orders.
(a) If an accepted payment order is not, under Section 4A-202(a), an authorized order of a customer
identified as sender, but is effective as an order of the customer pursuant to Section 4A-202(b), the
following rules apply:
(1) By express written agreement, the receiving bank may limit the extent to which it is entitled to
enforce or retain payment of the payment order.
(2) The receiving bank is not entitled to enforce or retain payment of the payment order if the customer
proves that the order was not caused, directly or indirectly, by a person (i) entrusted at any time with
duties to act for the customer with respect to payment orders or the security procedure, or (ii) who
obtained access to transmitting facilities of the customer or who obtained, from a source controlled by
the customer and without authority of the receiving bank, information facilitating breach of the security
procedure, regardless of how the information was obtained or whether the customer was at fault.
Information includes any access device, computer software, or the like.
(b) This section applies to amendments of payment orders to the same extent it applies to payment orders.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. Some person will always be identified as the sender of a payment order. Acceptance of the order by the
receiving bank is based on a belief by the bank that the order was authorized by the person identified as the
sender. If the receiving bank is the beneficiary's bank acceptance means that the receiving bank is obliged to pay
the beneficiary. If the receiving bank is not the beneficiary's bank, acceptance means that the receiving bank has
executed the sender's order and is obliged to pay the bank that accepted the order issued in execution of the
sender's order. In either case the receiving bank may suffer a loss unless it is entitled to enforce payment of the
payment order that it accepted. If the person identified as the sender of the order refuses to pay on the ground that
the order was not authorized by that person, what are the rights of the receiving bank? In the absence of a statute
or agreement that specifically addresses the issue, the question usually will be resolved by the law of agency. In
some cases, the law of agency works well. For example, suppose the receiving bank executes a payment order
given by means of a letter apparently written by a corporation that is a customer of the bank and apparently signed
by an officer of the corporation. If the receiving bank acts solely on the basis of the letter, the corporation is not
bound as the sender of the payment order unless the signature was that of the officer and the officer was
authorized to act for the corporation in the issuance of payment orders, or some other agency doctrine such as
apparent authority or estoppel causes the corporation to be bound. Estoppel can be illustrated by the following
example. Suppose P is aware that A, who is unauthorized to act for P, has fraudulently misrepresented to T that A
is authorized to act for P. T believes A and is about to rely on the misrepresentation. If P does not notify T of the
true facts although P could easily do so, P may be estopped from denying A's lack of authority. A similar resut
could follow if the failure to notify T is the result of negligence rather than a deliberate decision. Restatement,
Second, Agency § 8B. Other equitable principles such as subrogation or restitution might also allow a receiving
§ 4A-203. Unenforceability of Certain Verified Payment Orders.
Page 2 of 5
bank to recover with respect to an unauthorized payment order that it accepted. In Gatoil (U.S.A.), Inc. v. Forest
Hill State Bank, 1 U.C.C.Rep.Serv.2d 171 (D.Md.1986), a joint venturer not authorized to order payments from the
account of the joint venture, ordered a funds transfer from the account. The transfer paid a bona fide debt of the
joint venture. Although the transfer was unauthorized the court refused to require recredit of the account because
the joint venture suffered no loss. The result can be rationalized on the basis of subrogation of the receiving bank
to the right of the beneficiary of the funds transfer to receive the payment from the joint venture.
But in most cases these legal principles give the receiving bank very little protection in the case of an authorized
payment order. Cases like those just discussed are not typical of the way that most payment orders are transmitted
and accepted, and such cases are likely to become even less common. Given the large amount of the typical
payment order, a prudent receiving bank will be unwilling to accept a payment order unless it has assurance that
the order is what it purports to be. This assurance is normally provided by security procedures described in Section
4A-201.
In a very large percentage of cases covered by Article 4A, transmission of the payment order is made electronically.
The receiving bank may be required to act on the basis of a message that appears on a computer screen.
Common law concepts of authority of agent to bind principal are not helpful. There is no way of determining the
identity or the authority of the person who caused the message to be sent. The receiving bank is not relying on the
authority of any particular person to act for the purported sender. The case is not comparable to payment of a
check by the drawee bank on the basis of a signature that is forged. Rather, the receiving bank relies on a security
procedure pursuant to which the authenticity of the message can be "tested" by various devices which are designed
to provide certainty that the message is that of the sender identified in the payment order. In the wire transfer
business the concept of "authorized" is different from that found in agency law. In that business a payment order is
treated as the order of the person in whose name it is issued if it is properly tested pursuant to a security procedure
and the order passes the test.
Section 4A-202 reflects the reality of the wire transfer business. A person in whose name a payment order is
issued is considered to be the sender of the order if the order is "authorized" as stated in subsection (a) or if the
order is "verified" pursuant to a security procedure in compliance with subsection (b). If subsection (b) does not
apply, the question of whether the customer is responsible for the order is determined by the law of agency. The
issue is one of actual or apparent authority of the person who caused the order to be issued in the name of the
customer. In some cases the law of agency might allow the customer to be bound by an unauthorized order if
conduct of the customer can be used to find an estoppel against the customer to deny that the order was
unauthorized. If the customer is bound by the order under any of these agency doctrines, subsection (a) treats the
order as authorized and thus the customer is deemed to be the sender of the order. In most cases, however,
subsection (b) will apply. In that event there is no need to make an agency law analysis to determine authority.
Under Section 4A-202, the issue of liability of the purported sender of the payment order will be determined by
agency law only if the receiving bank did not comply with subsection (b).
2. The scope of Section 4A-202 can be illustrated by the following cases. Case #1. A payment order purporting to
be that of Customer is received by Receiving Bank but the order was fraudulently transmitted by a person who had
no authority to act for Customer. Case #2. An authentic payment order was sent by Customer, but before the order
was received by Receiving Bank the order was fraudulently altered by an unauthorized person to change the
beneficiary. Case #3. An authentic payment order was received by Receiving Bank, but before the order was
executed by Receiving Bank a person who had no authority to act for Customer fraudulently sent a communication
purporting to amend the order by changing the beneficiary. In each case Receiving Bank acted on the fraudulent
communication by accepting the payment order. These cases are all essentially similar and they are treated
identically by Section 4A-202. In each case Receiving Bank acted on a communication that it thought was
authorized by Customer when in fact the communication was fraudulent. No distinction is made between Case #1
in which Customer took no part at all in the transaction and Case #2 and Case #3 in which an authentic order was
fraudulently altered or amended by an unauthorized person. If subsection (b) does not apply, each case is
governed by subsection (a). If there are no additional facts on which an estoppel might be found, Customer is not
responsible in Case #1 for the fraudulently issued payment order, in Case #2 for the fraudulent alteration or in Case
§ 4A-203. Unenforceability of Certain Verified Payment Orders.
Page 3 of 5
#3 for the fraudulent amendment. Thus, in each case Customer is not liable to pay the order and Receiving Bank
takes the loss. The only remedy of Receiving Bank is to seek recovery from the person who received payment as
beneficiary of the fraudulent order. If there was verification in compliance with subsection (b), Customer will take
the loss unless Section 4A-203 applies.
3. Subsection (b) of Section 4A-202 is based on the assumption that losses due to fraudulent payment orders can
best be avoided by the use of commercially reasonable security procedures, and that the use of such procedures
should be encouraged. The subsection is designed to protect both the customer and the receiving bank. A
receiving bank needs to be able to rely on objective criteria to determine whether it can safely act on a payment
order. Employees of the bank can be trained to "test" a payment order according to the various steps specified in
the security procedure. The bank is responsible for the acts of these employees. Subsection (b)(ii) requires the
bank to prove that it accepted the payment order in good faith and "in compliance with the security procedure." If
the fraud was not detected because the bank's employee did not perform the acts required by the security
procedure, the bank has not complied. Subsection (b)(ii) also requires the bank to prove that it complied with any
agreement or instruction that restricts acceptance of payment orders issued in the name of the customer. A
customer may want to protect itself by imposing limitations on acceptance of payment orders by the bank. For
example, the customer may prohibit the bank from accepting a payment order that is not payable from an
authorized account, that exceeds the credit balance in specified accounts of the customer, or that exceeds some
other amount. Another limitation may relate to the beneficiary. The customer may provide the bank with a list of
authorized beneficiaries and prohibit acceptance of any payment order to a beneficiary not appearing on the list.
Such limitations may be incorporated into the security procedure itself or they may be covered by a separate
agreement or instruction. In either case, the bank must comply with the limitations if the conditions stated in
subsection (b) are met. Normally limitations on acceptance would be incorporated into an agreement between the
customer and the receiving bank, but in some cases the instruction might e unilaterally given by the customer. If
standing instructions or an agreement state limitations on the ability of the receiving bank to act, provision must be
made for later modification of the limitations. Normally this would be done by an agreement that specifies particular
procedures to be followed. Thus, subsection (b) states that the receiving bank is not required to follow an
instruction that violates a written agreement. The receiving bank is not bound by an instruction unless it has
adequate notice of it. Subsections (25), (26) and (27) of Section 1-201 apply.
Subsection (b)(i) assures that the interests of the customer will be protected by providing an incentive to a bank to
make available to the customer a security procedure that is commercially reasonable. If a commercially reasonable
security procedure is not made available to the customer, subsection (b) does not apply. The result is that
subsection (a) applies and the bank acts at its peril in accepting a payment order that may be unauthorized.
Prudent banking practice may require that security procedures be utilized in virtually all cases except for those in
which personal contact between the customer and the bank eliminates the possibility of an unauthorized order. The
burden of making available commercially reasonable security procedures is imposed on receiving banks because
they generally determine what security procedures can be used and are in the best position to evaluate the efficacy
of procedures offered to customers to combat fraud. The burden on the customer is to supervise its employees to
assure compliance with the security procedure and to safeguard confidential security information and access to
transmitting facilities so that the security procedure cannot be breached.
4. The principal issue that is likely to arise in litigation involving subsection (b) is whether the security procedure in
effect when a fraudulent payment order was accepted was commercially reasonable. The concept of what is
commercially reasonable in a given case is flexible. Verification entails labor and equipment costs that can vary
greatly depending upon the degree of security that is sought. A customer that transmits very large numbers of
payment orders in very large amounts may desire and may reasonably expect to be provided with state-of-the-art
procedures that provide maximum security. But the expense involved may make use of a state-of-the-art procedure
infeasible for a customer that normally transmits payment orders infrequently or in relatively low amounts. Another
variable is the type of receiving bank. It is reasonable to require large money center banks to make available stateof-
the-art security procedures. On the other hand, the same requirement may not be reasonable for a small country
bank. A receiving bank might have several security procedures that are designed to meet the varying needs of
different customers. The type of payment order is another variable. For example, in a wholesale wire transfer,
§ 4A-203. Unenforceability of Certain Verified Payment Orders.
Page 4 of 5
each payment order is normally transmitted electronically and individually. A testing procedure will be individually
applied to each payment order. In funds transfers to be made by means of an automated clearing house many
payment orders are incorporated into an electronic device such as a magnetic tape that is physically delivered.
Testing of the individual payment orders is not feasible. Thus, a different kind of security procedure must be
adopted to take into account the different mode of transmission.
The issue of whether a particular security procedure is commercially reasonable is a question of law. Whether the
receiving bank complied with the procedure is a question of fact. It is appropriate to make the finding concerning
commercial reasonability a matter of law because security procedures are likely to be standardized in the banking
industry and a question of law standard leads to more predictability concerning the level of security that a bank
must offer to its customers. The purpose of subsection (b) is to encourage banks to institute reasonable safeguards
against fraud but not to make them insurers against fraud. A security procedure is not commercially unreasonable
simply because another procedure might have been better or because the judge deciding the question would have
opted for a more stringent procedure. The standard is not whether the security procedure is the best available.
Rather it is whether the procedure is reasonable for the particular customer and the particular bank, which is a
lower standard. On the other hand, a security procedure that fails to meet prevailing standards of good banking
practice applicable to the particular bank should not be held to be commercially reasonable. Subsection (c) states
factors to be considered by the judge in making the determination of commercial reasonableness. Sometimes an
informed customer refuses a security procedure that is commercially reasonable and suitable for that customer and
insists on using a higher-risk procedure because it is more convenient or cheaper. In that case, under the last
sentence of subsection (c), the customer has voluntarily assumed the risk of failure of the procedure and cannot
shift the loss to the bank. But this result follows only if the customer expressly agrees in writing to assume that risk.
It is implicit in the last sentence of subsection (c) that a bank that accedes to the wishes of its customer in this
regard is not acting in bad faith by so doing so long as the customer is made aware of the risk. In ll cases,
however, a receiving bank cannot get the benefit of subsection (b) unless it has made available to the customer a
security procedure that is commercially reasonable and suitable for use by that customer. In most cases, the
mutual interest of bank and customer to protect against fraud should lead to agreement to a security procedure
which is commercially reasonable.
5. The effect of Section 4a-202(b) is to place the risk of loss on the customer if an unauthorized payment order is
accepted by the receiving bank after verification by the bank in compliance with a commercially reasonable security
procedure. An exception to this result is provided by Section 4A-203(a)(2). The customer may avoid the loss
resulting from such a payment order if the customer can prove that the fraud was not committed by a person
described in that subsection. Breach of a commercially reasonable security procedure requires that the person
committing the fraud have knowledge of how the procedure works and knowledge of codes, identifying devices, and
the like. That person may also need access to transmitting facilities through an access device or other software in
order to breach the security procedure. This confidential information must be obtained either from a source
controlled by the customer or from a source controlled by the receiving bank. If the customer can prove that the
person committing the fraud did not obtain the confidential information from an agent or former agent of the
customer or from a source controlled by the customer, the loss is shifted to the bank. "Prove" is defined in Section
4A-105(a)(7). Because of bank regulation requirements, in this kind of case there will always be a criminal
investigation as well as an internal investigation of the bank to determine the probable explanation for the breach of
security. Because a funds transfer fraud usually will involve a very large amount of money, both the criminal
investigation and the internal investigation are likely to be thorough. In some cases there may be an investigation
by bank examiners as well. Frequently, these investigations will develop evidence of who is at fault and the cause
of the loss. The customer will have access to evidence developed in these investigations and that evidence can be
used by the customer in meeting its burden of proof.
6. The effect of Section 4A-202(b) may also be changed by an agreement meeting the requirements of Section 4A-
203(a)(1). Some customers may be unwilling to take all or part of the risk of loss with respect to unauthorized
payment orders even if all of the requirements of Section 4A-202(b) are met. By virtue of Section 4A-203(a)(1), a
receiving bank may assume all of the risk of loss with respect to unauthorized payment orders or the customer and
bank may agree that losses from unauthorized payment orders are to be divided as provided in the agreement.
§ 4A-203. Unenforceability of Certain Verified Payment Orders.
Page 5 of 5
7. In a large majority of cases the sender of a payment order is a bank. In many cases in which there is a bank
sender, both the sender and the receiving bank will be members of a funds transfer system over which the payment
order is transmitted. Since Section 4A-202(f) does not prohibit a funds transfer system rule from varying rights and
obligations under Section 4A-202, a rule of the funds transfer system can determine how loss due to an
unauthorized payment order from a participating bank to another participating bank is to be allocated. A funds
transfer system rule, however, cannot change the rights of a customer that is not a participating bank. § 4A-501(b).
Section 4A-202(f) also prevents variation by agreement except to the extent stated.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-204
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-204. Refund of Payment and Duty of Customer to Report With Respect
to Unauthorized Payment Order.
(a) If a receiving bank accepts a payment order issued in the name of its customer as sender which is (i)
not authorized and not effective as the order of the customer under Section 4A-202, or (ii) not enforceable,
in whole or in part, against the customer under Section 4A-203, the bank shall refund any payment of the
payment order received from the customer to the extent the bank is not entitled to enforce payment and
shall pay interest on the refundable amount calculated from the date the bank received payment to the date
of the refund. However, the customer is not entitled to interest from the bank on the amount to be refunded
if the customer fails to exercise ordinary care to determine that the order was not authorized by the
customer and to notify the bank of the relevant facts within a reasonable time not exceeding 90 days after
the date the customer received notification from the bank that the order was accepted or that the
customer's account was debited with respect to the order. The bank is not entitled to any recovery from the
customer on account of a failure by the customer to give notification as stated in this section.
(b) Reasonable time under subsection (a) may be fixed by agreement as stated in Section 1-204(1), but
the obligation of a receiving bank to refund payment as stated in subsection (a) may not otherwise be
varied by agreement.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. With respect to unauthorized payment orders, in a very large percentage of cases a commercially reasonable
security procedure will be in effect. Section 4A-204 applies only to cases in which (i) no commercially reasonable
security procedure is in effect, (ii) the bank did not comply with a commercially reasonable security procedure that
was in effect, (iii) the sender can prove, pursuant to Section 4A-203(a)(2), that the culprit did not obtain confidential
security information controlled by the customer, or (iv) the bank, pursuant to Section 4A-203(a)(1) agreed to take all
or part of the loss resulting from an unauthorized payment order. In each of these cases the bank takes the risk of
loss with respect to an unauthorized payment order because the bank is not entitled to payment from the customer
with respect to the order. The bank normally debits the customer's account or otherwise receives payment from the
customer shortly after acceptance of the payment order. Subsection (a) of Section 4A-204 states that the bank
must recredit the account or refund payment to the extent the bank is not entitled to enforce payment.
2. Section 4A-204 is designed to encourage a customer to promptly notify the receiving bank that it has accepted
an unauthorized payment order. Since cases of unauthorized payment orders will almost always involve fraud, the
bank's remedy is normally to recover from the beneficiary of the unauthorized order if the beneficiary was party to
the fraud. This remedy may not be worth very much and it may not make any difference whether or not the bank
promptly learns about the fraud. But in some cases prompt notification may make it easier for the bank to recover
some part of its loss from the culprit. The customer will routinely be notified of the debit to its account with respect
to an unauthorized order or will otherwise be notified of acceptance of the order. The customer has a duty to
exercise ordinary care to determine that the order was unauthorized after it has received notification from the bank,
§ 4A-204. Refund of Payment and Duty of Customer to Report With Respect to Unauthorized Payment Order.
Page 2 of 2
and to advise the bank of the relevant facts within a reasonable time not exceeding 90 days after receipt of
notification. Reasonable time is not defined and it may depend on the facts of the particular case. If a payment
order for $1,000,000 is wholly unauthorized, the customer should normally discover it in far less than 90 days. If a
$1,000,000 payment order was authorized but the name of the beneficiary was fraudulently changed, a much
longer period may be necessary to discover the fraud. But in any event, if the customer delays more than 90 days
the customer's duty has not been met. The only consequence of a failure of the customer to perform this duty is a
loss of interest on the refund payable by the bank. A customer that acts promptly is entitled to interest from the time
the customer's account was debited or the customer otherwise made payment. The rate of interest is stated in
Section 4A-506. If the customer fails to perform the duty, no interest is recoverable for any part of the period before
the bank learns that it accepted an unauthorized order. But the bank is not entitled to any recovery from the
customer based on negligence for failure to inform the bank. Loss of interest is in the nature of a penalty on the
customer designed to provide an incentive for the customer to police its account. There is no intention to impose a
duty on the customer that might result in shifting loss from the unauthorized order to the customer.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-205
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-205. Erroneous Payment Orders.
(a) If an accepted payment order was transmitted pursuant to a security procedure for the detection of
error and the payment order (i) erroneously instructed payment to a beneficiary not intended by the sender,
(ii) erroneously instructed payment in an amount greater than the amount intended by the sender, or (iii)
was an erroneously transmitted duplicate of a payment order previously sent by the sender, the following
rules apply:
(1) If the sender proves that the sender or a person acting on behalf of the sender pursuant to Section
4A-206 complied with the security procedure and that the error would have been detected if the
receiving bank had also complied, the sender is not obliged to pay the order to the extent stated in
paragraphs (2) and (3).
(2) If the funds transfer is completed on the basis of an erroneous payment order described in clause
(i) or (iii) of subsection (a), the sender is not obliged to pay the order and the receiving bank is entitled
to recover from the beneficiary any amount paid to the beneficiary to the extent allowed by the law
governing mistake and restitution.
(3) If the funds transfer is completed on the basis of a payment order described in clause (ii) of
subsection (a), the sender is not obliged to pay the order to the extent the amount received by the
beneficiary is greater than the amount intended by the sender. In that case, the receiving bank is
entitled to recover from the beneficiary the excess amount received to the extent allowed by the law
governing mistake and restitution.
(b) If (i) the sender of an erroneous payment order described in subsection (a) is not obliged to pay all or
part of the order, and (ii) the sender receives notification from the receiving bank that the order was
accepted by the bank or that the sender's account was debited with respect to the order, the sender has a
duty to exercise ordinary care, on the basis of information available to the sender, to discover the error with
respect to the order and to advise the bank of the relevant facts within a reasonable time, not exceeding 90
days, after the bank's notification was received by the sender. If the bank proves that the sender failed to
perform that duty, the sender is liable to the bank for the loss the bank proves it incurred as a result of the
failure, but the liability of the sender may not exceed the amount of the sender's order.
(c) This section applies to amendments to payment orders to the same extent it applies to payment orders.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. This section concerns error in the content or in the transmission of payment orders. It deals with three kinds of
error. Case #1. The order identifies a beneficiary not intended by the sender. For example, Sender intends to wire
funds to a beneficiary identified only by an account number. The wrong account number is stated in the order.
Case #2. The error is in the amount of the order. For example, Sender intends to wire $1,000 to Beneficiary.
Through error, the payment order instructs payment of $1,000,000. Case #3. A payment order is sent to the
§ 4A-205. Erroneous Payment Orders.
Page 2 of 3
receiving bank and then, by mistake, the same payment order is sent to the receiving bank again. In Case #3, the
receiving bank may have no way of knowing whether the second order is a duplicate of the first or is another order.
Similarly, in Case #1 and Case #2, the receiving bank may have no way of knowing that the error exists. In each
case, if this section does not apply and the funds transfer is completed, Sender is obliged to pay the order. Section
4A-402. Sender's remedy, based on payment by mistake, is to recover from the beneficiary that received payment.
Sometimes, however, transmission of payment orders of the sender to the receiving bank is made pursuant to a
security procedure designed to detect one or more of the errors described above. Since "security procedure" is
defined by Section 4A-201 as "a procedure established by agreement of a customer and a receiving bank for the
purpose of * * * detecting error * * *," Section 4A-205 does not apply if the receiving bank and the customer did not
agree to the establishment of a procedure for detecting error. A security procedure may be designed to detect an
account number that is not one to which Sender normally makes payment. In that case, the security procedure may
require a special verification that payment to the stated account number was intended. In the case of dollar
amounts, the security procedure may require different codes for different dollar amounts. If a $1,000,000 payment
order contains a code that is inappropriate for that amount, the error in amount should be detected. In the case of
duplicate orders, the security procedure may require that each payment order be identified by a number or code
that applies to no other order. If the number or code of each payment order received is registered in a computer
base, the receiving bank can quickly identify a duplicate order. The three cases covered by this section are
essentially similar. In each, if the error is not detected, some beneficiary will receive funds that the beneficiary was
not intended to receive. If this section applies, the risk of loss with respect to the error of the sender is shifted to the
bank which has the burden of recovering the funds from the beneficiary. The risk of loss is shifted to the bank only
if the sender proves that the error would have been detected if there had been compliance with the procedure and
that the sender (or an agent under Section 4A-206) complied. In the case of a duplicate order or a wrong
beneficiary, the sender doesn't have to pay the order. In the case of an overpayment, the sender does not have to
pay the order to the extent of the overpayment. If subsection (a)(1) applies, the position of the receiving bank is
comparable to that of a receiving bank that erroneously executes a payment order as stated in Section 4A-303.
However, failure of the sender to timely report the error is covered by Section 4A-205(b) rather than by Section 4A-
304 which applies only to erroneous execution under Section 4A-303. A receiving bank to which the risk of loss is
shifted by subsection (a)(1) or (2) is entitled to recover the amount erroneously paid to the beneficiary to the extent
allowed by the law of mistake and restitution. Rights of the receiving bank against the beneficiary are similar to
those of a receiving bank that erroneously executes a payment order as stated in Section 4A-303. Those rights are
discussed in Comment 2 to Section 4A-303.
2. A security procedure established for the purpose of detecting error is not effective unless both sender and
receiving bank comply with the procedure. Thus, the bank undertakes a duty of complying with the procedure for
the benefit of the sender. This duty is recognized in subsection (a)(1). The loss with respect to the sender's error is
shifted to the bank if the bank fails to comply with the procedure and the sender (or an agent under Section 4A-206)
does comply. Although the customer may have been negligent in transmitting the erroneous payment order, the
loss is put on the bank on a last-clear-chance theory. A similar analysis applies to subsection (b). If the loss with
respect to an error is shifted to the receiving bank and the sender is notified by the bank that the erroneous
payment order was accepted, the sender has a duty to exercise ordinary care to discover the error and notify the
bank of the relevant facts within a reasonable time not exceeding 90 days. If the bank can prove that the sender
failed in this duty it is entitled to compensation for the loss incurred as a result of the failure. Whether the bank is
entitled to recover from the sender depends upon whether the failure to give timely notice would have made any
difference. If the bank could not have recovered from the beneficiary that received payment under the erroneous
payment order even if timely notice had been given, the sender's failure to notify did not cause any loss of the bank.
3. Section 4A-205 is subject to variation by agreement under Section 4A-501. Thus, if a receiving bank and its
customer have agreed to a security procedure for detection of error, the liability of the receiving bank for failing to
detect an error of the customer as provided in Section 4A-205 may be varied as provided in an agreement of the
bank and the customer.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 4A-205. Erroneous Payment Orders.
Page 3 of 3
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-206
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-206. Transmission of Payment Order Through Funds-Transfer or Other
Communication System.
(a) If a payment order addressed to a receiving bank is transmitted to a funds-transfer system or other
third-party communication system for transmittal to the bank, the system is deemed to be an agent of the
sender for the purpose of transmitting the payment order to the bank. If there is a discrepancy between the
terms of the payment order transmitted to the system and the terms of the payment order transmitted by the
system to the bank, the terms of the payment order of the sender are those transmitted by the system. This
section does not apply to a funds-transfer system of the Federal Reserve Banks.
(b) This section applies to cancellations and amendments of payment orders to the same extent it applies
to payment orders.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. A payment order may be issued to a receiving bank directly by delivery of a writing or electronic device or by an
oral or electronic communication. If an agent of the sender is employed to transmit orders on behalf of the sender,
the sender is bound by the order transmitted by the agent on the basis of agency law. Section 4A-206 is an
application of that principle to cases in which a funds transfer or communication system acts as an intermediary in
transmitting the sender's order to the receiving bank. The intermediary is deemed to be an agent of the sender for
the purpose of transmitting payment orders and related messages for the sender. Section 4A-206 deals with error
by the intermediary.
2. Transmission by an automated clearing house of an association of banks other than the Federal Reserve Banks
is an example of a transaction covered by Section 4A-206. Suppose Originator orders Originator's Bank to cause a
large number of payments to be made to many accounts in banks in various parts of the country. These payment
orders are electronically transmitted to Originator's Bank and stored in an electronic device that is held by
Originator's Bank. Or, transmission of the various payment orders is made by delivery to Originator's Bank of an
electronic device containing the instruction to the bank. In either case the terms of the various payment orders by
Originator are determined by the information contained in the electronic device. In order to execute the various
orders, the information in the electronic device must be processed. For example, if some of the orders are for
payments to accounts in Bank X and some to accounts in Bank Y, Originator's Bank will execute these orders of
Originator by issuing a series of payment orders to Bank X covering all payments to accounts in that bank, and by
issuing a series of payment orders to Bank Y covering all payments to accounts in that bank. The orders to Bank X
may be transmitted together by means of an electronic device, and those to Bank Y may be included in another
electronic device. Typically, this processing is done by an automated clearing house acting for a group of banks
including Originator's Bank. The automated clearing house is a funds transfer system. Section 4A-105(a)(5).
Originator's Bank delivers Originator's electronic device or transmits the information contained in the device to the
funds transfer system for processing into payment orders of Originator's Bank to the appropriate beneficiary's
banks. The processing may result in an erroneous payment order. Originator's Bank, by use of Originator's
§ 4A-206. Transmission of Payment Order Through Funds-Transfer or Other Communication System.
Page 2 of 2
electronic device, may have given information to the funds transfer system instructing payment of $100,000 to an
account in Bank X, but because of human error or an equipment malfunction the processing may have converted
that instruction into an instruction to Bank X to make a payment of $1,000,000. Under Section 4A-206, Originator's
Bank issued a payment order for $1,000,000 to Bank X when the erroneous information was sent to Bank X.
Originator's Bank is responsible for the error of the automated clearing house. The liability of the funds transfer
system that made the error is not governed by Article 4A. It is left to the law of contract, a funds transfer system
rule, or other applicable law.
In the hypothetical case just discussed, if the automated clearing house is operated by a Federal Reserve Bank, the
analysis is different. Section 4A-206 does not apply. Originator's Bank will execute Originator's payment orders by
delivery or transmission of the electronic information to the Federal Reserve Bank for processing. The result is that
Originator's Bank has issued payment orders to the Federal Reserve Bank which, in this case, is acting as an
intermediary bank. When the Federal Reserve Bank has processed the information given to it by Originator's Bank
it will issue payment orders to the various beneficiary's banks. If the processing results in an erroneous payment
order, the Federal Reserve Bank has erroneously executed the payment order of Originator's Bank and the case is
governed by Section 4A-303.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-207
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-207. Misdescription of Beneficiary.
(a) Subject to subsection (b), if, in a payment order received by the beneficiary's bank, the name, bank
account number, or other identification of the beneficiary refers to a nonexistent or unidentifiable person or
account, no person has rights as a beneficiary of the order and acceptance of the order cannot occur.
(b) If a payment order received by the beneficiary's bank identifies the beneficiary both by name and by an
identifying or bank account number and the name and number identify different persons, the following rules
apply:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), if the beneficiary's bank does not know that the
name and number refer to different persons, it may rely on the number as the proper identification of
the beneficiary of the order. The beneficiary's bank need not determine whether the name and number
refer to the same person.
(2) If the beneficiary's bank pays the person identified by name or knows that the name and number
identify different persons, no person has rights as beneficiary except the person paid by the
beneficiary's bank if that person was entitled to receive payment from the originator of the funds
transfer. If no person has rights as beneficiary, acceptance of the order cannot occur.
(c) If (i) a payment order described in subsection (b) is accepted, (ii) the originator's payment order
described the beneficiary inconsistently by name and number, and (iii) the beneficiary's bank pays the
person identified by number as permitted by subsection (b)(1), the following rules apply:
(1) If the originator is a bank, the originator is obliged to pay its order.
(2) If the originator is not a bank and proves that the person identified by number was not entitled to
receive payment from the originator, the originator is not obliged to pay its order unless the originator's
bank proves that the originator, before acceptance of the originator's order, had notice that payment of
a payment order issued by the originator might be made by the beneficiary's bank on the basis of an
identifying or bank account number even if it identifies a person different from the named beneficiary.
Proof of notice may be made by any admissible evidence. The originator's bank satisfies the burden of
proof if it proves that the originator, before the payment order was accepted, signed a writing stating the
information to which the notice relates.
(d) In a case governed by subsection (b)(1), if the beneficiary's bank rightfully pays the person identified by
number and that person was not entitled to receive payment from the originator, the amount paid may be
recovered from that person to the extent allowed by the law governing mistake and restitution as follows:
(1) If the originator is obliged to pay its payment order as stated in subsection (c), the originator has
the right to recover.
(2) If the originator is not a bank and is not obliged to pay its payment order, the originator's bank has
the right to recover.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 4A-207. Misdescription of Beneficiary.
Page 2 of 3
Official Comment
1. Subsection (a) deals with the problem of payment orders issued to the beneficiary's bank for payment to
nonexistent or unidentifiable persons or accounts. Since it is not possible in that case for the funds transfer to be
completed, subsection (a) states that the order cannot be accepted. Under Section 4A-402(c), a sender of a
payment order is not obliged to pay its order unless the beneficiary's bank accepts a payment order instructing
payment to the beneficiary of that sender's order. Thus, if the beneficiary of a funds transfer is nonexistent or
unidentifiable, each sender in the funds transfer that has paid its payment order is entitled to get its money back.
2. Subsection (b), which takes precedence over subsection (a), deals with the problem of payment orders in which
the description of the beneficiary does not allow identification of the beneficiary because the beneficiary is
described by name and by an identifying number or an account number and the name and number refer to different
persons. A very large percentage of payment orders issued to the beneficiary's bank by another bank are
processed by automated means using machines capable of reading orders on standard formats that identify the
beneficiary by an identifying number or the number of a bank account. The processing of the order by the
beneficiary's bank and the crediting of the beneficiary's account are done by use of the identifying or bank account
number without human reading of the payment order itself. The process is comparable to that used in automated
payment of checks. The standard format, however, may also allow the inclusion of the name of the beneficiary and
other information which can be useful to the beneficiary's bank and the beneficiary but which plays no part in the
process of payment. If the beneficiary's bank has both the account number and name of the beneficiary supplied
by the originator of the funds transfer, it is possible for the beneficiary's bank to determine whether the name and
number refer to the same person, but if a duty to make that determination is imposed on the beneficiary's bank the
benefits of automated payment are lost. Manual handling of payment orders is both expensive and subject to
human error. If payment orders can be handled on an automated basis there are substantial economies of
operation and the possibility of clerical error is reduced. Subsection (b) allows banks to utilize automated
processing by allowing banks to act on the basis of the number without regard to the name if the bank does not
know that the name and number refer to different persons. "Know" is defined in Section 1-201(25) to mean actual
knowledge, and Section 1-201(27) states rules for determining when an organization has knowledge of information
received by the organization. The time of payment is the pertinent time at which knowledge or lack of knowledge
must be determined.
Although the clear trend is for beneficiary's banks to process payment orders by automated means, Section 4A-207
is not limited to cases in which processing is done by automated means. A bank that processes by semi-automated
means or even manually may rely on number as stated in Section 4A-207.
In cases covered by subsection (b) the erroneous identification would in virtually all cases be the identifying or bank
account number. In the typical case the error is made by the originator of the funds transfer. The originator should
know the name of the person who is to receive payment and can further identify that person by an address that
would normally be known to the originator. It is not unlikely, however, that the originator may not be sure whether
the identifying or account number refers to the person the originator intends to pay. Subsection (b)(1) deals with
the typical case in which the beneficiary's bank pays on the basis of the account number and is not aware at the
time of payment that the named beneficiary is not the holder of the account which was paid. In some cases the
false number will be the result of error by the originator. In other cases fraud is involved. For example, Doe is the
holder of shares in Mutual Fund. Thief, impersonating Doe, requests redemption of the shares and directs Mutual
Fund to wire the redemption proceeds to Doe's account #12345 in Beneficiary's Bank. Mutual Fund originates a
funds transfer by issuing a payment order to Originator's Bank to make the payment to Doe's account #12345 in
Beneficiary's Bank. Originator's Bank executes the order by issuing a conforming payment order to Beneficiary's
Bank which makes payment to account #12345. That account is the account of Roe rather than Doe. Roe might
be a person acting in concert with Thief or Roe might be an innocent third party. Assume that Roe is a gem
merchant that agreed to sell gems to Thief who agreed to wire the purchase price to Roe's account in Beneficiary's
Bank. Roe believed that the credit to Roe's account was a transfer of funds from Thief and released the gems to
Thief in good faith in reliance on the payment. The case law is unclear on the responsibility of a beneficiary's bank
in carrying out a payment order in which the identification of the beneficiary by name and number is conflicting. See
§ 4A-207. Misdescription of Beneficiary.
Page 3 of 3
Securities Fund Services, Inc. v. American National Bank, 542 F.Supp. 323 (N.D.Ill.1982) and Bradford Trust Co. v.
Texas American Bank, 790 F.2d 407 (5th Cir.1986). Section 4A-207 resolves the issue.
If Beneficiary's Bank did not know about the conflict between the name and number, subsection (b)(1) applies.
Beneficiary's Bank has no duty to determine whether there is a conflict and it may rely on the number as the proper
identification of the beneficiary of the order. When it accepts the order, it is entitled to payment from Originator's
Bank. Section 4A-402(b). On the other hand, if Beneficiary's Bank knew about the conflict between the name and
number and nevertheless paid Roe, subsection (b)(2) applies. Under that provision, acceptance of the payment
order of Originator's Bank did not occur because there is no beneficiary of that order. Since acceptance did not
occur Originator's Bank is not obliged to pay Beneficiary's Bank. Section 4A-402(b). Similarly, Mutual Fund is
excused from its obligation to pay Originator's Bank. Section 4A-402(c). Thus, Beneficiary's Bank takes the loss.
Its only cause of action is against Thief. Roe is not obliged to return the payment to the beneficiary's bank because
Roe received the payment in good faith and for value. Article 4A makes irrelevant the issue of whether Mutual
Fund was or was not negligent in issuing its payment order.
3. Normally, subsection (b)(1) will apply to the hypothetical case discussed in Comment 2. Beneficiary's Bank will
pay on the basis of the number without knowledge of the conflict. In that case subsection (c) places the loss on
either Mutual Fund or Originator's Bank. It is not unfair to assign the loss to Mutual Fund because it is the person
who dealt with the imposter and it supplied the wrong account number. It could have avoided the loss if it had not
used an account number that it was not sure was that of Doe. Mutual Fund, however, may not have been aware of
the risk involved in giving both name and number. Subsection (c) is designed to protect the originator, Mutual
Fund, in this case. Under that subsection, the originator is responsible for the inconsistent description of the
beneficiary if it had notice that the order might be paid by the beneficiary's bank on the basis of the number. If the
originator is a bank, the originator always has that responsibility. The rationale is that any bank should know how
payment orders are processed and paid. If the originator is not a bank, the originator's bank must prove that its
customer, the originator, had notice. Notice can be proved by any admissible evidence, but the bank can always
prove notice by providing the customer with a written statement of the required information and obtaining the
customer's signature to the statement. That statement will then apply to any payment order accepted by the bank
thereafter. The information need not be supplied more than once.
In the hypothetical case if Originator's Bank made the disclosure stated in the last sentence of subsection (c)(2),
Mutual Fund must pay Originator's Bank. Under subsection (d)(1), Mutual Fund has an action to recover from Roe
if recovery from Roe is permitted by the law governing mistake and restitution. Under the assumed facts Roe
should be entitled to keep the money as a person who took it in good faith and for value since it was taken as
payment for the gems. In that case, Mutual Fund's only remedy is against Thief. If Roe was not acting in good
faith, Roe has to return the money to Mutual Fund. If Originator's Bank does not prove that Mutual Fund had notice
as stated in subsection (c)(2), Mutual Fund is not required to pay Originator's Bank. Thus, the risk of loss falls on
Originator's Bank whose remedy is against Roe or Thief as stated above. Subsection (d)(2).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-208
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-208. Misdescription of Intermediary Bank or Beneficiary's Bank.
(a) This subsection applies to a payment order identifying an intermediary bank or the beneficiary's bank
only by an identifying number.
(1) The receiving bank may rely on the number as the proper identification of the intermediary or
beneficiary's bank and need not determine whether the number identifies a bank.
(2) The sender is obliged to compensate the receiving bank for any loss and expenses incurred by the
receiving bank as a result of its reliance on the number in executing or attempting to execute the order.
(b) This subsection applies to a payment order identifying an intermediary bank or the beneficiary's bank
both by name and an identifying number if the name and number identify different persons.
(1) If the sender is a bank, the receiving bank may rely on the number as the proper identification of
the intermediary or beneficiary's bank if the receiving bank, when it executes the sender's order, does
not know that the name and number identify different persons. The receiving bank need not determine
whether the name and number refer to the same person or whether the number refers to a bank. The
sender is obliged to compensate the receiving bank for any loss and expenses incurred by the
receiving bank as a result of its reliance on the number in executing or attempting to execute the order.
(2) If the sender is not a bank and the receiving bank proves that the sender, before the payment order
was accepted, had notice that the receiving bank might rely on the number as the proper identification
of the intermediary or beneficiary's bank even if it identifies a person different from the bank identified
by name, the rights and obligations of the sender and the receiving bank are governed by subsection
(b)(1), as though the sender were a bank. Proof of notice may be made by any admissible evidence.
The receiving bank satisfies the burden of proof if it proves that the sender, before the payment order
was accepted, signed a writing stating the information to which the notice relates.
(3) Regardless of whether the sender is a bank, the receiving bank may rely on the name as the
proper identification of the intermediary or beneficiary's bank if the receiving bank, at the time it
executes the sender's order, does not know that the name and number identify different persons. The
receiving bank need not determine whether the name and number refer to the same person.
(4) If the receiving bank knows that the name and number identify different persons, reliance on either
the name or the number in executing the sender's payment order is a breach of the obligation stated in
Section 4A-302(a)(1).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. This section addresses an issue similar to that addressed by Section 4A-207. Because of automation in the
processing of payment orders, a payment order may identify the beneficiary's bank or an intermediary bank by an
§ 4A-208. Misdescription of Intermediary Bank or Beneficiary's Bank.
Page 2 of 3
identifying number. The bank identified by number might or might not also be identified by name. The following two
cases illustrate Section 4A-208(a) and (b):
Case #1. Originator's payment order to Originator's Bank identifies the beneficiary's bank as Bank A and instructs
payment to Account #12345 in that bank. Originator's Bank executes Originator's order by issuing a payment order
to Intermediary Bank. In the payment order of Originator's Bank the beneficiary's bank is identified as Bank A but is
also identified by number, #67890. The identifying number refers to Bank B rather than Bank A. If processing by
Intermediary Bank of the payment order of Originator's Bank is done by automated means, Intermediary Bank, in
executing the order, will rely on the identifying number and will issue a payment order to Bank B rather than Bank A.
If there is an Account #12345 in Bank B, the payment order of Intermediary Bank would normally be accepted and
payment would be made to a person not intended by Originator. In this case, Section 4A-208(b)(1) puts the risk of
loss on Originator's Bank. Intermediary Bank may rely on the number #67890 as the proper identification of the
beneficiary's bank. Intermediary Bank has properly executed the payment order of Originator's Bank. By using the
wrong number to describe the beneficiary's bank, Originator's Bank has improperly executed Originator's payment
order because the payment order of Originator's Bank provides for payment to the wrong beneficiary, the holder of
Account #12345 in Bank B rather than the holder of Account #12345 in Bank A. Section 4A-302(a)(1) and Section
4A-303(c). Originator's Bank is not entitled to payment from Originator but is required to pay Intermediary Bank.
Section 4A-303(c) and Section 4A-402(c). Intermediary Bank is also entitled to compensation for any loss and
expenses resulting from the error by Originator's Bank.
If there is no Account #12345 in Bank B, the result is that there is no beneficiary of the payment order issued by
Originator's Bank and the funds transfer will not be completed. Originator's Bank is not entitled to payment from
Originator and Intermediary Bank is not entitled to payment from Originator's Bank. Section 4A-402(c). Since
Originator's Bank improperly executed Originator's payment order it may be liable for damages under Section 4A-
305. As stated above, Intermediary Bank is entitled to compensation for loss and expenses resulting from the error
by Originator's Bank.
Case #2. Suppose the same payment order by Originator to Originator's Bank as in Case #1. In executing the
payment order Originator's Bank issues a payment order to Intermediary Bank in which the beneficiary's bank is
identified only by number, #67890. That number does not refer to Bank A. Rather, it identifies a person that is not
a bank. If processing by Intermediary Bank of the payment order of Originator's Bank is done by automated means,
Intermediary Bank will rely on the number #67890 to identify the beneficiary's bank. Intermediary Bank has no duty
to determine whether the number identifies a bank. The funds transfer cannot be completed in this case because
no bank is identified as the beneficiary's bank. Subsection (a) puts the risk of loss on Originator's Bank.
Originator's Bank is not entitled to payment from Originator. Section 4A-402(c). Originator's Bank has improperly
executed Originator's payment order and may be liable for damages under Section 4A-305. Originator's Bank is
obliged to compensate Intermediary Bank for loss and expenses resulting from the error by Originator's Bank.
Subsection (a) also applies if #67890 identifies a bank, but the bank is not Bank A. Intermediary Bank may rely on
the number as the proper identification of the beneficiary's bank. If the bank to which Intermediary Bank sends its
payment order accepts the order, Intermediary Bank is entitled to payment from Originator's Bank, but Originator's
Bank is not entitled to payment from Originator. The analysis is similar to that in Case #1.
2. Subsection (b)(2) of Section 4A-208 addresses cases in which an erroneous identification of a beneficiary's bank
or intermediary bank by name and number is made in a payment order of a sender that is not a bank. Suppose
Originator issues a payment order to Originator's Bank that instructs that bank to use an intermediary bank
identified as Bank A and by an identifying number, #67890. The identifying number refers to Bank B. Originator
intended to identify Bank A as intermediary bank. If Originator's Bank relied on the number and issued a payment
order to Bank B the rights of Originator's Bank depend upon whether the proof of notice stated in subsection (b)(2)
is made by Originator's Bank. If proof is made, Originator's Bank's rights are governed by subsection (b)(1) of
Section 4A-208. Originator's Bank is not liable for breach of Section 4A-302(a)(1) and is entitled to compensation
from Originator for any loss and expenses resulting from Originator's error. If notice is not proved, Originator's Bank
may not rely on the number in executing Originator's payment order. Since Originator's Bank does not get the
§ 4A-208. Misdescription of Intermediary Bank or Beneficiary's Bank.
Page 3 of 3
benefit of subsection (b)(1) in that case, Originator's Bank improperly executed Originator's payment order and is in
breach of the obligation stated in Section 4A-302(a)(1). If notice is not given, Originator's Bank can rely on the
name if it is not aware of the conflict in name and number. Subsection (b)(3).
3. Although the principal purpose of Section 4A-208 is to accommodate automated processing of payment orders,
Section 4A-208 applies regardless of whether processing is done by automation, semiautomated means or
manually.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-209
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-209. Acceptance of Payment Order.
(a) Subject to subsection (d), a receiving bank other than the beneficiary's bank accepts a payment order
when it executes the order.
(b) Subject to subsections (c) and (d), a beneficiary's bank accepts a payment order at the earliest of the
following times:
(1) when the bank (i) pays the beneficiary as stated in Section 4A-405(a) or 4A-405(b), or (ii) notifies
the beneficiary of receipt of the order or that the account of the beneficiary has been credited with
respect to the order unless the notice indicates that the bank is rejecting the order or that funds with
respect to the order may not be withdrawn or used until receipt of payment from the sender of the
order;
(2) when the bank receives payment of the entire amount of the sender's order pursuant to Section 4A-
403(a)(1) or 4A-403(a)(2); or
(3) the opening of the next funds-transfer business day of the bank following the payment date of the
order if, at that time, the amount of the sender's order is fully covered by a withdrawable credit balance
in an authorized account of the sender or the bank has otherwise received full payment from the
sender, unless the order was rejected before that time or is rejected within (i) one hour after that time,
or (ii) one hour after the opening of the next business day of the sender following the payment date if
that time is later. If notice of rejection is received by the sender after the payment date and the
authorized account of the sender does not bear interest, the bank is obliged to pay interest to the
sender on the amount of the order for the number of days elapsing after the payment date to the day
the sender receives notice or learns that the order was not accepted, counting that day as an elapsed
day. If the withdrawable credit balance during that period falls below the amount of the order, the
amount of interest payable is reduced accordingly.
(c) Acceptance of a payment order cannot occur before the order is received by the receiving bank.
Acceptance does not occur under subsection (b)(2) or (b)(3) if the beneficiary of the payment order does
not have an account with the receiving bank, the account has been closed, or the receiving bank is not
permitted by law to receive credits for the beneficiary's account.
(d) A payment order issued to the originator's bank cannot be accepted until the payment date if the bank
is the beneficiary's bank, or the execution date if the bank is not the beneficiary's bank. If the originator's
bank executes the originator's payment order before the execution date or pays the beneficiary of the
originator's payment order before the payment date and the payment order is subsequently canceled
pursuant to Section 4A-211(b), the bank may recover from the beneficiary any payment received to the
extent allowed by the law governing mistake and restitution.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
§ 4A-209. Acceptance of Payment Order.
Page 2 of 5
1. This section treats the sender's payment order as a request by the sender to the receiving bank to execute or
pay the order and that request can be accepted or rejected by the receiving bank. Section 4A-209 defines when
acceptance occurs. Section 4A-210 covers rejection. Acceptance of the payment order imposes an obligation on
the receiving bank to the sender if the receiving bank is not the beneficiary's bank, or to the beneficiary if the
receiving bank is the beneficiary's bank. These obligations are stated in Section 4A-302 and Section 4A-404.
2. Acceptance by a receiving bank other than the beneficiary's bank is defined in Section 4A-209(a). That
subsection states the only way that a bank other than the beneficiary's bank can accept a payment order. A
payment order to a bank other than the beneficiary's bank is, in effect, a request that the receiving bank execute the
sender's order by issuing a payment order to the beneficiary's bank or to an intermediary bank. Normally,
acceptance occurs at the time of execution, but there is an exception stated in subsection (d) and discussed in
Comment 9. Execution occurs when the receiving bank "issues a payment order intended to carry out" the sender's
order. Section 4A-301(a). In some cases the payment order issued by the receiving bank may not conform to the
sender's order. For example, the receiving bank might make a mistake in the amount of its order, or the order
might be issued to the wrong beneficiary's bank or for the benefit of the wrong beneficiary. In all of these cases
there is acceptance of the sender's order by the bank when the receiving bank issues its order intended to carry out
the sender's order, even though the bank's payment order does not in fact carry out the instruction of the sender.
Improper execution of the sender's order may lead to liability to the sender for damages or it may mean that the
sender is not obliged to pay its payment order. These matters are covered in Section 4A-303, Section 4A-305, and
Section 4A-402.
3. A receiving bank has no duty to accept a payment order unless the bank makes an agreement, either before or
after issuance of the payment order, to accept it, or acceptance is required by a funds transfer system rule. If the
bank makes such an agreement it incurs a contractual obligation based on the agreement and may be held liable
for breach of contract if a failure to execute violates the agreement. In many cases a bank will enter into an
agreement with its customer to govern the rights and obligations of the parties with respect to payment orders
issued to the bank by the customer or, in cases in which the sender is also a bank, there may be a funds transfer
system rule that governs the obligations of a receiving bank with respect to payment orders transmitted over the
system. Such agreements or rules can specify the circumstances under which a receiving bank is obliged to
execute a payment order and can define the extent of liability of the receiving bank for breach of the agreement or
rule. Section 4A-305(d) states the liability for breach of an agreement to execute a payment order.
4. In the case of a payment order issued to the beneficiary's bank, acceptance is defined in Section 4A-209(b). The
function of a beneficiary's bank that receives a payment order is different from that of a receiving bank that receives
a payment order for execution. In the typical case, the beneficiary's bank simply receives payment from the sender
of the order, credits the account of the beneficiary and notifies the beneficiary of the credit. Acceptance by the
beneficiary's bank does not create any obligation to the sender. Acceptance by the beneficiary's bank means that
the bank is liable to the beneficiary for the amount of the order. Section 4A-404(a). There are three ways in which
the beneficiary's bank can accept a payment order which are described in the following comments.
5. Under Section 4A-209(b)(1), the beneficiary's bank can accept a payment order by paying the beneficiary. In the
normal case of crediting an account of the beneficiary, payment occurs when the beneficiary is given notice of the
right to withdraw the credit, the credit is applied to a debt of the beneficiary, or "funds with respect to the order" are
otherwise made available to the beneficiary. Section 4A-405(a). The quoted phrase covers cases in which funds
are made available to the beneficiary as a result of receipt of a payment order for the benefit of the beneficiary but
the release of funds is not expressed as payment of the order. For example, the beneficiary's bank might express a
release of funds equal to the amount of the order as a "loan" that will be automatically repaid when the beneficiary's
bank receives payment by the sender of the order. If the release of funds is designated as a loan pursuant to a
routine practice of the bank, the release is conditional payment of the order rather than a loan, particularly if normal
incidents of a loan such as the signing of a loan agreement or note and the payment of interest are not present.
Such a release of funds is payment to the beneficiary under Section 4A-405(a). Under Section 4A-405(c) the bank
cannot recover the money from the beneficiary if the bank does not receive payment from the sender of the
payment order that it accepted. Exceptions to this rule are stated in § 4A-405(d) and (e). The beneficiary's bank
§ 4A-209. Acceptance of Payment Order.
Page 3 of 5
may also accept by notifying the beneficiary that the order has been received. "Notifies" is defined in Section 1-
201(26). In some cases a beneficiary's bank will receive a payment order during the day but settlement of the
sender's obligation to pay the order will not occur until the end of the day. If the beneficiary's bank wants to defer
incurring liability to the beneficiary until the beneficiary's bank receives payment, it can do so. The beneficiary's
bank incurs no liability to the beneficiary with respect to a payment order that it receives until it accepts the order. If
the bank does not accept pursuant to subsection (b)(1), acceptance does not occur until the end of the day when
the beneficiary's bank receives settlement. If the sender settles, the payment order will be accepted under
subsection (b)(2) and the funds will be released to the beneficiary the next morning. If the sender doesn't settle, no
acceptance occurs. In either case the beneficiary's bank suffers no loss.
6. In most cases the beneficiary's bank will receive a payment order from another bank. If the sender is a bank and
the beneficiary's bank receives payment from the sender by final settlement through the Federal Reserve System or
a funds transfer system (Section 4A-403(a)(1)) or, less commonly, through credit to an account of the beneficiary's
bank with the sender or another bank (Section 4A-403(a)(2)), acceptance by the beneficiary's bank occurs at the
time payment is made. Section 4A-209(b)(2). A minor exception to this rule is stated in Section 4A-209(c). Section
4A-209(b)(2) results in automatic acceptance of payment orders issued to a beneficiary's bank by means of
Fedwire because the Federal Reserve account of the beneficiary's bank is credited and final payment is made to
that bank when the payment order is received.
Subsection (b)(2) would also apply to cases in which the beneficiary's bank mistakenly pays a person who is not the
beneficiary of the payment order issued to the beneficiary's bank. For example, suppose the payment order
provides for immediate payment to Account #12345. The beneficiary's bank erroneously credits Account #12346
and notifies the holder of that account of the credit. No acceptance occurs in this case under subsection (b)(1)
because the beneficiary of the order has not been paid or notified. The holder of Account #12345 is the beneficiary
of the order issued to the beneficiary's bank. But acceptance will normally occur if the beneficiary's bank takes no
other action, because the bank will normally receive settlement with respect to the payment order. At that time the
bank has accepted because the sender paid its payment order. The bank is liable to pay the holder of Account
#12345. The bank has paid the holder of Account #12346 by mistake, and has a right to recover the payment if the
credit is withdrawn, to the extent provided in the law governing mistake and restitution.
7. Subsection (b)(3) covers cases of inaction by the beneficiary's bank. It applies whether or not the sender is a
bank and covers a case in which the sender and the beneficiary both have accounts with the receiving bank and
payment will be made by debiting the account of the sender and crediting the account of the beneficiary.
Subsection (b)(3) is similar to subsection (b)(2) in that it bases acceptance by the beneficiary's bank on payment by
the sender. Payment by the sender is effected by a debit to the sender's account if the account balance is sufficient
to cover the amount of the order. On the payment date (Section 4A-401) of the order the beneficiary's bank will
normally credit the beneficiary's account and notify the beneficiary of receipt of the order if it is satisfied that the
sender's account balance covers the order or is willing to give credit to the sender. In some cases, however, the
bank may not be willing to give credit to the sender and it may not be possible for the bank to determine until the
end of the day on the payment date whether there are sufficient good funds in the sender's account. There may be
various transactions during the day involving funds going into and out of the account. Some of these transactions
may occur late in the day or after the close of the banking day. To accommodate this situation, subsection (b)(3)
provides that the status of the account is determined at the opening of the next funds transfer business day of the
beneficiary's bank after the payment date of the order. If the sender's account balance is sufficient to cover the
order, the beneficiary's bank has a source of payment and the result in almost all cases is that the bank accepts the
order at that time if it did not previously accept under subsection (b)(1). In rare cases, a bank may want to avoid
acceptance under subsection (b)(3) by rejecting the order as discussed in Comment 8.
8. Section 4A-209 is based on a general principle that a receiving bank is not obliged to accept a payment order
unless it has agreed or is bound by a funds transfer system rule to do so. Thus, provision is made to allow the
receiving bank to prevent acceptance of the order. This principle is consistently followed if the receiving bank is not
the beneficiary's bank. If the receiving bank is not the beneficiary's bank, acceptance is in the control of the
receiving bank because it occurs only if the order is executed. But in the case of the beneficiary's bank acceptance
§ 4A-209. Acceptance of Payment Order.
Page 4 of 5
can occur by passive receipt of payment under subsection (b)(2) or (3). In the case of a payment made by Fedwire
acceptance cannot be prevented. In other cases the beneficiary's bank can prevent acceptance by giving notice of
rejection to the sender before payment occurs under Section 4A-403(a)(1) or (2). A minor exception to the ability of
the beneficiary's bank to reject is stated in Section 4A-502(c)(3).
Under subsection (b)(3) acceptance occurs at the opening of the next funds transfer business day of the
beneficiary's bank following the payment date unless the bank rejected the order before that time or it rejects within
one hour after that time. In some cases the sender and the beneficiary's bank may not be in the same time zone or
the beginning of the business day of the sender and the funds transfer business day of the beneficiary's bank may
not coincide. For example, the sender may be located in California and the beneficiary's bank in New York. Since
in most cases notice of rejection would be communicated electronically or by telephone, it might not be feasible for
the bank to give notice before one hour after the opening of the funds transfer business day in New York because
at that hour, the sender's business day may not have started in California. For that reason, there are alternative
deadlines stated in subsection (b)(3). In the case stated, the bank acts in time if it gives notice within one hour after
the opening of the business day of the sender. But if the notice of rejection is received by the sender after the
payment date, the bank is obliged to pay interest to the sender if the sender's account does not bear interest. In
that case the bank had the use of funds of the sender that the sender could reasonably assume would be used to
pay the beneficiary. The rate of interest is stated in Section 4A-506. If the sender receives notice on the day after
the payment date the sender is entitled to one day's interest. If receipt of notice is delayed for more than one day,
the sender is entitled to interest for each additional day of delay.
9. Subsection (d) applies only to a payment order by the originator of a funds transfer to the originator's bank and it
refers to the following situation. On April 1, Originator instructs Bank A to make a payment on April 15 to the
account of Beneficiary in Bank B. By mistake, on April 1, Bank A executes Originator's payment order by issuing a
payment order to Bank B instructing immediate payment to Beneficiary. Bank B credited Beneficiary's account and
immediately released the funds to Beneficiary. Under subsection (d) no acceptance by Bank A occurred on April 1
when Originator's payment order was executed because acceptance cannot occur before the execution date which
in this case would be April 15 or shortly before that date. Section 4A-301(b). Under Section 4A-402(c), Originator
is not obliged to pay Bank A until the order is accepted and that can't occur until the execution date. But Bank A is
required to pay Bank B when Bank B accepted Bank A's order on April 1. Unless Originator and Beneficiary are the
same person, in almost all cases Originator is paying a debt owed to Beneficiary and early payment does not injure
Originator because Originator does not have to pay Bank A until the execution date. Section 4A-402(c). Bank A
takes the interest loss. But suppose that on April 3, Originator concludes that no debt was owed to Beneficiary or
that the debt was less than the amount of the payment order. Under Section 4A-211(b) Originator can cancel its
payment order if Bank A has not accepted. If early execution of Originator's payment order is acceptance,
Originator can suffer a loss because cancellation after acceptance is not possible without the consent of Bank A
and Bank B. Section 4A-211(c). If Originator has to pay Bank A, Originator would be required to seek recovery of
the money from Beneficiary. Subsection (d) prevents this result and puts the risk of loss on Bank A by providing
that the early execution does not result in acceptance until the execution date. Since on April 3 Originator's order
was not yet accepted, Originator can cancel it under Section 4A-211(b). The result is that Bank A is not entitled to
payment from Originator but is obliged to pay Bank B. Bank A has paid Beneficiary by mistake. If Originator's
payment order is cancelled, Bank A becomes the originator of an erroneous funds transfer to Beneficiary. Bank A
has the burden of recovering payment from Beneficiary on the basis of a payment by mistake. If Beneficiary
received the money in good faith in payment of a debt owed to Beneficiary by Originator, the law of mistake and
restitution may allow Beneficiary to keep all or part of the money received. If Originator owed money to Beneficiary,
Bank A has paid Originator's debt and, under the law of restitution, which applies pursuant to Section 1-103, Bank A
is subrogated to Beneficiary's rights against Originator on the debt.
If Bank A is the Beneficiary's bank and Bank A credited Beneficiary's account and released the funds to Beneficiary
on April 1, the analysis is similar. If Originator's order is cancelled, Bank A has paid Beneficiary by mistake. The
right of Bank A to recover the payment from Beneficiary is similar to Bank A's rights in the preceding paragraph.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 4A-209. Acceptance of Payment Order.
Page 5 of 5
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-210
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-210. Rejection of Payment Order.
(a) A payment order is rejected by the receiving bank by a notice of rejection transmitted to the sender
orally, electronically, or in writing. A notice of rejection need not use any particular words and is sufficient if
it indicates that the receiving bank is rejecting the order or will not execute or pay the order. Rejection is
effective when the notice is given if transmission is by a means that is reasonable in the circumstances. If
notice of rejection is given by a means that is not reasonable, rejection is effective when the notice is
received. If an agreement of the sender and receiving bank establishes the means to be used to reject a
payment order, (i) any means complying with the agreement is reasonable and (ii) any means not
complying is not reasonable unless no significant delay in receipt of the notice resulted from the use of the
noncomplying means.
(b) This subsection applies if a receiving bank other than the beneficiary's bank fails to execute a payment
order despite the existence on the execution date of a withdrawable credit balance in an authorized account
of the sender sufficient to cover the order. If the sender does not receive notice of rejection of the order on
the execution date and the authorized account of the sender does not bear interest, the bank is obliged to
pay interest to the sender on the amount of the order for the number of days elapsing after the execution
date to the earlier of the day the order is canceled pursuant to Section 4A-211(d) or the day the sender
receives notice or learns that the order was not executed, counting the final day of the period as an elapsed
day. If the withdrawable credit balance during that period falls below the amount of the order, the amount
of interest is reduced accordingly.
(c) If a receiving bank suspends payments, all unaccepted payment orders issued to it are deemed
rejected at the time the bank suspends payments.
(d) Acceptance of a payment order precludes a later rejection of the order. Rejection of a payment order
precludes a later acceptance of the order.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. With respect to payment orders issued to a receiving bank other than the beneficiary's bank, notice of rejection is
not necessary to prevent acceptance of the order. Acceptance can occur only if the receiving bank executes the
order. Section 4A-209(a). But notice of rejection will routinely be given by such a bank in cases in which the bank
cannot or is not willing to execute the order for some reason. There are many reasons why a bank doesn't execute
an order. The payment order may not clearly instruct the receiving bank because of some ambiguity in the order or
an internal inconsistency. In some cases, the receiving bank may not be able to carry out the instruction because
of equipment failure, credit limitations on the receiving bank, or some other factor which makes proper execution of
the order infeasible. In those cases notice of rejection is a means of informing the sender of the facts so that a
corrected payment order can be transmitted or the sender can seek alternate means of completing the funds
transfer. The other major reason for not executing an order is that the sender's account is insufficient to cover the
order and the receiving bank is not willing to give credit to the sender. If the sender's account is sufficient to cover
§ 4A-210. Rejection of Payment Order.
Page 2 of 2
the order and the receiving bank chooses not to execute the order, notice of rejection is necessary to prevent
liability to pay interest to the sender if the case falls within Section 4A-210(b) which is discussed in Comment 3.
2. A payment order to the beneficiary's bank can be accepted by inaction of the bank. Section 4A-209(b)(2) and
(3). To prevent acceptance under those provisions it is necessary for the receiving bank to send notice of rejection
before acceptance occurs. Subsection (a) of Section 4A-210 states the rule that rejection is accomplished by giving
notice of rejection. This incorporates the definitions in Section 1-201(26). Rejection is effective when notice is
given if it is given by a means that is reasonable in the circumstances. Otherwise, it is effective when the notice is
received. The question of when rejection is effective is important only in the relatively few cases under subsection
(b)(2) and (3) in which a notice of rejection is necessary to prevent acceptance. The question of whether a
particular means is reasonable depends on the facts in a particular case. In a very large percentage of cases the
sender and the receiving bank will be in direct electronic contact with each other and in those cases a notice of
rejection can be transmitted instantaneously. Since time is of the essence in a large proportion of funds transfers,
some quick means of transmission would usually be required, but this is not always the case. The parties may
specify by agreement the means by which communication between the parties is to be made.
3. Subsection (b) deals with cases in which a sender does not learn until after the execution date that the sender's
order has not been executed. It applies only to cases in which the receiving bank was assured of payment because
the sender's account was sufficient to cover the order. Normally, the receiving bank will accept the sender's order if
it is assured of payment, but there may be some cases in which the bank chooses to reject. Unless the receiving
bank had obligated itself by agreement to accept, the failure to accept is not wrongful. There is no duty of the
receiving bank to accept the payment order unless it is obliged to accept by express agreement. Section 4A-212.
But even if the bank has not acted wrongfully, the receiving bank had the use of the sender's money that the sender
could reasonably assume was to be the source of payment of the funds transfer. Until the sender learns that the
order was not accepted the sender is denied the use of that money. Subsection (b) obliges the receiving bank to
pay interest to the sender as restitution unless the sender receives notice of rejection on the execution date. The
time of receipt of notice is determined pursuant to § 1-201(27). The rate of interest is stated in Section 4A-506. If
the sender receives notice on the day after the execution date, the sender is entitled to one day's interest. If receipt
of notice is delayed for more than one day, the sender is entitled to interest for each additional day of delay.
4. Subsection (d) treats acceptance and rejection as mutually exclusive. If a payment order has been accepted,
rejection of that order becomes impossible. If a payment order has been rejected it cannot be accepted later by the
receiving bank. Once notice of rejection has been given, the sender may have acted on the notice by making the
payment through other channels. If the receiving bank wants to act on a payment order that it has rejected it has to
obtain the consent of the sender. In that case the consent of the sender would amount to the giving of a second
payment order that substitutes for the rejected first order. If the receiving bank suspends payments (Section 4-
104(1)(k)), subsection (c) provides that unaccepted payment orders are deemed rejected at the time suspension of
payments occurs. This prevents acceptance by passage of time under Section 4A-209(b)(3).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-211
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-211. Cancellation and Amendment of Payment Order.
(a) A communication of the sender of a payment order cancelling or amending the order may be
transmitted to the receiving bank orally, electronically, or in writing. If a security procedure is in effect
between the sender and the receiving bank, the communication is not effective to cancel or amend the
order unless the communication is verified pursuant to the security procedure or the bank agrees to the
cancellation or amendment.
(b) Subject to subsection (a), a communication by the sender cancelling or amending a payment order is
effective to cancel or amend the order if notice of the communication is received at a time and in a manner
affording the receiving bank a reasonable opportunity to act on the communication before the bank accepts
the payment order.
(c) After a payment order has been accepted, cancellation or amendment of the order is not effective
unless the receiving bank agrees or a funds-transfer system rule allows cancellation or amendment without
agreement of the bank.
(1) With respect to a payment order accepted by a receiving bank other than the beneficiary's bank,
cancellation or amendment is not effective unless a conforming cancellation or amendment of the
payment order issued by the receiving bank is also made.
(2) With respect to a payment order accepted by the beneficiary's bank, cancellation or amendment is
not effective unless the order was issued in execution of an unauthorized payment order, or because of
a mistake by a sender in the funds transfer which resulted in the issuance of a payment order (i) that is
a duplicate of a payment order previously issued by the sender, (ii) that orders payment to a beneficiary
not entitled to receive payment from the originator, or (iii) that orders payment in an amount greater
than the amount the beneficiary was entitled to receive from the originator. If the payment order is
canceled or amended, the beneficiary's bank is entitled to recover from the beneficiary any amount paid
to the beneficiary to the extent allowed by the law governing mistake and restitution.
(d) An unaccepted payment order is canceled by operation of law at the close of the fifth funds-transfer
business day of the receiving bank after the execution date or payment date of the order.
(e) A canceled payment order cannot be accepted. If an accepted payment order is canceled, the
acceptance is nullified and no person has any right or obligation based on the acceptance. Amendment of
a payment order is deemed to be cancellation of the original order at the time of amendment and issue of a
new payment order in the amended form at the same time.
(f) Unless otherwise provided in an agreement of the parties or in a funds-transfer system rule, if the
receiving bank, after accepting a payment order, agrees to cancellation or amendment of the order by the
sender or is bound by a funds-transfer system rule allowing cancellation or amendment without the bank's
agreement, the sender, whether or not cancellation or amendment is effective, is liable to the bank for any
loss and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the bank as a result of the
cancellation or amendment or attempted cancellation or amendment.
(g) A payment order is not revoked by the death or legal incapacity of the sender unless the receiving bank
knows of the death or of an adjudication of incapacity by a court of competent jurisdiction and has
reasonable opportunity to act before acceptance of the order.
§ 4A-211. Cancellation and Amendment of Payment Order.
Page 2 of 5
(h) A funds-transfer system rule is not effective to the extent it conflicts with subsection (c)(2).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. This section deals with cancellation and amendment of payment orders. It states the conditions under which
cancellation or amendment is both effective and rightful. There is no concept of wrongful cancellation or
amendment of a payment order. If the conditions stated in this section are not met the attempted cancellation or
amendment is not effective. If the stated conditions are met the cancellation or amendment is effective and rightful.
The sender of a payment order may want to withdraw or change the order because the sender has had a change of
mind about the transaction or because the payment order was erroneously issued or for any other reason. One
common situation is that of multiple transmission of the same order. The sender that mistakenly transmits the same
order twice wants to correct the mistake by cancelling the duplicate order. Or, a sender may have intended to order
a payment of $1,000,000 but mistakenly issued an order to pay $10,000,000. In this case the sender might try to
correct the mistake by cancelling the order and issuing another order in the proper amount. Or, the mistake could
be corrected by amending the order to change it to the proper amount. Whether the error is corrected by
amendment or cancellation and reissue the net result is the same. This result is stated in the last sentence of
subsection (e).
2. Subsection (a) allows a cancellation or amendment of a payment order to be communicated to the receiving bank
"orally, electronically, or in writing." The quoted phrase is consistent with the language of Section 4A-103(a)
applicable to payment orders. Cancellations and amendments are normally subject to verification pursuant to
security procedures to the same extent as payment orders. Subsection (a) recognizes this fact by providing that in
cases in which there is a security procedure in effect between the sender and the receiving bank the bank is not
bound by a communication cancelling or amending an order unless verification has been made. This is necessary
to protect the bank because under subsection (b) a cancellation or amendment can be effective by unilateral action
of the sender. Without verification the bank cannot be sure whether the communication was or was not effective to
cancel or amend a previously verified payment order.
3. If the receiving bank has not yet accepted the order, there is no reason why the sender should not be able to
cancel or amend the order unilaterally so long as the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) are met. If the
receiving bank has accepted the order, it is possible to cancel or amend but only if the requirements of subsection
(c) are met.
First consider the case of a receiving bank other than the beneficiary's bank. If the bank has not yet accepted the
order, the sender can unilaterally cancel or amend. The communication amending or cancelling the payment order
must be received in time to allow the bank to act on it before the bank issues its payment order in execution of the
sender's order. The time that the sender's communication is received is governed by Section 4a-106. If a payment
order does not specify a delayed payment date or execution date, the order will normally be executed shortly after
receipt. Thus, as a practical matter, the sender will have very little time in which to instruct cancellation or
amendment before acceptance. In addition, a receiving bank will normally have cut-off times for receipt of such
communications, and the receiving bank is not obliged to act on communications received after the cut-off hour.
Cancellation by the sender after execution of the order by the receiving bank requires the agreement of the bank
unless a funds transfer rule otherwise provides. Subsection (c). Although execution of the sender's order by the
receiving bank does not itself impose liability on the receiving bank (under Section 4A-402 no liability is incurred by
the receiving bank to pay its order until it is accepted), it would commonly be the case that acceptance follows
shortly after issuance. Thus, as a practical matter, a receiving bank that has executed a payment order will incur a
liability to the next bank in the chain before it would be able to act on the cancellation request of its customer. It is
§ 4A-211. Cancellation and Amendment of Payment Order.
Page 3 of 5
unreasonable to impose on the receiving bank a risk of loss with respect to a cancellation request without the
consent of the receiving bank.
The statute does not state how or when the agreement of the receiving bank must be obtained for cancellation after
execution. The receiving bank's consent could be obtained at the time cancellation occurs or it could be based on a
preexisting agreement. Or, a funds transfer system rule could provide that cancellation can be made unilaterally by
the sender. By virtue of that rule any receiving bank covered by the rule is bound. Section 4A-501. If the receiving
bank has already executed the sender's order, the bank would not consent to cancellation unless the bank to which
the receiving bank has issued its payment order consents to cancellation of that order. It makes no sense to allow
cancellation of a payment order unless all subsequent payment orders in the funds transfer that were issued
because of the cancelled payment order are also cancelled. Under subsection (c)(1), if a receiving bank consents
to cancellation of the payment order after it has executed, the cancellation is not effective unless the receiving bank
also cancels the payment order issued by the bank.
4. With respect to a payment order issued to the beneficiary's bank, acceptance is particularly important because it
creates liability to pay the beneficiary, it defines when the originator pays its obligation to the beneficiary, and it
defines when any obligation for which the payment is made is discharged. Since acceptance affects the rights of
the originator and the beneficiary it is not appropriate to allow the beneficiary's bank to agree to cancellation or
amendment except in unusual cases. Except as provided in subsection (c)(2), cancellation or amendment after
acceptance by the beneficiary's bank is not possible unless all parties affected by the order agree. Under
subsection (c)(2), cancellation or amendment is possible only in the four cases stated. The following examples
illustrate subsection (c)(2):
Case #1. Originator's Bank executed a payment order issued in the name of its customer as sender. The order
was not authorized by the customer and was fraudulently issued. Beneficiary's Bank accepted the payment order
issued by Originator's Bank. Under subsection (c)(2) Originator's Bank can cancel the order if Beneficiary's Bank
consents. It doesn't make any difference whether the payment order that Originator's Bank accepted was or was
not enforceable against the customer under Section 4A-202(b). Verification under that provision is important in
determining whether Originator's Bank or the customer has the risk of loss, but it has no relevance under Section
4A-211(c)(2). Whether or not verified, the payment order was not authorized by the customer. Cancellation of the
payment order to Beneficiary's Bank causes the acceptance of Beneficiary's Bank to be nullified. Subsection (e).
Beneficiary's Bank is entitled to recover payment from the beneficiary to the extent allowed by the law of mistake
and restitution. In this kind of case the beneficiary is usually a party to the fraud who has no right to receive or
retain payment of the order.
Case #2. Originator owed Beneficiary $1,000,000 and ordered Bank A to pay that amount to the account of
Beneficiary in Bank B. Bank A issued a complying order to Bank B, but by mistake issued a duplicate order as well.
Bank B accepted both orders. Under subsection (c)(2)(i) cancellation of the duplicate order could be made by Bank
A with the consent of Bank B. Beneficiary has no right to receive or retain payment of the duplicate payment order
if only $1,000,000 was owed by Originator to Beneficiary. If Originator owed $2,000,000 to Beneficiary, the law of
restitution might allow Beneficiary to retain the $1,000,000 paid by Bank B on the duplicate order. In that case Bank
B is entitled to reimbursement from Bank A under subsection (f).
Case #3. Originator owed $1,000,000 to X. Intending to pay X, Originator ordered Bank A to pay $1,000,000 to Y's
account in Bank B. Bank A issued a complying payment order to Bank B which Bank B accepted by releasing the
$1,000,000 to Y. Under subsection (c)(2)(ii) Bank A can cancel its payment order to Bank B with the consent of
Bank B if Y was not entitled to receive payment from Originator. Originator can also cancel its order to Bank A with
Bank A's consent. Subsection (c)(1). Bank B may recover the $1,000,000 from Y unless the law of mistake and
restitution allows Y to retain some or all of the amount paid. If no debt was owed to Y, Bank B should have a right
of recovery.
Case #4. Originator owed Beneficiary $10,000. By mistake Originator ordered Bank A to pay $1,000,000 to the
account of Beneficiary in Bank B. Bank A issued a complying order to Bank B which accepted by notifying
§ 4A-211. Cancellation and Amendment of Payment Order.
Page 4 of 5
Beneficiary of its right to withdraw $1,000,000. Cancellation is permitted in this case under subsection (c)(2)(iii). If
Bank B paid Beneficiary it is entitled to recover the payment except to the extent the law of mistake and restitution
allows Beneficiary to retain payment. In this case Beneficiary might be entitled to retain $10,000, the amount of the
debt owed to Beneficiary. If Beneficiary may retain $10,000, Bank B would be entitled to $10,000 from Bank A
pursuant to subsection (f). In this case Originator also cancelled its order. Thus Bank A would be entitled to
$10,000 from Originator pursuant to subsection (f).
5. Unless constrained by a funds transfer system rule, a receiving bank may agree to cancellation or amendment of
the payment order under subsection (c) but is not required to do so regardless of the circumstances. If the
receiving bank has incurred liability as a result of its acceptance of the sender's order, there are substantial risks in
agreeing to cancellation or amendment. This is particularly true for a beneficiary's bank. Cancellation or
amendment after acceptance by the beneficiary's bank can be made only in the four cases stated and the
beneficiary's bank may not have any way of knowing whether the requirements of subsection (c) have been met or
whether it will be able to recover payment from the beneficiary that received payment. Even with indemnity the
beneficiary's bank may be reluctant to alienate its customer, the beneficiary, by denying the customer the funds.
Subsection (c) leaves the decision to the beneficiary's bank unless the consent of the beneficiary's bank is not
required under a funds transfer system rule or other interbank agreement. If a receiving bank agrees to
cancellation or amendment under subsection (c)(1) or (2), it is automatically entitled to indemnification from the
sender under subsection (f). The indemnification provision recognizes that a sender has no right to cancel a
payment order after it is accepted by the receiving bank. If the receiving bank agrees to cancellation, it is doing so
as an accommodation to the sender and it should not incur a risk of loss in doing so.
6. Acceptance by the receiving bank of a payment order issued by the sender is comparable to acceptance of an
offer under the law of contracts. Under that law the death or legal incapacity of an offeror terminates the offer even
though the offeree has no notice of the death or incapacity. Restatement Second, Contracts § 48. Comment a. to
that section states that the "rule seems to be a relic of the obsolete view that a contract requires a 'meeting of
minds,' and it is out of harmony with the modern doctrine that a manifestation of assent is effective without regard to
actual mental assent." Subsection (g), which reverses the Restatement rule in the case of a payment order, is
similar to Section 4-405(1) which applies to checks. Subsection (g) does not address the effect of the bankruptcy of
the sender of a payment order before the order is accepted, but the principle of subsection (g) has been recognized
in Bank of Marin v. England, 385 U.S. 99 (1966). Although Bankruptcy Code Section 542(c) may not have been
drafted with wire transfers in mind, its language can be read to allow the receiving bank to charge the sender's
account for the amount of the payment order if the receiving bank executed it in ignorance of the bankruptcy.
7. Subsection (d) deals with stale payment orders. Payment orders normally are executed on the execution date or
the day after. An order issued to the beneficiary's bank is normally accepted on the payment date or the day after.
If a payment order is not accepted on its execution or payment date or shortly thereafter, it is probable that there
was some problem with the terms of the order or the sender did not have sufficient funds or credit to cover the
amount of the order. Delayed acceptance of such an order is normally not contemplated, but the order may not
have been cancelled by the sender. Subsection (d) provides for cancellation by operation of law to prevent an
unexpected delayed acceptance.
8. A funds transfer system rule can govern rights and obligations between banks that are parties to payment orders
transmitted over the system even if the rule conflicts with Article 4A. In some cases, however, a rule governing a
transaction between two banks can affect a third party in an unacceptable way. Subsection (h) deals with such a
case. A funds transfer system rule cannot allow cancellation of a payment order accepted by the beneficiary's bank
if the rule conflicts with subsection (c)(2). Because rights of the beneficiary and the originator are directly affected
by acceptance, subsection (c)(2) severely limits cancellation. These limitations cannot be altered by funds transfer
system rule.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 4A-211. Cancellation and Amendment of Payment Order.
Page 5 of 5
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-212
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 2. ISSUE AND ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENT ORDER
§ 4A-212. Liability and Duty of Receiving Bank Regarding Unaccepted
Payment Order.
If a receiving bank fails to accept a payment order that it is obliged by express agreement to accept, the bank is
liable for breach of the agreement to the extent provided in the agreement or in this Article, but does not otherwise
have any duty to accept a payment order or, before acceptance, to take any action, or refrain from taking action,
with respect to the order except as provided in this Article or by express agreement. Liability based on acceptance
arises only when acceptance occurs as stated in Section 4A-209, and liability is limited to that provided in this
Article. A receiving bank is not the agent of the sender or beneficiary of the payment order it accepts, or of any
other party to the funds transfer, and the bank owes no duty to any party to the funds transfer except as provided in
this Article or by express agreement.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
With limited exceptions stated in this Article, the duties and obligations of receiving banks that carry out a funds
transfer arise only as a result of acceptance of payment orders or of agreements made by receiving banks.
Exceptions are stated in Section 4A-209(b)(3) and Section 4A-210(b). A receiving bank is not like a collecting bank
under Article 4. No receiving bank, whether it be an originator's bank, an intermediary bank or a beneficiary's bank,
is an agent for any other party in the funds transfer.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-301
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 3. EXECUTION OF SENDER'S PAYMENT ORDER BY RECEIVING BANK
§ 4A-301. Execution and Execution Date.
(a) A payment order is "executed" by the receiving bank when it issues a payment order intended to carry
out the payment order received by the bank. A payment order received by the beneficiary's bank can be
accepted but cannot be executed.
(b) "Execution date" of a payment order means the day on which the receiving bank may properly issue a
payment order in execution of the sender's order. The execution date may be determined by instruction of
the sender but cannot be earlier than the day the order is received and, unless otherwise determined, is the
day the order is received. If the sender's instruction states a payment date, the execution date is the
payment date or an earlier date on which execution is reasonably necessary to allow payment to the
beneficiary on the payment date.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. The terms "executed," "execution" and "execution date" are used only with respect to a payment order to a
receiving bank other than the beneficiary's bank. The beneficiary's bank can accept the payment order that it
receives, but it does not execute the order. Execution refers to the act of the receiving bank in issuing a payment
order "intended to carry out" the payment order that the bank received. A receiving bank has executed an order
even if the order issued by the bank does not carry out the order received by the bank. For example, the bank may
have erroneously issued an order to the wrong beneficiary, or in the wrong amount or to the wrong beneficiary's
bank. In each of these cases execution has occurred but the execution is erroneous. Erroneous execution is
covered in Section 4A-303.
2. "Execution date" refers to the time a payment order should be executed rather than the day it is actually
executed. Normally the sender will not specify an execution date, but most payment orders are meant to be
executed immediately. Thus, the execution date is normally the day the order is received by the receiving bank. It
is common for the sender to specify a "payment date" which is defined in Section 4A-401 as "the day on which the
amount of the order is payable to the beneficiary by the beneficiary's bank." Except for automated clearing house
transfers, if a funds transfer is entirely within the United States and the payment is to be carried out electronically,
the execution date is the payment date unless the order is received after the payment date. If the payment is to be
carried out through an automated clearing house, execution may occur before the payment date. In an ACH
transfer the beneficiary is usually paid one or two days after issue of the originator's payment order. The execution
date is determined by the stated payment date and is a day before the payment date on which execution is
reasonably necessary to allow payment on the payment date. A funds transfer system rule could also determine
the execution date of orders received by the receiving bank if both the sender and the receiving bank are
participants in the funds transfer system. The execution date can be determined by the payment order itself or by
separate instructions of the sender or an agreement of the sender and the receiving bank. The second sentence of
subsection (b) must be read in the light of Section 4A-106 which states that if a payment order is received after the
§ 4A-301. Execution and Execution Date.
Page 2 of 2
cut-off time of the receiving bank it may be treated by the bank as received at the opening of the next funds transfer
business day.
3. Execution on the execution date is timely, but the order can be executed before or after the execution date.
Section 4A-209(d) and Section 4A-402(c) state the consequences of early execution and Section 4A-305(a) states
the consequences of late execution.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-302
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 3. EXECUTION OF SENDER'S PAYMENT ORDER BY RECEIVING BANK
§ 4A-302. Obligations of Receiving Bank in Execution of Payment Order.
(a) Except as provided in subsections (b) through (d), if the receiving bank accepts a payment order
pursuant to Section 4A-209(a), the bank has the following obligations in executing the order:
(1) The receiving bank is obliged to issue, on the execution date, a payment order complying with the
sender's order and to follow the sender's instructions concerning (i) any intermediary bank or fundstransfer
system to be used in carrying out the funds transfer, or (ii) the means by which payment orders
are to be transmitted in the funds transfer. If the originator's bank issues a payment order to an
intermediary bank, the originator's bank is obliged to instruct the intermediary bank according to the
instruction of the originator. An intermediary bank in the funds transfer is similarly bound by an
instruction given to it by the sender of the payment order it accepts.
(2) If the sender's instruction states that the funds transfer is to be carried out telephonically or by wire
transfer or otherwise indicates that the funds transfer is to be carried out by the most expeditious
means, the receiving bank is obliged to transmit its payment order by the most expeditious available
means, and to instruct any intermediary bank accordingly. If a sender's instruction states a payment
date, the receiving bank is obliged to transmit its payment order at a time and by means reasonably
necessary to allow payment to the beneficiary on the payment date or as soon thereafter as is feasible.
(b) Unless otherwise instructed, a receiving bank executing a payment order may (i) use any funds-transfer
system if use of that system is reasonable in the circumstances, and (ii) issue a payment order to the
beneficiary's bank or to an intermediary bank through which a payment order conforming to the sender's
order can expeditiously be issued to the beneficiary's bank if the receiving bank exercises ordinary care in
the selection of the intermediary bank. A receiving bank is not required to follow an instruction of the
sender designating a funds-transfer system to be used in carrying out the funds transfer if the receiving
bank, in good faith, determines that it is not feasible to follow the instruction or that following the instruction
would unduly delay completion of the funds transfer.
(c) Unless subsection (a)(2) applies or the receiving bank is otherwise instructed, the bank may execute a
payment order by transmitting its payment order by first class mail or by any means reasonable in the
circumstances. If the receiving bank is instructed to execute the sender's order by transmitting its payment
order by a particular means, the receiving bank may issue its payment order by the means stated or by any
means as expeditious as the means stated.
(d) Unless instructed by the sender, (i) the receiving bank may not obtain payment of its charges for
services and expenses in connection with the execution of the sender's order by issuing a payment order in
an amount equal to the amount of the sender's order less the amount of the charges, and (ii) may not
instruct a subsequent receiving bank to obtain payment of its charges in the same manner.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
§ 4A-302. Obligations of Receiving Bank in Execution of Payment Order.
Page 2 of 3
1. In the absence of agreement, the receiving bank is not obliged to execute an order of the sender. Section 4A-
212. Section 4A-302 states the manner in which the receiving bank may execute the sender's order if execution
occurs. Subsection (a)(1) states the residual rule. The payment order issued by the receiving bank must comply
with the sender's order and, unless some other rule is stated in the section, the receiving bank is obliged to follow
any instruction of the sender concerning which funds transfer system is to be used, which intermediary banks are to
be used, and what means of transmission is to be used. The instruction of the sender may be incorporated in the
payment order itself or may be given separately. For example, there may be a master agreement between the
sender and receiving bank containing instructions governing payment orders to be issued from time to time by the
sender to the receiving bank. In most funds transfers, speed is a paramount consideration. A sender that wants
assurance that the funds transfer will be expeditiously completed can specify the means to be used. The receiving
bank can follow the instructions literally or it can use an equivalent means. For example, if the sender instructs the
receiving bank to transmit by telex, the receiving bank could use telephone instead. Subsection (c). In most cases
the sender will not specify a particular means but will use a general term such as "by wire" or "wire transfer" or "as
soon as possible." These words signify that the sender wants a same-day transfer. In these cases the receiving
bank is required to use a telephonic or electronic communication to transmit its order and is also required to instruct
any intermediary bank to which it issues its order to transmit by similar means. Subsection (a)(2). In other cases,
such as an automated clearing house transfer, a same-day transfer is not contemplated. Normally the sender's
instruction or the context in which the payment order is received makes clear the type of funds transfer that is
appropriate. If the sender states a payment date with respect to the payment order, the receiving bank is obliged o
execute the order at a time and in a manner to meet the payment date if that is feasible. Subsection (a)(2). This
provision would apply to many ACH transfers made to pay recurring debts of the sender. In other cases, involving
relatively small amounts, time may not be an important factor and cost may be a more important element. Fast
means, such as telephone or electronic transmission, are more expensive than slow means such as mailing.
Subsection (c) states that in the absence of instructions the receiving bank is given discretion to decide. It may
issue its payment order by first class mail or by any means reasonable in the circumstances. Section 4A-305 states
the liability of a receiving bank for breach of the obligations stated in Section 4A-302.
2. Subsection (b) concerns the choice of intermediary banks to be used in completing the funds transfer, and the
funds transfer system to be used. If the receiving bank is not instructed about the matter, it can issue an order
directly to the beneficiary's bank or can issue an order to an intermediary bank. The receiving bank also has
discretion concerning use of a funds transfer system. In some cases it may be reasonable to use either an
automated clearing house system or a wire transfer system such as Fedwire or CHIPS. Normally, the receiving
bank will follow the instruction of the sender in these matters, but in some cases it may be prudent for the bank not
to follow instructions. The sender may have designated a funds transfer system to be used in carrying out the
funds transfer, but it may not be feasible to use the designated system because of some impediment such as a
computer breakdown which prevents prompt execution of the order. The receiving bank is permitted to use an
alternate means of transmittal in a good faith effort to execute the order expeditiously. The same leeway is not
given to the receiving bank if the sender designates an intermediary bank through which the funds transfer is to be
routed. The sender's designation of that intermediary bank may mean that the beneficiary's bank is expecting to
obtain a credit from that intermediary bank and may have relied on that anticipated credit. If the receiving bank
uses another intermediary bank the expectations of the beneficiary's bank may not be realized. The receiving bank
could choose to route the transfer to another intermediary bank and then to the designated intermediary bank if
there were some reason such as a lack of a correspondent-bank relationship or a bilateral credit limitation, but the
designated intermediary bank cannot be circumvented. To do so violates the sender's instructions.
3. The normal rule, under subsection (a)(1), is that the receiving bank, in executing a payment order, is required to
issue a payment order that complies as to amount with that of the sender's order. In most cases the receiving bank
issues an order equal to the amount of the sender's order and makes a separate charge for services and expenses
in executing the sender's order. In some cases, particularly if it is an intermediary bank that is executing an order,
charges are collected by deducting them from the amount of the payment order issued by the executing bank. If
that is done, the amount of the payment order accepted by the beneficiary's bank will be slightly less than the
amount of the originator's payment order. For example, Originator, in order to pay an obligation of $1,000,000
owed to Beneficiary, issues a payment order to Originator's Bank to pay $1,000,000 to the account of Beneficiary in
§ 4A-302. Obligations of Receiving Bank in Execution of Payment Order.
Page 3 of 3
Beneficiary's Bank. Originator's Bank issues a payment order to Intermediary Bank for $1,000,000 and debits
Originator's account for $1,000,010. The extra $10 is the fee of Originator's Bank. Intermediary Bank executes the
payment order of Originator's Bank by issuing a payment order to Beneficiary's Bank for $999,990, but under § 4A-
402(c) is entitled to receive $1,000,000 from Originator's Bank. The $10 difference is the fee of Intermediary Bank.
Beneficiary's Bank credits Beneficiary's account for $999,990. When Beneficiary's Bank accepts the payment order
of Intermediary Bank the result is a payment of $999,990 from Originator to Beneficiary. Section 4A-406(a). If that
payment discharges the $1,000,000 debt, the effect is that Beneficiary has paid the charges of Intermediary Bank
and Originator has paid the charges of Originator's Bank. Subsection (d) of Section 4A-302 allows Intermediary
Bank to collect its charges by deducting them from the amount of the payment order, but only if instructed to do so
by Originator's Bank. Originator's Bank is not authorized to give that instruction to Intermediary Bank unless
Originator authorized the instruction. Thus, Originator can control how the charges of Originator's Bank and
Intermediary Bank are to be paid. Subsection (d) does not apply to charges of Beneficiary's Bank to Beneficiary.
In the case discussed in the preceding paragraph the $10 charge is trivial in relation to the amount of the payment
and it may not be important to Beneficiary how the charge is paid. But it may be very important if the $1,000,000
obligation represented the price of exercising a right such as an option favorable to Originator and unfavorable to
Beneficiary. Beneficiary might well argue that it was entitled to receive $1,000,000. If the option was exercised
shortly before its expiration date, the result could be loss of the option benefit because the required payment of
$1,000,000 was not made before the option expired. Section 4A-406(c) allows Originator to preserve the option
benefit. The amount received by Beneficiary is deemed to be $1,000,000 unless Beneficiary demands the $10 and
Originator does not pay it.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-303
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 3. EXECUTION OF SENDER'S PAYMENT ORDER BY RECEIVING BANK
§ 4A-303. Erroneous Execution of Payment Order.
(a) A receiving bank that (i) executes the payment order of the sender by issuing a payment order in an
amount greater than the amount of the sender's order, or (ii) issues a payment order in execution of the
sender's order and then issues a duplicate order, is entitled to payment of the amount of the sender's order
under Section 4A-402(c) if that subsection is otherwise satisfied. The bank is entitled to recover from the
beneficiary of the erroneous order the excess payment received to the extent allowed by the law governing
mistake and restitution.
(b) A receiving bank that executes the payment order of the sender by issuing a payment order in an
amount less than the amount of the sender's order is entitled to payment of the amount of the sender's
order under Section 4A-402(c) if (i) that subsection is otherwise satisfied and (ii) the bank corrects its
mistake by issuing an additional payment order for the benefit of the beneficiary of the sender's order. If
the error is not corrected, the issuer of the erroneous order is entitled to receive or retain payment from the
sender of the order it accepted only to the extent of the amount of the erroneous order. This subsection
does not apply if the receiving bank executes the sender's payment order by issuing a payment order in an
amount less than the amount of the sender's order for the purpose of obtaining payment of its charges for
services and expenses pursuant to instruction of the sender.
(c) If a receiving bank executes the payment order of the sender by issuing a payment order to a
beneficiary different from the beneficiary of the sender's order and the funds transfer is completed on the
basis of that error, the sender of the payment order that was erroneously executed and all previous senders
in the funds transfer are not obliged to pay the payment orders they issued. The issuer of the erroneous
order is entitled to recover from the beneficiary of the order the payment received to the extent allowed by
the law governing mistake and restitution.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. Section 4A-303 states the effect of erroneous execution of a payment order by the receiving bank. Under
Section 4A-402(c) the sender of a payment order is obliged to pay the amount of the order to the receiving bank if
the bank executes the order, but the obligation to pay is excused if the beneficiary's bank does not accept a
payment order instructing payment to the beneficiary of the sender's order. If erroneous execution of the sender's
order causes the wrong beneficiary to be paid, the sender is not required to pay. If erroneous execution causes the
wrong amount to be paid the sender is not obliged to pay the receiving bank an amount in excess of the amount of
the sender's order. Section 4A-303 takes precedence over Section 4A-402(c) and states the liability of the sender
and the rights of the receiving bank in various cases of erroneous execution.
2. Subsections (a) and (b) deal with cases in which the receiving bank executes by issuing a payment order in the
wrong amount. If Originator ordered Originator's Bank to pay $1,000,000 to the account of Beneficiary in
Beneficiary's Bank, but Originator's Bank erroneously instructed Beneficiary's Bank to pay $2,000,000 to
Beneficiary's account, subsection (a) applies. If Beneficiary's Bank accepts the order of Originator's Bank,
§ 4A-303. Erroneous Execution of Payment Order.
Page 2 of 2
Beneficiary's Bank is entitled to receive $2,000,000 from Originator's Bank, but Originator's Bank is entitled to
receive only $1,000,000 from Originator. Originator's Bank is entitled to recover the overpayment from Beneficiary
to the extent allowed by the law governing mistake and restitution. Originator's Bank would normally have a right to
recover the overpayment from Beneficiary, but in unusual cases the law of restitution might allow Beneficiary to
keep all or part of the overpayment. For example, if Originator owed $2,000,000 to Beneficiary and Beneficiary
received the extra $1,000,000 in good faith in discharge of the debt, Beneficiary may be allowed to keep it. In this
case Originator's Bank has paid an obligation of Originator and under the law of restitution, which applies through
Section 1-103, Originator's Bank would be subrogated to Beneficiary's rights against Originator on the obligation
paid by Originator's Bank.
If Originator's Bank erroneously executed Originator's order by instructing Beneficiary's Bank to pay less than
$1,000,000, subsection (b) applies. If Originator's Bank corrects its error by issuing another payment order to
Beneficiary's Bank that results in payment of $1,000,000 to Beneficiary, Originator's Bank is entitled to payment of
$1,000,000 from Originator. If the mistake is not corrected, Originator's Bank is entitled to payment from Originator
only in the amount of the order issued by Originator's Bank.
3. Subsection (a) also applies to duplicate payment orders. Assume Originator's Bank properly executes
Originator's $1,000,000 payment order and then by mistake issues a second $1,000,000 payment order in
execution of Originator's order. If Beneficiary's Bank accepts both orders issued by Originator's Bank, Beneficiary's
Bank is entitled to receive $2,000,000 from Originator's Bank but Originator's Bank is entitled to receive only
$1,000,000 from Originator. The remedy of Originator's Bank is the same as that of a receiving bank that executes
by issuing an order in an amount greater than the sender's order. It may recover the overpayment from Beneficiary
to the extent allowed by the law governing mistake and restitution and in a proper case as stated in Comment 2
may have subrogation rights if it is not entitled to recover from Beneficiary.
4. Suppose Originator instructs Originator's Bank to pay $1,000,000 to Account #12345 in Beneficiary's Bank.
Originator's Bank erroneously instructs Beneficiary's Bank to pay $1,000,000 to Account #12346 and Beneficiary's
Bank accepted. Subsection (c) covers this case. Originator is not obliged to pay its payment order, but Originator's
Bank is required to pay $1,000,000 to Beneficiary's Bank. The remedy of Originator's Bank is to recover
$1,000,000 from the holder of Account #12346 that received payment by mistake. Recovery based on the law of
mistake and restitution is described in Comment 2.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-304
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 3. EXECUTION OF SENDER'S PAYMENT ORDER BY RECEIVING BANK
§ 4A-304. Duty of Sender to Report Erroneously Executed Payment Order.
If the sender of a payment order that is erroneously executed as stated in Section 4A-303 receives notification from
the receiving bank that the order was executed or that the sender's account was debited with respect to the order,
the sender has a duty to exercise ordinary care to determine, on the basis of information available to the sender,
that the order was erroneously executed and to notify the bank of the relevant facts within a reasonable time not
exceeding 90 days after the notification from the bank was received by the sender. If the sender fails to perform
that duty, the bank is not obliged to pay interest on any amount refundable to the sender under Section 4A-402(d)
for the period before the bank learns of the execution error. The bank is not entitled to any recovery from the
sender on account of a failure by the sender to perform the duty stated in this section.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
This section is identical in effect to Section 4A-204 which applies to unauthorized orders issued in the name of a
customer of the receiving bank. The rationale is stated in Comment 2 to Section 4A-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-305
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 3. EXECUTION OF SENDER'S PAYMENT ORDER BY RECEIVING BANK
§ 4A-305. Liability for Late or Improper Execution or Failure to Execute
Payment Order.
(a) If a funds transfer is completed but execution of a payment order by the receiving bank in breach of
Section 4A-302 results in delay in payment to the beneficiary, the bank is obliged to pay interest to either
the originator or the beneficiary of the funds transfer for the period of delay caused by the improper
execution. Except as provided in subsection (c), additional damages are not recoverable.
(b) If execution of a payment order by a receiving bank in breach of Section 4A-302 results in (i)
noncompletion of the funds transfer, (ii) failure to use an intermediary bank designated by the originator, or
(iii) issuance of a payment order that does not comply with the terms of the payment order of the originator,
the bank is liable to the originator for its expenses in the funds transfer and for incidental expenses and
interest losses, to the extent not covered by subsection (a), resulting from the improper execution. Except
as provided in subsection (c), additional damages are not recoverable.
(c) In addition to the amounts payable under subsections (a) and (b), damages, including consequential
damages, are recoverable to the extent provided in an express written agreement of the receiving bank.
(d) If a receiving bank fails to execute a payment order it was obliged by express agreement to execute,
the receiving bank is liable to the sender for its expenses in the transaction and for incidental expenses and
interest losses resulting from the failure to execute. Additional damages, including consequential damages,
are recoverable to the extent provided in an express written agreement of the receiving bank, but are not
otherwise recoverable.
(e) Reasonable attorney's fees are recoverable if demand for compensation under subsection (a) or (b) is
made and refused before an action is brought on the claim. If a claim is made for breach of an agreement
under subsection (d) and the agreement does not provide for damages, reasonable attorney's fees are
recoverable if demand for compensation under subsection (d) is made and refused before an action is
brought on the claim.
(f) Except as stated in this section, the liability of a receiving bank under subsections (a) and (b) may not
be varied by agreement.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. Subsection (a) covers cases of delay in completion of a funds transfer resulting from an execution by a receiving
bank in breach of Section 4A-302(a). The receiving bank is obliged to pay interest on the amount of the order for
the period of the delay. The rate of interest is stated in Section 4A-506. With respect to wire transfers (other than
ACH transactions) within the United States, the expectation is that the funds transfer will be completed the same
day. In those cases, the originator can reasonably expect that the originator's account will be debited on the same
day as the beneficiary's account is credited. If the funds transfer is delayed, compensation can be paid either to the
originator or to the beneficiary. The normal practice is to compensate the beneficiary's bank to allow that bank to
§ 4A-305. Liability for Late or Improper Execution or Failure to Execute Payment Order.
Page 2 of 3
compensate the beneficiary by back-valuing the payment by the number of days of delay. Thus, the beneficiary is
in the same position that it would have been in if the funds transfer had been completed on the same day. Assume
on Day 1, Originator's Bank issues its payment order to Intermediary Bank which is received on that day.
Intermediary Bank does not execute that order until Day 2 when it issues an order to Beneficiary's Bank which is
accepted on that day. Intermediary Bank complies with subsection (a) by paying one day's interest to Beneficiary's
Bank for the account of Beneficiary.
2. Subsection (b) applies to cases of breach of Section 4A-302 involving more than mere delay. In those cases the
bank is liable for damages for improper execution but they are limited to compensation for interest losses and
incidental expenses of the sender resulting from the breach, the expenses of the sender in the funds transfer and
attorney's fees. This subsection reflects the judgment that imposition of consequential damages on a bank for
commission of an error is not justified.
The leading common law case on the subject of consequential damages is Evra Corp. v. Swiss Bank Corp., 673
F.2d 951 (7th Cir.1982), in which Swiss Bank, an intermediary bank, failed to execute a payment order. Because
the beneficiary did not receive timely payment the originator lost a valuable ship charter. The lower court awarded
the originator $2.1 million for lost profits even though the amount of the payment order was only $27,000. The
Seventh Circuit reversed, in part on the basis of the common law rule of Hadley v. Baxendale that consequential
damages may not be awarded unless the defendant is put on notice of the special circumstances giving rise to
them. Swiss Bank may have known that the originator was paying the shipowner for the hire of a vessel but did not
know that a favorable charter would be lost if the payment was delayed. "Electronic payments are not so unusual
as to automatically place a bank on notice of extraordinary consequences if such a transfer goes awry. Swiss Bank
did not have enough information to infer that if it lost a $27,000 payment order it would face liability in excess of $2
million." 673 F.2d at 956.
If Evra means that consequential damages can be imposed if the culpable bank has notice of particular
circumstances giving rise to the damages, it does not provide an acceptable solution to the problem of bank liability
for consequential damages. In the typical case transmission of the payment order is made electronically.
Personnel of the receiving bank that process payment orders are not the appropriate people to evaluate the risk of
liability for consequential damages in relation to the price charged for the wire transfer service. Even if notice is
received by higher level management personnel who could make an appropriate decision whether the risk is
justified by the price, liability based on notice would require evaluation of payment orders on an individual basis.
This kind of evaluation is inconsistent with the high-speed, low-price, mechanical nature of the processing system
that characterizes wire transfers. Moreover, in Evra the culpable bank was an intermediary bank with which the
originator did not deal. Notice to the originator's bank would not bind the intermediary bank, and it seems
impractical for the originator's bank to convey notice of this kind to intermediary banks in the funds transfer. The
success of the wholesale wire transfer industry has largely been based on its ability to effect payment at low cost
and great speed. Both of these essential aspects of the modern wire transfer system would be adversely affected
by a rule that imposed on banks liability for consequential damages. A banking industry amicus brief in Evra stated:
"Whether banks can continue to make EFT services available on a widespread basis, by charging reasonable rates,
depends on whether they can do so without incurring unlimited consequential risks. Certainly, no bank would
handle for $3.25 a transaction entailing potential liability in the millions of dollars."
As the court in Evra also noted, the originator of the funds transfer is in the best position to evaluate the risk that a
funds transfer will not be made on time and to manage that risk by issuing a payment order in time to allow
monitoring of the transaction. The originator, by asking the beneficiary, can quickly determine if the funds transfer
has been completed. If the originator has sent the payment order at a time that allows a reasonable margin for
correcting error, no loss is likely to result if the transaction is monitored. The other published cases on this issue
reach the Evra result. Central Coordinates, Inc. v. Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., 40 U.C.C.Rep.Serv. 1340
(N.Y.Sup.Ct.1985), and Gatoil (U.S.A.), Inc. v. Forest Hill State Bank, 1 U.C.C.Rep.Serv.2d 171 (D.Md.1986).
§ 4A-305. Liability for Late or Improper Execution or Failure to Execute Payment Order.
Page 3 of 3
Subsection (c) allows the measure of damages in subsection (b) to be increased by an express written agreement
of the receiving bank. An originator's bank might be willing to assume additional responsibilities and incur
additional liability in exchange for a higher fee.
3. Subsection (d) governs cases in which a receiving bank has obligated itself by express agreement to accept
payment orders of a sender. In the absence of such an agreement there is no obligation by a receiving bank to
accept a payment order. Section 4A-212. The measure of damages for breach of an agreement to accept a
payment order is the same as that stated in subsection (b). As in the case of subsection (b), additional damages,
including consequential damages, may be recovered to the extent stated in an express written agreement of the
receiving bank.
4. Reasonable attorney's fees are recoverable only in cases in which damages are limited to statutory damages
stated in subsections (a), (b) and (d). If additional damages are recoverable because provided for by an express
written agreement, attorney's fees are not recoverable. The rationale is that there is no need for statutory attorney's
fees in the latter case, because the parties have agreed to a measure of damages which may or may not provide
for attorney's fees.
5. The effect of subsection (f) is to prevent reduction of a receiving bank's liability under Section 4A-305.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-401
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 4. PAYMENT
§ 4A-401. Payment Date.
"Payment date" of a payment order means the day on which the amount of the order is payable to the beneficiary
by the beneficiary's bank. The payment date may be determined by instruction of the sender but cannot be earlier
than the day the order is received by the beneficiary's bank and, unless otherwise determined, is the day the order
is received by the beneficiary's bank.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
"Payment date" refers to the day the beneficiary's bank is to pay the beneficiary. The payment date may be
expressed in various ways so long as it indicates the day the beneficiary is to receive payment. For example, in
ACH transfers the payment date is the equivalent of "settlement date" or "effective date." Payment date applies to
the payment order issued to the beneficiary's bank, but a payment order issued to a receiving bank other than the
beneficiary's bank may also state a date for payment to the beneficiary. In the latter case, the statement of a
payment date is to instruct the receiving bank concerning time of execution of the sender's order. Section 4A-
301(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-402
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 4. PAYMENT
§ 4A-402. Obligation of Sender to Pay Receiving Bank.
(a) This section is subject to Sections 4A-205 and 4A-207.
(b) With respect to a payment order issued to the beneficiary's bank, acceptance of the order by the bank
obliges the sender to pay the bank the amount of the order, but payment is not due until the payment date
of the order.
(c) This subsection is subject to subsection (e) and to Section 4A-303. With respect to a payment order
issued to a receiving bank other than the beneficiary's bank, acceptance of the order by the receiving bank
obliges the sender to pay the bank the amount of the sender's order. Payment by the sender is not due
until the execution date of the sender's order. The obligation of that sender to pay its payment order is
excused if the funds transfer is not completed by acceptance by the beneficiary's bank of a payment order
instructing payment to the beneficiary of that sender's payment order.
(d) If the sender of a payment order pays the order and was not obliged to pay all or part of the amount
paid, the bank receiving payment is obliged to refund payment to the extent the sender was not obliged to
pay. Except as provided in Sections 4A-204 and 4A-304, interest is payable on the refundable amount
from the date of payment.
(e) If a funds transfer is not completed as stated in subsection (c) and an intermediary bank is obliged to
refund payment as stated in subsection (d) but is unable to do so because not permitted by applicable law
or because the bank suspends payments, a sender in the funds transfer that executed a payment order in
compliance with an instruction, as stated in Section 4A-302(a)(1), to route the funds transfer through that
intermediary bank is entitled to receive or retain payment from the sender of the payment order that it
accepted. The first sender in the funds transfer that issued an instruction requiring routing through that
intermediary bank is subrogated to the right of the bank that paid the intermediary bank to refund as stated
in subsection (d).
(f) The right of the sender of a payment order to be excused from the obligation to pay the order as stated
in subsection (c) or to receive refund under subsection (d) may not be varied by agreement.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. Subsection (b) states that the sender of a payment order to the beneficiary's bank must pay the order when the
beneficiary's bank accepts the order. At that point the beneficiary's bank is obliged to pay the beneficiary. Section
4A-404(a). The last clause of subsection (b) covers a case of premature acceptance by the beneficiary's bank. In
some funds transfers, notably automated clearing house transfers, a beneficiary's bank may receive a payment
order with a payment date after the day the order is received. The beneficiary's bank might accept the order before
the payment date by notifying the beneficiary of receipt of the order. Although the acceptance obliges the
beneficiary's bank to pay the beneficiary, payment is not due until the payment date. The last clause of subsection
§ 4A-402. Obligation of Sender to Pay Receiving Bank.
Page 2 of 2
(b) is consistent with that result. The beneficiary's bank is also not entitled to payment from the sender until the
payment date.
2. Assume that Originator instructs Bank A to order immediate payment to the account of Beneficiary in Bank B.
Execution of Originator's payment ordered by Bank A is acceptance under Section 4A-209(a). Under the second
sentence of Section 4A-402(c) the acceptance creates an obligation of Originator to pay Bank A the amount of the
order. The last clause of that sentence deals with attempted funds transfers that are not completed. In that event
the obligation of the sender to pay its payment order is excused. Originator makes payment to Beneficiary when
Bank B, the beneficiary's bank, accepts a payment order for the benefit of Beneficiary. Section 4A-406(a). If that
acceptance by Bank B does not occur, the funds transfer has miscarried because Originator has not paid
Beneficiary. Originator doesn't have to pay its payment order, and if it has already paid it is entitled to refund of the
payment with interest. The rate of interest is stated in Section 4A-506. This "money-back guarantee" is an
important protection of Originator. Originator is assured that it will not lose its money if something goes wrong in
the transfer. For example, risk of loss resulting from payment to the wrong beneficiary is borne by some bank, not
by Originator. The most likely reason for noncompletion is a failure to execute or an erroneous execution of a
payment order by Bank A or an intermediary bank. Bank A may have issued its payment order to the wrong bank
or it may have identified the wrong beneficiary in its order. The money-back guarantee is particularly important to
Originator if noncompletion of the funds transfer is due to the fault of an intermediary bank rather than Bank A. In
that case Bank A must refund payment to Originator, and Bank A has the burden of obtaining refund from the
intermediary bank that it paid.
Subsection (c) can result in loss if an intermediary bank suspends payments. Suppose Originator instructs Bank A
to pay to Beneficiary's account in Bank B and to use Bank C as an intermediary bank. Bank A executes
Originator's order by issuing a payment order to Bank C. Bank A pays Bank C. Bank C fails to execute the order of
Bank A and suspends payments. Under subsections (c) and (d), Originator is not obliged to pay Bank A and is
entitled to refund from Bank A of any payment that it may have made. Bank A is entitled to a refund from Bank C,
but Bank C is insolvent. Subsection (e) deals with this case. Bank A was required to issue its payment order to
Bank C because Bank C was designated as an intermediary bank by Originator. Section 4A-302(a)(1). In this case
Originator takes the risk of insolvency of Bank C. Under subsection (e), Bank A is entitled to payment from
Originator and Originator is subrogated to the right of Bank A under subsection (d) to refund of payment from Bank
C.
3. A payment order is not like a negotiable instrument on which the drawer or maker has liability. Acceptance of the
order by the receiving bank creates an obligation of the sender to pay the receiving bank the amount of the order.
That is the extent of the sender's liability to the receiving bank and no other person has any rights against the
sender with respect to the sender's order.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-403
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 4. PAYMENT
§ 4A-403. Payment by Sender to Receiving Bank.
(a) Payment of the sender's obligation under Section 4A-402 to pay the receiving bank occurs as follows:
(1) If the sender is a bank, payment occurs when the receiving bank receives final settlement of the
obligation through a Federal Reserve Bank or through a funds-transfer system.
(2) If the sender is a bank and the sender (i) credited an account of the receiving bank with the sender,
or (ii) caused an account of the receiving bank in another bank to be credited, payment occurs when
the credit is withdrawn or, if not withdrawn, at midnight of the day on which the credit is withdrawable
and the receiving bank learns of that fact.
(3) If the receiving bank debits an account of the sender with the receiving bank, payment occurs when
the debit is made to the extent the debit is covered by a withdrawable credit balance in the account.
(b) If the sender and receiving bank are members of a funds-transfer system that nets obligations
multilaterally among participants, the receiving bank receives final settlement when settlement is complete
in accordance with the rules of the system. The obligation of the sender to pay the amount of a payment
order transmitted through the funds-transfer system may be satisfied, to the extent permitted by the rules of
the system, by setting off and applying against the sender's obligation the right of the sender to receive
payment from the receiving bank of the amount of any other payment order transmitted to the sender by the
receiving bank through the funds-transfer system. The aggregate balance of obligations owed by each
sender to each receiving bank in the funds-transfer system may be satisfied, to the extent permitted by the
rules of the system, by setting off and applying against that balance the aggregate balance of obligations
owed to the sender by other members of the system. The aggregate balance is determined after the right
of setoff stated in the second sentence of this subsection has been exercised.
(c) If two banks transmit payment orders to each other under an agreement that settlement of the
obligations of each bank to the other under Section 4A-402 will be made at the end of the day or other
period, the total amount owed with respect to all orders transmitted by one bank shall be set off against the
total amount owed with respect to all orders transmitted by the other bank. To the extent of the setoff, each
bank has made payment to the other.
(d) In a case not covered by subsection (a), the time when payment of the sender's obligation under
Section 4A-402(b) or 4A-402(c) occurs is governed by applicable principles of law that determine when an
obligation is satisfied.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. This section defines when a sender pays the obligation stated in Section 4A-402. If a group of two or more
banks engage in funds transfers with each other, the participating banks will sometimes be senders and sometimes
receiving banks. With respect to payment orders other than Fedwires, the amounts of the various payment orders
may be credited and debited to accounts of one bank with another or to a clearing house account of each bank and
§ 4A-403. Payment by Sender to Receiving Bank.
Page 2 of 3
amounts owed and amounts due are netted. Settlement is made through a Federal Reserve Bank by charges to
the Federal Reserve accounts of the net debtor banks and credits to the Federal Reserve accounts of the net
creditor banks. In the case of Fedwires the sender's obligation is settled by a debit to the Federal Reserve account
of the sender and a credit to the Federal Reserve account of the receiving bank at the time the receiving bank
receives the payment order. Both of these cases are covered by subsection (a)(1). When the Federal Reserve
settlement becomes final the obligation of the sender under Section 4A-402 is paid.
2. In some cases a bank does not settle an obligation owed to another bank through a Federal Reserve Bank. This
is the case if one of the banks is a foreign bank without access to the Federal Reserve payment system. In this
kind of case, payment is usually made by credits or debits to accounts of the two banks with each other or to
accounts of the two banks in a third bank. Suppose Bank B has an account in Bank A. Bank A advises Bank B that
its account in Bank A has been credited $1,000,000 and that the credit is immediately withdrawable. Bank A also
instructs Bank B to pay $1,000,000 to the account of Beneficiary in Bank B. This case is covered by subsection
(a)(2). Bank B may want to immediately withdraw this credit. For example, it might do so by instructing Bank A to
debit the account and pay some third party. Payment by Bank A to Bank B of Bank A's payment order occurs when
the withdrawal is made. Suppose Bank B does not withdraw the credit. Since Bank B is the beneficiary's bank, one
of the effects of receipt of payment by Bank B is that acceptance of Bank A's payment order automatically occurs at
the time of payment. Section 4A-209(b)(2). Acceptance means that Bank B is obliged to pay $1,000,000 to
Beneficiary. Section 4A-404(a). Subsection (a)(2) of Section 4A-403 states that payment does not occur until
midnight if the credit is not withdrawn. This allows Bank B an opportunity to reject the order if it does not have time
to withdraw the credit to its account and it is not willing to incur the liability to Beneficiary before it has use of the
funds represented by the credit.
3. Subsection (a)(3) applies to a case in which the sender (bank or nonbank) has a funded account in the receiving
bank. If Sender has an account in Bank and issues a payment order to Bank, Bank can obtain payment from
Sender by debiting the account of Sender, which pays its Section 4A-402 obligation to Bank when the debit is
made.
4. Subsection (b) deals with multilateral settlements made through a funds transfer system and is based on the
CHIPS settlement system. In a funds transfer system such as CHIPS, which allows the various banks that transmit
payment orders over the system to settle obligations at the end of each day, settlement is not based on individual
payment orders. Each bank using the system engages in funds transfers with many other banks using the system.
Settlement for any participant is based on the net credit or debit position of that participant with all other banks
using the system. Subsection (b) is designed to make clear that the obligations of any sender are paid when the
net position of that sender is settled in accordance with the rules of the funds transfer system. This provision is
intended to invalidate any argument, based on common-law principles, that multilateral netting is not valid because
mutuality of obligation is not present. Subsection (b) dispenses with any mutuality of obligation requirements.
Subsection (c) applies to cases in which two banks send payment orders to each other during the day and settle
with each other at the end of the day or at the end of some other period. It is similar to subsection (b) in that it
recognizes that a sender's obligation to pay a payment order is satisfied by a setoff. The obligations of each bank
as sender to the other as receiving bank are obligations of the bank itself and not as representative of customers.
These two sections are important in the case of insolvency of a bank. They make clear that liability under Section
4A-402 is based on the net position of the insolvent bank after setoff.
5. Subsection (d) relates to the uncommon case in which the sender doesn't have an account relationship with the
receiving bank and doesn't settle through a Federal Reserve Bank. An example would be a customer that pays
over the counter for a payment order that the customer issues to the receiving bank. Payment would normally be
by cash, check or bank obligation. When payment occurs is determined by law outside Article 4A.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 4A-403. Payment by Sender to Receiving Bank.
Page 3 of 3
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-404
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 4. PAYMENT
§ 4A-404. Obligation of Beneficiary's Bank to Pay and Give Notice to
Beneficiary.
(a) Subject to Sections 4A-211(e), 4A-405(d), and 4A-405(e), if a beneficiary's bank accepts a payment
order, the bank is obliged to pay the amount of the order to the beneficiary of the order. Payment is due on
the payment date of the order, but if acceptance occurs on the payment date after the close of the fundstransfer
business day of the bank, payment is due on the next funds-transfer business day. If the bank
refuses to pay after demand by the beneficiary and receipt of notice of particular circumstances that will
give rise to consequential damages as a result of nonpayment, the beneficiary may recover damages
resulting from the refusal to pay to the extent the bank had notice of the damages, unless the bank proves
that it did not pay because of a reasonable doubt concerning the right of the beneficiary to payment.
(b) If a payment order accepted by the beneficiary's bank instructs payment to an account of the
beneficiary, the bank is obliged to notify the beneficiary of receipt of the order before midnight of the next
funds-transfer business day following the payment date. If the payment order does not instruct payment to
an account of the beneficiary, the bank is required to notify the beneficiary only if notice is required by the
order. Notice may be given by first class mail or any other means reasonable in the circumstances. If the
bank fails to give the required notice, the bank is obliged to pay interest to the beneficiary on the amount of
the payment order from the day notice should have been given until the day the beneficiary learned of
receipt of the payment order by the bank. No other damages are recoverable. Reasonable attorney's fees
are also recoverable if demand for interest is made and refused before an action is brought on the claim.
(c) The right of a beneficiary to receive payment and damages as stated in subsection (a) may not be
varied by agreement or a funds-transfer system rule. The right of a beneficiary to be notified as stated in
subsection (b) may be varied by agreement of the beneficiary or by a funds-transfer system rule if the
beneficiary is notified of the rule before initiation of the funds transfer.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. The first sentence of subsection (a) states the time when the obligation of the beneficiary's bank arises. The
second and third sentences state when the beneficiary's bank must make funds available to the beneficiary. They
also state the measure of damages for failure, after demand, to comply. Since the Expedited Funds Availability Act,
12 U.S.C. 4001 et seq., also governs funds availability in a funds transfer, the second and third sentences of
subsection (a) may be subject to preemption by that Act.
2. Subsection (a) provides that the beneficiary of an accepted payment order may recover consequential damages
if the beneficiary's bank refuses to pay the order after demand by the beneficiary if the bank at that time had notice
of the particular circumstances giving rise to the damages. Such damages are recoverable only to the extent the
bank had "notice of the damages." The quoted phrase requires that the bank have notice of the general type or
nature of the damages that will be suffered as a result of the refusal to pay and their general magnitude. There is
§ 4A-404. Obligation of Beneficiary's Bank to Pay and Give Notice to Beneficiary.
Page 2 of 2
no requirement that the bank have notice of the exact or even the approximate amount of the damages, but if the
amount of damages is extraordinary the bank is entitled to notice of that fact. For example, in Evra Corp. v. Swiss
Bank Corp., 673 F.2d 951 (7th Cir.1982), failure to complete a funds transfer of only $27,000 required to retain
rights to a very favorable ship charter resulted in a claim for more than $2,000,000 of consequential damages.
Since it is not reasonably foreseeable that a failure to make a relatively small payment will result in damages of this
magnitude, notice is not sufficient if the beneficiary's bank has notice only that the $27,000 is necessary to retain
rights on a ship charter. The bank is entitled to notice that an exceptional amount of damages will result as well.
For example, there would be adequate notice if the bank had been made aware that damages of $1,000,000 or
more might result.
3. Under the last clause of subsection (a) the beneficiary's bank is not liable for damages if its refusal to pay was
"because of a reasonable doubt concerning the right of the beneficiary to payment." Normally there will not be any
question about the right of the beneficiary to receive payment. Normally, the bank should be able to determine
whether it has accepted the payment order and, if it has been accepted, the first sentence of subsection (a) states
that the bank is obliged to pay. There may be uncommon cases, however, in which there is doubt whether
acceptance occurred. For example, if acceptance is based on receipt of payment by the beneficiary's bank under
Section 4A-403(a)(1) or (2), there may be cases in which the bank is not certain that payment has been received.
There may also be cases in which there is doubt about whether the person demanding payment is the person
identified in the payment order as beneficiary of the order.
The last clause of subsection (a) does not apply to cases in which a funds transfer is being used to pay an
obligation and a dispute arises between the originator and the beneficiary concerning whether the obligation is in
fact owed. For example, the originator may try to prevent payment to the beneficiary by the beneficiary's bank by
alleging that the beneficiary is not entitled to payment because of fraud against the originator or a breach of contract
relating to the obligation. The fraud or breach of contract claim of the originator may be grounds for recovery by the
originator from the beneficiary after the beneficiary is paid, but it does not affect the obligation of the beneficiary's
bank to pay the beneficiary. Unless the payment order has been cancelled pursuant to Section 4A-211(c), there is
no excuse for refusing to pay the beneficiary and, in a proper case, the refusal may result in consequential
damages. Except in the case of a book transfer, in which the beneficiary's bank is also the originator's bank, the
originator of a funds transfer cannot cancel a payment order to the beneficiary's bank, with or without the consent of
that bank, because the originator is not the sender of that order. Thus, the beneficiary's bank may safely ignore any
instruction by the originator to withhold payment to the beneficiary.
4. Subsection (b) states the duty of the beneficiary's bank to notify the beneficiary of receipt of the order. If
acceptance occurs under Section 4A-209(b)(1) the beneficiary is normally notified. Thus, subsection (b) applies
primarily to cases in which acceptance occurs under Section 4A-209(b)(2) or (3). Notice under subsection (b) is not
required if the person entitled to the notice agrees or a funds transfer system rule provides that notice is not
required and the beneficiary is given notice of the rule. In ACH transactions the normal practice is not to give notice
to the beneficiary unless notice is requested by the beneficiary. This practice can be continued by adoption of a
funds transfer system rule. Subsection (a) is not subject to variation by agreement or by a funds transfer system
rule.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-405
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 4. PAYMENT
§ 4A-405. Payment by Beneficiary's Bank to Beneficiary.
(a) If the beneficiary's bank credits an account of the beneficiary of a payment order, payment of the bank's
obligation under Section 4A-404(a) occurs when and to the extent (i) the beneficiary is notified of the right
to withdraw the credit, (ii) the bank lawfully applies the credit to a debt of the beneficiary, or (iii) funds with
respect to the order are otherwise made available to the beneficiary by the bank.
(b) If the beneficiary's bank does not credit an account of the beneficiary of a payment order, the time
when payment of the bank's obligation under Section 4A-404(a) occurs is governed by principles of law that
determine when an obligation is satisfied.
(c) Except as stated in subsections (d) and (e), if the beneficiary's bank pays the beneficiary of a payment
order under a condition to payment or agreement of the beneficiary giving the bank the right to recover
payment from the beneficiary if the bank does not receive payment of the order, the condition to payment or
agreement is not enforceable.
(d) A funds-transfer system rule may provide that payments made to beneficiaries of funds transfers made
through the system are provisional until receipt of payment by the beneficiary's bank of the payment order it
accepted. A beneficiary's bank that makes a payment that is provisional under the rule is entitled to refund
from the beneficiary if (i) the rule requires that both the beneficiary and the originator be given notice of the
provisional nature of the payment before the funds transfer is initiated, (ii) the beneficiary, the beneficiary's
bank and the originator's bank agreed to be bound by the rule, and (iii) the beneficiary's bank did not
receive payment of the payment order that it accepted. If the beneficiary is obliged to refund payment to
the beneficiary's bank, acceptance of the payment order by the beneficiary's bank is nullified and no
payment by the originator of the funds transfer to the beneficiary occurs under Section 4A-406.
(e) This subsection applies to a funds transfer that includes a payment order transmitted over a fundstransfer
system that (i) nets obligations multilaterally among participants, and (ii) has in effect a loss-sharing
agreement among participants for the purpose of providing funds necessary to complete settlement of the
obligations of one or more participants that do not meet their settlement obligations. If the beneficiary's
bank in the funds transfer accepts a payment order and the system fails to complete settlement pursuant to
its rules with respect to any payment order in the funds transfer, (i) the acceptance by the beneficiary's
bank is nullified and no person has any right or obligation based on the acceptance, (ii) the beneficiary's
bank is entitled to recover payment from the beneficiary, (iii) no payment by the originator to the beneficiary
occurs under Section 4A-406, and (iv) subject to Section 4A-402(e), each sender in the funds transfer is
excused from its obligation to pay its payment order under Section 4A-402(c) because the funds transfer
has not been completed.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. This section defines when the beneficiary's bank pays the beneficiary and when the obligation of the beneficiary's
bank under Section 4A-404 to pay the beneficiary is satisfied. In almost all cases the bank will credit an account of
§ 4A-405. Payment by Beneficiary's Bank to Beneficiary.
Page 2 of 3
the beneficiary when it receives a payment order. In the typical case the beneficiary is paid when the beneficiary is
given notice of the right to withdraw the credit. Subsection (a)(i). In some cases payment might be made to the
beneficiary not by releasing funds to the beneficiary, but by applying the credit to a debt of the beneficiary.
Subsection (a)(ii). In this case the beneficiary gets the benefit of the payment order because a debt of the
beneficiary has been satisfied. The two principal cases in which payment will occur in this manner are setoff by the
beneficiary's bank and payment of the proceeds of the payment order to a garnishing creditor of the beneficiary.
These cases are discussed in Comment 2 to Section 4A-502.
2. If a beneficiary's bank releases funds to the beneficiary before it receives payment from the sender of the
payment order, it assumes the risk that the sender may not pay the sender's order because of suspension of
payments or other reason. Subsection (c). As stated in Comment 5 to Section 4A-209, the beneficiary's bank can
protect itself against this risk by delaying acceptance. But if the bank accepts the order it is obliged to pay the
beneficiary. If the beneficiary's bank has given the beneficiary notice of the right to withdraw a credit made to the
beneficiary's account, the beneficiary has received payment from the bank. Once payment has been made to the
beneficiary with respect to an obligation incurred by the bank under Section 4A-404(a), the payment cannot be
recovered by the beneficiary's bank unless subsection (d) or (e) applies. Thus, a right to withdraw a credit cannot
be revoked if the right to withdraw constituted payment of the bank's obligation. This principle applies even if funds
were released as a "loan" (see Comment 5 to Section 4A-209), or were released subject to a condition that they
would be repaid in the event the bank does not receive payment from the sender of the payment order, or the
beneficiary agreed to return the payment if the bank did not receive payment from the sender.
3. Subsection (c) is subject to an exception stated in subsection (d) which is intended to apply to automated
clearing house transfers. ACH transfers are made in batches. A beneficiary's bank will normally accept, at the
same time and as part of a single batch, payment orders with respect to many different originator's banks.
Comment 2 to Section 4A-206. The custom in ACH transactions is to release funds to the beneficiary early on the
payment date even though settlement to the beneficiary's bank does not occur until later in the day. The
understanding is that payments to beneficiaries are provisional until the beneficiary's bank receives settlement.
This practice is similar to what happens when a depositary bank releases funds with respect to a check forwarded
for collection. If the check is dishonored the bank is entitled to recover the funds from the customer. ACH transfers
are widely perceived as check substitutes. Section 4A-405(d) allows the funds transfer system to adopt a rule
making payments to beneficiaries provisional. If such a rule is adopted, a beneficiary's bank that releases funds to
the beneficiary will be able to recover the payment if it doesn't receive payment of the payment order that it
accepted. There are two requirements with respect to the funds transfer system rule. The beneficiary, the
beneficiary's bank and the originator's bank must all agree to be bound by the rule and the rule must require that
both the beneficiary and the originator be given notice of the provisional nature of the payment before the funds
transfer is initiated. There is no requirement that the notice be given with respect to a particular funds transfer.
Once notice of the provisional nature of the payment has been given, the notice is effective for all subsequent
payments to or from the person to whom the notice was given. Subsection (d) provides only that the funds transfer
system rule must require notice to the beneficiary and the originator. The beneficiary's bank will know what the rule
requires, but it has no way of knowing whether the originator's bank complied with the rule. Subsection (d) does not
require proof that the originator received notice. If the originator's bank failed to give the required notice and the
originator suffered as a result, the appropriate remedy is an action by the originator against the originator's bank
based on that failure. But the beneficiary's bank will not be able to get the benefit of subsection (d) unless the
beneficiary had notice of the provisional nature of the payment because subsection (d) requires an agreement by
the beneficiary to be bound by the rule. Implicit in an agreement to be bound by a rule that makes a payment
provisional is a requirement that notice be given of what the rule provides. The notice can be part of the agreement
or separately given. For example, notice can be given by providing a copy of the system's operating rules.
With respect to ACH transfers made through a Federal Reserve Bank acting as an intermediary bank, the Federal
Reserve Bank is obliged under Section 4A-402(b) to pay a beneficiary's bank that accepts the payment order.
Unlike Fedwire transfers, under current ACH practice a Federal Reserve Bank that processes a payment order
does not obligate itself to pay if the originator's bank fails to pay the Federal Reserve Bank. It is assumed that the
§ 4A-405. Payment by Beneficiary's Bank to Beneficiary.
Page 3 of 3
Federal Reserve will use its right of preemption which is recognized in Section 4A-107 to disclaim the Section 4A-
402(b) obligation in ACH transactions if it decides to retain the provisional payment rule.
4. Subsection (e) is another exception to subsection (c). It refers to funds transfer systems having loss-sharing
rules described in the subsection. CHIPS has proposed a rule that fits the description. Under the CHIPS losssharing
rule the CHIPS banks will have agreed to contribute funds to allow the system to settle for payment orders
sent over the system during the day in the event that one or more banks are unable to meet their settlement
obligations. Subsection (e) applies only if CHIPS fails to settle despite the loss-sharing rule. Since funds under the
loss-sharing rule will be instantly available to CHIPS and will be in an amount sufficient to cover any failure that can
be reasonably anticipated, it is extremely unlikely that CHIPS would ever fail to settle. Thus, subsection (e)
addresses an event that should never occur. If that event were to occur, all payment orders made over the system
would be cancelled under the CHIPS rule. Thus, no bank would receive settlement, whether or not a failed bank
was involved in a particular funds transfer. Subsection (e) provides that each funds transfer in which there is a
payment order with respect to which there is a settlement failure is unwound. Acceptance by the beneficiary's bank
in each funds transfer is nullified. The consequences of nullification are that the beneficiary has no right to receive
or retain payment by the beneficiary's bank, no payment is made by the originator to the beneficiary and each
sender in the funds transfer is, subject to Section 4A-402(e), not obliged to pay its payment order and is entitled to
refund under Section 4A-402(d) if it has already paid.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-406
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 4. PAYMENT
§ 4A-406. Payment by Originator to Beneficiary; Discharge of Underlying
Obligation.
(a) Subject to Sections 4A-211(e), 4A-405(d), and 4A-405(e), the originator of a funds transfer pays the
beneficiary of the originator's payment order (i) at the time a payment order for the benefit of the beneficiary
is accepted by the beneficiary's bank in the funds transfer and (ii) in an amount equal to the amount of the
order accepted by the beneficiary's bank, but not more than the amount of the originator's order.
(b) If payment under subsection (a) is made to satisfy an obligation, the obligation is discharged to the
same extent discharge would result from payment to the beneficiary of the same amount in money, unless
(i) the payment under subsection (a) was made by a means prohibited by the contract of the beneficiary
with respect to the obligation, (ii) the beneficiary, within a reasonable time after receiving notice of receipt of
the order by the beneficiary's bank, notified the originator of the beneficiary's refusal of the payment, (iii)
funds with respect to the order were not withdrawn by the beneficiary or applied to a debt of the beneficiary,
and (iv) the beneficiary would suffer a loss that could reasonably have been avoided if payment had been
made by a means complying with the contract. If payment by the originator does not result in discharge
under this section, the originator is subrogated to the rights of the beneficiary to receive payment from the
beneficiary's bank under Section 4A-404(a).
(c) For the purpose of determining whether discharge of an obligation occurs under subsection (b), if the
beneficiary's bank accepts a payment order in an amount equal to the amount of the originator's payment
order less charges of one or more receiving banks in the funds transfer, payment to the beneficiary is
deemed to be in the amount of the originator's order unless upon demand by the beneficiary the originator
does not pay the beneficiary the amount of the deducted charges.
(d) Rights of the originator or of the beneficiary of a funds transfer under this section may be varied only by
agreement of the originator and the beneficiary.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. Subsection (a) states the fundamental rule of Article 4A that payment by the originator to the beneficiary is
accomplished by providing to the beneficiary the obligation of the beneficiary's bank to pay. Since this obligation
arises when the beneficiary's bank accepts a payment order, the originator pays the beneficiary at the time of
acceptance and in the amount of the payment order accepted.
2. In a large percentage of funds transfers, the transfer is made to pay an obligation of the originator. Subsection
(a) states that the beneficiary is paid by the originator when the beneficiary's bank accepts a payment order for the
benefit of the beneficiary. When that happens the effect under subsection (b) is to substitute the obligation of the
beneficiary's bank for the obligation of the originator. The effect is similar to that under Article 3 if a cashier's check
payable to the beneficiary had been taken by the beneficiary. Normally, payment by funds transfer is sought by the
beneficiary because it puts money into the hands of the beneficiary more quickly. As a practical matter the
§ 4A-406. Payment by Originator to Beneficiary; Discharge of Underlying Obligation.
Page 2 of 2
beneficiary and the originator will nearly always agree to the funds transfer in advance. Under subsection (b)
acceptance by the beneficiary's bank will result in discharge of the obligation for which payment was made unless
the beneficiary had made a contract with respect to the obligation which did not permit payment by the means used.
Thus, if there is no contract of the beneficiary with respect to the means of payment of the obligation, acceptance by
the beneficiary's bank of a payment order to the account of the beneficiary can result in discharge.
3. Suppose Beneficiary's contract stated that payment of an obligation owed by Originator was to be made by a
cashier's check of Bank A. Instead, Originator paid by a funds transfer to Beneficiary's account in Bank B. Bank B
accepted a payment order for the benefit of Beneficiary by immediately notifying Beneficiary that the funds were
available for withdrawal. Before Beneficiary had a reasonable opportunity to withdraw the funds Bank B suspended
payments. Under the unless clause of subsection (b) Beneficiary is not required to accept the payment as
discharging the obligation owed by Originator to Beneficiary if Beneficiary's contract means that Beneficiary was not
required to accept payment by wire transfer. Beneficiary could refuse the funds transfer as payment of the
obligation and could resort to rights under the underlying contract to enforce the obligation. The rationale is that
Originator cannot impose the risk of Bank B's insolvency on Beneficiary if Beneficiary had specified another means
of payment that did not entail that risk. If Beneficiary is required to accept Originator's payment, Beneficiary would
suffer a loss that would not have occurred if payment had been made by a cashier's check on Bank A, and Bank A
has not suspended payments. In this case Originator will have to pay twice. It is obliged to pay the amount of its
payment order to the bank that accepted it and has to pay the obligation it owes to Beneficiary which has not been
discharged. Under the last sentence of subsection (b) Originator is subrogated to Beneficiary's right to receive
payment from Bank B under Section 4A-404(a).
4. Suppose Beneficiary's contract called for payment by a Fedwire transfer to Bank B, but the payment order
accepted by Bank B was not a Fedwire transfer. Before the funds were withdrawn by Beneficiary, Bank B
suspended payments. The sender of the payment order to Bank B paid the amount of the order to Bank B. In this
case the payment by Originator did not comply with Beneficiary's contract, but the noncompliance did not result in a
loss to Beneficiary as required by subsection (b)(iv). A Fedwire transfer avoids the risk of insolvency of the sender
of the payment order to Bank B, but it does not affect the risk that Bank B will suspend payments before withdrawal
of the funds by Beneficiary. Thus, the unless clause of subsection (b) is not applicable and the obligation owed to
Beneficiary is discharged.
5. Charges of receiving banks in a funds transfer normally are nominal in relationship to the amount being paid by
the originator to the beneficiary. Wire transfers are normally agreed to in advance and the parties may agree
concerning how these charges are to be divided between the parties. Subsection (c) states a rule that applies in
the absence of agreement. In some funds transfers charges of banks that execute payment orders are collected by
deducting the charges from the amount of the payment order issued by the bank, i.e. the bank issues a payment
order that is slightly less than the amount of the payment order that is being executed. The process is described in
Comment 3 to Section 4A-302. The result in such a case is that the payment order accepted by the beneficiary's
bank will be slightly less than the amount of the originator's order. Subsection (c) recognizes the principle that a
beneficiary is entitled to full payment of a debt paid by wire transfer as a condition to discharge. On the other hand,
subsection (c) prevents a beneficiary from denying the originator the benefit of the payment by asserting that
discharge did not occur because deduction of bank charges resulted in less than full payment. The typical case is
one in which the payment is made to exercise a valuable right such as an option which is unfavorable to the
beneficiary. Subsection (c) allows discharge notwithstanding the deduction unless the originator fails to reimburse
the beneficiary for the deducted charges after demand by the beneficiary.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-501
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 4A-501. Variation by Agreement and Effect of Funds-Transfer System Rule.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the rights and obligations of a party to a funds transfer may
be varied by agreement of the affected party.
(b) "Funds-transfer system rule" means a rule of an association of banks (i) governing transmission of
payment orders by means of a funds-transfer system of the association or rights and obligations with
respect to those orders, or (ii) to the extent the rule governs rights and obligations between banks that are
parties to a funds transfer in which a Federal Reserve Bank, acting as an intermediary bank, sends a
payment order to the beneficiary's bank. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, a funds-transfer
system rule governing rights and obligations between participating banks using the system may be effective
even if the rule conflicts with this Article and indirectly affects another party to the funds transfer who does
not consent to the rule. A funds-transfer system rule may also govern rights and obligations of parties other
than participating banks using the system to the extent stated in Sections 4A-404(c), 4A-405(d), and 4A-
507(c).
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. This section is designed to give some flexibility to Article 4A. Funds transfer system rules govern rights and
obligations between banks that use the system. They may cover a wide variety of matters such as form and
content of payment orders, security procedures, cancellation rights and procedures, indemnity rights, compensation
rules for delays in completion of a funds transfer, time and method of settlement, credit restrictions with respect to
senders of payment orders and risk allocation with respect to suspension of payments by a participating bank.
Funds transfer system rules can be very effective in supplementing the provisions of Article 4A and in filling gaps
that may be present in Article 4A. To the extent they do not conflict with Article 4A there is no problem with respect
to their effectiveness. In that case they merely supplement Article 4A. Section 4A-501 goes further. It states that
unless the contrary is stated, funds transfer system rules can override provisions of Article 4A. Thus, rights and
obligations of a sender bank and a receiving bank with respect to each other can be different from that stated in
Article 4A to the extent a funds transfer system rule applies. Since funds transfer system rules are defined as those
governing the relationship between participating banks, a rule can have a direct effect only on participating banks.
But a rule that affects the conduct of a participating bank may indirectly affect the rights of nonparticipants such as
the originator or beneficiary of a funds transfer, and such a rule can be effective even though it may affect
nonparticipants without their consent. For example, a rule might prevent execution of a payment order or might
allow cancellation of a payment order with the result that a funds transfer is not completed or is delayed. But a rule
purporting to define rights and obligations of nonparticipants in the system would not be effective to alter Article 4A
rights because the rule is not within the definition of funds transfer system rule. Rights and obligations arising under
Article 4A may also be varied by agreement of the affected parties, except to the extent Article 4A otherwise
provides. Rights and obligations arising under Article 4A can also be changed by Federal Reserve regulations and
operating circulars of Federal Reserve Banks. Section 4A-107.
§ 4A-501. Variation by Agreement and Effect of Funds-Transfer System Rule.
Page 2 of 2
2. Subsection (b)(ii) refers to ACH transfers. Whether an ACH transfer is made through an automated clearing
house of a Federal Reserve Bank or through an automated clearing house of another association of banks, the
rights and obligations of the originator's bank and the beneficiary's bank are governed by uniform rules adopted by
various associations of banks in various parts of the nation. With respect to transfers in which a Federal Reserve
Bank acts as intermediary bank these rules may be incorporated, in whole or in part, in operating circulars of the
Federal Reserve Bank. Even if not so incorporated these rules can still be binding on the association banks. If a
transfer is made through a Federal Reserve Bank, the rules are effective under subsection (b)(ii). If the transfer is
not made through a Federal Reserve Bank, the association rules are effective under subsection (b)(i).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-502
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 4A-502. Creditor Process Served on Receiving Bank; Setoff by
Beneficiary's Bank.
(a) As used in this section, "creditor process" means levy, attachment, garnishment, notice of lien,
sequestration, or similar process issued by or on behalf of a creditor or other claimant with respect to an
account.
(b) This subsection applies to creditor process with respect to an authorized account of the sender of a
payment order if the creditor process is served on the receiving bank. For the purpose of determining rights
with respect to the creditor process, if the receiving bank accepts the payment order the balance in the
authorized account is deemed to be reduced by the amount of the payment order to the extent the bank did
not otherwise receive payment of the order, unless the creditor process is served at a time and in a manner
affording the bank a reasonable opportunity to act on it before the bank accepts the payment order.
(c) If a beneficiary's bank has received a payment order for payment to the beneficiary's account in the
bank, the following rules apply:
(1) The bank may credit the beneficiary's account. The amount credited may be set off against an
obligation owed by the beneficiary to the bank or may be applied to satisfy creditor process served on
the bank with respect to the account.
(2) The bank may credit the beneficiary's account and allow withdrawal of the amount credited unless
creditor process with respect to the account is served at a time and in a manner affording the bank a
reasonable opportunity to act to prevent withdrawal.
(3) If creditor process with respect to the beneficiary's account has been served and the bank has had
a reasonable opportunity to act on it, the bank may not reject the payment order except for a reason
unrelated to the service of process.
(d) Creditor process with respect to a payment by the originator to the beneficiary pursuant to a funds
transfer may be served only on the beneficiary's bank with respect to the debt owed by that bank to the
beneficiary. Any other bank served with the creditor process is not obliged to act with respect to the
process.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. When a receiving bank accepts a payment order, the bank normally receives payment from the sender by
debiting an authorized account of the sender. In accepting the sender's order the bank may be relying on a credit
balance in the account. If creditor process is served on the bank with respect to the account before the bank
accepts the order but the bank employee responsible for the acceptance was not aware of the creditor process at
the time the acceptance occurred, it is unjust to the bank to allow the creditor process to take the credit balance on
which the bank may have relied. Subsection (b) allows the bank to obtain payment from the sender's account in
§ 4A-502. Creditor Process Served on Receiving Bank; Setoff by Beneficiary's Bank.
Page 2 of 2
this case. Under that provision, the balance in the sender's account to which the creditor process applies is
deemed to be reduced by the amount of the payment order unless there was sufficient time for notice of the service
of creditor process to be received by personnel of the bank responsible for the acceptance.
2. Subsection (c) deals with payment orders issued to the beneficiary's bank. The bank may credit the beneficiary's
account when the order is received, but under Section 4A-404(a) the bank incurs no obligation to pay the
beneficiary until the order is accepted pursuant to Section 4A-209(b). Thus, before acceptance, the credit to the
beneficiary's account is provisional. But under Section 4A-209(b) acceptance occurs if the beneficiary's bank pays
the beneficiary pursuant to Section 4A-405(a). Under that provision, payment occurs if the credit to the
beneficiary's account is applied to a debt of the beneficiary. Subsection (c)(1) allows the bank to credit the
beneficiary's account with respect to a payment order and to accept the order by setting off the credit against an
obligation owed to the bank or applying the credit to creditor process with respect to the account.
Suppose a beneficiary's bank receives a payment order for the benefit of a customer. Before the bank accepts the
order, the bank learns that creditor process has been served on the bank with respect to the customer's account.
Normally there is no reason for a beneficiary's bank to reject a payment order, but if the beneficiary's account is
garnished, the bank may be faced with a difficult choice. If it rejects the order, the garnishing creditor's potential
recovery of funds of the beneficiary is frustrated. It may be faced with a claim by the creditor that the rejection was
a wrong to the creditor. If the bank accepts the order, the effect is to allow the creditor to seize funds of its
customer, the beneficiary. Subsection (c)(3) gives the bank no choice in this case. It provides that it may not favor
its customer over the creditor by rejecting the order. The beneficiary's bank may rightfully reject only if there is an
independent basis for rejection.
3. Subsection (c)(2) is similar to subsection (b). Normally the beneficiary's bank will release funds to the beneficiary
shortly after acceptance or it will accept by releasing funds. Since the bank is bound by a garnishment order served
before funds are released to the beneficiary, the bank might suffer a loss if funds were released without knowledge
that a garnishment order had been served. Subsection (c)(2) protects the bank if it did not have adequate notice of
the garnishment when the funds were released.
4. A creditor may want to reach funds involved in a funds transfer. The creditor may try to do so by serving process
on the originator's bank, an intermediary bank or the beneficiary's bank. The purpose of subsection (d) is to guide
the creditor and the court as to the proper method of reaching the funds involved in a funds transfer. A creditor of
the originator can levy on the account of the originator in the originator's bank before the funds transfer is initiated,
but that levy is subject to the limitations stated in subsection (b). The creditor of the originator cannot reach any
other funds because no property of the originator is being transferred. A creditor of the beneficiary cannot levy on
property of the originator and until the funds transfer is completed by acceptance by the beneficiary's bank of a
payment order for the benefit of the beneficiary, the beneficiary has no property interest in the funds transfer which
the beneficiary's creditor can reach. A creditor of the beneficiary that wants to reach the funds to be received by the
beneficiary must serve creditor process on the beneficiary's bank to reach the obligation of the beneficiary's bank to
pay the beneficiary which arises upon acceptance by the beneficiary's bank under Section 4A-404(a).
5. "Creditor process" is defined in subsection (a) to cover a variety of devices by which a creditor of the holder of a
bank account or a claimant to a bank account can seize the account. Procedure and nomenclature varies widely
from state to state. The term used in Section 4A-502 is a generic term.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-503
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 4A-503. Injunction or Restraining Order With Respect to Funds Transfer.
For proper cause and in compliance with applicable law, a court may restrain (i) a person from issuing a payment
order to initiate a funds transfer, (ii) an originator's bank from executing the payment order of the originator, or (iii)
the beneficiary's bank from releasing funds to the beneficiary or the beneficiary from withdrawing the funds. A court
may not otherwise restrain a person from issuing a payment order, paying or receiving payment of a payment order,
or otherwise acting with respect to a funds transfer.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
This section is related to Section 4A-502(d) and to Comment 4 to Section 4A-502. It is designed to prevent
interruption of a funds transfer after it has been set in motion. The initiation of a funds transfer can be prevented by
enjoining the originator or the originator's bank from issuing a payment order. After the funds transfer is completed
by acceptance of a payment order by the beneficiary's bank, that bank can be enjoined from releasing funds to the
beneficiary or the beneficiary can be enjoined from withdrawing the funds. No other injunction is permitted. In
particular, intermediary banks are protected, and injunctions against the originator and the originator's bank are
limited to issuance of a payment order. Except for the beneficiary's bank, nobody can be enjoined from paying a
payment order, and no receiving bank can be enjoined from receiving payment from the sender of the order that it
accepted.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-504
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 4A-504. Order in Which Items and Payment Orders May Be Charged to
Account; Order of Withdrawals From Account.
(a) If a receiving bank has received more than one payment order of the sender or one or more payment
orders and other items that are payable from the sender's account, the bank may charge the sender's
account with respect to the various orders and items in any sequence.
(b) In determining whether a credit to an account has been withdrawn by the holder of the account or
applied to a debt of the holder of the account, credits first made to the account are first withdrawn or
applied.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. Subsection (a) concerns priority among various obligations that are to be paid from the same account. A
customer may have written checks on its account with the receiving bank and may have issued one or more
payment orders payable from the same account. If the account balance is not sufficient to cover all of the checks
and payment orders, some checks may be dishonored and some payment orders may not be accepted. Although
there is no concept of wrongful dishonor of a payment order in Article 4A in the absence of an agreement to honor
by the receiving bank, some rights and obligations may depend on the amount in the customer's account. Section
4A-209(b)(3) and Section 4A-210(b). Whether dishonor of a check is wrongful also may depend upon the balance
in the customer's account. Under subsection (a), the bank is not required to consider the competing items and
payment orders in any particular order. Rather it may charge the customer's account for the various items and
orders in any order. Suppose there is $12,000 in the customer's account. If a check for $5,000 is presented for
payment and the bank receives a $10,000 payment order from the customer, the bank could dishonor the check
and accept the payment order. Dishonor of the check is not wrongful because the account balance was less than
the amount of the check after the bank charged the account $10,000 on account of the payment order. Or, the
bank could pay the check and not execute the payment order because the amount of the order is not covered by
the balance in the account.
2. Subsection (b) follows Section 4-208(b) in using the first-in-first-out rule for determining the order in which credits
to an account are withdrawn.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-505
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 4A-505. Preclusion of Objection to Debit of Customer's Account.
If a receiving bank has received payment from its customer with respect to a payment order issued in the name of
the customer as sender and accepted by the bank, and the customer received notification reasonably identifying the
order, the customer is precluded from asserting that the bank is not entitled to retain the payment unless the
customer notifies the bank of the customer's objection to the payment within one year after the notification was
received by the customer.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
This section is in the nature of a statute of repose for objecting to debits made to the customer's account. A
receiving bank that executes payment orders of a customer may have received payment from the customer by
debiting the customer's account with respect to a payment order that the customer was not required to pay. For
example, the payment order may not have been authorized or verified pursuant to Section 4A-202 or the funds
transfer may not have been completed. In either case the receiving bank is obliged to refund the payment to the
customer and this obligation to refund payment cannot be varied by agreement. Section 4A-204 and Section 4A-
402. Refund may also be required if the receiving bank is not entitled to payment from the customer because the
bank erroneously executed a payment order. Section 4A-303. A similar analysis applies to that case. Section 4A-
402(d) and (f) require refund and the obligation to refund may not be varied by agreement. Under 4A-505,
however, the obligation to refund may not be asserted by the customer if the customer has not objected to the
debiting of the account within one year after the customer received notification of the debit.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-506
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 4A-506. Rate of Interest.
(a) If, under this Article, a receiving bank is obliged to pay interest with respect to a payment order issued
to the bank, the amount payable may be determined (i) by agreement of the sender and receiving bank, or
(ii) by a funds-transfer system rule if the payment order is transmitted through a funds-transfer system.
(b) If the amount of interest is not determined by an agreement or rule as stated in subsection (a), the
amount is calculated by multiplying the applicable Federal Funds rate by the amount on which interest is
payable, and then multiplying the product by the number of days for which interest is payable. The
applicable Federal Funds rate is the average of the Federal Funds rates published by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York for each of the days for which interest is payable divided by 360. The Federal Funds
rate for any day on which a published rate is not available is the same as the published rate for the next
preceding day for which there is a published rate. If a receiving bank that accepted a payment order is
required to refund payment to the sender of the order because the funds transfer was not completed, but
the failure to complete was not due to any fault by the bank, the interest payable is reduced by a
percentage equal to the reserve requirement on deposits of the receiving bank.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. A receiving bank is required to pay interest on the amount of a payment order received by the bank in a number
of situations. Sometimes the interest is payable to the sender and in other cases it is payable to either the
originator or the beneficiary of the funds transfer. The relevant provisions are Section 4A-204(a), Section 4A-
209(b)(3), Section 4A-210(b), Section 4A-305(a), Section 4A-402(d) and Section 4A-404(b). The rate of interest
may be governed by a funds transfer system rule or by agreement as stated in subsection (a). If subsection (a)
doesn't apply, the rate is determined under subsection (b). Subsection (b) is illustrated by the following example. A
bank is obliged to pay interest on $1,000,000 for three days, July 3, July 4, and July 5. The published Fed Funds
rate is .082 for July 3 and .081 for July 5. There is no published rate for July 4 because that day is not a banking
day. The rate for July 3 applies to July 4. The applicable Fed Funds rate is .08167 (the average of .082, .082, and
.081) divided by 360 which equals .0002268. The amount of interest payable is $1,000,000 ? .0002268 ? 3 =
$680.40.
2. In some cases, interest is payable in spite of the fact that there is no fault by the receiving bank. The last
sentence of subsection (b) applies to those cases. For example, a funds transfer might not be completed because
the beneficiary's bank rejected the payment order issued to it by the originator's bank or an intermediary bank.
Section 4A-402(c) provides that the originator is not obliged to pay its payment order and Section 4A-402(d)
provides that the originator's bank must refund any payment received plus interest. The requirement to pay interest
in this case is not based on fault by the originator's bank. Rather, it is based on restitution. Since the originator's
bank had the use of the originator's money, it is required to pay the originator for the value of that use. The value of
that use is not determined by multiplying the interest rate by the refundable amount because the originator's bank is
required to deposit with the Federal Reserve a percentage of the bank's deposits as a reserve requirement. Since
§ 4A-506. Rate of Interest.
Page 2 of 2
that deposit does not bear interest, the bank had use of the refundable amount reduced by a percentage equal to
the reserve requirement. If the reserve requirement is 12%, the amount of interest payable by the bank under the
formula stated in subsection (b) is reduced by 12%.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 4A-507
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 4A-507. Choice of Law.
(a) The following rules apply unless the affected parties otherwise agree or subsection (c) applies:
(1) The rights and obligations between the sender of a payment order and the receiving bank are
governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the receiving bank is located.
(2) The rights and obligations between the beneficiary's bank and the beneficiary are governed by the
law of the jurisdiction in which the beneficiary's bank is located.
(3) The issue of when payment is made pursuant to a funds transfer by the originator to the beneficiary
is governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the beneficiary's bank is located.
(b) If the parties described in each paragraph of subsection (a) have made an agreement selecting the law
of a particular jurisdiction to govern rights and obligations between each other, the law of that jurisdiction
governs those rights and obligations, whether or not the payment order or the funds transfer bears a
reasonable relation to that jurisdiction.
(c) A funds-transfer system rule may select the law of a particular jurisdiction to govern (i) rights and
obligations between participating banks with respect to payment orders transmitted or processed through
the system, or (ii) the rights and obligations of some or all parties to a funds transfer any part of which is
carried out by means of the system. A choice of law made pursuant to clause (i) is binding on participating
banks. A choice of law made pursuant to clause (ii) is binding on the originator, other sender, or a receiving
bank having notice that the funds-transfer system might be used in the funds transfer and of the choice of
law by the system when the originator, other sender, or receiving bank issued or accepted a payment order.
The beneficiary of a funds transfer is bound by the choice of law if, when the funds transfer is initiated, the
beneficiary has notice that the funds-transfer system might be used in the funds transfer and of the choice
of law by the system. The law of a jurisdiction selected pursuant to this subsection may govern, whether or
not that law bears a reasonable relation to the matter in issue.
(d) In the event of inconsistency between an agreement under subsection (b) and a choice-of-law rule
under subsection (c), the agreement under subsection (b) prevails.
(e) If a funds transfer is made by use of more than one funds-transfer system and there is inconsistency
between choice-of-law rules of the systems, the matter in issue is governed by the law of the selected
jurisdiction that has the most significant relationship to the matter in issue.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
1. Funds transfers are typically interstate or international in character. If part of a funds transfer is governed by
Article 4A and another part is governed by other law, the rights and obligations of parties to the funds transfer may
be unclear because there is no clear consensus in various jurisdictions concerning the juridical nature of the
transaction. Unless all of a funds transfer is governed by a single law it may be very difficult to predict the result if
§ 4A-507. Choice of Law.
Page 2 of 3
something goes wrong in the transfer. Section 4A-507 deals with this problem. Subsection (b) allows parties to a
funds transfer to make a choice-of-law agreement. Subsection (c) allows a funds transfer system to select the law
of a particular jurisdiction to govern funds transfers carried out by means of the system. Subsection (a) states
residual rules if no choice of law has occurred under subsection (b) or subsection (c).
2. Subsection (a) deals with three sets of relationships. Rights and obligations between the sender of a payment
order and the receiving bank are governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the receiving bank is located. If
the receiving bank is the beneficiary's bank the rights and obligations of the beneficiary are also governed by the
law of the jurisdiction in which the receiving bank is located. Suppose Originator, located in Canada, sends a
payment order to Originator's Bank located in a state in which Article 4A has been enacted. The order is for
payment to an account of Beneficiary in a bank in England. Under subsection (a)(1), the rights and obligations of
Originator and Originator's Bank toward each other are governed by Article 4A if an action is brought in a court in
the Article 4A state. If an action is brought in a Canadian court, the conflict of laws issue will be determined by
Canadian law which might or might not apply the law of the state in which Originator's Bank is located. If that law is
applied, the execution of Originator's order will be governed by Article 4A, but with respect to the payment order of
Originator's Bank to the English bank, Article 4A may or may not be applied with respect to the rights and
obligations between the two banks. The result may depend upon whether action is brought in a court in the state in
which Originator's Bank is located or in an English court. Article 4A is binding only on a court in a state that enacts
it. It can have extraterritorial effect only to the extent courts of another jurisdiction are willing to apply it. Subsection
(c) also bears on the issues discussed in this Comment.
Under Section 4A-406 payment by the originator to the beneficiary of the funds transfer occurs when the
beneficiary's bank accepts a payment order for the benefit of the beneficiary. A jurisdiction in which Article 4A is not
in effect may follow a different rule or it may not have a clear rule. Under Section 4A-507(a)(3) the issue is
governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the beneficiary's bank is located. Since the payment to the
beneficiary is made through the beneficiary's bank it is reasonable that the issue of when payment occurs be
governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the bank is located. Since it is difficult in many cases to determine
where a beneficiary is located, the location of the beneficiary's bank provides a more certain rule.
3. Subsection (b) deals with choice-of-law agreements and it gives maximum freedom of choice. Since the law of
funds transfers is not highly developed in the case law there may be a strong incentive to choose the law of a
jurisdiction in which Article 4A is in effect because it provides a greater degree of certainty with respect to the rights
of various parties. With respect to commercial transactions, it is often said that "[u]niformity and predictability based
upon commercial convenience are the prime considerations in making the choice of governing law ...." R. Leflar,
American Conflicts Law, § 185 (1977). Subsection (b) is derived in part from recently enacted choice-of-law rules in
the States of New York and California. N.Y.Gen. Obligations Law 5-1401 (McKinney's 1989 Supp.) and California
Civil Code § 1646.5. This broad endorsement of freedom of contract is an enhancement of the approach taken by
Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws § 187(b) (1971). The Restatement recognizes the basic right of freedom
of contract, but the freedom granted the parties may be more limited than the freedom granted here. Under the
formulation of the Restatement, if there is no substantial relationship to the jurisdiction whose law is selected and
there is no "other" reasonable basis for the parties' choice, then the selection of the parties need not be honored by
a court. Further, if the choice is violative of a fundamental policy of a state which has a materially greater interest
than the chosen state, the selection could be disregarded by a court. Those limitations are not found in subsection
(b).
4. Subsection (c) may be the most important provision in regard to creating uniformity of law in funds transfers.
Most rights stated in Article 4A regard parties who are in privity of contract such as originator and beneficiary,
sender and receiving bank, and beneficiary's bank and beneficiary. Since they are in privity they can make a
choice of law by agreement. But that is not always the case. For example, an intermediary bank that improperly
executes a payment order is not in privity with either the originator or the beneficiary. The ability of a funds transfer
system to make a choice of law by rule is a convenient way of dispensing with individual agreements and to cover
cases in which agreements are not feasible. It is probable that funds transfer systems will adopt a governing law to
increase the certainty of commercial transactions that are effected over such systems. A system rule might adopt
§ 4A-507. Choice of Law.
Page 3 of 3
the law of an Article 4A state to govern transfers on the system in order to provide a consistent, unitary, law
governing all transfers made on the system. To the extent such system rules develop, individual choice-of-law
agreements become unnecessary.
Subsection (c) has broad application. A system choice of law applies not only to rights and obligations between
banks that use the system, but may also apply to other parties to the funds transfer so long as some part of the
transfer was carried out over the system. The originator and any other sender or receiving bank in the funds
transfer is bound if at the time it issues or accepts a payment order it had notice that the funds transfer involved use
of the system and that the system chose the law of a particular jurisdiction. Under Section 4A-107, the Federal
Reserve by regulation could make a similar choice of law to govern funds transfers carried out by use of Federal
Reserve Banks. Subsection (d) is a limitation on subsection (c). If parties have made a choice-of-law agreement
that conflicts with a choice of law made under subsection (c), the agreement prevails.
5. Subsection (e) addresses the case in which a funds transfer involves more than one funds transfer system and
the systems adopt conflicting choice-of-law rules. The rule that has the most significant relationship to the matter at
issue prevails. For example, each system should be able to make a choice of law governing payment orders
transmitted over that system with regard to a choice of law made by another system.
TECHNICAL AMENDMENT TO ARTICLE 1
A state enacting Article 4A should amend Section 1-105(2) by adding the following:
"Governing law in the Article on Funds Transfers. Section 4A-507."
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-101. SHORT TITLE
This article may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code--Letters of Credit.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
The Official Comment to the original Section 5-101 was a remarkably brief inaugural address. Noting that letters
of credit had not been the subject of statutory enactment and that the law concerning them had been developed in
the cases, the Comment stated that Article 5 was intended "within its limited scope" to set an independent
theoretical frame for the further development of letters of credit. That statement addressed accurately conditions as
they existed when the statement was made, nearly half a century ago. Since Article 5 was originally drafted, the use
of letters of credit has expanded and developed, and the case law concerning these developments is, in some
respects, discordant.
Revision of Article 5 therefore has required reappraisal both of the statutory goals and of the extent to which
particular statutory provisions further or adversely affect achievement of those goals.
The statutory goal of Article 5 was originally stated to be: (1) to set a substantive theoretical frame that describes
the function and legal nature of letters of credit; and (2) to preserve procedural flexibility in order to accommodate
further development of the efficient use of letters of credit. A letter of credit is an idiosyncratic form of undertaking
that supports performance of an obligation incurred in a separate financial, mercantile, or other transaction or
arrangement. The objectives of the original and revised Article 5 are best achieved (1) by defining the peculiar
characteristics of a letter of credit that distinguish it and the legal consequences of its use from other forms of
assurance such as secondary guarantees, performance bonds, and insurance policies, and from ordinary contracts,
fiduciary engagements, and escrow arrangements; and (2) by preserving flexibility through variation by agreement
in order to respond to and accommodate developments in custom and usage that are not inconsistent with the
essential definitions and substantive mandates of the statute. No statute can, however, prescribe the manner in
which such substantive rights and duties are to be enforced or imposed without risking stultification of wholesome
developments in the letter of credit mechanism. Letter of credit law should remain responsive to commercial reality
and in particular to the customs and expectations of the international banking and mercantile community. Courts
should read the terms of this article in a manner consistent with these customs and expectations.
The subject matter in Article 5, letters of credit, may also be governed by an international convention that is now
being drafted by UNCITRAL, the draft Convention on Independent Guarantees and Standby Letters of Credit. The
Uniform Customs and Practice is an international body of trade practice that is commonly adopted by international
and domestic letters of credit and as such is the "law of the transaction" by agreement of the parties. Article 5 is
consistent with and was influenced by the rules in the existing version of the UCP. In addition to the UCP and the
international convention, other bodies of law apply to letters of credit. For example, the federal bankruptcy law
applies to letters of credit with respect to applicants and beneficiaries that are in bankruptcy; regulations of the
Federal Reserve Board and the Comptroller of the Currency lay out requirements for banks that issue letters of
credit and describe how letters of credit are to be treated for calculating asset risk and for the purpose of loan
limitations. In addition there is an array of anti-boycott and other similar laws that may affect the issuance and
§ 5-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 2 of 2
performance of letters of credit. All of these laws are beyond the scope of Article 5, but in certain circumstances
they will override Article 5.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-102. DEFINITIONS
(a) In this article:
(1) "Adviser" means a person who, at the request of the issuer, a confirmer, or another adviser, notifies
or requests another adviser to notify the beneficiary that a letter of credit has been issued, confirmed,
or amended.
(2) "Applicant" means a person at whose request or for whose account a letter of credit is issued. The
term includes a person who requests an issuer to issue a letter of credit on behalf of another if the
person making the request undertakes an obligation to reimburse the issuer.
(3) "Beneficiary" means a person who under the terms of a letter of credit is entitled to have its
complying presentation honored. The term includes a person to whom drawing rights have been
transferred under a transferable letter of credit.
(4) "Confirmer" means a nominated person who undertakes, at the request or with the consent of the
issuer, to honor a presentation under a letter of credit issued by another.
(5) "Dishonor" of a letter of credit means failure timely to honor or to take an interim action, such as
acceptance of a draft, that may be required by the letter of credit.
(6) "Document" means a draft or other demand, document of title, investment security, certificate,
invoice, or other record, statement, or representation of fact, law, right, or opinion (i) which is presented
in a written or other medium permitted by the letter of credit or, unless prohibited by the letter of credit,
by the standard practice referred to in Section 5-108(e) and (ii) which is capable of being examined for
compliance with the terms and conditions of the letter of credit. A document may not be oral.
(7) "Good faith" means honesty in fact in the conduct or transaction concerned.
(8) "Honor" of a letter of credit means performance of the issuer's undertaking in the letter of credit to
pay or deliver an item of value. Unless the letter of credit otherwise provides, "honor" occurs
(i) upon payment,
(ii) if the letter of credit provides for acceptance, upon acceptance of a draft and, at maturity, its
payment, or
(iii) if the letter of credit provides for incurring a deferred obligation, upon incurring the obligation
and, at maturity, its performance.
(9) "Issuer" means a bank or other person that issues a letter of credit, but does not include an
individual who makes an engagement for personal, family, or household purposes.
(10) "Letter of credit" means a definite undertaking that satisfies the requirements of Section 5-104 by
an issuer to a beneficiary at the request or for the account of an applicant or, in the case of a financial
institution, to itself or for its own account, to honor a documentary presentation by payment or delivery
of an item of value.
(11) "Nominated person" means a person whom the issuer (i) designates or authorizes to pay, accept,
negotiate, or otherwise give value under a letter of credit and (ii) undertakes by agreement or custom
and practice to reimburse.
§ 5-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 4
(12) "Presentation" means delivery of a document to an issuer or nominated person for honor or giving
of value under a letter of credit.
(13) "Presenter" means a person making a presentation as or on behalf of a beneficiary or nominated
person.
(14) "Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium, or that is stored in an
electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.
(15) "Successor of a beneficiary" means a person who succeeds to substantially all of the rights of a
beneficiary by operation of law, including a corporation with or into which the beneficiary has been
merged or consolidated, an administrator, executor, personal representative, trustee in bankruptcy,
debtor in possession, liquidator, and receiver.
(b) Definitions in other Articles applying to this article and the sections in which they appear are:
"Accept" or "Acceptance"
Section 3-409
"Value" Sections 3-303, 4-211
(c) Article 1 contains certain additional general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation
applicable throughout this article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Since no one can be a confirmer unless that person is a nominated person as defined in Section 5-102(a)(11),
those who agree to "confirm" without the designation or authorization of the issuer are not confirmers under Article
5. Nonetheless, the undertakings to the beneficiary of such persons may be enforceable by the beneficiary as
letters of credit issued by the "confirmer" for its own account or as guarantees or contracts outside of Article 5.
2. The definition of "document" contemplates and facilitates the growing recognition of electronic and other
nonpaper media as "documents," however, for the time being, data in those media constitute documents only in
certain circumstances. For example, a facsimile received by an issuer would be a document only if the letter of
credit explicitly permitted it, if the standard practice authorized it and the letter did not prohibit it, or the agreement of
the issuer and beneficiary permitted it. The fact that data transmitted in a nonpaper (unwritten) medium can be
recorded on paper by a recipient's computer printer, facsimile machine, or the like does not under current practice
render the data so transmitted a "document." A facsimile or S.W.I.F.T. message received directly by the issuer is in
an electronic medium when it crosses the boundary of the issuer's place of business. One wishing to make a
presentation by facsimile (an electronic medium) will have to procure the explicit agreement of the issuer (assuming
that the standard practice does not authorize it). Article 5 contemplates that electronic documents may be
presented under a letter of credit and the provisions of this Article should be read to apply to electronic documents
as well as tangible documents. An electronic document of title is delivered through the voluntary transfer of control.
Article 1, Section 1-201 (definition of "delivery"). See Article 7, Section 7-106 on control of an electronic
document.Where electronic transmissions are authorized neither by the letter of credit nor by the practice, the
beneficiary may transmit the data electronically to its agent who may be able to put it in written form and make a
conforming presentation. Cf. Article 7, Section 7-105 on reissuing an electronic document in a tangible medium.
3. "Good faith" continues in revised Article 5 to be defined as "honesty in fact." "Observance of reasonable
standards of fair dealing" has not been added to the definition. The narrower definition of "honesty in fact"
reinforces the "independence principle" in the treatment of "fraud," "strict compliance," "preclusion," and other tests
§ 5-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 3 of 4
affecting the performance of obligations that are unique to letters of credit. This narrower definition -- which does
not include "fair dealing" -- is appropriate to the decision to honor or dishonor a presentation of documents specified
in a letter of credit. The narrower definition is also appropriate for other parts of revised Article 5 where greater
certainty of obligations is necessary and is consistent with the goals of speed and low cost. It is important that U.S.
letters of credit have continuing vitality and competitiveness in international transactions.
For example, it would be inconsistent with the "independence" principle if any of the following occurred: (i) the
beneficiary's failure to adhere to the standard of "fair dealing" in the underlying transaction or otherwise in
presenting documents were to provide applicants and issuers with an "unfairness" defense to dishonor even when
the documents complied with the terms of the letter of credit; (ii) the issuer's obligation to honor in "strict compliance
in accordance with standard practice" were changed to "reasonable compliance" by use of the "fair dealing"
standard, or (iii) the preclusion against the issuer (Section 5-108(d)) were modified under the "fair dealing" standard
to enable the issuer later to raise additional deficiencies in the presentation. The rights and obligations arising from
presentation, honor, dishonor and reimbursement, are independent and strict, and thus "honesty in fact" is an
appropriate standard.
The contract between the applicant and beneficiary is not governed by Article 5, but by applicable contract law,
such as Article 2 or the general law of contracts. "Good faith" in that contract is defined by other law, such as
Section 2-103(1)(b) or Restatement of Contracts 2d, § 205, which incorporate the principle of "fair dealing" in most
cases, or a State's common law or other statutory provisions that may apply to that contract.
The contract between the applicant and the issuer (sometimes called the "reimbursement" agreement) is
governed in part by this article (e.g., Sections 5-108(i), 5-111(b), and 5-103(c)) and partly by other law (e.g., the
general law of contracts). The definition of good faith in Section 5-102(a)(7) applies only to the extent that the
reimbursement contract is governed by provisions in this article; for other purposes good faith is defined by other
law.
4. Payment and acceptance are familiar modes of honor. A third mode of honor, incurring an unconditional
obligation, has legal effects similar to an acceptance of a time draft but does not technically constitute an
acceptance. The practice of making letters of credit available by "deferred payment undertaking" as now provided in
UCP 500 has grown up in other countries and spread to the United States. The definition of "honor" will
accommodate that practice.
5. The exclusion of consumers from the definition of "issuer" is to keep creditors from using a letter of credit in
consumer transactions in which the consumer might be made the issuer and the creditor would be the beneficiary. If
that transaction were recognized under Article 5, the effect would be to leave the consumer without defenses
against the creditor. That outcome would violate the policy behind the Federal Trade Commission Rule in 16 CFR
Part 433. In a consumer transaction, an individual cannot be an issuer where that person would otherwise be either
the principal debtor or a guarantor.
6. The label on a document is not conclusive; certain documents labelled "guarantees" in accordance with
European (and occasionally, American) practice are letters of credit. On the other hand, even documents that are
labelled "letter of credit" may not constitute letters of credit under the definition in Section 5-102(a). When a
document labelled a letter of credit requires the issuer to pay not upon the presentation of documents, but upon the
determination of an extrinsic fact such as applicant's failure to perform a construction contract, and where that
condition appears on its face to be fundamental and would, if ignored, leave no obligation to the issuer under the
document labelled letter of credit, the issuer's undertaking is not a letter of credit. It is probably some form of
suretyship or other contractual arrangement and may be enforceable as such. See Sections 5-102(a)(10) and 5-
103(d). Therefore, undertakings whose fundamental term requires an issuer to look beyond documents and beyond
conventional reference to the clock, calendar, and practices concerning the form of various documents are not
governed by Article 5. Although Section 5-108(g) recognizes that certain nondocumentary conditions can be
included in a letter of credit without denying the undertaking the status of letter of credit, that section does not apply
to cases where the nondocumentary condition is fundamental to the issuer's obligation. The rules in Sections 5-
102(a)(10), 5-103(d), and 5-108(g) approve the conclusion in Wichita Eagle & Beacon Publishing Co. v. Pacific Nat.
Bank, 493 F.2d 1285 (9th Cir. 1974).
§ 5-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 4 of 4
The adjective "definite" is taken from the UCP. It approves cases that deny letter of credit status to documents
that are unduly vague or incomplete. See, e.g., Transparent Products Corp. v. Paysaver Credit Union, 864 F.2d 60
(7th Cir. 1988). Note, however, that no particular phrase or label is necessary to establish a letter of credit. It is
sufficient if the undertaking of the issuer shows that it is intended to be a letter of credit. In most cases the parties'
intention will be indicated by a label on the undertaking itself indicating that it is a "letter of credit," but no such
language is necessary.
A financial institution may be both the issuer and the applicant or the issuer and the beneficiary. Such letters are
sometimes issued by a bank in support of the bank's own lease obligations or on behalf of one of its divisions as an
applicant or to one of its divisions as beneficiary, such as an overseas branch. Because wide use of letters of credit
in which the issuer and the applicant or the issuer and the beneficiary are the same would endanger the unique
status of letters of credit, only financial institutions are authorized to issue them.
In almost all cases the ultimate performance of the issuer under a letter of credit is the payment of money. In rare
cases the issuer's obligation is to deliver stock certificates or the like. The definition of letter of credit in Section 5-
102(a)(10) contemplates those cases.
7. Under the UCP any bank is a nominated bank where the letter of credit is "freely negotiable." A letter of credit
might also nominate by the following: "We hereby engage with the drawer, indorsers, and bona fide holders of
drafts drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this credit that the same will be duly honored on due
presentation" or "available with any bank by negotiation." A restricted negotiation credit might be "available with x
bank by negotiation" or the like.
Several legal consequences may attach to the status of nominated person. First, when the issuer nominates a
person, it is authorizing that person to pay or give value and is authorizing the beneficiary to make presentation to
that person. Unless the letter of credit provides otherwise, the beneficiary need not present the documents to the
issuer before the letter of credit expires; it need only present those documents to the nominated person. Secondly,
a nominated person that gives value in good faith has a right to payment from the issuer despite fraud. Section 5-
109(a)(1).
8. A "record" must be in or capable of being converted to a perceivable form. For example, an electronic message
recorded in a computer memory that could be printed from that memory could constitute a record. Similarly, a tape
recording of an oral conversation could be a record.
9. Absent a specific agreement to the contrary, documents of a beneficiary delivered to an issuer or nominated
person are considered to be presented under the letter of credit to which they refer, and any payment or value given
for them is considered to be made under that letter of credit. As the court held in Alaska Textile Co. v. Chase
Manhattan Bank, N.A., 982 F.2d 813, 820 (2d Cir. 1992), it takes a "significant showing" to make the presentation of
a beneficiary's documents for "collection only" or otherwise outside letter of credit law and practice.
10. Although a successor of a beneficiary is one who succeeds "by operation of law," some of the successions
contemplated by Section 5-102(a)(15) will have resulted from voluntary action of the beneficiary such as merger of
a corporation. Any merger makes the successor corporation the "successor of a beneficiary" even though the
transfer occurs partly by operation of law and partly by the voluntary action of the parties. The definition excludes
certain transfers, where no part of the transfer is "by operation of law" -- such as the sale of assets by one company
to another.
11. "Draft" in Article 5 does not have the same meaning it has in Article 3. For example, a document may be a
draft under Article 5 even though it would not be a negotiable instrument, and therefore would not qualify as a draft
under Section 3-104(e).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-103. SCOPE
(a) This article applies to letters of credit and to certain rights and obligations arising out of transactions
involving letters of credit.
(b) The statement of a rule in this article does not by itself require, imply, or negate application of the same
or a different rule to a situation not provided for, or to a person not specified, in this article.
(c) With the exception of this subsection, subsections (a) and (d), Sections 5-102(a)(9) and (10), 5-106(d),
and 5-114(d), and except to the extent prohibited in Sections 1-102(3) and 5-117(d), the effect of this article
may be varied by agreement or by a provision stated or incorporated by reference in an undertaking. A term
in an agreement or undertaking generally excusing liability or generally limiting remedies for failure to
perform obligations is not sufficient to vary obligations prescribed by this article.
(d) Rights and obligations of an issuer to a beneficiary or a nominated person under a letter of credit are
independent of the existence, performance, or nonperformance of a contract or arrangement out of which
the letter of credit arises or which underlies it, including contracts or arrangements between the issuer and
the applicant and between the applicant and the beneficiary.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Sections 5-102(a)(10) and 5-103 are the principal limits on the scope of Article 5. Many undertakings in
commerce and contract are similar, but not identical to the letter of credit. Principal among those are "secondary,"
"accessory," or "suretyship" guarantees. Although the word "guarantee" is sometimes used to describe an
independent obligation like that of the issuer of a letter of credit (most often in the case of European bank
undertakings but occasionally in the case of undertakings of American banks), in the United States the word
"guarantee" is more typically used to describe a surety ship transaction in which the "guarantor" is only secondarily
liable and has the right to assert the underlying debtor's defenses. This article does not apply to secondary or
accessory guarantees and it is important to recognize the distinction between letters of credit and those guarantees.
It is often a defense to a secondary or accessory guarantor's liability that the underlying debt has been discharged
or that the debtor has other defenses to the underlying liability. In letter of credit law, on the other hand, the
independence principle recognized throughout Article 5 states that the issuer's liability is independent of the
underlying obligation. That the beneficiary may have breached the underlying contract and thus have given a good
defense on that contract to the applicant against the beneficiary is no defense for the issuer's refusal to honor. Only
staunch recognition of this principle by the issuers and the courts will give letters of credit the continuing vitality that
arises from the certainty and speed of payment under letters of credit. To that end, it is important that the law not
carry into letter of credit transactions rules that properly apply only to secondary guarantees or to other forms of
engagement.
2. Like all of the provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code, Article 5 is supplemented by Section 1-103 and,
through it, by many rules of statutory and common law. Because this article is quite short and has no rules on many
issues that will affect liability with respect to a letter of credit transaction, law beyond Article 5 will often determine
rights and liabilities in letter of credit transactions. Even within letter of credit law, the article is far from
comprehensive; it deals only with "certain" rights of the parties. Particularly with respect to the standards of
§ 5-103. SCOPE
Page 2 of 2
performance that are set out in Section 5-108, it is appropriate for the parties and the courts to turn to customs and
practice such as the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits, currently published by the
International Chamber of Commerce as I.C.C. Pub. No. 500 (hereafter UCP). Many letters of credit specifically
adopt the UCP as applicable to the particular transaction. Where the UCP are adopted but conflict with Article 5 and
except where variation is prohibited, the UCP terms are permissible contractual modifications under Sections 1-
102(3) and 5-103(c). See Section 5-116(c). Normally Article 5 should not be considered to conflict with practice
except when a rule explicitly stated in the UCP or other practice is different from a rule explicitly stated in Article 5.
Except by choosing the law of a jurisdiction that has not adopted the Uniform Commercial Code, it is not possible
entirely to escape the Uniform Commercial Code. Since incorporation of the UCP avoids only "conflicting" Article 5
rules, parties who do not wish to be governed by the nonconflicting provisions of Article 5 must normally either
adopt the law of a jurisdiction other than a State of the United States or state explicitly the rule that is to govern.
When rules of custom and practice are incorporated by reference, they are considered to be explicit terms of the
agreement or undertaking.
Neither the obligation of an issuer under Section 5-108 nor that of an adviser under Section 5-107 is an obligation
of the kind that is invariable under Section 1-102(3). Section 5-103(c) and Comment 1 to Section 5-108 make it
clear that the applicant and the issuer may agree to almost any provision establishing the obligations of the issuer
to the applicant. The last sentence of subsection (c) limits the power of the issuer to achieve that result by a
nonnegotiated disclaimer or limitation of remedy.
What the issuer could achieve by an explicit agreement with its applicant or by a term that explicitly defines its
duty, it cannot accomplish by a general disclaimer. The restriction on disclaimers in the last sentence of subsection
(c) is based more on procedural than on substantive unfairness. Where, for example, the reimbursement agreement
provides explicitly that the issuer need not examine any documents, the applicant understands the risk it has
undertaken. A term in a reimbursement agreement which states generally that an issuer will not be liable unless it
has acted in "bad faith" or committed "gross negligence" is ineffective under Section 5-103(c). On the other hand,
less general terms such as terms that permit issuer reliance on an oral or electronic message believed in good faith
to have been received from the applicant or terms that entitle an issuer to reimbursement when it honors a
"substantially" though not "strictly" complying presentation, are effective. In each case the question is whether the
disclaimer or limitation is sufficiently clear and explicit in reallocating a liability or risk that is allocated differently
under a variable Article 5 provision.
Of course, no term in a letter of credit, whether incorporated by reference to practice rules or stated specifically,
can free an issuer from a conflicting contractual obligation to its applicant. If, for example, an issuer promised its
applicant that it would pay only against an inspection certificate of a particular company but failed to require such a
certificate in its letter of credit or made the requirement only a nondocumentary condition that had to be
disregarded, the issuer might be obliged to pay the beneficiary even though its payment might violate its contract
with its applicant.
3. Parties should generally avoid modifying the definitions in Section 5-102. The effect of such an agreement is
almost inevitably unclear. To say that something is a "guarantee" in the typical domestic transaction is to say that
the parties intend that particular legal rules apply to it. By acknowledging that something is a guarantee, but
asserting that it is to be treated as a "letter of credit," the parties leave a court uncertain about where the rules on
guarantees stop and those concerning letters of credit begin.
4. Section 5-102(2) and (3) of Article 5 are omitted as unneeded; the omission does not change the law.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-104. FORMAL REQUIREMENTS
A letter of credit, confirmation, advice, transfer, amendment, or cancellation may be issued in any form that is a
record and is authenticated (i) by a signature or (ii) in accordance with the agreement of the parties or the standard
practice referred to in Section 5-108(e).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Neither Section 5-104 nor the definition of letter of credit in Section 5-102(a)(10) requires inclusion of all the
terms that are normally contained in a letter of credit in order for an undertaking to be recognized as a letter of
credit under Article 5. For example, a letter of credit will typically specify the amount available, the expiration date,
the place where presentation should be made, and the documents that must be presented to entitle a person to
honor. Undertakings that have the formalities required by Section 5-104 and meet the conditions specified in
Section 5-102(a)(10) will be recognized as letters of credit even though they omit one or more of the items usually
contained in a letter of credit.
2. The authentication specified in this section is authentication only of the identity of the issuer, confirmer, or
adviser.
An authentication agreement may be by system rule, by standard practice, or by direct agreement between the
parties. The reference to practice is intended to incorporate future developments in the UCP and other practice
rules as well as those that may arise spontaneously in commercial practice.
3. Many banking transactions, including the issuance of many letters of credit, are now conducted mostly by
electronic means. For example, S.W.I.F.T. is currently used to transmit letters of credit from issuing to advising
banks. The letter of credit text so transmitted may be printed at the advising bank, stamped "original" and provided
to the beneficiary in that form. The printed document may then be used as a way of controlling and recording
payments and of recording and authorizing assignments of proceeds or transfers of rights under the letter of credit.
Nothing in this section should be construed to conflict with that practice.
To be a record sufficient to serve as a letter of credit or other undertaking under this section, data must have a
durability consistent with that function. Because consideration is not required for a binding letter of credit or similar
undertaking (Section 5 - 105) yet those undertakings are to be strictly construed (Section 5 - 108), parties to a letter
of credit transaction are especially dependent on the continued availability of the terms and conditions of the letter
of credit or other undertaking. By declining to specify any particular medium in which the letter of credit must be
established or communicated, Section 5 - 104 leaves room for future developments.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-105. CONSIDERATION
Consideration is not required to issue, amend, transfer, or cancel a letter of credit, advice, or confirmation.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
It is not to be expected that any issuer will issue its letter of credit without some form of remuneration. But it is not
expected that the beneficiary will know what the issuer's remuneration was or whether in fact there was any
identifiable remuneration in a given case. And it might be difficult for the beneficiary to prove the issuer's
remuneration. This section dispenses with this proof and is consistent with the position of Lord Mansfield in Pillans
v. Van Mierop, 97 Eng.Rep. 1035 (K.B. 1765) in making consideration irrelevant.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-106. ISSUANCE, AMENDMENT, CANCELLATION, AND DURATION
(a) A letter of credit is issued and becomes enforceable according to its terms against the issuer when the
issuer sends or otherwise transmits it to the person requested to advise or to the beneficiary. A letter of
credit is revocable only if it so provides.
(b) After a letter of credit is issued, rights and obligations of a beneficiary, applicant, confirmer, and issuer
are not affected by an amendment or cancellation to which that person has not consented except to the
extent the letter of credit provides that it is revocable or that the issuer may amend or cancel the letter of
credit without that consent.
(c) If there is no stated expiration date or other provision that determines its duration, a letter of credit
expires one year after its stated date of issuance or, if none is stated, after the date on which it is issued.
(d) A letter of credit that states that it is perpetual expires five years after its stated date of issuance, or if
none is stated, after the date on which it is issued.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section adopts the position taken by several courts, namely that letters of credit that are silent as to
revocability are irrevocable. See, e.g., Weyerhaeuser Co. v. First Nat. Bank, 27 UCC Rep. Serv. 777 (S.D. Iowa
1979); West Va. Hous. Dev. Fund v. Sroka, 415 F. Supp. 1107 (W.D. Pa. 1976). This is the position of the current
UCP (500). Given the usual commercial understanding and purpose of letters of credit, revocable letters of credit
offer unhappy possibilities for misleading the parties who deal with them.
2. A person can consent to an amendment by implication. For example, a beneficiary that tenders documents for
honor that conform to an amended letter of credit but not to the original letter of credit has probably consented to
the amendment. By the same token an applicant that has procured the issuance of a transferable letter of credit has
consented to its transfer and to performance under the letter of credit by a person to whom the beneficiary's rights
are duly transferred. If some, but not all of the persons involved in a letter of credit transaction consent to
performance that does not strictly conform to the original letter of credit, those persons assume the risk that other
nonconsenting persons may insist on strict compliance with the original letter of credit. Under subsection (b) those
not consenting are not bound. For example, an issuer might agree to amend its letter of credit or honor documents
presented after the expiration date in the belief that the applicant has consented or will consent to the amendment
or will waive presentation after the original expiration date. If that belief is mistaken, the issuer is bound to the
beneficiary by the terms of the letter of credit as amended or waived, even though it may be unable to recover from
the applicant.
In general, the rights of a recognized transferee beneficiary cannot be altered without the transferee's consent,
but the same is not true of the rights of assignees of proceeds from the beneficiary. When the beneficiary makes a
complete transfer of its interest that is effective under the terms for transfer established by the issuer, adviser, or
other party controlling transfers, the beneficiary no longer has an interest in the letter of credit, and the transferee
steps into the shoes of the beneficiary as the one with rights under the letter of credit. Section 5 - 102(a)(3). When
there is a partial transfer, both the original beneficiary and the transferee beneficiary have an interest in
§ 5-106. ISSUANCE, AMENDMENT, CANCELLATION, AND DURATION
Page 2 of 2
performance of the letter of credit and each expects that its rights will not be altered by amendment unless it
consents.
The assignee of proceeds under a letter of credit from the beneficiary enjoys no such expectation.
Notwithstanding an assignee's notice to the issuer of the assignment of proceeds, the assignee is not a person
protected by subsection (b). An assignee of proceeds should understand that its rights can be changed or
completely extinguished by amendment or cancellation of the letter of credit. An assignee's claim is precarious, for
it depends entirely upon the continued existence of the letter of credit and upon the beneficiary's preparation and
presentation of documents that would entitle the beneficiary to honor under Section 5 - 108.
3. The issuer's right to cancel a revocable letter of credit does not free it from a duty to reimburse a nominated
person who has honored, accepted, or undertaken a deferred obligation prior to receiving notice of the amendment
or cancellation. Compare UCP Article 8.
4. Although all letters of credit should specify the date on which the issuer's engagement expires, the failure to
specify an expiration date does not invalidate the letter of credit, or diminish or relieve the obligation of any party
with respect to the letter of credit. A letter of credit that may be revoked or terminated at the discretion of the issuer
by notice to the beneficiary is not "perpetual."
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-107. CONFIRMER, NOMINATED PERSON, AND ADVISER
(a) A confirmer is directly obligated on a letter of credit and has the rights and obligations of an issuer to
the extent of its confirmation. The confirmer also has rights against and obligations to the issuer as if the
issuer were an applicant and the confirmer had issued the letter of credit at the request and for the account
of the issuer.
(b) A nominated person who is not a confirmer is not obligated to honor or otherwise give value for a
presentation.
(c) A person requested to advise may decline to act as an adviser. An adviser that is not a confirmer is not
obligated to honor or give value for a presentation. An adviser undertakes to the issuer and to the
beneficiary accurately to advise the terms of the letter of credit, confirmation, amendment, or advice
received by that person and undertakes to the beneficiary to check the apparent authenticity of the request
to advise. Even if the advice is inaccurate, the letter of credit, confirmation, or amendment is enforceable as
issued.
(d) A person who notifies a transferee beneficiary of the terms of a letter of credit, confirmation,
amendment, or advice has the rights and obligations of an adviser under subsection (c). The terms in the
notice to the transferee beneficiary may differ from the terms in any notice to the transferor beneficiary to
the extent permitted by the letter of credit, confirmation, amendment, or advice received by the person who
so notifies.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. A confirmer has the rights and obligations identified in Section 5 - 108. Accordingly, unless the context
otherwise requires, the terms "confirmer" and "confirmation" should be read into this article wherever the terms
"issuer" and "letter of credit" appear.
A confirmer that has paid in accordance with the terms and conditions of the letter of credit is entitled to
reimbursement by the issuer even if the beneficiary committed fraud (see Section 5 - 109(a)(1)(ii)) and, in that
sense, has greater rights against the issuer than the beneficiary has. To be entitled to reimbursement from the
issuer under the typical confirmed letter of credit, the confirmer must submit conforming documents, but the
confirmer's presentation to the issuer need not be made before the expiration date of the letter of credit.
A letter of credit confirmation has been analogized to a guarantee of issuer performance, to a parallel letter of
credit issued by the confirmer for the account of the issuer or the letter of credit applicant or both, and to a back-toback
letter of credit in which the confirmer is a kind of beneficiary of the original issuer's letter of credit. Like letter of
credit undertakings, confirmations are both unique and flexible, so that no one of these analogies is perfect, but
unless otherwise indicated in the letter of credit or confirmation, a confirmer should be viewed by the letter of credit
issuer and the beneficiary as an issuer of a parallel letter of credit for the account of the original letter of credit
issuer. Absent a direct agreement between the applicant and a confirmer, normally the obligations of a confirmer
are to the issuer not the applicant, but the applicant might have a right to injunction against a confirmer under
§ 5-107. CONFIRMER, NOMINATED PERSON, AND ADVISER
Page 2 of 2
Section 5-109 or warranty claim under Section 5-110, and either might have claims against the other under Section
5-117.
2. No one has a duty to advise until that person agrees to be an adviser or undertakes to act in accordance with
the instructions of the issuer. Except where there is a prior agreement to serve or where the silence of the adviser
would be an acceptance of an offer to contract, a person's failure to respond to a request to advise a letter of credit
does not in and of itself create any liability, nor does it establish a relationship of issuer and adviser between the
two. Since there is no duty to advise a letter of credit in the absence of a prior agreement, there can be no duty to
advise it timely or at any particular time. When the adviser manifests its agreement to advise by actually doing so
(as is normally the case), the adviser cannot have violated any duty to advise in a timely way. This analysis is
consistent with the result of Sound of Market Street v. Continental Bank International, 819 F.2d 384 (3d Cir. 1987)
which held that there is no such duty. This section takes no position on the reasoning of that case, but does not
overrule the result. By advising or agreeing to advise a letter of credit, the adviser assumes a duty to the issuer and
to the beneficiary accurately to report what it has received from the issuer, but, beyond determining the apparent
authenticity of the letter, an adviser has no duty to investigate the accuracy of the message it has received from the
issuer. "Checking" the apparent authenticity of the request to advise means only that the prospective adviser must
attempt to authenticate the message (e.g., by "testing" the telex that comes from the purported issuer), and if it is
unable to authenticate the message must report that fact to the issuer and, if it chooses to advise the message, to
the beneficiary. By proper agreement, an adviser may disclaim its obligation under this section.
3. An issuer may issue a letter of credit which the adviser may advise with different terms. The issuer may then
believe that it has undertaken a certain engagement, yet the text in the hands of the beneficiary will contain different
terms, and the beneficiary would not be entitled to honor if the documents it submitted did not comply with the terms
of the letter of credit as originally issued. On the other hand, if the adviser also confirmed the letter of credit, then as
a confirmer it will be independently liable on the letter of credit as advised and confirmed. If in that situation the
beneficiary's ultimate presentation entitled it to honor under the terms of the confirmation but not under those in the
original letter of credit, the confirmer would have to honor but might not be entitled to reimbursement from the
issuer.
4. When the issuer nominates another person to "pay," "negotiate," or otherwise to take up the documents and
give value, there can be confusion about the legal status of the nominated person. In rare cases the person might
actually be an agent of the issuer and its act might be the act of the issuer itself. In most cases the nominated
person is not an agent of the issuer and has no authority to act on the issuer's behalf. Its "nomination" allows the
beneficiary to present to it and earns it certain rights to payment under Section 5-109 that others do not enjoy. For
example, when an issuer issues a "freely negotiable credit," it contemplates that banks or others might take up
documents under that credit and advance value against them, and it is agreeing to pay those persons but only if the
presentation to the issuer made by the nominated person complies with the credit. Usually there will be no
agreement to pay, negotiate, or to serve in any other capacity by the nominated person, therefore the nominated
person will have the right to decline to take the documents. It may return them or agree merely to act as a
forwarding agent for the documents but without giving value against them or taking any responsibility for their
conformity to the letter of credit.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-108
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-108. ISSUER'S RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
(a) Except as otherwise provided in Section 5-109, an issuer shall honor a presentation that, as determined
by the standard practice referred to in subsection (e), appears on its face strictly to comply with the terms
and conditions of the letter of credit. Except as otherwise provided in Section 5-113 and unless otherwise
agreed with the applicant, an issuer shall dishonor a presentation that does not appear so to comply.
(b) An issuer has a reasonable time after presentation, but not beyond the end of the seventh business
day of the issuer after the day of its receipt of documents:
(1) to honor,
(2) if the letter of credit provides for honor to be completed more than seven business days after
presentation, to accept a draft or incur a deferred obligation, or
(3) to give notice to the presenter of discrepancies in the presentation.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), an issuer is precluded from asserting as a basis for
dishonor any discrepancy if timely notice is not given, or any discrepancy not stated in the notice if timely
notice is given.
(d) Failure to give the notice specified in subsection (b) or to mention fraud, forgery, or expiration in the
notice does not preclude the issuer from asserting as a basis for dishonor fraud or forgery as described in
Section 5-109(a) or expiration of the letter of credit before presentation.
(e) An issuer shall observe standard practice of financial institutions that regularly issue letters of credit.
Determination of the issuer's observance of the standard practice is a matter of interpretation for the court.
The court shall offer the parties a reasonable opportunity to present evidence of the standard practice.
(f) An issuer is not responsible for:
(1) the performance or nonperformance of the underlying contract, arrangement, or transaction,
(2) an act or omission of others, or
(3) observance or knowledge of the usage of a particular trade other than the standard practice
referred to in subsection (e).
(g) If an undertaking constituting a letter of credit under Section 5-102(a)(10) contains nondocumentary
conditions, an issuer shall disregard the nondocumentary conditions and treat them as if they were not
stated.
(h) An issuer that has dishonored a presentation shall return the documents or hold them at the disposal
of, and send advice to that effect to, the presenter.
(i) An issuer that has honored a presentation as permitted or required by this article:
(1) is entitled to be reimbursed by the applicant in immediately available funds not later than the date
of its payment of funds;
(2) takes the documents free of claims of the beneficiary or presenter;
(3) is precluded from asserting a right of recourse on a draft under Sections 3-414 and 3-415;
§ 5-108. ISSUER'S RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
Page 2 of 6
(4) except as otherwise provided in Sections 5-110 and 5-117, is precluded from restitution of money
paid or other value given by mistake to the extent the mistake concerns discrepancies in the
documents or tender which are apparent on the face of the presentation; and
(5) is discharged to the extent of its performance under the letter of credit unless the issuer honored a
presentation in which a required signature of a beneficiary was forged.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section combines some of the duties previously included in Sections 5-114 and 5-109. Because a
confirmer has the rights and duties of an issuer, this section applies equally to a confirmer and an issuer. See
Section 5-107(a).
The standard of strict compliance governs the issuer's obligation to the beneficiary and to the applicant. By
requiring that a "presentation" appear strictly to comply, the section requires not only that the documents
themselves appear on their face strictly to comply, but also that the other terms of the letter of credit such as those
dealing with the time and place of presentation are strictly complied with. Typically, a letter of credit will provide that
presentation is timely if made to the issuer, confirmer, or any other nominated person prior to expiration of the letter
of credit. Accordingly, a nominated person that has honored a demand or otherwise given value before expiration
will have a right to reimbursement from the issuer even though presentation to the issuer is made after the
expiration of the letter of credit. Conversely, where the beneficiary negotiates documents to one who is not a
nominated person, the beneficiary or that person acting on behalf of the beneficiary must make presentation to a
nominated person, confirmer, or issuer prior to the expiration date.
This section does not impose a bifurcated standard under which an issuer's right to reimbursement might be
broader than a beneficiary's right to honor. However, the explicit deference to standard practice in Section 5-108(a)
and (e) and elsewhere expands issuers' rights of reimbursement where that practice so provides. Also, issuers can
and often do contract with their applicants for expanded rights of reimbursement. Where that is done, the
beneficiary will have to meet a more stringent standard of compliance as to the issuer than the issuer will have to
meet as to the applicant. Similarly, a nominated person may have reimbursement and other rights against the
issuer based on this article, the UCP, bank-to-bank reimbursement rules, or other agreement or undertaking of the
issuer. These rights may allow the nominated person to recover from the issuer even when the nominated person
would have no right to obtain honor under the letter of credit.
The section adopts strict compliance, rather than the standard that commentators have called "substantial
compliance," the standard arguably applied in Banco Espanol de Credito v. State Street Bank and Trust Company,
385 F.2d 230 (1st Cir. 1967) and Flagship Cruises Ltd. v. New England Merchants Nat. Bank, 569 F.2d 699 (1st
Cir. 1978). Strict compliance does not mean slavish conformity to the terms of the letter of credit. For example,
standard practice (what issuers do) may recognize certain presentations as complying that an unschooled layman
would regard as discrepant. By adopting standard practice as a way of measuring strict compliance, this article
indorses the conclusion of the court in New Braunfels Nat. Bank v. Odiorne, 780 S.W.2d 313 (Tex.Ct.App. 1989)
(beneficiary could collect when draft requested payment on 'Letter of Credit No. 86-122-5' and letter of credit
specified 'Letter of Credit No. 86-122-S' holding strict compliance does not demand oppressive perfectionism). The
section also indorses the result in Tosco Corp. v. Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., 723 F.2d 1242 (6th Cir. 1983).
The letter of credit in that case called for "drafts Drawn under Bank of Clarksville Letter of Credit Number 105." The
draft presented stated "drawn under Bank of Clarksville, Clarksville, Tennessee letter of Credit No. 105." The court
correctly found that despite the change of upper case "L" to a lower case "1" and the use of the word "No." instead
of "Number," and despite the addition of the words "Clarksville, Tennessee," the presentation conformed. Similarly
a document addressed by a foreign person to General Motors as "Jeneral Motors" would strictly conform in the
absence of other defects.
§ 5-108. ISSUER'S RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
Page 3 of 6
Identifying and determining compliance with standard practice are matters of interpretation for the court, not for
the jury. As with similar rules in Sections 4A-202(c) and 2-302, it is hoped that there will be more consistency in the
outcomes and speedier resolution of disputes if the responsibility for determining the nature and scope of standard
practice is granted to the court, not to a jury. Granting the court authority to make these decisions will also
encourage the salutary practice of courts' granting summary judgment in circumstances where there are no
significant factual disputes. The statute encourages outcomes such as American Coleman Co. v. Intrawest Bank,
887 F.2d 1382 (10th Cir. 1989), where summary judgment was granted.
In some circumstances standards may be established between the issuer and the applicant by agreement or by
custom that would free the issuer from liability that it might otherwise have. For example, an applicant might agree
that the issuer would have no duty whatsoever to examine documents on certain presentations (e.g., those below a
certain dollar amount). Where the transaction depended upon the issuer's payment in a very short time period (e.g.,
on the same day or within a few hours of presentation), the issuer and the applicant might agree to reduce the
issuer's responsibility for failure to discover discrepancies. By the same token, an agreement between the applicant
and the issuer might permit the issuer to examine documents exclusively by electronic or electro-optical means.
Neither those agreements nor others like them explicitly made by issuers and applicants violate the terms of
Section 5-108(a) or (b) or Section 5-103(c).
2. Section 5-108(a) balances the need of the issuer for time to examine the documents against the possibility that
the examiner (at the urging of the applicant or for fear that it will not be reimbursed) will take excessive time to
search for defects. What is a "reasonable time" is not extended to accommodate an issuer's procuring a waiver
from the applicant. See Article 14c of the UCP.
Under both the UCC and the UCP the issuer has a reasonable time to honor or give notice. The outside limit of
that time is measured in business days under the UCC and in banking days under the UCP, a difference that will
rarely be significant. Neither business nor banking days are defined in Article 5, but a court may find useful
analogies in Regulation CC, 12 CFR 229.2, in state law outside of the Uniform Commercial Code, and in Article 4.
Examiners must note that the seven-day period is not a safe harbor. The time within which the issuer must give
notice is the lesser of a reasonable time or seven business days. Where there are few documents (as, for example,
with the mine run standby letter of credit), the reasonable time would be less than seven days. If more than a
reasonable time is consumed in examination, no timely notice is possible. What is a "reasonable time" is to be
determined by examining the behavior of those in the business of examining documents, mostly banks. Absent prior
agreement of the issuer, one could not expect a bank issuer to examine documents while the beneficiary waited in
the lobby if the normal practice was to give the documents to a person who had the opportunity to examine those
together with many others in an orderly process. That the applicant has not yet paid the issuer or that the
applicant's account with the issuer is insufficient to cover the amount of the draft is not a basis for extension of the
time period.
This section does not preclude the issuer from contacting the applicant during its examination; however, the
decision to honor rests with the issuer, and it has no duty to seek a waiver from the applicant or to notify the
applicant of receipt of the documents. If the issuer dishonors a conforming presentation, the beneficiary will be
entitled to the remedies under Section 5-111, irrespective of the applicant's views.
Even though the person to whom presentation is made cannot conduct a reasonable examination of documents
within the time after presentation and before the expiration date, presentation establishes the parties' rights. The
beneficiary's right to honor or the issuer's right to dishonor arises upon presentation at the place provided in the
letter of credit even though it might take the person to whom presentation has been made several days to
determine whether honor or dishonor is the proper course. The issuer's time for honor or giving notice of dishonor
may be extended or shortened by a term in the letter of credit. The time for the issuer's performance may be
otherwise modified or waived in accordance with Section 5-106.
The issuer's time to inspect runs from the time of its "receipt of documents." Documents are considered to be
received only when they are received at the place specified for presentation by the issuer or other party to whom
presentation is made. "Receipt of documents" when documents of title are presented must be read in light of the
definition of "delivery" in Article 1, Section 1-201 and the definition of "presentment" in Section 5-102(a)(12).
§ 5-108. ISSUER'S RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
Page 4 of 6
Failure of the issuer to act within the time permitted by subsection (b) constitutes dishonor. Because of the
preclusion in subsection (c) and the liability that the issuer may incur under Section 5-111 for wrongful dishonor, the
effect of such a silent dishonor may ultimately be the same as though the issuer had honored, i.e., it may owe
damages in the amount drawn but unpaid under the letter of credit.
3. The requirement that the issuer send notice of the discrepancies or be precluded from asserting discrepancies
is new to Article 5. It is taken from the similar provision in the UCP and is intended to promote certainty and finality.
The section thus substitutes a strict preclusion principle for the doctrines of waiver and estoppel that might
otherwise apply under Section 1-103. It rejects the reasoning in Flagship Cruises Ltd. v. New England Merchants'
Nat. Bank, 569 F.2d 699 (1st Cir. 1978) and Wing On Bank Ltd. v. American Nat. Bank & Trust Co., 457 F.2d 328
(5th Cir. 1972) where the issuer was held to be estopped only if the beneficiary relied on the issuer's failure to give
notice.
Assume, for example, that the beneficiary presented documents to the issuer shortly before the letter of credit
expired, in circumstances in which the beneficiary could not have cured any discrepancy before expiration. Under
the reasoning of Flagship and Wing On, the beneficiary's inability to cure, even if it had received notice, would
absolve the issuer of its failure to give notice. The virtue of the preclusion obligation adopted in this section is that it
forecloses litigation about reliance and detriment.
Even though issuers typically give notice of the discrepancy of tardy presentation when presentation is made after
the expiration of a credit, they are not required to give that notice and the section permits them to raise late
presentation as a defect despite their failure to give that notice.
4. To act within a reasonable time, the issuer must normally give notice without delay after the examining party
makes its decision. If the examiner decides to dishonor on the first day, it would be obliged to notify the beneficiary
shortly thereafter, perhaps on the same business day. This rule accepts the reasoning in cases such as Datapoint
Corp. v. M & I Bank, 665 F. Supp. 722 (W.D. Wis. 1987) and Esso Petroleum Canada, Div. of Imperial Oil, Ltd. v.
Security Pacific Bank, 710 F. Supp. 275 (D. Ore. 1989).
The section deprives the examining party of the right simply to sit on a presentation that is made within seven
days of expiration. The section requires the examiner to examine the documents and make a decision and, having
made a decision to dishonor, to communicate promptly with the presenter. Nevertheless, a beneficiary who
presents documents shortly before the expiration of a letter of credit runs the risk that it will never have the
opportunity to cure any discrepancies.
5. Confirmers, other nominated persons, and collecting banks acting for beneficiaries can be presenters and,
when so, are entitled to the notice provided in subsection (b). Even nominated persons who have honored or given
value against an earlier presentation of the beneficiary and are themselves seeking reimbursement or honor need
notice of discrepancies in the hope that they may be able to procure complying documents. The issuer has the
obligations imposed by this section whether the issuer's performance is characterized as "reimbursement" of a
nominated person or as "honor."
6. In many cases a letter of credit authorizes presentation by the beneficiary to someone other than the issuer.
Sometimes that person is identified as a "payor" or "paying bank," or as an "acceptor" or "accepting bank," in other
cases as a "negotiating bank," and in other cases there will be no specific designation. The section does not impose
any duties on a person other than the issuer or confirmer, however a nominated person or other person may have
liability under this article or at common law if it fails to perform an express or implied agreement with the beneficiary.
7. The issuer's obligation to honor runs not only to the beneficiary but also to the applicant. It is possible that an
applicant who has made a favorable contract with the beneficiary will be injured by the issuer's wrongful dishonor.
Except to the extent that the contract between the issuer and the applicant limits that liability, the issuer will have
liability to the applicant for wrongful dishonor under Section 5-111 as a matter of contract law. A good faith
extension of the time in Section 5-108(b) by agreement between the issuer and beneficiary binds the applicant even
if the applicant is not consulted or does not consent to the extension.
The issuer's obligation to dishonor when there is no apparent compliance with the letter of credit runs only to the
applicant. No other party to the transaction can complain if the applicant waives compliance with terms or conditions
§ 5-108. ISSUER'S RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
Page 5 of 6
of the letter of credit or agrees to a less stringent standard for compliance than that supplied by this article. Except
as otherwise agreed with the applicant, an issuer may dishonor a noncomplying presentation despite an applicant's
waiver.
Waiver of discrepancies by an issuer or an applicant in one or more presentations does not waive similar
discrepancies in a future presentation. Neither the issuer nor the beneficiary can reasonably rely upon honor over
past waivers as a basis for concluding that a future defective presentation will justify honor. The reasoning of
Courtaulds of North America Inc. v. North Carolina Nat. Bank, 528 F.2d 802 (4th Cir. 1975) is accepted and that
expressed in Schweibish v. Pontchartrain State Bank, 389 So.2d 731 (La.App. 1980) and Titanium Metals Corp. v.
Space Metals, Inc., 529 P.2d 431 (Utah 1974) is rejected.
8. The standard practice referred to in subsection (e) includes (i) international practice set forth in or referenced
by the Uniform Customs and Practice, (ii) other practice rules published by associations of financial institutions, and
(iii) local and regional practice. It is possible that standard practice will vary from one place to another. Where there
are conflicting practices, the parties should indicate which practice governs their rights. A practice may be
overridden by agreement or course of dealing. See Section 1-205(4).
9. The responsibility of the issuer under a letter of credit is to examine documents and to make a prompt decision
to honor or dishonor based upon that examination. Nondocumentary conditions have no place in this regime and
are better accommodated under contract or surety ship law and practice. In requiring that nondocumentary
conditions in letters of credit be ignored as surplusage, Article 5 remains aligned with the UCP (see UCP 500 Article
13c), approves cases like Pringle-Associated Mortgage Corp. v. Southern National Bank, 571 F.2d 871, 874 (5th
Cir. 1978), and rejects the reasoning in cases such as Sherwood & Roberts, Inc. v. First Security Bank, 682 P.2d
149 (Mont. 1984).
Subsection (g) recognizes that letters of credit sometimes contain nondocumentary terms or conditions.
Conditions such as a term prohibiting "shipment on vessels more than 15 years old," are to be disregarded and
treated as surplusage. Similarly, a requirement that there be an award by a "duly appointed arbitrator" would not
require the issuer to determine whether the arbitrator had been "duly appointed." Likewise a term in a standby letter
of credit that provided for differing forms of certification depending upon the particular type of default does not
oblige the issuer independently to determine which kind of default has occurred. These conditions must be
disregarded by the issuer. Where the nondocumentary conditions are central and fundamental to the issuer's
obligation (as for example a condition that would require the issuer to determine in fact whether the beneficiary had
performed the underlying contract or whether the applicant had defaulted) their inclusion may remove the
undertaking from the scope of Article 5 entirely. See Section 5-102(a)(10) and Comment 6 to Section 5-102.
Subsection (g) would not permit the beneficiary or the issuer to disregard terms in the letter of credit such as
place, time, and mode of presentation. The rule in subsection (g) is intended to prevent an issuer from deciding or
even investigating extrinsic facts, but not from consulting the clock, the calendar, the relevant law and practice, or
its own general knowledge of documentation or transactions of the type underlying a particular letter of credit.
Even though nondocumentary conditions must be disregarded in determining compliance of a presentation (and
thus in determining the issuer's duty to the beneficiary), an issuer that has promised its applicant that it will honor
only on the occurrence of those nondocumentary conditions may have liability to its applicant for disregarding the
conditions.
10. Subsection (f) condones an issuer's ignorance of "any usage of a particular trade"; that trade is the trade of
the applicant, beneficiary, or others who may be involved in the underlying transaction. The issuer is expected to
know usage that is commonly encountered in the course of document examination. For example, an issuer should
know the common usage with respect to documents in the maritime shipping trade but would not be expected to
understand synonyms used in a particular trade for product descriptions appearing in a letter of credit or an invoice.
11. Where the issuer's performance is the delivery of an item of value other than money, the applicant's
reimbursement obligation would be to make the "item of value" available to the issuer.
12. An issuer is entitled to reimbursement from the applicant after honor of a forged or fraudulent drawing if honor
was permitted under Section 5-109(a).
§ 5-108. ISSUER'S RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
Page 6 of 6
13. The last clause of Section 5-108(i)(5) deals with a special case in which the fraud is not committed by the
beneficiary, but is committed by a stranger to the transaction who forges the beneficiary's signature. If the issuer
pays against documents on which a required signature of the beneficiary is forged, it remains liable to the true
beneficiary. This principle is applicable to both electronic and tangible documents.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-109
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-109. FRAUD AND FORGERY
(a) If a presentation is made that appears on its face strictly to comply with the terms and conditions of the
letter of credit, but a required document is forged or materially fraudulent, or honor of the presentation
would facilitate a material fraud by the beneficiary on the issuer or applicant:
(1) the issuer shall honor the presentation, if honor is demanded by (i) a nominated person who has
given value in good faith and without notice of forgery or material fraud, (ii) a confirmer who has
honored its confirmation in good faith, (iii) a holder in due course of a draft drawn under the letter of
credit which was taken after acceptance by the issuer or nominated person, or (iv) an assignee of the
issuer's or nominated person's deferred obligation that was taken for value and without notice of forgery
or material fraud after the obligation was incurred by the issuer or nominated person; and
(2) the issuer, acting in good faith, may honor or dishonor the presentation in any other case.
(b) If an applicant claims that a required document is forged or materially fraudulent or that honor of the
presentation would facilitate a material fraud by the beneficiary on the issuer or applicant, a court of
competent jurisdiction may temporarily or permanently enjoin the issuer from honoring a presentation or
grant similar relief against the issuer or other persons only if the court finds that:
(1) the relief is not prohibited under the law applicable to an accepted draft or deferred obligation
incurred by the issuer;
(2) a beneficiary, issuer, or nominated person who may be adversely affected is adequately protected
against loss that it may suffer because the relief is granted;
(3) all of the conditions to entitle a person to the relief under the law of this State have been met; and
(4) on the basis of the information submitted to the court, the applicant is more likely than not to
succeed under its claim of forgery or material fraud and the person demanding honor does not qualify
for protection under subsection (a)(1).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This recodification makes clear that fraud must be found either in the documents or must have been committed
by the beneficiary on the issuer or applicant. See Cromwell v. Commerce & Energy Bank, 464 So.2d 721 (La.
1985).
Secondly, it makes clear that fraud must be "material." Necessarily courts must decide the breadth and width of
"materiality." The use of the word requires that the fraudulent aspect of a document be material to a purchaser of
that document or that the fraudulent act be significant to the participants in the underlying transaction. Assume, for
example, that the beneficiary has a contract to deliver 1,000 barrels of salad oil. Knowing that it has delivered only
998, the beneficiary nevertheless submits an invoice showing 1,000 barrels. If two barrels in a 1,000 barrel
shipment would be an insubstantial and immaterial breach of the underlying contract, the beneficiary's act, though
possibly fraudulent, is not materially so and would not justify an injunction. Conversely, the knowing submission of
§ 5-109. FRAUD AND FORGERY
Page 2 of 3
those invoices upon delivery of only five barrels would be materially fraudulent. The courts must examine the
underlying transaction when there is an allegation of material fraud, for only by examining that transaction can one
determine whether a document is fraudulent or the beneficiary has committed fraud and, if so, whether the fraud
was material.
Material fraud by the beneficiary occurs only when the beneficiary has no colorable right to expect honor and
where there is no basis in fact to support such a right to honor. The section indorses articulations such as those
stated in Intraworld Indus. v. Girard Trust Bank, 336 A.2d 316 (Pa. 1975), Roman Ceramics Corp. v. People's Nat.
Bank, 714 F.2d 1207 (3d Cir. 1983), and similar decisions and embraces certain decisions under Section 5-114 that
relied upon the phrase "fraud in the transaction." Some of these decisions have been summarized as follows in
Ground Air Transfer v. Westate's Airlines, 899 F.2d 1269, 1272-73 (1st Cir. 1990):
We have said throughout that courts may not "normally" issue an injunction because of an important exception to
the general "no injunction" rule. The exception, as we also explained in Itek, 730 F.2d at 24-25, concerns "fraud" so
serious as to make it obviously pointless and unjust to permit the beneficiary to obtain the money. Where the
circumstances "plainly" show that the underlying contract forbids the beneficiary to call a letter of credit, Itek, 730
F.2d at 24; where they show that the contract deprives the beneficiary of even a "colorable" right to do so, id., at 25;
where the contract and circumstances reveal that the beneficiary's demand for payment has "absolutely no basis in
fact," id.; see Dynamics Corp. of America, 356 F. Supp. at 999; where the beneficiary's conduct has "so vitiated the
entire transaction that the legitimate purposes of the independence of the issuer's obligation would no longer be
served," Itek, 730 F.2d at 25 (quoting Roman Ceramics Corp. v. Peoples National Bank, 714 F.2d 1207, 1212 n.12,
1215 (3d Cir. 1983) (quoting Intraworld Indus., 336 A.2d at 324-25)); then a court may enjoin payment.
2. Subsection (a)(2) makes clear that the issuer may honor in the face of the applicant's claim of fraud. The
subsection also makes clear what was not stated in former Section 5-114, that the issuer may dishonor and defend
that dishonor by showing fraud or forgery of the kind stated in subsection (a). Because issuers may be liable for
wrongful dishonor if they are unable to prove forgery or material fraud, presumably most issuers will choose to
honor despite applicant's claims of fraud or forgery unless the applicant procures an injunction. Merely because the
issuer has a right to dishonor and to defend that dishonor by showing forgery or material fraud does not mean it has
a duty to the applicant to dishonor. The applicant's normal recourse is to procure an injunction, if the applicant is
unable to procure an injunction, it will have a claim against the issuer only in the rare case in which it can show that
the issuer did not honor in good faith.
3. Whether a beneficiary can commit fraud by presenting a draft under a clean letter of credit (one calling only for
a draft and no other documents) has been much debated. Under the current formulation it would be possible but
difficult for there to be fraud in such a presentation. If the applicant were able to show that the beneficiary were
committing material fraud on the applicant in the underlying transaction, then payment would facilitate a material
fraud by the beneficiary on the applicant and honor could be enjoined. The courts should be skeptical of claims of
fraud by one who has signed a "suicide" or clean credit and thus granted a beneficiary the right to draw by mere
presentation of a draft.
4. The standard for injunctive relief is high, and the burden remains on the applicant to show, by evidence and not
by mere allegation, that such relief is warranted. Some courts have enjoined payments on letters of credit on
insufficient showing by the applicant. For example, in Griffin Cos. v. First Nat. Bank, 374 N.W.2d 768 (Minn.App.
1985), the court enjoined payment under a stand by letter of credit, basing its decision on plaintiff's allegation,
rather than competent evidence, of fraud.
There are at least two ways to prohibit injunctions against honor under this section after acceptance of a draft by
the issuer. First is to define honor (see Section 5-102(a)(8)) in the particular letter of credit to occur upon
acceptance and without regard to later payment of the acceptance. Second is explicitly to agree that the applicant
has no right to an injunction after acceptance -- whether or not the acceptance constitutes honor.
5. Although the statute deals principally with injunctions against honor, it also cautions against granting "similar
relief" and the same principles apply when the applicant or issuer attempts to achieve the same legal outcome by
injunction against presentation (see Ground Air Transfer Inc. v. Westates Airlines, Inc., 899 F.2d 1269 (1st Cir.
§ 5-109. FRAUD AND FORGERY
Page 3 of 3
1990)), interpleader, declaratory judgment, or attachment. These attempts should face the same obstacles that face
efforts to enjoin the issuer from paying. Expanded use of any of these devices could threaten the independence
principle just as much as injunctions against honor. For that reason courts should have the same hostility to them
and place the same restrictions on their use as would be applied to injunctions against honor. Courts should not
allow the "sacred cow of equity to trample the tender vines of letter of credit law."
6. Section 5-109(a)(1) also protects specified third parties against the risk of fraud. By issuing a letter of credit that
nominates a person to negotiate or pay, the issuer (ultimately the applicant) induces that nominated person to give
value and thereby assumes the risk that a draft drawn under the letter of credit will be transferred to one with a
status like that of a holder in due course who deserves to be protected against a fraud defense.
7. The "loss" to be protected against -- by bond or otherwise under subsection (b)(2) -- includes incidental
damages. Among those are legal fees that might be incurred by the beneficiary or issuer in defending against an
injunction action.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-110
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-110. WARRANTIES
(a) If its presentation is honored, the beneficiary warrants:
(1) to the issuer, any other person to whom presentation is made, and the applicant that there is no
fraud or forgery of the kind described in Section 5-109(a); and
(2) to the applicant that the drawing does not violate any agreement between the applicant and
beneficiary or any other agreement intended by them to be augmented by the letter of credit.
(b) The warranties in subsection (a) are in addition to warranties arising under Article 3, 4, 7, and 8
because of the presentation or transfer of documents covered by any of those articles.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Since the warranties in subsection (a) are not given unless a letter of credit has been honored, no breach of
warranty under this subsection can be a defense to dishonor by the issuer. Any defense must be based on Section
5-108 or 5-109 and not on this section. Also, breach of the warranties by the beneficiary in subsection (a) cannot
excuse the applicant's duty to reimburse.
2. The warranty in Section 5-110(a)(2) assumes that payment under the letter of credit is final. It does not run to
the issuer, only to the applicant. In most cases the applicant will have a direct cause of action for breach of the
underlying contract. This warranty has primary application in standby letters of credit or other circumstances where
the applicant is not a party to an underlying contract with the beneficiary. It is not a warranty that the statements
made on the presentation of the documents presented are truthful nor is it a warranty that the documents strictly
comply under Section 5-108(a). It is a warranty that the beneficiary has performed all the acts expressly and
implicitly necessary under any underlying agreement to entitle the beneficiary to honor. If, for example, an
underlying sales contract authorized the beneficiary to draw only upon "due performance" and the beneficiary drew
even though it had breached the underlying contract by delivering defective goods, honor of its draw would break
the warranty. By the same token, if the underlying contract authorized the beneficiary to draw only upon actual
default or upon its or a third party's determination of default by the applicant and if the beneficiary drew in violation
of its authorization, then upon honor of its draw the warranty would be breached. In many cases, therefore, the
documents presented to the issuer will contain inaccurate statements (concerning the goods delivered or
concerning default or other matters), but the breach of warranty arises not because the statements are untrue but
because the beneficiary's drawing violated its express or implied obligations in the underlying transaction.
3. The damages for breach of warranty are not specified in Section 5-111. Courts may find damage analogies in
Section 2-714 in Article 2 and in warranty decisions under Articles 3 and 4.
Unlike wrongful dishonor cases -- where the damages usually equal the amount of the draw -- the damages for
breach of warranty will often be much less than the amount of the draw, sometimes zero. Assume a seller entitled
to draw only on proper performance of its sales contract. Assume it breaches the sales contract in a way that gives
the buyer a right to damages but no right to reject. The applicant's damages for breach of the warranty in
subsection (a)(2) are limited to the damages it could recover for breach of the contract of sale. Alternatively assume
§ 5-110. WARRANTIES
Page 2 of 2
an underlying agreement that authorizes a beneficiary to draw only the "amount in default." Assume a default of $
200,000 and a draw of $ 500,000. The damages for breach of warranty would be no more than $ 300,000.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-111
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-111. REMEDIES
(a) If an issuer wrongfully dishonors or repudiates its obligation to pay money under a letter of credit before
presentation, the beneficiary, successor, or nominated person presenting on its own behalf may recover
from the issuer the amount that is the subject of the dishonor or repudiation. If the issuer's obligation under
the letter of credit is not for the payment of money, the claimant may obtain specific performance or, at the
claimant's election, recover an amount equal to the value of performance from the issuer. In either case,
the claimant may also recover incidental but not consequential damages. The claimant is not obligated to
take action to avoid damages that might be due from the issuer under this subsection. If, although not
obligated to do so, the claimant avoids damages, the claimant's recovery from the issuer must be reduced
by the amount of damages avoided. The issuer has the burden of proving the amount of damages avoided.
In the case of repudiation the claimant need not present any document.
(b) If an issuer wrongfully dishonors a draft or demand presented under a letter of credit or honors a draft
or demand in breach of its obligation to the applicant, the applicant may recover damages resulting from the
breach, including incidental but not consequential damages, less any amount saved as a result of the
breach.
(c) If an adviser or nominated person other than a confirmer breaches an obligation under this article or an
issuer breaches an obligation not covered in subsection (a) or (b), a person to whom the obligation is owed
may recover damages resulting from the breach, including incidental but not consequential damages, less
any amount saved as a result of the breach. To the extent of the confirmation, a confirmer has the liability of
an issuer specified in this subsection and subsections (a) and (b).
(d) An issuer, nominated person, or adviser who is found liable under subsection (a), (b), or (c) shall pay
interest on the amount owed thereunder from the date of wrongful dishonor or other appropriate date.
(e) Reasonable attorney's fees and other expenses of litigation must be awarded to the prevailing party in
an action in which a remedy is sought under this article.
(f) Damages that would otherwise be payable by a party for breach of an obligation under this article may
be liquidated by agreement or undertaking, but only in an amount or by a formula that is reasonable in light
of the harm anticipated.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The right to specific performance is new. The express limitation on the duty of the beneficiary to mitigate
damages adopts the position of certain courts and commentators. Because the letter of credit depends upon speed
and certainty of payment, it is important that the issuer not be given an incentive to dishonor. The issuer might have
an incentive to dishonor if it could rely on the burden of mitigation falling on the beneficiary, (to sell goods and sue
only for the difference between the price of the goods sold and the amount due under the letter of credit). Under the
scheme contemplated by Section 5-111(a), the beneficiary would present the documents to the issuer. If the issuer
wrongfully dishonored, the beneficiary would have no further duty to the issuer with respect to the goods covered by
documents that the issuer dishonored and returned. The issuer thus takes the risk that the beneficiary will let the
§ 5-111. REMEDIES
Page 2 of 3
goods rot or be destroyed. Of course the beneficiary may have a duty of mitigation to the applicant arising from the
underlying agreement, but the issuer would not have the right to assert that duty by way of defense or setoff. See
Section 5-117(d). If the beneficiary sells the goods covered by dishonored documents or if the beneficiary sells a
draft after acceptance but before dishonor by the issuer, the net amount so gained should be subtracted from the
amount of the beneficiary's damages -- at least where the damage claim against the issuer equals or exceeds the
damage suffered by the beneficiary. If, on the other hand, the beneficiary suffers damages in an underlying
transaction in an amount that exceeds the amount of the wrongfully dishonored demand (e.g., where the letter of
credit does not cover 100 percent of the underlying obligation), the damages avoided should not necessarily be
deducted from the beneficiary's claim against the issuer. In such a case, the damages would be the lesser of (i) the
amount recoverable in the absence of mitigation (that is, the amount that is subject to the dishonor or repudiation
plus any incidental damages) and (ii) the damages remaining after deduction for the amount of damages actually
avoided.
A beneficiary need not present documents as a condition of suit for anticipatory repudiation, but if a beneficiary
could never have obtained documents necessary for a presentation conforming to the letter of credit, the beneficiary
cannot recover for anticipatory repudiation of the letter of credit. Doelger v. Battery Park Bank, 201 A.D. 515, 194
N.Y.S. 582 (1922) and Decor by Nikkei Int'l, Inc. v. Federal Republic of Nigeria, 497 F.Supp. 893 (S.D.N.Y. 1980),
aff'd, 647 F.2d 300 (2d Cir. 1981), cert. denied, 454 U.S. 1148 (1982). The last sentence of subsection (c) does not
expand the liability of a confirmer to persons to whom the confirmer would not otherwise be liable under Section 5-
107.
Almost all letters of credit, including those that call for an acceptance, are "obligations to pay money" as that term
is used in Section 5-111(a).
2. What damages "result" from improper honor is for the courts to decide. Even though an issuer pays a
beneficiary in violation of Section 5-108(a) or of its contract with the applicant, it may have no liability to an
applicant. If the underlying contract has been fully performed, the applicant may not have been damaged by the
issuer's breach. Such a case would occur when A contracts for goods at $ 100 per ton, but, upon delivery, the
market value of conforming goods has decreased to $ 25 per ton. If the issuer pays over discrepancies, there
should be no recovery by A for the price differential if the issuer's breach did not alter the applicant's obligation
under the underlying contract, i.e., to pay $ 100 per ton for goods now worth $ 25 per ton. On the other hand, if the
applicant intends to resell the goods and must itself satisfy the strict compliance requirements under a second letter
of credit in connection with its sale, the applicant may be damaged by the issuer's payment despite discrepancies
because the applicant itself may then be unable to procure honor on the letter of credit where it is the beneficiary,
and may be unable to mitigate its damages by enforcing its rights against others in the underlying transaction. Note
that an issuer found liable to its applicant may have recourse under Section 5-117 by subrogation to the applicant's
claim against the beneficiary or other persons.
One who inaccurately advises a letter of credit breaches its obligation to the beneficiary, but may cause no
damage. If the beneficiary knows the terms of the letter of credit and understands the advice to be inaccurate, the
beneficiary will have suffered no damage as a result of the adviser's breach.
3. Since the confirmer has the rights and duties of an issuer, in general it has an issuer's liability, see subsection
(c). The confirmer is usually a confirming bank. A confirming bank often also plays the role of an adviser. If it breaks
its obligation to the beneficiary, the confirming bank may have liability as an issuer or, depending upon the
obligation that was broken, as an adviser. For example, a wrongful dishonor would give it liability as an issuer under
Section 5-111(a). On the other hand a confirming bank that broke its obligation to advise the credit but did not
commit wrongful dishonor would be treated under Section 5-111(c).
4. Consequential damages for breach of obligations under this article are excluded in the belief that these
damages can best be avoided by the beneficiary or the applicant and out of the fear that imposing consequential
damages on issuers would raise the cost of the letter of credit to a level that might render it uneconomic. A fortiori
punitive and exemplary damages are excluded, however, this section does not bar recovery of consequential or
even punitive damages for breach of statutory or common law duties arising outside of this article.
§ 5-111. REMEDIES
Page 3 of 3
5. The section does not specify a rate of interest. It leaves the setting of the rate to the court. It would be
appropriate for a court to use the rate that would normally apply in that court in other situations where interest is
imposed by law.
6. The court must award attorney's fees to the prevailing party, whether that party is an applicant, a beneficiary,
an issuer, a nominated person, or adviser. Since the issuer may be entitled to recover its legal fees and costs from
the applicant under the reimbursement agreement, allowing the issuer to recover those fees from a losing
beneficiary may also protect the applicant against undeserved losses. The party entitled to attorneys' fees has been
described as the "prevailing party." Sometimes it will be unclear which party "prevailed," for example, where there
are multiple issues and one party wins on some and the other party wins on others. Determining which is the
prevailing party is in the discretion of the court. Subsection (e) authorizes attorney's fees in all actions where a
remedy is sought "under this article." It applies even when the remedy might be an injunction under Section 5-109
or when the claimed remedy is otherwise outside of Section 5-111. Neither an issuer nor a confirmer should be
treated as a "losing" party when an injunction is granted to the applicant over the objection of the issuer or
confirmer; accordingly neither should be liable for fees and expenses in that case.
"Expenses of litigation" is intended to be broader than "costs." For example, expense of litigation would include
travel expenses of witnesses, fees for expert witnesses, and expenses associated with taking depositions.
7. For the purposes of Section 5-111(f) "harm anticipated" must be anticipated at the time when the agreement
that includes the liquidated damage clause is executed or at the time when the undertaking that includes the clause
is issued. See Section 2A-504.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-112
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-112. TRANSFER OF LETTER OF CREDIT
(a) Except as otherwise provided in Section 5-113, unless a letter of credit provides that it is transferable,
the right of a beneficiary to draw or otherwise demand performance under a letter of credit may not be
transferred.
(b) Even if a letter of credit provides that it is transferable, the issuer may refuse to recognize or carry out a
transfer if:
(1) the transfer would violate applicable law; or
(2) the transferor or transferee has failed to comply with any requirement stated in the letter of credit or
any other requirement relating to transfer imposed by the issuer which is within the standard practice
referred to in Section 5-108(e) or is otherwise reasonable under the circumstances.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. In order to protect the applicant's reliance on the designated beneficiary, letter of credit law traditionally has
forbidden the beneficiary to convey to third parties its right to draw or demand payment under the letter of credit.
Subsection (a) codifies that rule. The term "transfer" refers to the beneficiary's conveyance of that right. Absent
incorporation of the UCP (which make elaborate provision for partial transfer of a commercial letter of credit) or
similar trade practice and absent other express indication in the letter of credit that the term is used to mean
something else, a term in the letter of credit indicating that the beneficiary has the right to transfer should be taken
to mean that the beneficiary may convey to a third party its right to draw or demand payment. Even in that case, the
issuer or other person controlling the transfer may make the beneficiary's right to transfer subject to conditions,
such as timely notification, payment of a fee, delivery of the letter of credit to the issuer or other person controlling
the transfer, or execution of appropriate forms to document the transfer. A nominated person who is not a confirmer
has no obligation to recognize a transfer.
The power to establish "requirements" does not include the right absolutely to refuse to recognize transfers under
a transferable letter of credit. An issuer who wishes to retain the right to deny all transfers should not issue
transferable letters of credit or should incorporate the UCP. By stating its requirements in the letter of credit an
issuer may impose any requirement without regard to its conformity to practice or reasonableness. Transfer
requirements of issuers and nominated persons must be made known to potential transferors and transferees to
enable those parties to comply with the requirements. A common method of making such requirements known is to
use a form that indicates the information that must be provided and the instructions that must be given to enable the
issuer or nominated person to comply with a request to transfer.
2. The issuance of a transferable letter of credit with the concurrence of the applicant is ipso facto an agreement
by the issuer and applicant to permit a beneficiary to transfer its drawing right and permit a nominated person to
recognize and carry out that transfer without further notice to them. In international commerce, transferable letters
of credit are often issued under circumstances in which a nominated person or adviser is expected to facilitate the
transfer from the original beneficiary to a transferee and to deal with that transferee. In those circumstances it is the
responsibility of the nominated person or adviser to establish procedures satisfactory to protect itself against double
§ 5-112. TRANSFER OF LETTER OF CREDIT
Page 2 of 2
presentation or dispute about the right to draw under the letter of credit. Commonly such a person will control the
transfer by requiring that the original letter of credit be given to it or by causing a paper copy marked as an original
to be issued where the original letter of credit was electronic. By keeping possession of the original letter of credit
the nominated person or adviser can minimize or entirely exclude the possibility that the original beneficiary could
properly procure payment from another bank. If the letter of credit requires presentation of the original letter of credit
itself, no other payment could be procured. In addition to imposing whatever requirements it considers appropriate
to protect itself against double payment the person that is facilitating the transfer has a right to charge an
appropriate fee for its activity.
"Transfer" of a letter of credit should be distinguished from "assignment of proceeds." The former is analogous to
a novation or a substitution of beneficiaries. It contemplates not merely payment to but also performance by the
transferee. For example, under the typical terms of transfer for a commercial letter of credit, a transferee could
comply with a letter of credit transferred to it by signing and presenting its own draft and invoice. An assignee of
proceeds, on the other hand, is wholly dependent on the presentation of a draft and invoice signed by the
beneficiary.
By agreeing to the issuance of a transferable letter of credit, which is not qualified or limited, the applicant may
lose control over the identity of the person whose performance will earn payment under the letter of credit.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-113
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-113. TRANSFER BY OPERATION OF LAW
(a) A successor of a beneficiary may consent to amendments, sign and present documents, and receive
payment or other items of value in the name of the beneficiary without disclosing its status as a successor.
(b) A successor of a beneficiary may consent to amendments, sign and present documents, and receive
payment or other items of value in its own name as the disclosed successor of the beneficiary. Except as
otherwise provided in subsection (e), an issuer shall recognize a disclosed successor of a beneficiary as
beneficiary in full substitution for its predecessor upon compliance with the requirements for recognition by
the issuer of a transfer of drawing rights by operation of law under the standard practice referred to in
Section 5-108(e) or, in the absence of such a practice, compliance with other reasonable procedures
sufficient to protect the issuer.
(c) An issuer is not obliged to determine whether a purported successor is a successor of a beneficiary or
whether the signature of a purported successor is genuine or authorized.
(d) Honor of a purported successor's apparently complying presentation under subsection (a) or (b) has
the consequences specified in Section 5-108(i) even if the purported successor is not the successor of a
beneficiary. Documents signed in the name of the beneficiary or of a disclosed successor by a person who
is neither the beneficiary nor the successor of the beneficiary are forged documents for the purposes of
Section 5-109.
(e) An issuer whose rights of reimbursement are not covered by subsection (d) or substantially similar law
and any confirmer or nominated person may decline to recognize a presentation under subsection (b).
(f) A beneficiary whose name is changed after the issuance of a letter of credit has the same rights and
obligations as a successor of a beneficiary under this section.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section affirms the result in Pastor v. Nat. Republic Bank of Chicago, 76 Ill.2d 139, 390 N.E.2d 894 (Ill. 1979)
and Federal Deposit Insurance Co. v. Bank of Boulder, 911 F.2d 1466 (10th Cir. 1990). Both electronic and tangible
documents may be signed.
An issuer's requirements for recognition of a successor's status might include presentation of a certificate of
merger, a court order appointing a bankruptcy trustee or receiver, a certificate of appointment as bankruptcy
trustee, or the like. The issuer is entitled to rely upon such documents which on their face demonstrate that
presentation is made by a successor of a beneficiary. It is not obliged to make an independent investigation to
determine the fact of succession.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 5-113. TRANSFER BY OPERATION OF LAW
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-114
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-114. ASSIGNMENT OF PROCEEDS
(a) In this section, "proceeds of a letter of credit" means the cash, check, accepted draft, or other item of
value paid or delivered upon honor or giving of value by the issuer or any nominated person under the letter
of credit. The term does not include a beneficiary's drawing rights or documents presented by the
beneficiary.
(b) A beneficiary may assign its right to part or all of the proceeds of a letter of credit. The beneficiary may
do so before presentation as a present assignment of its right to receive proceeds contingent upon its
compliance with the terms and conditions of the letter of credit.
(c) An issuer or nominated person need not recognize an assignment of proceeds of a letter of credit until
it consents to the assignment.
(d) An issuer or nominated person has no obligation to give or withhold its consent to an assignment of
proceeds of a letter of credit, but consent may not be unreasonably withheld if the assignee possesses and
exhibits the letter of credit and presentation of the letter of credit is a condition to honor.
(e) Rights of a transferee beneficiary or nominated person are independent of the beneficiary's assignment
of the proceeds of a letter of credit and are superior to the assignee's right to the proceeds.
(f) Neither the rights recognized by this section between an assignee and an issuer, transferee beneficiary,
or nominated person nor the issuer's or nominated person's payment of proceeds to an assignee or a third
person affect the rights between the assignee and any person other than the issuer, transferee beneficiary,
or nominated person. The mode of creating and perfecting a security interest in or granting an assignment
of a beneficiary's rights to proceeds is governed by Article 9 or other law. Against persons other than the
issuer, transferee beneficiary, or nominated person, the rights and obligations arising upon the creation of a
security interest or other assignment of a beneficiary's right to proceeds and its perfection are governed by
Article 9 or other law.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (b) expressly validates the beneficiary's present assignment of letter of credit proceeds if made
after the credit is established but before the proceeds are realized. This section adopts the prevailing usage --
"assignment of proceeds" -- to an assignee. That terminology carries with it no implication, however, that an
assignee acquires no interest until the proceeds are paid by the issuer. For example, an "assignment of the right to
proceeds" of a letter of credit for purposes of security that meets the requirements of Section 9-203(1) would
constitute the present creation of a security interest in that right. This security interest can be perfected by
possession (Section 9-305) if the letter of credit is in written form. Although subsection (a) explains the meaning of
"'proceeds' of a letter of credit," it should be emphasized that those proceeds also may be Article 9 proceeds of
other collateral. For example, if a seller of inventory receives a letter of credit to support the account that arises
upon the sale, payments made under the letter of credit are Article 9 proceeds of the inventory, account, and any
document of title covering the inventory. Thus, the secured party who had a perfected security interest in that
inventory, account, or document has a perfected security interest in the proceeds collected under the letter of credit,
§ 5-114. ASSIGNMENT OF PROCEEDS
Page 2 of 2
so long as they are identifiable cash proceeds (Section 9-306(2), (3)). This perfection is continuous, regardless of
whether the secured party perfected a security interest in the right to letter of credit proceeds.
2. An assignee's rights to enforce an assignment of proceeds against an issuer and the priority of the assignee's
rights against a nominated person or transferee beneficiary are governed by Article 5. Those rights and that priority
are stated in subsections (c), (d), and (e). Note also that Section 4-210 gives first priority to a collecting bank that
has given value for a documentary draft.
3. By requiring that an issuer or nominated person consent to the assignment of proceeds of a letter of credit,
subsections (c) and (d) follow more closely recognized national and international letter of credit practices than did
prior law. In most circumstances, it has always been advisable for the assignee to obtain the consent of the issuer
in order better to safeguard its right to the proceeds. When notice of an assignment has been received, issuers
normally have required signatures on a consent form. This practice is reflected in the revision. By unconditionally
consenting to such an assignment, the issuer or nominated person becomes bound, subject to the rights of the
superior parties specified in subsection (e), to pay to the assignee the assigned letter of credit proceeds that the
issuer or nominated person would otherwise pay to the beneficiary or another assignee.
Where the letter of credit must be presented as a condition to honor and the assignee holds and exhibits the letter
of credit to the issuer or nominated person, the risk to the issuer or nominated person of having to pay twice is
minimized. In such a situation, subsection (d) provides that the issuer or nominated person may not unreasonably
withhold its consent to the assignment.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-115
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-115. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
An action to enforce a right or obligation arising under this article must be commenced within one year after the
expiration date of the relevant letter of credit or one year after the [claim for relief] [cause of action] accrues,
whichever occurs later. A [claim for relief] [cause of action] accrues when the breach occurs, regardless of the
aggrieved party's lack of knowledge of the breach.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section is based upon Sections 4-111 and 2-725(2).
2. This section applies to all claims for which there are remedies under Section 5-111 and to other claims made
under this article, such as claims for breach of warranty under Section 5-110. Because it covers all claims under
Section 5-111, the statute of limitations applies not only to wrongful dishonor claims against the issuer but also to
claims between the issuer and the applicant arising from the reimbursement agreement. These might be for
reimbursement (issuer v. applicant) or for breach of the reimbursement contract by wrongful honor (applicant v.
issuer).
3. The statute of limitations, like the rest of the statute, applies only to a letter of credit issued on or after the
effective date and only to transactions, events, obligations, or duties arising out of or associated with such a letter. If
a letter of credit was issued before the effective date and an obligation on that letter of credit was breached after the
effective date, the complaining party could bring its suit within the time that would have been permitted prior to the
adoption of Section 5-115 and would not be limited by the terms of Section 5-115.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-116
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-116. CHOICE OF LAW AND FORUM
(a) The liability of an issuer, nominated person, or adviser for action or omission is governed by the law of
the jurisdiction chosen by an agreement in the form of a record signed or otherwise authenticated by the
affected parties in the manner provided in Section 5-104 or by a provision in the person's letter of credit,
confirmation, or other undertaking. The jurisdiction whose law is chosen need not bear any relation to the
transaction.
(b) Unless subsection (a) applies, the liability of an issuer, nominated person, or adviser for action or
omission is governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the person is located. The person is considered
to be located at the address indicated in the person's undertaking. If more than one address is indicated,
the person is considered to be located at the address from which the person's undertaking was issued. For
the purpose of jurisdiction, choice of law, and recognition of inter branch letters of credit, but not
enforcement of a judgment, all branches of a bank are considered separate juridical entities and a bank is
considered to be located at the place where its relevant branch is considered to be located under this
subsection.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the liability of an issuer, nominated person, or adviser
is governed by any rules of custom or practice, such as the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary
Credits, to which the letter of credit, confirmation, or other undertaking is expressly made subject. If (i) this
article would govern the liability of an issuer, nominated person, or adviser under subsection (a) or (b), (ii)
the relevant undertaking incorporates rules of custom or practice, and (iii) there is conflict between this
article and those rules as applied to that undertaking, those rules govern except to the extent of any conflict
with the nonvariable provisions specified in Section 5-103(c).
(d) If there is conflict between this article and Article 3, 4, 4A, or 9, this article governs.
(e) The forum for settling disputes arising out of an undertaking within this article may be chosen in the
manner and with the binding effect that governing law may be chosen in accordance with subsection (a).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Although it would be possible for the parties to agree otherwise, the law normally chosen by agreement under
subsection (a) and that provided in the absence of agreement under subsection (b) is the substantive law of a
particular jurisdiction not including the choice of law principles of that jurisdiction. Thus, two parties, an issuer and
an applicant, both located in Oklahoma might choose the law of New York. Unless they agree otherwise, the
section anticipates that they wish the substantive law of New York to apply to their transaction and they do not
intend that a New York choice of law principle might direct a court to Oklahoma law. By the same token, the liability
of an issuer located in New York is governed by New York substantive law -- in the absence of agreement -- even in
circumstances in which choice of law principles found in the common law of New York might direct one to the law of
another State. Subsection (b) states the relevant choice of law principles and it should not be subordinated to some
other choice of law rule. Within the States of the United States renvoi will not be a problem once every jurisdiction
§ 5-116. CHOICE OF LAW AND FORUM
Page 2 of 3
has enacted Section 5-116 because every jurisdiction will then have the same choice of law rule and in a particular
case all choice of law rules will point to the same substantive law.
Subsection (b) does not state a choice of law rule for the "liability of an applicant." However, subsection (b) does
state a choice of law rule for the liability of an issuer, nominated person, or adviser, and since some of the issues in
suits by applicants against those persons involve the "liability of an issuer, nominated person, or adviser,"
subsection (b) states the choice of law rule for those issues. Because an issuer may have liability to a confirmer
both as an issuer (Section 5-108(a), Comment 5 to Section 5-108) and as an applicant (Section 5-107(a), Comment
1 to Section 5-107, Section 5-108(i)), subsection (b) may state the choice of law rule for some but not all of the
issuer's liability in a suit by a confirmer.
2. Because the confirmer or other nominated person may choose different law from that chosen by the issuer or
may be located in a different jurisdiction and fail to choose law, it is possible that a confirmer or nominated person
may be obligated to pay (under their law) but will not be entitled to payment from the issuer (under its law).
Similarly, the rights of an unreimbursed issuer, confirmer, or nominated person against a beneficiary under Section
5-109, 5-110, or 5-117, will not necessarily be governed by the same law that applies to the issuer's or confirmer's
obligation upon presentation. Because the UCP and other practice are incorporated in most international letters of
credit, disputes arising from different legal obligations to honor have not been frequent. Since Section 5-108
incorporates standard practice, these problems should be further minimized -- at least to the extent that the same
practice is and continues to be widely followed.
3. This section does not permit what is now authorized by the nonuniform Section 5-102(4) in New York. Under
the current law in New York a letter of credit that incorporates the UCP is not governed in any respect by Article 5.
Under revised Section 5-116 letters of credit that incorporate the UCP or similar practice will still be subject to
Article 5 in certain respects. First, incorporation of the UCP or other practice does not override the nonvariable
terms of Article 5. Second, where there is no conflict between Article 5 and the relevant provision of the UCP or
other practice, both apply. Third, practice provisions incorporated in a letter of credit will not be effective if they fail
to comply with Section 5-103(c). Assume, for example, that a practice provision purported to free a party from any
liability unless it were "grossly negligent" or that the practice generally limited the remedies that one party might
have against another. Depending upon the circumstances, that disclaimer or limitation of liability might be
ineffective because of Section 5-103(c).
Even though Article 5 is generally consistent with UCP 500, it is not necessarily consistent with other rules or with
versions of the UCP that may be adopted after Article 5's revision, or with other practices that may develop. Rules
of practice incorporated in the letter of credit or other undertaking are those in effect when the letter of credit or
other undertaking is issued. Except in the unusual cases discussed in the immediately preceding paragraph,
practice adopted in a letter of credit will override the rules of Article 5 and the parties to letter of credit transactions
must be familiar with practice (such as future versions of the UCP) that is explicitly adopted in letters of credit.
4. In several ways Article 5 conflicts with and overrides similar matters governed by Articles 3 and 4. For example,
"draft" is more broadly defined in letter of credit practice than under Section 3-104. The time allowed for honor and
the required notification of reasons for dishonor are different in letter of credit practice than in the handling of
documentary and other drafts under Articles 3 and 4.
5. Subsection (e) must be read in conjunction with existing law governing subject matter jurisdiction. If the local
law restricts a court to certain subject matter jurisdiction not including letter of credit disputes, subsection (e) does
not authorize parties to choose that forum. For example, the parties' agreement under Section 5-116(e) would not
confer jurisdiction on a probate court to decide a letter of credit case.
If the parties choose a forum under subsection (e) and if -- because of other law -- that forum will not take
jurisdiction, the parties' agreement or undertaking should then be construed (for the purpose of forum selection) as
though it did not contain a clause choosing a particular forum. That result is necessary to avoid sentencing the
parties to eternal purgatory where neither the chosen State nor the State which would have jurisdiction but for the
clause will take jurisdiction -- the former in disregard of the clause and the latter in honor of the clause.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 5-116. CHOICE OF LAW AND FORUM
Page 3 of 3
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-117
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-117. SUBROGATION OF ISSUER, APPLICANT, AND NOMINATED
PERSON
(a) An issuer that honors a beneficiary's presentation is subrogated to the rights of the beneficiary to the
same extent as if the issuer were a secondary obligor of the underlying obligation owed to the beneficiary
and of the applicant to the same extent as if the issuer were the secondary obligor of the underlying
obligation owed to the applicant.
(b) An applicant that reimburses an issuer is subrogated to the rights of the issuer against any beneficiary,
presenter, or nominated person to the same extent as if the applicant were the secondary obligor of the
obligations owed to the issuer and has the rights of subrogation of the issuer to the rights of the beneficiary
stated in subsection (a).
(c) A nominated person who pays or gives value against a draft or demand presented under a letter of
credit is subrogated to the rights of:
(1) the issuer against the applicant to the same extent as if the nominated person were a secondary
obligor of the obligation owed to the issuer by the applicant;
(2) the beneficiary to the same extent as if the nominated person were a secondary obligor of the
underlying obligation owed to the beneficiary; and
(3) the applicant to same extent as if the nominated person were a secondary obligor of the underlying
obligation owed to the applicant.
(d) Notwithstanding any agreement or term to the contrary, the rights of subrogation stated in subsections
(a) and (b) do not arise until the issuer honors the letter of credit or otherwise pays and the rights in
subsection (c) do not arise until the nominated person pays or otherwise gives value. Until then, the issuer,
nominated person, and the applicant do not derive under this section present or prospective rights forming
the basis of a claim, defense, or excuse.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. By itself this section does not grant any right of subrogation. It grants only the right that would exist if the
person seeking subrogation "were a secondary obligor." (The term "secondary obligor" refers to a surety, guarantor,
or other person against whom or whose property an obligee has recourse with respect to the obligation of a third
party. See Restatement of the Law Third, Suretyship § 1 (1995).) If the secondary obligor would not have a right to
subrogation in the circumstances in which one is claimed under this section, none is granted by this section. In
effect, the section does no more than to remove an impediment that some courts have found to subrogation
because they conclude that the issuer's or other claimant's rights are "independent" of the underlying obligation. If,
for example, a secondary obligor would not have a subrogation right because its payment did not fully satisfy the
underlying obligation, none would be available under this section. The section indorses the position of Judge
Becker in Tudor Development Group, Inc. v. United States Fidelity and Guaranty, 968 F.2d 357 (3rd Cir. 1991).
§ 5-117. SUBROGATION OF ISSUER, APPLICANT, AND NOMINATED PERSON
Page 2 of 2
2. To preserve the independence of the letter of credit obligation and to insure that subrogation not be used as an
offensive weapon by an issuer or others, the admonition in subsection (d) must be carefully observed. Only one
who has completed its performance in a letter of credit transaction can have a right to subrogation. For example, an
issuer may not dishonor and then defend its dishonor or assert a setoff on the ground that it is subrogated to
another person's rights. Nor may the issuer complain after honor that its subrogation rights have been impaired by
any good faith dealings between the beneficiary and the applicant or any other person. Assume, for example, that
the beneficiary under a standby letter of credit is a mortgagee. If the mortgagee were obliged to issue a release of
the mortgage upon payment of the underlying debt (by the issuer under the letter of credit), that release might
impair the issuer's rights of subrogation, but the beneficiary would have no liability to the issuer for having granted
that release.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 5-118
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 5. LETTERS OF CREDIT
§ 5-118. SECURITY INTEREST OF ISSUER OR NOMINATED PERSON
(a) An issuer or nominated person has a security interest in a document presented under a letter of credit
to the extent that the issuer or nominated person honors or gives value for the presentation.
(b) So long as and to the extent that an issuer or nominated person has not been reimbursed or has not
otherwise recovered the value given with respect to a security interest in a document under subsection (a),
the security interest continues and is subject to Article 9, but:
(1) a security agreement is not necessary to make the security interest enforceable under Section 9-
203(b)(3);
(2) if the document is presented in a medium other than a written or other tangible medium, the
security interest is perfected; and
(3) if the document is presented in a written or other tangible medium and is not a certificated security,
chattel paper, a document of title, an instrument, or a letter of credit, the security interest is perfected
and has priority over a conflicting security interest in the document so long as the debtor does not have
possession of the document.
As added in 1999
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section gives the issuer of a letter of credit or a nominated person thereunder an automatic perfected
security interest in a "document" (as that term is defined in Section 5-102(a)(6)). The security interest arises only if
the document is presented to the issuer or nominated person under the letter of credit and only to the extent of the
value that is given. This security interest is analogous to that awarded to a collecting bank under Section 4-210.
Subsection (b) contains special rules governing the security interest arising under this section. In all other respects,
a security interest arising under this section is subject to Article 9. See Section 9-109. Thus, for example, a security
interest arising under this section may give rise to a security interest in proceeds under Section 9-315.
2. Subsection (b)(1) makes a security agreement unnecessary to the creation of a security interest under this
section. Under subsection (b)(2), a security interest arising under this section is perfected if the document is
presented in a medium other than a written or tangible medium. Documents that are written and that are not an
otherwise-defined type of collateral under Article 9 (e.g., an invoice or inspection certificate) may be goods, in which
an issuer or nominated person could perfect its security interest by possession. Because the definition of document
in Section 5-102(a)(6) includes records (e.g., electronic records) that may not be goods, subsection (b)(2) provides
for automatic perfection (i.e., without filing or possession).
Under subsection (b)(3), if the document (i) is in a written or tangible medium, (ii) is not a certificated security,
chattel paper, a document of title, an instrument, or a letter of credit, and (iii) is not in the debtor's possession, the
security interest is perfected and has priority over a conflicting security interest. If the document is a type of tangible
collateral that subsection (b)(3) excludes from its perfection and priority rules, the issuer or nominated person must
comply with the normal method of perfection (e.g., possession of an instrument) and is subject to the applicable
§ 5-118. SECURITY INTEREST OF ISSUER OR NOMINATED PERSON
Page 2 of 2
Article 9 priority rules. Documents to which subsection (b)(3) applies may be important to an issuer or nominated
person. For example, a confirmer who pays the beneficiary must be assured that its rights to all documents are not
impaired. It will find it necessary to present all of the required documents to the issuer in order to be reimbursed.
Moreover, when a nominated person sends documents to an issuer in connection with the nominated person's
reimbursement, that activity is not a collection, enforcement, or disposition of collateral under Article 9.
One purpose of this section is to protect an issuer or nominated person from claims of a beneficiary's creditors. It
is a fallback provision inasmuch as issuers and nominated persons frequently may obtain and perfect security
interests under the usual Article 9 rules, and, in many cases, the documents will be owned by the issuer, nominated
person, or applicant.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 6-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]
§ 6-101. SHORT TITLE.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code - Bulk Sales.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 6-101 (1987 Official Text).
Change: This Article applies only to sales, as defined in Section 2-103(1), and not to other transfers.
Purpose of Change: Transfers other than sales, e.g., grants of security interests, do not present risks to creditors
necessitating advance notice in accordance with the provisions of this Article. The Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act
affords a remedy to creditors who are injured by donative transfers.
Rationale for Revision of the Article:
Article 6 (1987 Official Text) imposes upon transferees in bulk several duties toward creditors of the transferor.
These duties include the duty to notify the creditors of the impending bulk transfer and, in those jurisdictions that
have adopted optional Section 6-106, the duty to assure that the new consideration for the transfer is applied to pay
debts of the transferor.
Compliance with the provisions of Article 6 can be burdensome, particularly when the transferor has a large number
of creditors. When the transferor is actively engaged in business at a number of locations, assembling a current list
of creditors may not be possible. Mailing a notice to each creditor may prove costly. When the goods that are the
subject of the transfer are located in several jurisdictions, the transferor may be obligated to comply with Article 6 as
enacted in each jurisdiction. The widespread enactment of nonuniform amendments makes compliance with Article
6 in multiple-state transactions problematic. Moreover, the Article requires compliance even when there is no
reason to believe that the transferor is conducting a fraudulent transfer, e.g., when the transferor is scaling down
the business but remaining available to creditors.
Article 6 imposes strict liability for noncompliance. Failure to comply with the provisions of the Article renders the
transfer ineffective, even when the transferor has attempted compliance in good faith, and even when no creditor
has been injured by the noncompliance. The potential liability for minor noncompliance may be high. If the
transferor should enter bankruptcy before the expiration of the limitation period, Bankruptcy Code §§ 544(b), 550(a),
11 U.S.C. §§ 544(b), 550(a), may enable the transferor's bankruptcy trustee to set aside the entire transaction and
recover from the noncomplying transferee all the goods transferred or their value. The trustee has this power even
though the noncompliance was with respect to only a single creditor holding a small claim.
The benefits that compliance affords to creditors do not justify the substantial burdens and risks that the Article
imposes upon good faith purchasers of business assets. The Article requires that notice be sent only ten days
before the transferee takes possession of the goods or pays for them, whichever happens first. Given the delay
§ 6-101. SHORT TITLE.
Page 2 of 2
between sending the notice and its receipt, creditors have scant opportunity to avail themselves of a judicial or
nonjudicial remedy before the transfer has been consummated.
In some cases Article 6 may have the unintended effect of injuring, rather than aiding, creditors of the transferor.
Those transferees who recognize the burdens and risks that Article 6 imposes upon them sometimes agree to
purchase only at a reduced price. Others refuse to purchase at all, leaving the creditors to realize only the
liquidation value, rather than the going concern value, of the business goods.
As a response to these inadequacies and others, the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State
Laws has completely revised Article 6. This revision is designed to reduce the burdens and risks imposed upon
good-faith buyers of business assets while increasing the protection afforded to creditors. Among the major
changes it makes are the following:
-- this Article applies only when the buyer has notice, or after reasonable inquiry would have had notice, that the
seller will not continue to operate the same or a similar kind of business after the sale (Section 6-102(1)(c)).
-- this Article does not apply to sales in which the value of the property otherwise available to creditors is less than
$10,000 or those in which the value of the property is greater than $25,000,000 (Section 6-103(3)(l)).
-- the choice-of-law provision (Sections 6-103(1)(b) and 6-103(2)) limits the applicable law to that of one jurisdiction.
-- when the seller is indebted to a large number of persons, the buyer need neither obtain a list of those persons nor
send individual notices to each person but instead may give notice by filing (Sections 6-105(2) and 6-104(2)).
-- the notice period is increased from 10 days to 45 days (Section 6-105(5)), and the statute of limitations is
extended from six months to one year (Section 6- 110).
-- the notice must include a copy of a "schedule of distribution," which sets forth how the net contract price is to be
distributed (Sections 6-105(3) and 6- 106(1)).
-- a buyer who makes a good faith effort to comply with the requirements of this Article or to exclude the sale from
the application of this Article, or who acts on the good faith belief that this Article does not apply to the sale, is not
liable for noncompliance (Section 6-107(3)).
-- a buyer's noncompliance does not render the sale ineffective or otherwise affect the buyer's title to the goods;
rather, the liability of a noncomplying buyer is for damages caused by the noncompliance (Sections 6-107(1) and 6-
107(8)).
In addition to making these and other major substantive changes, revised Article 6 resolves the ambiguities that
three decades of law practice, judicial construction, and scholarly inquiry have disclosed.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 6-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]
§ 6-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS.
(1) In this Article, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Assets" means the inventory that is the subject of a bulk sale and any tangible and intangible
personal property used or held for use primarily in, or arising from, the seller's business and sold in
connection with that inventory, but the term does not include:
(i) fixtures ( Section 9-102(a)(41)) other than readily removable factory and office machines;
(ii) the lessee's interest in a lease of real property; or
(iii) property to the extent it is generally exempt from creditor process under nonbankruptcy law.
(1) In this Article, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Assets" means the inventory that is the subject of a bulk sale and any tangible and intangible
personal property used or held for use primarily in, or arising from, the seller's business and sold in
connection with that inventory, but the term does not include:
(i) fixtures ( Section 9-313(1)(a)) other than readily removable factory and office machines;
(ii) the lessee's interest in a lease of real property; or
(iii) property to the extent it is generally exempt from creditor process under nonbankruptcy law.
(b) "Auctioneer" means a person whom the seller engages to direct, conduct, control, or be
responsible for a sale by auction.
(c) "Bulk sale" means:
(i) in the case of a sale by auction or a sale or series of sales conducted by a liquidator on the
seller's behalf, a sale or series of sales not in the ordinary course of the seller's business of more
than half of the seller's inventory, as measured by value on the date of the bulk-sale agreement, if
on that date the auctioneer or liquidator has notice, or after reasonable inquiry would have had
notice, that the seller will not continue to operate the same or a similar kind of business after the
sale or series of sales; and
(ii) in all other cases, a sale not in the ordinary course of the seller's business of more than half the
seller's inventory, as measured by value on the date of the bulk-sale agreement, if on that date the
buyer has notice, or after reasonable inquiry would have had notice, that the seller will not continue
to operate the same or a similar kind of business after the sale.
(d) "Claim" means a right to payment from the seller, whether or not the right is reduced to judgment,
liquidated, fixed, matured, disputed, secured, legal, or equitable. The term includes costs of collection
and attorney's fees only to the extent that the laws of this state permit the holder of the claim to recover
them in an action against the obligor.
(e) "Claimant" means a person holding a claim incurred in the seller's business other than:
(i) an unsecured and unmatured claim for employment compensation and benefits, including
commissions and vacation, severance, and sick-leave pay;
(ii) a claim for injury to an individual or to property, or for breach of warranty, unless:
§ 6-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS.
Page 2 of 6
(A) a right of action for the claim has accrued;
(B) the claim has been asserted against the seller; and
(C) the seller knows the identity of the person asserting the claim and the basis upon which the
person has asserted it; and
(States To Select One Alternative)
ALTERNATIVE A
[(iii) a claim for taxes owing to a governmental unit.]
ALTERNATIVE B
[(iii) a claim for taxes owing to a governmental unit, if:
(A) a statute governing the enforcement of the claim permits or requires notice of the bulk
sale to be given to the governmental unit in a manner other than by compliance with the
requirements of this Article; and
(B) notice is given in accordance with the statute.]
(f) "Creditor" means a claimant or other person holding a claim.
(g) (i) "Date of the bulk sale" means:
(A) if the sale is by auction or is conducted by a liquidator on the seller's behalf, the date on which
more than ten percent of the net proceeds is paid to or for the benefit of the seller; and
(B) in all other cases, the later of the date on which:
(I) more than ten percent of the net contract price is paid to or for the benefit of the seller; or
(II) more than ten percent of the assets, as measured by value, are transferred to the buyer.
(ii) For purposes of this subsection:
(A) Delivery of a negotiable instrument ( Section 3-104(1)) to or for the benefit of the
seller in exchange for assets constitutes payment of the contract price pro tanto;
(B) To the extent that the contract price is deposited in an escrow, the contract price is
paid to or for the benefit of the seller when the seller acquires the unconditional right to
receive the deposit or when the deposit is delivered to the seller or for the benefit of the
seller, whichever is earlier; and
(C) An asset is transferred when a person holding an unsecured claim can no longer
obtain through judicial proceedings rights to the asset that are superior to those of the
buyer arising as a result of the bulk sale. A person holding an unsecured claim can
obtain those superior rights to a tangible asset at least until the buyer has an
unconditional right, under the bulk-sale agreement, to possess the asset, and a person
holding an unsecured claim can obtain those superior rights to an intangible asset at
least until the buyer has an unconditional right, under the bulk-sale agreement, to use
the asset.
(h) "Date of the bulk-sale agreement" means:
(i) in the case of a sale by auction or conducted by a liquidator (subsection (c)(i)), the date on
which the seller engages the auctioneer or liquidator; and
(ii) in all other cases, the date on which a bulk-sale agreement becomes enforceable between the
buyer and the seller.
(i) "Debt" means liability on a claim.
§ 6-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS.
Page 3 of 6
(j) "Liquidator" means a person who is regularly engaged in the business of disposing of assets for
businesses contemplating liquidation or dissolution.
(k) "Net contract price" means the new consideration the buyer is obligated to pay for the assets less:
(i) the amount of any proceeds of the sale of an asset, to the extent the proceeds are applied in
partial or total satisfaction of a debt secured by the asset; and
(ii) the amount of any debt to the extent it is secured by a security interest or lien that is
enforceable against the asset before and after it has been sold to a buyer. If a debt is secured by
an asset and other property of the seller, the amount of the debt secured by a security interest or
lien that is enforceable against the asset is determined by multiplying the debt by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the value of the new consideration for the asset on the date of the bulk sale
and the denominator of which is the value of all property securing the debt on the date of the bulk
sale.
(l) "Net proceeds" means the new consideration received for assets sold at a sale by auction or a sale
conducted by a liquidator on the seller's behalf less:
(i) commissions and reasonable expenses of the sale;
(ii) the amount of any proceeds of the sale of an asset, to the extent the proceeds are applied in
partial or total satisfaction of a debt secured by the asset; and
(iii) the amount of any debt to the extent it is secured by a security interest or lien that is
enforceable against the asset before and after it has been sold to a buyer. If a debt is secured by
an asset and other property of the seller, the amount of the debt secured by a security interest or
lien that is enforceable against the asset is determined by multiplying the debt by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the value of the new consideration for the asset on the date of the bulk sale
and the denominator of which is the value of all property securing the debt on the date of the bulk
sale.
(m) A sale is "in the ordinary course of the seller's business" if the sale comports with usual or
customary practices in the kind of business in which the seller is engaged or with the seller's own usual
or customary practices.
(n) "United States" includes its territories and possessions and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
(o) "Value" means fair market value.
(p) "Verified" means signed and sworn to or affirmed.
(2) The following definitions in other Articles apply to this Article:
(a) "Buyer." Section 2-103(1)(a).
(b) "Equipment." Section 9-102(a)(33).
(c) "Inventory." Section 9-102(a)(48).
(d) "Sale." Section 2-106(1).
(e) "Seller." Section 2-103(1)(d).
(3) In addition, Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation
applicable throughout this Article.
As amended in 1999
See Appendix I contained within revised Article 9 for material relating to changes made in text in 1999.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 6-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS.
Page 4 of 6
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. (a) "Assets". New. The term generally includes only "personal property." Whether particular property is
"personal property" is to be determined by law outside this Article; however, for purposes of this Article, (i) the term
includes "readily removable factory and office machines" (compare Section 9-313(4)(c)), even if they are covered
by applicable real estate law and thus are "fixtures" as defined in Section 9-313(1)(a); (ii) the term does not include
the lessee's interest in a lease of real property, even if that interest is considered to be personal property under
other applicable law; and (iii) the term does not include property to the extent that it is "generally exempt from
creditor process under nonbankruptcy law."
(b) "Auctioneer". Compare Section 6-108(3) (1987 Official Text).
(c) "Bulk Sale". Bulk sales are of two kinds. Subsection (1)(c)(i) describes bulk sales conducted by a professional
intermediary (i.e., an auctioneer or liquidator), as to which sales Section 6-108 applies. If these indirect sales occur
as a series of related sales, then the entire series is treated as a single "bulk sale" and the term applies to the sales
in the aggregate. Sales made directly by the seller to the buyer, described in subsection (1)(c)(ii), include sales
conducted by an auctioneer or liquidator for its own account.
The elements of both direct and indirect sales are the same. Some of these elements have been borrowed from
the 1987 Official Text of Article 6 and restated. For example, the term includes only sales that are not "in the
ordinary course of the seller's business" (subsection (1)(m)). The sale must be of "more than half of the seller's
inventory, as measured by value [subsection (1)(o)] on the date of the bulk-sale agreement [subsection (1)(h)]." All
inventory owned by the seller should be included in the calculation, regardless of where it is located. Inventory that
is encumbered by a security interest or lien should be counted at its gross value, although the fact that it is
encumbered may affect the applicability of this Article to the sale.
The determination whether a sale is a "bulk sale" and thus subject to this Article is not affected by whether other
types of property are sold in connection with inventory. However, other provisions of this Article take account of the
fact that other property may be sold in connection with inventory. For example, the availability of the exclusion in
Section 6-103(3)(l) turns on the value of all the "assets," not just the inventory. Similarly, the notice required by
Section 6-105 must describe the "assets," not just the inventory. And Section 6-107(4) measures the buyer's
maximum cumulative liability for noncompliance by the value of the inventory and equipment sold in the bulk sale.
In an effort to limit its coverage to sales posing the greatest risks to creditors, this Article adds an additional element
to the definition of "bulk sale." A sale is not a "bulk sale" unless the buyer, auctioneer, or liquidator has notice, or
after a reasonable inquiry would have had notice, that the seller will not continue to operate the same or a similar
kind of business after the sale. Whether a person has "notice" depends upon what the person knows and what the
person would have known had the person conducted a reasonable inquiry. The issue of whether a transaction was
a bulk sale is likely to be litigated only when the seller has absconded with the sale proceeds. This Article requires
that the matters as to which the buyer, auctioneer, or liquidator had notice be determined only by reference to facts
that the person knew or would have known at the date of the bulk-sale agreement. Reference to what actually
occurred is inappropriate.
Whether an inquiry is "reasonable" depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. These facts and
circumstances may include the identities of the buyer and seller and the type of assets being sold. In some cases,
a reasonable inquiry may consist of no inquiry at all concerning the seller's future.
Not every change in business operations poses a substantial enough risk to creditors to justify the costs of
compliance with this Article. Thus, in determining whether post-sale business is of a kind that is "the same" or
"similar" to the business conducted before the sale, a court should consider whether, viewed from the perspective
of the creditors of the seller, the change poses extraordinary risks or whether the change is a normal risk that
creditors can be assumed to take. In particular, when the post-bulk sale business differs from the pre-bulk sale
§ 6-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS.
Page 5 of 6
business only in the size of the business conducted, the seller should be considered to be continuing in the same or
a similar kind of business and the sale should not be considered a bulk sale.
The seller must "continue to operate" the same or a similar kind of business as owner. If the owner sells the
business assets to a buyer and continues to manage the business as an employee of the buyer, the seller is not
continuing to operate the business within the meaning of this Article.
(d) "Claim". New. The first sentence derives from Bankruptcy Code § 101(4), 11 U.S.C. § 101(4). Changes,
including the deletion of Section 101(4)(B), were made for stylistic purposes only.
(e) "Claimant". New. This term defines the category of claim holders who are the primary beneficiaries of the
duties that this Article imposes. Compare "Creditor" (subsection (1)(f)).
States that choose not to afford taxing authorities the benefits of this Article should adopt Alternative A. Adoption of
Alternative B would afford the benefits of this Article to taxing authorities except with respect to those taxes as to
which there has been compliance with another statute requiring that notice of the bulk sale be given to the taxing
authority.
(f) "Creditor". New. The term includes all holders of claims against the seller, even holders of claims arising from
consumer transactions. Compare "Claimant" (subsection (1)(e)).
(g) "Date of the bulk sale". New. The parties are able to control the date of the bulk sale in several ways. They
can keep the proceeds of the sale in escrow, thereby delaying the date of payment, or they can specifically agree
that the assets remain subject to the reach of the seller's creditors, thereby delaying the date that the assets are
transferred. By adjusting the time that the buyer acquires an unconditional right to possess tangible assets and the
time the buyer acquires an unconditional right to use intangible assets, the parties may affect the substantive rights
of creditors and thereby control the date the assets are transferred.
The connection between the time of transfer and the buyer's rights under the bulk-sale agreement appears only for
purposes of sales to which this Article applies. Subsection (1)(g) does not purport to affect the rights of creditors of
a seller of property for other purposes or under other circumstances.
(h) "Date of the bulk-sale agreement". New. Law outside this Article, including the provisions of Article 2,
determines when an agreement for a bulk sale becomes enforceable between the buyer and the seller and when an
auctioneer or liquidator is engaged.
(i) "Debt". New. This subsection is borrowed from Bankruptcy Code Section 101(11).
(j) "Liquidator". New. Although the definition of "liquidator" is quite broad, the term is used with respect to sales
that are "conducted" by a liquidator on behalf of the seller. See subsection (1)(c)(i). Thus only those liquidators
that "conduct" sales will be affected by this Article.
(k) "Net contract price". New. Consideration is not "new consideration" to the extent that it consists of the partial or
total satisfaction of an antecedent debt owed to the buyer by the seller. When the buyer buys assets along with
property other than assets, the "net contract price" is that portion of the new consideration allocable to the assets.
(l) "Net proceeds". New. The term appears, without definition, in Section 6-108 (1987 Official Text).
(m) "In the ordinary course of the seller's business". New.
(n) "United States". New. This subsection derives from Section 9-103(3)(c).
(o) "Value". New. The definition in Section 1-201(44) is not appropriate in the context of this Article.
(p) "Verified". New.
§ 6-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS.
Page 6 of 6
2. "Good faith". This Article adopts the definition of "good faith" in Article 1 in all cases, even when the buyer is a
merchant.
Cross-References:
Point 1(a): Section 9-313.
Point 1(c): Sections 1-201 and 6-103.
Point 1(g): Article 2 generally.
Point 1(h): Section 2-201 and Article 2 generally.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 6-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]
§ 6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (3), this Article applies to a bulk sale if:
(a) the seller's principal business is the sale of inventory from stock; and
(b) on the date of the bulk-sale agreement the seller is located in this state or, if the seller is located in
a jurisdiction that is not a part of the United States, the seller's major executive office in the United
States is in this state.
(2) A seller is deemed to be located at his [or her] place of business. If a seller has more than one place of
business, the seller is deemed located at his [or her] chief executive office.
(3) This Article does not apply to:
(a) a transfer made to secure payment or performance of an obligation;
(b) a transfer of collateral to a secured party pursuant to Section 9-609;
(c) a disposition of collateral pursuant to Section 9-610;
(d) retention of collateral pursuant to Section 9-620;
(e) a sale of an asset encumbered by a security interest or lien if (i) all the proceeds of the sale are
applied in partial or total satisfaction of the debt secured by the security interest or lien or (ii) the
security interest or lien is enforceable against the asset after it has been sold to the buyer and the net
contract price is zero;
(f) a general assignment for the benefit of creditors or to a subsequent transfer by the assignee;
(g) a sale by an executor, administrator, receiver, trustee in bankruptcy, or any public officer under
judicial process;
(h) a sale made in the course of judicial or administrative proceedings for the dissolution or
reorganization of an organization;
(i) a sale to a buyer whose principal place of business is in the United States and who:
(i) not earlier than 21 days before the date of the bulk sale, (A) obtains from the seller a verified
and dated list of claimants of whom the seller has notice three days before the seller sends or
delivers the list to the buyer or (B) conducts a reasonable inquiry to discover the claimants;
(ii) assumes in full the debts owed to claimants of whom the buyer has knowledge on the date the
buyer receives the list of claimants from the seller or on the date the buyer completes the
reasonable inquiry, as the case may be;
(iii) is not insolvent after the assumption; and
(iv) gives written notice of the assumption not later than 30 days after the date of the bulk sale by
sending or delivering a notice to the claimants identified in subparagraph (ii) or by filing a notice in
the office of the [Secretary of State];
(j) a sale to a buyer whose principal place of business is in the United States and who:
§ 6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
Page 2 of 5
(i) assumes in full the debts that were incurred in the seller's business before the date of the bulk
sale;
(ii) is not insolvent after the assumption; and
(iii) gives written notice of the assumption not later than 30 days after the date of the bulk sale by
sending or delivering a notice to each creditor whose debt is assumed or by filing a notice in the
office of the [Secretary of State];
(k) a sale to a new organization that is organized to take over and continue the business of the seller
and that has its principal place of business in the United States if:
(i) the buyer assumes in full the debts that were incurred in the seller's business before the date of
the bulk sale;
(ii) the seller receives nothing from the sale except an interest in the new organization that is
subordinate to the claims against the organization arising from the assumption; and
(iii) the buyer gives written notice of the assumption not later than 30 days after the date of the
bulk sale by sending or delivering a notice to each creditor whose debt is assumed or by filing a
notice in the office of the [Secretary of State];
(l) a sale of assets having:
(i) a value, net of liens and security interests, of less than $10,000. If a debt is secured by assets
and other property of the seller, the net value of the assets is determined by subtracting from their
value an amount equal to the product of the debt multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is
the value of the assets on the date of the bulk sale and the denominator of which is the value of all
property securing the debt on the date of the bulk sale; or
(ii) a value of more than $25,000,000
on the date of the bulk-sale agreement; or
(m) a sale required by, and made pursuant to, statute.
(4) The notice under subsection (3)(i)(iv) must state: (i) that a sale that may constitute a bulk sale has been
or will be made; (ii) the date or prospective date of the bulk sale; (iii) the individual, partnership, or corporate
names and the addresses of the seller and buyer; (iv) the address to which inquiries about the sale may be
made, if different from the seller's address; and (v) that the buyer has assumed or will assume in full the
debts owed to claimants of whom the buyer has knowledge on the date the buyer receives the list of
claimants from the seller or completes a reasonable inquiry to discover the claimants.
(5) The notice under subsections (3)(j)(iii) and (3)(k)(iii) must state: (i) that a sale that may constitute a bulk
sale has been or will be made; (ii) the date or prospective date of the bulk sale; (iii) the individual,
partnership, or corporate names and the addresses of the seller and buyer; (iv) the address to which
inquiries about the sale may be made, if different from the seller's address; and (v) that the buyer has
assumed or will assume the debts that were incurred in the seller's business before the date of the bulk
sale.
(6) For purposes of subsection (3)(l), the value of assets is presumed to be equal to the price the buyer
agrees to pay for the assets. However, in a sale by auction or a sale conducted by a liquidator on the
seller's behalf, the value of assets is presumed to be the amount the auctioneer or liquidator reasonably
estimates the assets will bring at auction or upon liquidation.
As amended in 1999
See Appendix I contained within revised Article 9 for material relating to changes made in text in 1999.
Annotations
§ 6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
Page 3 of 5
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 6-102 and 6-103 (1987 Official Text).
Changes: New choice-of-law provision; exclusions from the Article clarified, revised, and expanded.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. Subsection (1)(a) follows Section 6-102(3) of the 1987 Official Text and makes Article 6 applicable only when the
seller's principal business is the sale of inventory from stock. This Article does not apply to a sale by a seller whose
principal business is the sale of goods other than inventory, e.g., a farmer, is the sale of inventory not from stock,
e.g., a manufacturer who produces goods to order, or is the sale of services, e.g., a dry cleaner, barber, or operator
of a hotel, tavern, or restaurant.
2. The choice-of-law rule in subsections (1)(b) and (2) derives from Section 9-103(3) and should be interpreted
consistently with the Official Comment and case law construing that Section. Any agreement between the buyer
and the seller with regard to the law governing a bulk sale does not affect the choice-of-law rule in this Article.
3. Some of the transactions excluded by subsection (3), e.g., those excluded by subsection (3)(a), may not be bulk
sales. This Article nevertheless specifically excludes them in order to allay any doubts about the Article's
applicability. Certain transactions, e.g., the sale of fully encumbered inventory that remains subject to a security
interest, may be excluded by more than one subsection.
4. Subsections (3)(a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) derive from subsections (1) and (3) of Section 6-103 (1987 Official Text).
5. Subsections (3)(f), (g), and (h) restate subsections (2), (4), and (5) of Section 6-103 with minor changes.
6. Subsections (3)(i), (j), and (k) relate to sales in which the buyer assumes specified debts of the seller. A bulk
sale does not fall within any of these subsections unless the buyer's assumption of debts is binding and irrevocable.
Subsection (3)(j) derives from subsection (6) of Section 6-103 (1987 Official Text) and is available to buyers who
are not insolvent (as defined in Section 1-201(23)), assume all the seller's business debts in full, and give notice of
the assumption. Subsection (3)(k) derives from subsection (7) of Section 6-103 (1987 Official Text) and excludes
transactions in which the risks to creditors are minimal. Like subsection (3)(j), this subsection applies only if the
buyer assumes all the seller's business debts in full and gives notice of the assumption. In addition, the buyer must
be a new organization that is organized to take over and continue the seller's business, the seller must receive
nothing from the sale other than an interest in the new organization, and the seller's interest must be subordinate to
the claims arising from the assumption. Sales that may qualify for the exclusion include the incorporation of a
partnership or sole proprietorship.
Buyers often are reluctant to assume debts of which they have no knowledge. Subsection (3)(i), which is new,
permits a qualifying buyer to exclude a sale from this Article by assuming only those debts owed to claimants of
whom the buyer has knowledge after the buyer either conducts a reasonable inquiry to discover claimants or
obtains a list of claimants from the seller. A buyer who takes a verified list from the seller is held to have knowledge
of the claimants on the list and is entitled to rely in good faith on the list without making further inquiry. The
protection afforded by the assumption of these debts, while not perfect, is sufficiently great to eliminate the need for
compliance with Article 6.
7. Subsection (3)(l) is new. Although the bulk sale of even a very small business may be of concern to some
creditors, losses to creditors from sales of assets in which the seller's equity is less than $10,000 are not likely to
justify the costs of complying with this Article. Sales of assets having a value of more than $25,000,000 have not
presented serious risks to creditors. Publicity normally attends sales of that magnitude, and the sellers are unlikely
§ 6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
Page 4 of 5
to be able successfully to remove the proceeds from the reach of creditors. As used in this subsection, "price"
includes all consideration for the assets, not only new consideration. Compare "Net contract price" (Section 6-
102(1)(k)). If the auctioneer or liquidator does not make an estimation, then no presumption arises.
8. Subsection (3)(m) is new. This Article assumes that creditors are aware of statutes that may require their
debtors to conduct bulk sales under specified circumstances, e.g., upon the termination of a franchise or of a
contract between a dealer and supplier, and are able to take account of any risk that those sales may impose.
Cross-References:
Point 1: Section 9-109.
Point 2: Sections 1-105 and 9-103.
Point 3: Section 6-102.
Point 4: Sections 9-111, 9-503, 9-504, and 9-505.
Point 6: Sections 1-201 and 1-203.
Point 7: Section 6-102.
Definitional Cross-References:
"Asset". Section 6-102.
"Auctioneer". Section 6-102.
"Bulk sale". Section 6-102.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Claimant". Section 6-102.
"Collateral". Section 9-105.
"Date of the bulk sale". Section 6-102.
"Date of the bulk-sale agreement". Section 6-102.
"Debt". Section 6-102.
"Insolvent". Section 1-201.
"Inventory". Section 9-109.
"Knowledge". Section 1-201.
"Liquidator". Section 6-102.
"Net contract price". Section 6-102.
"Notice". Section 1-201.
"Organization". Section 1-201.
"Presumed". Section 1-201.
§ 6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE.
Page 5 of 5
"Proceeds". Section 9-306.
"Sale". Section 2-106.
"Secured party". Section 9-105.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Send". Section 1-201.
"United States". Section 6-102.
"Value". Section 6-102.
"Verified". Section 6-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 6-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]
§ 6-104. OBLIGATIONS OF BUYER.
(1) In a bulk sale as defined in Section 6-102(1)(c)(ii) the buyer shall:
(a) obtain from the seller a list of all business names and addresses used by the seller within three
years before the date the list is sent or delivered to the buyer;
(b) unless excused under subsection (2), obtain from the seller a verified and dated list of claimants of
whom the seller has notice three days before the seller sends or delivers the list to the buyer and
including, to the extent known by the seller, the address of and the amount claimed by each claimant;
(c) obtain from the seller or prepare a schedule of distribution ( Section 6-106(1));
(d) give notice of the bulk sale in accordance with Section 6-105;
(e) unless excused under Section 6-106(4), distribute the net contract price in accordance with the
undertakings of the buyer in the schedule of distribution; and
(f) unless excused under subsection (2), make available the list of claimants (subsection (1)(b)) by:
(i) promptly sending or delivering a copy of the list without charge to any claimant whose written
request is received by the buyer no later than six months after the date of the bulk sale;
(ii) permitting any claimant to inspect and copy the list at any reasonable hour upon request
received by the buyer no later than six months after the date of the bulk sale; or
(iii) filing a copy of the list in the office of the [Secretary of State] no later than the time for giving a
notice of the bulk sale ( Section 6-105(5)). A list filed in accordance with this subparagraph must
state the individual, partnership, or corporate name and a mailing address of the seller.
(2) A buyer who gives notice in accordance with Section 6-105(2) is excused from complying with the
requirements of subsections (1)(b) and (1)(f).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 6-104 (1987 Official Text).
Changes: Revised and rewritten.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. Subsection (1) sets forth the buyer's duties in a bulk sale conducted by the seller. The buyer's failure to perform
these duties may result in liability under Section 6-107. An auctioneer in a bulk sale by auction and a liquidator in a
bulk sale that the liquidator conducts on the seller's behalf have similar duties but may face somewhat different
liability. See Section 6-108(1). The buyer's duties are designed to afford the seller's claimants the opportunity to
§ 6-104. OBLIGATIONS OF BUYER.
Page 2 of 2
learn of the bulk sale before the seller has removed the assets from their reach and has received payment that is
easily secreted.
2. Section 6-104(3) (1987 Official Text) provides that "[r]esponsibilty for the completeness and accuracy of the list
of creditors rests on the transferor, and the transfer is not rendered ineffective by errors or omissions therein unless
the transferee is shown to have had knowledge." This sentence has been deleted as superfluous. Nothing in this
Article suggests that the buyer is responsible for the completeness or accuracy of the list of claimants. The buyer's
only obligations with respect to the list are to obtain it from the seller and to make it available. A buyer who sends
or delivers notice of the bulk sale in accordance with Section 6-105(1) may rely in good faith on the list supplied by
the seller unless, at the time the notice is sent or delivered, the buyer has knowledge of a claimant not on the list. A
buyer who knows of a claimant not on the list is obligated to send notice of the bulk sale to that claimant.
3. The buyer's only obligation with respect to the net contract price is to comply with the schedule of distribution.
The schedule may provide for the buyer to pay the entire net contract price to the seller. If so, the buyer complies
with the requirements of Section 6-104(1)(e) by paying the entire net contract price to the seller.
4. The purpose of the list of claimants is to enable the buyer to give claimants notice of the bulk sale. If the buyer
gives notice by filing in a public office (Section 6-105(2)), then the buyer need not obtain or preserve a list of the
seller's claimants.
Cross-References:
Point 1: Sections 6-107 and 6-108.
Point 2: Sections 6-105 and 1-203.
Point 3: Section 6-106.
Point 4: Section 6-105.
Definitional Cross-References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Bulk sale". Section 6-102.
"Claimant". Section 6-102.
"Date of the bulk sale". Section 6-102.
"Net contract price". Section 6-102.
"Notice". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Verified". Section 6-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 6-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]
§ 6-105. NOTICE TO CLAIMANTS.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2), to comply with Section 6-104(1)(d) the buyer shall send
or deliver a written notice of the bulk sale to each claimant on the list of claimants ( Section 6-104(1)(b))
and to any other claimant of whom the buyer has knowledge at the time the notice of the bulk sale is sent or
delivered.
(2) A buyer may comply with Section 6-104(1)(d) by filing a written notice of the bulk sale in the office of
the [Secretary of State] if:
(a) on the date of the bulk-sale agreement the seller has 200 or more claimants, exclusive of claimants
holding secured or matured claims for employment compensation and benefits, including commissions
and vacation, severance, and sick-leave pay; or
(b) the buyer has received a verified statement from the seller stating that, as of the date of the bulksale
agreement, the number of claimants, exclusive of claimants holding secured or matured claims for
employment compensation and benefits, including commissions and vacation, severance, and sickleave
pay, is 200 or more.
(3) The written notice of the bulk sale must be accompanied by a copy of the schedule of distribution (
Section 6-106(1)) and state at least:
(a) that the seller and buyer have entered into an agreement for a sale that may constitute a bulk sale
under the laws of the State of ...............;
(b) the date of the agreement;
(c) the date on or after which more than ten percent of the assets were or will be transferred;
(d) the date on or after which more than ten percent of the net contract price was or will be paid, if the
date is not stated in the schedule of distribution;
(e) the name and a mailing address of the seller;
(f) any other business name and address listed by the seller pursuant to Section 6-104(1)(a);
(g) the name of the buyer and an address of the buyer from which information concerning the sale can
be obtained;
(h) a statement indicating the type of assets or describing the assets item by item;
(i) the manner in which the buyer will make available the list of claimants ( Section 6-104(1)(f)), if
applicable; and
(j) if the sale is in total or partial satisfaction of an antecedent debt owed by the seller, the amount of
the debt to be satisfied and the name of the person to whom it is owed.
(4) For purposes of subsections (3)(e) and (3)(g), the name of a person is the person's individual,
partnership, or corporate name.
(5) The buyer shall give notice of the bulk sale not less than 45 days before the date of the bulk sale and, if
the buyer gives notice in accordance with subsection (1), not more than 30 days after obtaining the list of
claimants.
§ 6-105. NOTICE TO CLAIMANTS.
Page 2 of 4
(6) A written notice substantially complying with the requirements of subsection (3) is effective even though
it contains minor errors that are not seriously misleading.
(7) A form substantially as follows is sufficient to comply with subsection (3):
Notice of Sale
(1) .........................., whose address is .........................., is described in this notice as the "seller."
(2) ........................., whose address is ........................., is described in this notice as the "buyer."
(3) The seller has disclosed to the buyer that within the past three years the seller has used other business
names, operated at other addresses, or both, as follows: ...........................................…
(4) The seller and the buyer have entered into an agreement dated ................, for a sale that may constitute
a bulk sale under the laws of the state of .......................…
(5) The date on or after which more than ten percent of the assets that are the subject of the sale were or
will be transferred is ..............., and [if not stated in the schedule of distribution] the date on or after which
more than ten percent of the net contract price was or will be paid is ............…
(6) The following assets are the subject of the sale: .......................…
(7) [If applicable] The buyer will make available to claimants of the seller a list of the seller's claimants in the
following manner: .............…
(8) [If applicable] The sale is to satisfy $ ...… of an antecedent debt owed by the seller to ......................…
(9) A copy of the schedule of distribution of the net contract price accompanies this notice.
[End of Notice]
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Sections 6-105 and 6-107 (1987 Official Text).
Changes: Revised, alternative method of giving notice added, and form of notice added.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. Subsection (1) sets forth the method by which the buyer may discharge the duty to notify the seller's claimants of
the impending sale. The buyer "has knowledge" of a claimant only if the buyer has actual knowledge sufficient to
enable the buyer to send a notice to the claimant. A buyer who knows only that the seller has other, unidentified
claimants complies with this subsection by giving notice to the claimants on the seller's list.
2. Subsection (2) is new. It affords the buyer the opportunity to publish notice in cases in which the number of
claimants -- and thus the costs of compliance and risk of inadvertent noncompliance -- are large. Although a filed
notice will not inform every claimant of the impending sale, a filed notice is expected to inform a sufficient number of
claimants (perhaps through credit reporting services) to enable them to stop an unfair or fraudulent transaction
before it occurs.
The buyer may give notice by filing if the seller actually has 200 or more claimants or if the buyer receives a verified
statement that the seller has 200 or more claimants. Claimants who hold secured or matured claims for
employment compensation and benefits are not counted in determining the number of claimants for this purpose;
however, they are entitled to receive notice of the bulk sale.
§ 6-105. NOTICE TO CLAIMANTS.
Page 3 of 4
The duty to give notice must be performed in good faith. A buyer who receives a verified statement from the seller
but knows the statement to be false does not act in good faith and thus does not comply with subsection (2)(b).
3. Subsection (3) prescribes the contents of the notice. The contents are the same regardless of whether notice is
sent to each claimant or filed, except that the information in subsection (3)(i) is required only when notice is sent.
The requirements of subsection (3) are the minimum; a notice that includes additional information is effective. The
requirement in subsection (3)(h) for the description of assets is modeled on Section 9-402(1). Neither the
identification of assets by serial number nor an item-by-item list of assets is required.
Subsection (3)(j) applies when the sale satisfies a debt owed by the seller to the buyer or to a third party. Section
6-103(3) excludes certain sales of this kind from the application of this Article.
4. Subsection (4) requires that a notice give the proper name of the seller and the buyer. A trade name is
insufficient. See Official Comment 7 to UCC § 9-402. However, subsection (3)(f) requires that trade names be
added when the seller has provided them to the buyer. The list need not include trade names or other names that
the seller has used but not listed, even if the buyer knows of the names.
5. Subsection (5) requires that notice be given not less than 45 days before the date of the bulk sale. The period
was extended from the 10 days afforded by the 1987 Official Text to provide ample time for claimants to receive or
discover the notice and to take any action that the law permits to collect their claims from the seller. For example,
depending upon the facts of each case and upon applicable law, claimants might seek to enjoin the sale, acquire a
judicial lien on the assets or the proceeds, threaten to refuse to deal with the buyer unless the seller's debt is paid,
or file an involuntary bankruptcy petition against the seller. The "date of the bulk sale" is defined in such a way as
to permit the seller to transfer the assets to the buyer or the buyer to pay the price to the seller (but not both) before
or during the 45 days.
6. Subsection (6) derives from Section 9-402(8). The purpose of filing is to give notice to claimants. Whether an
error in the seller's name is seriously misleading should depend upon whether a claimant searching under the
seller's correct name could have found the filing. Whether an error other than in the seller's name is seriously
misleading should depend upon whether the error prejudiced the ability of claimants to assert their rights.
Cross-References:
Point 1: Sections 1-201 and 6-104.
Point 2: Sections 1-203 and 6-104.
Point 3: Sections 6-102, 6-104, and 9-402.
Point 4: Sections 6-104 and 9-402.
Point 5: Section 6-102.
Point 6: Sections 6-107 and 9-402.
Definitional Cross-References:
"Asset". Section 6-102.
"Bulk sale". Section 6-102.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Claim". Section 6-102.
"Claimant". Section 6-102.
§ 6-105. NOTICE TO CLAIMANTS.
Page 4 of 4
"Date of the bulk sale". Section 6-102.
"Date of the bulk-sale agreement". Section 6-102.
"Debt". Section 6-102.
"Knowledge". Section 1-201.
"Net contract price". Section 6-102.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Send". Section 1-201.
"Verified". Section 6-102.
"Written". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 6-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]
§ 6-106. SCHEDULE OF DISTRIBUTION.
(1) The seller and buyer shall agree on how the net contract price is to be distributed and set forth their
agreement in a written schedule of distribution.
(2) The schedule of distribution may provide for distribution to any person at any time, including distribution
of the entire net contract price to the seller.
(3) The buyer's undertakings in the schedule of distribution run only to the seller. However, a buyer who
fails to distribute the net contract price in accordance with the buyer's undertakings in the schedule of
distribution is liable to a creditor only as provided in Section 6-107(1).
(4) If the buyer undertakes in the schedule of distribution to distribute any part of the net contract price to a
person other than the seller, and, after the buyer has given notice in accordance with Section 6-105, some
or all of the anticipated net contract price is or becomes unavailable for distribution as a consequence of the
buyer's or seller's having complied with an order of court, legal process, statute, or rule of law, the buyer is
excused from any obligation arising under this Article or under any contract with the seller to distribute the
net contract price in accordance with the buyer's undertakings in the schedule if the buyer:
(a) distributes the net contract price remaining available in accordance with any priorities for payment
stated in the schedule of distribution and, to the extent that the price is insufficient to pay all the debts
having a given priority, distributes the price pro rata among those debts shown in the schedule as
having the same priority;
(b) distributes the net contract price remaining available in accordance with an order of court;
(c) commences a proceeding for interpleader in a court of competent jurisdiction and is discharged
from the proceeding; or
(d) reaches a new agreement with the seller for the distribution of the net contract price remaining
available, sets forth the new agreement in an amended schedule of distribution, gives notice of the
amended schedule, and distributes the net contract price remaining available in accordance with the
buyer's undertakings in the amended schedule.
(5) The notice under subsection (4)(d) must identify the buyer and the seller, state the filing number, if any,
of the original notice, set forth the amended schedule, and be given in accordance with subsection (1) or (2)
of Section 6-105, whichever is applicable, at least 14 days before the buyer distributes any part of the net
contract price remaining available.
(6) If the seller undertakes in the schedule of distribution to distribute any part of the net contract price,
and, after the buyer has given notice in accordance with Section 6-105, some or all of the anticipated net
contract price is or becomes unavailable for distribution as a consequence of the buyer's or seller's having
complied with an order of court, legal process, statute, or rule of law, the seller and any person in control of
the seller are excused from any obligation arising under this Article or under any agreement with the buyer
to distribute the net contract price in accordance with the seller's undertakings in the schedule if the seller:
(a) distributes the net contract price remaining available in accordance with any priorities for payment
stated in the schedule of distribution and, to the extent that the price is insufficient to pay all the debts
having a given priority, distributes the price pro rata among those debts shown in the schedule as
having the same priority;
§ 6-106. SCHEDULE OF DISTRIBUTION.
Page 2 of 4
(b) distributes the net contract price remaining available in accordance with an order of court;
(c) commences a proceeding for interpleader in a court of competent jurisdiction and is discharged
from the proceeding; or
(d) prepares a written amended schedule of distribution of the net contract price remaining available
for distribution, gives notice of the amended schedule, and distributes the net contract price remaining
available in accordance with the amended schedule.
(7) The notice under subsection (6)(d) must identify the buyer and the seller, state the filing number, if any,
of the original notice, set forth the amended schedule, and be given in accordance with subsection (1) or (2)
of Section 6-105, whichever is applicable, at least 14 days before the seller distributes any part of the net
contract price remaining available.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. A principal purpose of bulk sales legislation has been to impair the ability of a seller to liquidate inventory and
abscond with the proceeds, leaving creditors unpaid. Toward this end, a significant minority of jurisdictions adopted
optional Section 6-106 (1987 Official Text), which imposes upon a transferee in bulk the duty to apply the new
consideration for the transfer to the debts of the transferor pro rata. When one or more of these debts is
unliquidated, disputed, or allegedly secured, making a pro rata distribution may prove quite difficult and distribution
of the consideration may be delayed considerably. In addition, since preferences generally are permitted under
state law, the appropriateness of mandating a pro rata distribution is questionable. Accordingly, this Article does
not require the buyer to apply the consideration to payment of the seller's debts.
This Article recognizes, however, that the seller's claimants have an interest in learning what will happen to the net
contract price. If the contemplated distribution is objectionable, claimants should be able to avail themselves of
whatever remedies state law or federal law allows to prevent the sale or tie up the price. On the other hand, if the
price is to be distributed in a manner that is favorable to creditors, then advance knowledge of that fact will facilitate
the sale by obviating any need for claimants to interfere with it.
To afford advance notice of the intended distribution of the contract price, Section 6-105(3) requires the buyer to
include with the notice of the sale a copy of the "schedule of distribution" -- i.e., of the agreement between the buyer
and the seller on how the net contract price is to be distributed.
2. This Article does not require the net contract price to be applied in any particular fashion. Rather, the buyer and
the seller may agree to whatever they wish. They must, however, disclose their agreement in ample time before
the date of the bulk sale. See Section 6-105(5). The terms of the schedule of distribution in any given sale will be a
function of the negotiations between buyer and seller as affected by any applicable non-Code law (e.g., corporate
dissolution statutes) imposing distribution requirements in sales of the kind conducted.
In formulating the schedule, the parties may be well advised to consider the likely reaction of claimants to the
schedule. For example, a schedule that contemplates the distribution of the entire net contract price to the seller or
to a single creditor may prompt the filing of an involuntary bankruptcy petition. A schedule that contemplates paying
the net contract price into an escrow established for the benefit of the seller's claimants may be more favorably
received.
§ 6-106. SCHEDULE OF DISTRIBUTION.
Page 3 of 4
The seller may incur additional debt between the time the schedule is published and the time the net contract price
is paid. The schedule may provide for payment of those debts from the net contract price.
3. Unless otherwise agreed, the buyer's only liability to creditors for failure to comply with his undertakings in the
schedule of distribution is set forth in Section 6-107(1). A creditor named in the schedule may not rely on the
creation or publication of the schedule as the basis for imposing liability against the buyer on any other theory,
including that of estoppel or third-party beneficiary.
The seller may wish to undertake to pay some of the price to creditors. The seller may, but need not, include this
undertaking in the schedule of distribution. The buyer is not responsible for performance of the seller's
undertakings. Thus, if the seller makes an undertaking with respect to payment of the net contract price and fails to
perform in accordance with it, the buyer faces no liability. However, certain persons in control of the seller may be
liable under those circumstances. See Section 6-107(11).
4. In some cases, the precise amount of the net contract price may be unknown at the time that the schedule of
distribution is formulated and notice of the bulk sale is given. In other cases, the net contract price may prove to be
less than originally anticipated. Parties who fail to provide for these contingencies in the schedule of distribution
and are unable to abide by the original schedule may be required to give a new notice with a new schedule.
The inability to abide by the schedule may be due to an external legal event, e.g., the suffering of a garnishment
lien on the net contract price, the filing of a bankruptcy petition, or compliance with a corporate dissolution statute.
If so, subsection (4), which applies to the extent that the net contract price is within the control of the buyer, may
afford relief to the buyer, and subsection (6), which applies to the extent the net contract price is within the control of
the seller, may afford relief to a person in control of the seller. Although this Article imposes no obligation on sellers
with respect to distribution of the net contract price (or otherwise), a seller may incur an obligation of this kind by
agreement with the buyer. Accordingly, subsection (6) provides the means by which the seller as well as a person
in control of the seller may be excused from any such obligation.
Subsections (4)(a) and (6)(a) permit the buyer or seller respectively to distribute the net contract price remaining
available in accordance with any priorities for payment. A schedule need not afford priority to particular debts. If
the schedule contains no priorities, then the debts are treated as if they are all of the same priority, and the buyer or
seller, as the case may be, may distribute the price pro rata in partial satisfaction of the debts set forth in the
schedule. Law other than this Article determines whether a court order or a proceeding for interpleader is available
for purposes of subsections (4)(b), (4)(c), (6)(b), and (6)(c).
Cross-References:
Point 1: Sections 6-104 and 6-105.
Point 2: Section 6-105.
Point 3: Sections 1-102 and 6-107.
Definitional Cross-References:
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Creditor". Section 1-201.
"Debt". Section 6-102.
"Net contract price". Section 6-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
§ 6-106. SCHEDULE OF DISTRIBUTION.
Page 4 of 4
"Seller". Section 2-103
"Written". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 6-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]
§ 6-107. LIABILITY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
(1) Except as provided in subsection (3), and subject to the limitation in subsection (4):
(a) a buyer who fails to comply with the requirements of Section 6-104(1)(e) with respect to a creditor
is liable to the creditor for damages in the amount of the claim, reduced by any amount that the creditor
would not have realized if the buyer had complied; and
(b) a buyer who fails to comply with the requirements of any other subsection of Section 6-104 with
respect to a claimant is liable to the claimant for damages in the amount of the claim, reduced by any
amount that the claimant would not have realized if the buyer had complied.
(2) In an action under subsection (1), the creditor has the burden of establishing the validity and amount of
the claim, and the buyer has the burden of establishing the amount that the creditor would not have realized
if the buyer had complied.
(3) A buyer who:
(a) made a good faith and commercially reasonable effort to comply with the requirements of Section
6-104(1) or to exclude the sale from the application of this Article under Section 6-103(3); or
(b) on or after the date of the bulk-sale agreement, but before the date of the bulk sale, held a good
faith and commercially reasonable belief that this Article does not apply to the particular sale
is not liable to creditors for failure to comply with the requirements of Section 6-104. The buyer has the
burden of establishing the good faith and commercial reasonableness of the effort or belief.
(4) In a single bulk sale the cumulative liability of the buyer for failure to comply with the requirements of
Section 6-104(1) may not exceed an amount equal to:
(a) if the assets consist only of inventory and equipment, twice the net contract price, less the amount
of any part of the net contract price paid to or applied for the benefit of the seller or a creditor; or
(b) if the assets include property other than inventory and equipment, twice the net value of the
inventory and equipment less the amount of the portion of any part of the net contract price paid to or
applied for the benefit of the seller or a creditor which is allocable to the inventory and equipment.
(5) For the purposes of subsection (4)(b), the "net value" of an asset is the value of the asset less (i) the
amount of any proceeds of the sale of an asset, to the extent the proceeds are applied in partial or total
satisfaction of a debt secured by the asset and (ii) the amount of any debt to the extent it is secured by a
security interest or lien that is enforceable against the asset before and after it has been sold to a buyer. If
a debt is secured by an asset and other property of the seller, the amount of the debt secured by a security
interest or lien that is enforceable against the asset is determined by multiplying the debt by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the value of the asset on the date of the bulk sale and the denominator of which is
the value of all property securing the debt on the date of the bulk sale. The portion of a part of the net
contract price paid to or applied for the benefit of the seller or a creditor that is "allocable to the inventory
and equipment" is the portion that bears the same ratio to that part of the net contract price as the net value
of the inventory and equipment bears to the net value of all of the assets.
(6) A payment made by the buyer to a person to whom the buyer is, or believes he [or she] is, liable under
subsection (1) reduces pro tanto the buyer's cumulative liability under subsection (4).
§ 6-107. LIABILITY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
Page 2 of 6
(7) No action may be brought under subsection (1)(b) by or on behalf of a claimant whose claim is
unliquidated or contingent.
(8) A buyer's failure to comply with the requirements of Section 6-104(1) does not (i) impair the buyer's
rights in or title to the assets, (ii) render the sale ineffective, void, or voidable, (iii) entitle a creditor to more
than a single satisfaction of his [or her] claim, or (iv) create liability other than as provided in this Article.
(9) Payment of the buyer's liability under subsection (1) discharges pro tanto the seller's debt to the
creditor.
(10) Unless otherwise agreed, a buyer has an immediate right of reimbursement from the seller for any
amount paid to a creditor in partial or total satisfaction of the buyer's liability under subsection (1).
(11) If the seller is an organization, a person who is in direct or indirect control of the seller, and who
knowingly, intentionally, and without legal justification fails, or causes the seller to fail, to distribute the net
contract price in accordance with the schedule of distribution is liable to any creditor to whom the seller
undertook to make payment under the schedule for damages caused by the failure.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None.
Purposes:
1. This section sets forth the consequences of noncompliance with the requirements of Section 6-104. Although
other legal consequences may result from a bulk sale -- e.g., the buyer may be liable to the seller under Article 2 or
to the seller's creditors under the Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act -- no other consequences may be imposed by
reason of the buyer's failure to comply with the requirements of this Article.
The two subsections of Section 6-107(1) reflect the duties set forth in Section 6-104. The duties generally run only
to claimants, but the duty to distribute the net contract price in accordance with the schedule of distribution (Section
6-104(1)(e)) may run also to certain creditors.
2. Article 6 (1987 Official Text), like many of its nonuniform predecessors, makes a noncomplying transfer
ineffective against aggrieved creditors. In contrast, noncompliance with this Article neither renders the sale
ineffective nor otherwise affects the buyer's rights in or title to the assets.
Liability under this Article is for breach of a statutory duty. The buyer's only liability is personal (in personam)
liability. Aggrieved creditors may only recover money damages. In rem remedies, which are available upon
noncompliance with Article 6 (1987 Official Text), are not available under this Article. Thus, aggrieved creditors no
longer may treat the sale as if it had not occurred and use the judicial process to apply assets purchased by the
buyer toward the satisfaction of their claims against the seller.
The change in the theory of liability and in the available remedy should be of particular significance if the seller
enters bankruptcy after the sale is consummated. When an aggrieved creditor of the transferor has a
nonbankruptcy right to avoid a transfer in whole or in part, as may be the case under Article 6 (1987 Official Text),
the transferor's bankruptcy trustee may avoid the entire transfer. See Bankruptcy Code § 544(b), 11 U.S.C. §
544(b). Under this Article, a person who is aggrieved by the buyer's noncompliance may not avoid the sale.
Rather, the person is entitled only to recover damages as provided in this section. Because no creditor has the
right to avoid the transaction or to assert a remedy that is the functional equivalent of avoidance, the seller's
bankruptcy trustee likewise should be unable to do so.
§ 6-107. LIABILITY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
Page 3 of 6
3. This Article makes explicit what is implicit in Article 6 (1987 Official Text): only those persons as to whom there
has been noncompliance are entitled to a remedy. For example, if notices are sent to each claimant other than
claimant A, claimant B cannot recover. Similarly, a creditor who acquires a claim after notice is given has no
remedy unless the buyer undertakes in the schedule of distribution to pay that creditor and the buyer fails to meet
the obligation.
4. Unlike Article 6 (1987 Official Text), which imposes strict liability upon a noncomplying transferee, this Article
imposes liability for noncompliance only when the failure to comply actually has injured a creditor and only to the
extent of the injury. Each creditor's damages are measured by the injury that the particular creditor sustained as a
consequence of the buyer's failure to comply. This measure is stated as the amount of the debt reduced by any
amount that the person would not have realized if the buyer had complied. Compare Section 4-103(5).
5. A buyer is liable only for the buyer's own noncompliance with the requirements of Section 6-104. Under that
section, the only step the buyer must take to discover the identity of the seller's claimants is to obtain a list of
claimants from the seller. If the seller's list is incomplete and the buyer lacks knowledge of claimant C, then
claimant C has no remedy under subsection (1)(b) of this section.
6. The creditor has the burden of establishing the validity and amount of the debt owed by the seller as well as the
fact of the buyer's noncompliance. In contesting the allegation of noncompliance, the buyer may introduce
evidence tending to show either that the sale was not a bulk sale or that the sale was a bulk sale to which this
Article does not apply. In contesting the validity and amount of the debt, the buyer may introduce evidence tending
to show that the seller had a defense to the debt. The buyer has the burden of establishing the amount that the
creditor would not have realized even if the buyer had complied. Implicit in subsection (2) is that certain failures to
comply with the requirements of this Article will cause no injury and thus result in no liability.
The following examples illustrate the operation of subsection (2):
Example 1: The buyer fails to give notice of the bulk sale. Claimant D, who appears on seller's list of claimants,
admits to having had actual knowledge of the impending sale two months before it occurred. The buyer is likely to
be able to meet the burden of establishing that even had the buyer given notice of the sale, claimant D would not
have recovered any more than the claimant actually recovered.
Example 2: The buyer failed to obtain a list of seller's business names (Section 6-104(1)(a)) or to make available
the list of claimants (Section 6-104(1)(f)). In many cases, the buyer may be able to meet the burden of establishing
that compliance with those subsections would not have enabled claimants to recover any more than they actually
recovered.
7. Subsection (3) may afford a complete defense to a noncomplying buyer. This defense is available to buyers
who establish that they made a good faith effort to comply with the requirements of this Article or made a good faith
effort to exclude the sale from the application of this Article (e.g., by assuming debts and attempting to comply with
the notice requirements of Section 6-103(3)(i), (j), or (k)). When a buyer makes a good faith effort to comply with
this Article or to exclude the transaction from its coverage, the injury caused by noncompliance is likely to be de
minimis. In any event, the primary responsibility for satisfying claims rests with the creditors, and this Article
imposes no greater duty upon buyers who attempt to comply with this Article or to exclude a sale from its
application than to make a good faith effort to do so.
The defense of subsection (3) also is available to buyers who act on the good faith belief that this Article does not
apply to the sale (e.g., because the sale is not a bulk sale or is excluded under Section 6-103). The good-faithbelief
defense is an acknowledgement that reasonable people may disagree over whether a given transaction is or
is not a bulk sale and over whether Section 6-103 excludes a particular transaction. A buyer acting in good faith
should be protected from the liability that this Article otherwise would impose on buyers who may be completely
innocent of wrongdoing. A buyer who is unaware of the requirements of this Article holds no belief concerning the
applicability of the Article and so may not use the defense.
§ 6-107. LIABILITY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
Page 4 of 6
8. Even a buyer who completely fails to comply with this Article may not be liable in an amount equal to sum of the
seller's debts. Subsection (4) limits the aggregate recovery for "any one bulk sale," which term includes a series of
sales by a liquidator. The maximum cumulative liability for noncompliance with this Article parallels the maximum
recovery generally available to creditors under the 1987 Official Text of Article 6. Under that Article, the
noncomplying transferee may have to "pay twice" for the goods. First, the transferee may pay the purchase price to
the transferor; then, the transferee may lose the goods to aggrieved creditors.
Under this Article, the maximum cumulative liability is an amount equal to twice the net contract price of the
inventory and equipment (i.e., twice the amount that would be available to unsecured creditors from the inventory
and equipment), less the amount of any portion of that net contract price paid to or applied for the benefit of the
seller or a creditor of the seller. Unless the buyer receives credit for amounts paid to the seller (which amounts the
creditors have a right to apply to payment of their claims), the buyer might wind up paying an amount equal to the
net contract price three times (once to the seller and twice to aggrieved creditors). The grant of credit for amounts
paid to the seller's creditors recognizes that ordinarily the seller has no obligation to pay creditors pro rata.
When the assets sold consist of only inventory and equipment, calculation of the maximum cumulative liability is
relatively simple. But when the assets sold include property in addition to inventory and equipment, the calculation
becomes more difficult. When inventory or equipment secures a debt that also is secured by other collateral and
the aggregate value of the collateral exceeds the secured debt, a determination of the amount in clause (ii) of
subsection (5) may require an allocation of the collateral to the debt in accordance with the statutory formula. In
addition, one may need to determine which portion of payments of the net contract price is allocable to inventory
and equipment. Subsection (5) directs that this allocation be made by multiplying the part of the net contract price
paid to or applied for the benefit of the seller or a creditor by a fraction whose nominator is the net value of the
inventory and equipment and whose denominator is the net value of all the assets.
Sometimes the seller may receive the net contract price and pay some or all of it to one or more creditors. In
determining whether a payment to a creditor was made from the net contract price or from another source, courts
are free to employ tracing rules. Amounts paid to secured parties usually are taken into account in determining the
net contract price; if so, the buyer should not receive credit for them.
9. The buyer need not wait for judgment to be entered before paying a person believed to be a creditor of the
seller. Indeed, the buyer is entitled to credit for amounts paid to persons who in fact may not be creditors of the
seller, as long as the buyer acts with the belief that the seller is so indebted. As is the case with respect to all
obligations under the Code, the buyer's belief must be held in good faith.
10. Any amounts paid by the buyer in satisfaction of the liability created by Section 6-107(1) reduce the seller's
liability to the recipient pro tanto. Consequently, the buyer is entitled to immediate reimbursement of those amounts
from the seller. The right of reimbursement is available only for amounts paid to actual creditors. Amounts paid to
those whom the buyer incorrectly believes to be creditors ordinarily are not recoverable from the seller, although the
buyer is entitled to credit for those amounts against the aggregate liability in subsection (4). Of course, the buyer
and seller may vary the seller's reimbursement obligation by agreement.
11. Because of the difficulty in valuing claims that are unliquidated or contingent, persons holding claims of that
kind may not bring an action under subsection (1)(b). If the claim remains unliquidated or contingent throughout the
limitation period in Section 6-110, then these creditors have no remedy for noncompliance under that subsection.
They may, however, be entitled to a remedy under subsection (1)(a) or (11) for failure to distribute the net contract
price in accordance with the schedule of distribution.
12. In certain circumstances, subsection (11) imposes liability on a person in direct or indirect control of a seller
that is an organization. Excuse under Section 6-106(6) is a "legal justification" that prevents liability from attaching
under subsection (11). No special provision applies to the seller who fails to comply with the schedule. The seller
already owes the debt to the creditor, and other law governs the consequences of a debtor who fails to pay a debt
when promised.
§ 6-107. LIABILITY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
Page 5 of 6
Cross-References:
Point 1: Section 6-104.
Point 4: Section 4-103.
Point 5: Sections 6-104 and 6-105.
Point 6: Sections 1-201, 6-102, 6-103, and 6-104.
Point 7: Sections 1-102, 1-201, 6-102 and 6-103.
Point 8: Section 6-102.
Point 9: Section 1-203.
Point 10: Section 1-102.
Point 11: Sections 6-102 and 6-110.
Point 12: Section 6-106.
Definitional Cross-References:
"Assets". Section 6-102.
"Bulk sale". Section 6-102.
"Burden of establishing". Section 1-201.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Claim". Section 6-102.
"Claimant". Section 6-102.
"Creditor". Section 6-102.
"Date of the bulk sale". Section 6-102.
"Equipment". Section 6-102.
"Good faith". Section 6-102.
"Inventory". Section 9-109.
"Net contract price". Section 6-102.
"Organization". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Proceeds". Section 9-306.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Written". Section 1-201.
§ 6-107. LIABILITY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
Page 6 of 6
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 6-108
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]
§ 6-108. BULK SALES BY AUCTION; BULK SALES CONDUCTED BY
LIQUIDATOR.
(1) Sections 6-104, 6-105, 6-106, and 6-107 apply to a bulk sale by auction and a bulk sale conducted by a
liquidator on the seller's behalf with the following modifications:
(a) "buyer" refers to auctioneer or liquidator, as the case may be;
(b) "net contract price" refers to net proceeds of the auction or net proceeds of the sale, as the case
may be;
(c) the written notice required under Section 6-105(3) must be accompanied by a copy of the schedule
of distribution ( Section 6-106(1)) and state at least:
(i) that the seller and the auctioneer or liquidator have entered into an agreement for auction or
liquidation services that may constitute an agreement to make a bulk sale under the laws of the State of
...............;
(ii) the date of the agreement;
(iii) the date on or after which the auction began or will begin or the date on or after which the
liquidator began or will begin to sell assets on the seller's behalf;
(iv) the date on or after which more than ten percent of the net proceeds of the sale were or will be
paid, if the date is not stated in the schedule of distribution;
(v) the name and a mailing address of the seller;
(vi) any other business name and address listed by the seller pursuant to Section 6-104(1)(a);
(vii) the name of the auctioneer or liquidator and an address of the auctioneer or liquidator from
which information concerning the sale can be obtained;
(viii) a statement indicating the type of assets or describing the assets item by item;
(ix) the manner in which the auctioneer or liquidator will make available the list of claimants (
Section 6-104(1)(f)), if applicable; and
(x) if the sale is in total or partial satisfaction of an antecedent debt owed by the seller, the amount
of the debt to be satisfied and the name of the person to whom it is owed; and
(d) in a single bulk sale the cumulative liability of the auctioneer or liquidator for failure to comply with
the requirements of this section may not exceed the amount of the net proceeds of the sale allocable to
inventory and equipment sold less the amount of the portion of any part of the net proceeds paid to or
applied for the benefit of a creditor which is allocable to the inventory and equipment.
(2) A payment made by the auctioneer or liquidator to a person to whom the auctioneer or liquidator is, or
believes he [or she] is, liable under this section reduces pro tanto the auctioneer's or liquidator's cumulative
liability under subsection (1)(d).
(3) A form substantially as follows is sufficient to comply with subsection (1)(c):
Notice of Sale
(1) ........................., whose address is .........................., is described in this notice as the "seller."
§ 6-108. BULK SALES BY AUCTION; BULK SALES CONDUCTED BY LIQUIDATOR.
Page 2 of 4
(2) ........................., whose address is .........................., is described in this notice as the "auctioneer" or
"liquidator."
(3) The seller has disclosed to the auctioneer or liquidator that within the past three years the seller has
used other business names, operated at other addresses, or both, as follows: ....................…
(4) The seller and the auctioneer or liquidator have entered into an agreement dated ............… for auction
or liquidation services that may constitute an agreement to make a bulk sale under the laws of the State of
................…
(5) The date on or after which the auction began or will begin or the date on or after which the liquidator
began or will begin to sell assets on the seller's behalf is ..............., and [if not stated in the schedule of
distribution] the date on or after which more than ten percent of the net proceeds of the sale were or will be
paid is ............…
(6) The following assets are the subject of the sale: ..............................................…
(7) [If applicable] The auctioneer or liquidator will make available to claimants of the seller a list of the
seller's claimants in the following manner: .....................…
(8) [If applicable] The sale is to satisfy $ ...… of an antecedent debt owed by the seller to ......................…
(9) A copy of the schedule of distribution of the net proceeds accompanies this notice.
[End of Notice]
(4) A person who buys at a bulk sale by auction or conducted by a liquidator need not comply with the
requirements of Section 6-104(1) and is not liable for the failure of an auctioneer or liquidator to comply
with the requirements of this section.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 6-108.
Changes: Revised, expanded to include sales conducted by a liquidator on the seller's behalf, and form of notice
added.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. This section applies only to bulk sales by auction or conducted by a liquidator on the seller's behalf, as defined in
Section 6-102(1)(c). Bulk sales conducted by an auctioneer or liquidator on its own behalf are treated as ordinary
bulk sales and are not subject to this section.
2. Regardless of whether the assets are sold directly from the seller to the buyer, are sold to a variety of buyers at
auction, or are sold on the seller's behalf by a liquidator to one or more buyers, a going-out-of-business sale of
inventory presents similar risks to claimants. Auctioneers and liquidators are likely to be in a better position to
ascertain whether the sale they are conducting is, or is part of, a bulk sale than are their customers. Accordingly,
buyers at auctions and from liquidators selling assets of others need not be concerned with complying with this
Article. Instead, this section imposes upon auctioneers and liquidators duties and liabilities that are similar, but not
always identical, to those of a buyer under Sections 6-104(1) and 6-107. Except to the extent that this section
treats bulk sales by auctioneers and liquidators differently from those conducted by the seller on its own behalf, the
Official Comments to Sections 6-104(1) and 6-107, as well as the Comments to Sections 6-105 and 6-106, which
those sections incorporate by reference, are applicable to sales to which this section applies.
§ 6-108. BULK SALES BY AUCTION; BULK SALES CONDUCTED BY LIQUIDATOR.
Page 3 of 4
3. Subsection (1)(d) sets forth the maximum cumulative liability for auctioneers and liquidators "in any one bulk
sale," which term includes a series of sales by a liquidator. This liability is to be calculated in a manner similar to
that set forth in Sections 6-107(4) and 6-107(5). The term "net proceeds of the auction or sale allocable to
inventory and equipment" is analogous to the term "net value of the inventory and equipment"; however, the former
takes into account the reasonable expenses of the auction or sale whereas the latter does not. Also, the latter is
doubled whereas the former is not. The "amount of the portion of any part of the net proceeds paid to or applied for
the benefit of a creditor which is allocable to inventory and equipment" is determined by multiplying the part of the
net proceeds paid to or applied for the benefit of a creditor by a fraction whose numerator is the net proceeds of the
sale allocable to inventory and equipment and whose denominator is the total net proceeds of the auction or sale.
Because the amount of the net proceeds allocable to inventory and equipment is not doubled, the auctioneer or
liquidator is not entitled to credit for payments made to the seller.
4. Section 6-107(3) applies to all bulk sales. Accordingly, an auctioneer or liquidator who makes a good faith effort
to comply with the requirements of this Article or to exclude the sale from this Article or who acts under a good faith
belief that this Article does not apply to the sale faces no liability whatsoever.
Cross-References:
Point 1: Section 6-102.
Point 2: Sections 6-102, 6-104, 6-105, 6-106, and 6-107.
Point 3: Sections 6-102 and 6-107.
Point 4: Section 6-107.
Definitional Cross-References:
"Assets". Section 6-102.
"Auctioneer". Section 6-102.
"Bulk sale". Section 6-102.
"Claimants". Section 6-102.
"Creditor". Section 6-102.
"Debt". Section 6-102.
"Equipment". Section 9-109.
"Inventory". Section 9-109.
"Liquidator". Section 6-102.
"Net proceeds". Section 6-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Written". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 6-108. BULK SALES BY AUCTION; BULK SALES CONDUCTED BY LIQUIDATOR.
Page 4 of 4
End of Document
U.C.C. § 6-109
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]
§ 6-109. WHAT CONSTITUTES FILING; DUTIES OF FILING OFFICER;
INFORMATION FROM FILING OFFICER.
(1) Presentation of a notice or list of claimants for filing and tender of the filing fee or acceptance of the
notice or list by the filing officer constitutes filing under this Article.
(2) The filing officer shall:
(a) mark each notice or list with a file number and with the date and hour of filing;
(b) hold the notice or list or a copy for public inspection;
(c) index the notice or list according to each name given for the seller and for the buyer; and
(d) note in the index the file number and the addresses of the seller and buyer given in the notice or
list.
(3) If the person filing a notice or list furnishes the filing officer with a copy, the filing officer upon request
shall note upon the copy the file number and date and hour of the filing of the original and send or deliver
the copy to the person.
(4) The fee for filing and indexing and for stamping a copy furnished by the person filing to show the date
and place of filing is $ ....… for the first page and $ .....… for each additional page. The fee for indexing
each name more than two is $ .....…
(5) Upon request of any person, the filing officer shall issue a certificate showing whether any notice or list
with respect to a particular seller or buyer is on file on the date and hour stated in the certificate. If a notice
or list is on file, the certificate must give the date and hour of filing of each notice or list and the name and
address of each seller, buyer, auctioneer, or liquidator. The fee for the certificate is $ ....… if the request for
the certificate is in the standard form prescribed by the [Secretary of State] and otherwise is $ ......… Upon
request of any person, the filing officer shall furnish a copy of any filed notice or list for a fee of $ .....…
(6) The filing officer shall keep each notice or list for two years after it is filed.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: None
Purposes of New Matter:
This Article contemplates public filing of bulk sale notices and lists of claimants in a single filing office in each state.
This section, which derives substantially from Sections 9-403 and 9-407, governs filing. The filing system is
designed to enable one seeking information about a sale to discover any filed notices or lists by searching under
either the seller's or the buyer's (but not the auctioneer's or liquidator's) individual, partnership, or corporate name.
Cross-References:
§ 6-109. WHAT CONSTITUTES FILING; DUTIES OF FILING OFFICER; INFORMATION FROM FILING
OFFICER.
Page 2 of 2
Sections 6-103, 6-105, 9-403, and 9-407.
Definitional Cross-References:
"Auctioneer". Section 6-102.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Liquidator". Section 6-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Seller". Section 2-103.
"Send". Section 1-201.
CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO SECTION 2-403(4)
States adopting Alternative B should amend Section 2-403(4) of the Uniform Commercial Code to read as follows:
(4) The rights of other purchasers of goods and of lien creditors are governed by the Articles on Secured
Transactions (Article 9), Bulk Transfers Sales (Article 6) and Documents of Title (Article 7).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 6-110
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES >
ALTERNATIVE B [Including Article 6 as revised]
Notice
Added: Text highlighted in green
Deleted: Red text with a strikethrough
§ 6-110. LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
(1) Except as provided in subsection (2), an action under this Article against a buyer, auctioneer, or
liquidator must be commenced within one year after the date of the bulk sale.
(2) If the buyer, auctioneer, or liquidator conceals the fact that the sale has occurred, the limitation is tolled
and an action under this Article may be commenced within the earlier of (i) one year after the person
bringing the action discovers that the sale has occurred or (ii) one year after the person bringing the action
should have discovered that the sale has occurred, but no later than two years after the date of the bulk
sale. Complete noncompliance with the requirements of this Article does not of itself constitute
concealment.
(3) An action under Section 6-107(11) must be commenced within one year after the alleged violation
occurs.]
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Section 6-111 (1987 Official Text).
Changes: Statute of limitations extended and clarified.
Purposes of Changes and New Matter:
1. This Article imposes liability upon only those who do not make a good faith and commercially reasonable effort
to comply with the requirements of the Article or to exclude the sale from the application of the Article and who do
not hold a good faith and commercially reasonable belief that the Article is inapplicable to the sale. Consequently, it
extends the six-month limitation period of the 1987 Official Text, which applies to good faith transferees as well as
those not in good faith, to one year. The period commences with the date of the bulk sale.
2. Cases decided under the 1987 Official Text of Article 6 disagree over whether the complete failure to comply
with the requirements of that Article constitutes a concealment that tolls the limitation. This Article adopts the view
that noncompliance does not of itself constitute concealment.
§ 6-110. LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
Page 2 of 2
3. This Article does not contemplate tolling the limitation for actions against a person in control of the seller who
fails to distribute the net contract price in accordance with the schedule of distribution. Those actions must be
commenced within one year after the alleged violation occurs.
Cross-References:
Point 1: Sections 1-201, 6-102, 6-107 and 6-108.
Point 3: Section 6-107.
Definitional Cross-References:
"Action". Section 1-201.
"Auctioneer". Section 6-102.
"Buyer". Section 2-103.
"Date of the bulk sale". Section 6-102.
"Liquidator". Section 6-102.
CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO SECTION 1-105
States adopting Alternative B should amend Section 1-105(2) of the Uniform Commercial Code to read as follows:
(2) Where one of the following provisions of this Act specifies the applicable law, that provision governs and a
contrary agreement is effective only to the extent permitted by the law (including the conflict of laws rules) so
specified:
Rights of creditors against sold goods. Section 2-402.
Applicability of the Article on Leases. Sections 2A-105 and 2A-106.
Applicability of the Article on Bank Deposits and Collections. Section 4-102.
Bulk transfers sales subject to the Article on Bulk Transfers Sales. Section 6-102 6-103.
Applicability of the Article on Investment Securities. Section 8-106.
Perfection provisions of the Article on Secured Transactions. Section 9-103.
CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO SECTION 2-403(4)
States adopting Alternative B should amend Section 2-403(4) of the Uniform Commercial Code to read as follows:
(4) The rights of other purchasers of goods and of lien creditors are governed by the Articles on Secured
Transactions (Article 9), Bulk Transfers Sales (Article 6) and Documents of Title (Article 7).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 1. GENERAL
§ 7-101. SHORT TITLE
This article may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code-Documents of Title.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-101.
Changes: Revised for style only.
This Article is a revision of the 1962 Official Text with Comments as amended since 1962. The 1962 Official Text
was a consolidation and revision of the Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act and the Uniform Bills of Lading Act, and
embraced the provisions of the Uniform Sales Act relating to negotiation of documents of title.
This Article does not contain the substantive criminal provisions found in the Uniform Warehouse Receipts and
Bills of Lading Acts. These criminal provisions are inappropriate to a Commercial Code, and for the most part
duplicate portions of the ordinary criminal law relating to frauds. This revision deletes the former Section 7-105 that
provided that courts could apply a rule from Parts 2 and 3 by analogy to a situation not explicitly covered in the
provisions on warehouse receipts or bills of lading when it was appropriate. This is, of course, an unexceptional
proposition and need not be stated explicitly in the statute. Thus former Section 7-105 has been deleted. Whether
applying a rule by analogy to a situation is appropriate depends upon the facts of each case.
The Article does not attempt to define the tort liability of bailees, except to hold certain classes of bailees to a
minimum standard of reasonable care. For important classes of bailees, liabilities in case of loss, damages or
destruction, as well as other legal questions associated with particular documents of title, are governed by federal
statutes, international treaties, and in some cases regulatory state laws, which supersede the provisions of this
Article in case of inconsistency. See Section 7-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 1. GENERAL
§ 7-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
(a) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) "Bailee" means a person that by a warehouse receipt, bill of lading, or other document of title
acknowledges possession of goods and contracts to deliver them.
(2) "Carrier" means a person that issues a bill of lading.
(3) "Consignee" means a person named in a bill of lading to which or to whose order the bill promises
delivery.
(4) "Consignor" means a person named in a bill of lading as the person from which the goods have
been received for shipment.
(5) "Delivery order" means a record that contains an order to deliver goods directed to a warehouse,
carrier, or other person that in the ordinary course of business issues warehouse receipts or bills of
lading.
(6) "Good faith" means honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair
dealing.
(7) "Goods" means all things that are treated as movable for the purposes of a contract for storage or
transportation.
(8) "Issuer" means a bailee that issues a document of title or, in the case of an unaccepted delivery
order, the person that orders the possessor of goods to deliver. The term includes a person for which
an agent or employee purports to act in issuing a document if the agent or employee has real or
apparent authority to issue documents, even if the issuer did not receive any goods, the goods were
misdescribed, or in any other respect the agent or employee violated the issuer's instructions.
(9) "Person entitled under the document" means the holder, in the case of a negotiable document of
title, or the person to which delivery of the goods is to be made by the terms of, or pursuant to
instructions in a record under, a nonnegotiable document of title.
(10) "Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an
electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.
(11) "Sign" means, with present intent to authenticate or adopt a record:
(A) to execute or adopt a tangible symbol; or
(B) to attach to or logically associate with the record an electronic sound, symbol, or process.
(12) "Shipper" means a person that enters into a contract of transportation with a carrier.
(13) "Warehouse" means a person engaged in the business of storing goods for hire.
(b) Definitions in other articles applying to this article and the sections in which they appear are:
(1) "Contract for sale", Section 2-106.
(2) "Lessee in ordinary course", Section 2A-103.
(3) "Receipt" of goods, Section 2-103.
§ 7-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 3
(c) In addition, Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation
applicable throughout this article.
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: If the state has enacted Revised Article 1, the definitions of "good faith" in subsection (a)(6) and
"record" in (a)(10) need not be enacted in this section as they are contained in Article 1, Section 1-201. These
subsections should be marked as "reserved" in order to provide for uniform numbering of subsections.
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-102.
Changes: New definitions of "carrier," "good faith," "record," "sign," and "shipper." Other definitions revised to
accommodate electronic mediums.
Purposes:
1. "Bailee" is used in this Article as a blanket term to designate carriers, warehousemen and others who normally
issue documents of title on the basis of goods which they have received. The definition does not, however, require
actual possession of the goods. If a bailee acknowledges possession when it does not have possession, the bailee
is bound by sections of this Article which declare the "bailee's" obligations. (See definition of "Issuer" in this section
and Sections 7-203 and 7-301 on liability in case of non-receipt.) A "carrier" is one type of bailee and is defined as a
person that issues a bill of lading. A "shipper" is a person who enters into the contract of transportation with the
carrier. The definitions of "bailee," "consignee," "consignor," "goods", and "issuer", are unchanged in substance
from prior law. "Document of title" is defined in Article 1, and may be in either tangible or electronic form.
2. The definition of warehouse receipt contained in the general definitions section of this Act (Section 1-201) does
not require that the issuing warehouse be "lawfully engaged" in business or for profit. The warehouse's compliance
with applicable state regulations such as the filing of a bond has no bearing on the substantive issues dealt with in
this Article. Certainly the issuer's violations of law should not diminish its responsibility on documents the issuer has
put in commercial circulation. But it is still essential that the business be storing goods "for hire" (Section 1-201 and
this section). A person does not become a warehouse by storing its own goods.
3. When a delivery order has been accepted by the bailee it is for practical purposes indistinguishable from a
warehouse receipt. Prior to such acceptance there is no basis for imposing obligations on the bailee other than the
ordinary obligation of contract which the bailee may have assumed to the depositor of the goods. Delivery orders
may be either electronic or tangible documents of title. See definition of "document of title" in Section 1-201.
4. The obligation of good faith imposed by this Article and by Article 1, Section 1-304 includes the observance of
reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing.
5. The definitions of "record" and "sign" are included to facilitate electronic mediums. See comment 9 to Section
9-102 discussing "record" and the comment to amended Section 2-103 discussing "sign."
6. "Person entitled under the document" is moved from former Section 7-403.
7. These definitions apply in this Article unless the context otherwise requires. The "context" is intended to refer to
the context in which the defined term is used in the Uniform Commercial Code. The definition applies whenever the
defined term is used unless the context in which the defined term is used in the statute indicates that the term was
not used in its defined sense. See comment to Section 1-201.
Cross References:
§ 7-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 3 of 3
Point 1: Sections 1-201, 7-203 and 7-301.
Point 2: Sections 1-201 and 7-203.
Point 3: Section 1-201.
Point 4: Section 1-304.
Point 5: Section 9-102 and 2-103.
See general comment to document of title in Section 1-201.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Contract". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchase". Section 1-201.
"Receipt of goods". Section 2-103.
"Right". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 1. GENERAL
§ 7-103. RELATION OF ARTICLE TO TREATY OR STATUTE
(a) This article is subject to any treaty or statute of the United States or regulatory statute of this state to
the extent the treaty, statute, or regulatory statute is applicable.
(b) This article does not modify or repeal any law prescribing the form or content of a document of title or
the services or facilities to be afforded by a bailee, or otherwise regulating a bailee's business in respects
not specifically treated in this article. However, violation of such a law does not affect the status of a
document of title that otherwise is within the definition of a document of title.
(c) This [act] modifies, limits, and supersedes the federal Electronic Signatures in Global and National
Commerce Act ( 15 U.S.C. Section 7001, et. seq.) but does not modify, limit, or supersede Section 101(c)
of that act ( 15 U.S.C. Section 7001(c)) or authorize electronic delivery of any of the notices described in
Section 103(b) of that act ( 15 U.S.C. Section 7003(b)).
(d) To the extent there is a conflict between [the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act] and this article, this
article governs.
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: In states that have not enacted the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act in some form, states
should consider their own state laws to determine whether there is a conflict between the provisions of this article
and those laws particularly as those other laws may affect electronic documents of title.
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Sections 7-103 and 10-104.
Changes: Deletion of references to tariffs and classifications; incorporation of former Section 10-104 into
subsection (b), provide for intersection with federal and state law governing electronic transactions.
Purposes:
1. To make clear what would of course be true without the Section, that applicable Federal law is paramount.
2. To make clear also that regulatory state statutes (such as those fixing or authorizing a commission to fix rates
and prescribe services, authorizing different charges for goods of different values, and limiting liability for loss to the
declared value on which the charge was based) are not affected by the Article and are controlling on the matters
which they cover unless preempted by federal law. The reference in former Section 7-103 to tariffs, classifications,
and regulations filed or issued pursuant to regulatory state statutes has been deleted as inappropriate in the
modern era of diminished regulation of carriers and warehouses. If a regulatory scheme requires a carrier or
warehouse to issue a tariff or classification, that tariff or classification would be given effect via the state regulatory
scheme that this Article recognizes as controlling. Permissive tariffs or classifications would not displace the
provisions of this act, pursuant to this section, but may be given effect through the ability of parties to incorporate
those terms by reference into their agreement.
§ 7-103. RELATION OF ARTICLE TO TREATY OR STATUTE
Page 2 of 2
3. The document of title provisions of this act supplement the federal law and regulatory state law governing
bailees. This Article focuses on the commercial importance and usage of documents of title. State ex. rel Public
Service Commission v. Gunkelman & Sons, Inc., 219 N.W.2d 853 (N.D. 1974).
4. Subsection (c) is included to make clear the interrelationship between the federal Electronic Signatures in
Global and National Commerce Act and this article and the conforming amendments to other articles of the Uniform
Commercial Code promulgated as part of the revision of this article. Section 102 of the federal act allows a State
statute to modify, limit, or supersede the provisions of Section 101 of the federal act. See the comments to Revised
Article 1, Section 1-108.
5. Subsection (d) makes clear that once this article is in effect, its provisions regarding electronic commerce and
regarding electronic documents of title control in the event there is a conflict with the provisions of the Uniform
Electronic Transactions Act or other applicable state law governing electronic transactions.
Cross References:
Sections 1-108, 7-201, 7-202, 7-204, 7-206, 7-309, 7-401, 7-403.
Definitional Cross Reference:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 1. GENERAL
§ 7-104. NEGOTIABLE AND NONNEGOTIABLE DOCUMENT OF TITLE
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), a document of title is negotiable if by its terms the
goods are to be delivered to bearer or to the order of a named person.
(b) A document of title other than one described in subsection (a) is nonnegotiable. A bill of lading that
states that the goods are consigned to a named person is not made negotiable by a provision that the
goods are to be delivered only against an order in a record signed by the same or another named person.
(c) A document of title is nonnegotiable if, at the time it is issued, the document has a conspicuous legend,
however expressed, that it is nonnegotiable.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-104.
Changes: Subsection (a) is revised to reflect modern style and trade practice. Subsection (b) is revised for style
and medium neutrality. Subsection (c) is new.
Purposes:
1. This Article deals with a class of commercial paper representing commodities in storage or transportation. This
"commodity paper" is to be distinguished from what might be called "money paper" dealt with in the Article of this
Act on Commercial Paper (Article 3) and "investment paper" dealt with in the Article of this Act on Investment
Securities (Article 8). The class of "commodity paper" is designated "document of title" following the terminology of
the Uniform Sales Act Section 76. Section 1-201. The distinctions between negotiable and nonnegotiable
documents in this section makes the most important subclassification employed in the Article, in that the holder of
negotiable documents may acquire more rights than its transferor had (See Section 7-502). The former Section 7-
104, which provided that a document of title was negotiable if it runs to a named person or assigns if such
designation was recognized in overseas trade, has been deleted as not necessary in light of current commercial
practice.
A document of title is negotiable only if it satisfies this section. "Deliverable on proper indorsement and surrender
of this receipt" will not render a document negotiable. Bailees often include such provisions as a means of insuring
return of nonnegotiable receipts for record purposes. Such language may be regarded as insistence by the bailee
upon a particular kind of receipt in connection with delivery of the goods. Subsection (a) makes it clear that a
document is not negotiable which provides for delivery to order or bearer only if written instructions to that effect are
given by a named person. Either tangible or electronic documents of title may be negotiable if the document meets
the requirement of this section.
2. Subsection (c) is derived from Section 3-104(d). Prior to issuance of the document of title, an issuer may stamp
or otherwise provide by a notation on the document that it is nonnegotiable even if the document would otherwise
comply with the requirement of subsection (a). Once issued as a negotiable document of title, the document cannot
§ 7-104. NEGOTIABLE AND NONNEGOTIABLE DOCUMENT OF TITLE
Page 2 of 2
be changed from a negotiable document to a nonnegotiable document. A document of title that is nonnegotiable
cannot be made negotiable by stamping or providing a notation that the document is negotiable. The only way to
make a document of title negotiable is to comply with subsection (a). A negotiable document of title may fail to be
duly negotiated if the negotiation does not comply with the requirements for "due negotiation" stated in Section 7-
501.
Cross Reference: Sections 7-501 and 7-502.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bearer". Section 1-201.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Sign". Section 7-102
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 1. GENERAL
§ 7-105. REISSUANCE IN ALTERNATIVE MEDIUM
(a) Upon request of a person entitled under an electronic document of title, the issuer of the electronic
document may issue a tangible document of title as a substitute for the electronic document if:
(1) the person entitled under the electronic document surrenders control of the document to the issuer;
and
(2) the tangible document when issued contains a statement that it is issued in substitution for the
electronic document.
(b) Upon issuance of a tangible document of title in substitution for an electronic document of title in
accordance with subsection (a):
(1) the electronic document ceases to have any effect or validity; and
(2) the person that procured issuance of the tangible document warrants to all subsequent persons
entitled under the tangible document that the warrantor was a person entitled under the electronic
document when the warrantor surrendered control of the electronic document to the issuer.
(c) Upon request of a person entitled under a tangible document of title, the issuer of the tangible
document may issue an electronic document of title as a substitute for the tangible document if:
(1) the person entitled under the tangible document surrenders possession of the document to the
issuer; and
(2) the electronic document when issued contains a statement that it is issued in substitution for the
tangible document.
(d) Upon issuance of an electronic document of title in substitution for a tangible document of title in
accordance with subsection (c):
(1) the tangible document ceases to have any effect or validity; and
(2) the person that procured issuance of the electronic document warrants to all subsequent persons
entitled under the electronic document that the warrantor was a person entitled under the tangible
document when the warrantor surrendered possession of the tangible document to the issuer.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provisions: None.
Other relevant law: UNCITRAL Draft Instrument on the Carriage of Goods by SeaTransport Law.
Purpose:
§ 7-105. REISSUANCE IN ALTERNATIVE MEDIUM
Page 2 of 2
1. This section allows for documents of title issued in one medium to be reissued in another medium. This section
applies to both negotiable and nonnegotiable documents. This section sets forth minimum requirements for giving
the reissued document effect and validity. The issuer is not required to issue a document in an alternative medium
and if the issuer chooses to do so, it may impose additional requirements. Because a document of title imposes
obligations on the issuer of the document, it is imperative for the issuer to be the one who issues the substitute
document in order for the substitute document to be effective and valid.
2. The request must be made to the issuer by the person entitled to enforce the document of title (Section 7-
102(a)(9)) and that person must surrender possession or control of the original document to the issuer. The
reissued document must have a notation that it has been issued as a substitute for the original document. These
minimum requirements must be met in order to give the substitute document effect and validity. If these minimum
requirements are not met for issuance of a substitute document of title, the original document of title continues to be
effective and valid. Section 7-402. However, if the minimum requirements imposed by this section are met, in
addition to any other requirements that the issuer may impose, the substitute document will be the document that is
effective and valid.
3. To protect parties who subsequently take the substitute document of title, the person who procured issuance of
the substitute document warrants that it was a person entitled under the original document at the time it
surrendered possession or control of the original document to the issuer. This warranty is modeled after the
warranty found in Section 4-209.
Cross Reference: Sections 7-106, 7-402 and 7-601.
Definitional Cross Reference: "Person entitled to enforce," Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 1. GENERAL
§ 7-106. CONTROL OF ELECTRONIC DOCUMENT OF TITLE
(a) A person has control of an electronic document of title if a system employed for evidencing the transfer
of interests in the electronic document reliably establishes that person as the person to which the electronic
document was issued or transferred.
(b) A system satisfies subsection (a), and a person is deemed to have control of an electronic document of
title, if the document is created, stored, and assigned in such a manner that:
(1) a single authoritative copy of the document exists which is unique, identifiable, and, except as
otherwise provided in paragraphs (4), (5), and (6), unalterable;
(2) the authoritative copy identifies the person asserting control as:
(A) the person to which the document was issued; or
(B) if the authoritative copy indicates that the document has been transferred, the person to which
the document was most recently transferred;
(3) the authoritative copy is communicated to and maintained by the person asserting control or its
designated custodian;
(4) copies or amendments that add or change an identified assignee of the authoritative copy can be
made only with the consent of the person asserting control;
(5) each copy of the authoritative copy and any copy of a copy is readily identifiable as a copy that is
not the authoritative copy; and
(6) any amendment of the authoritative copy is readily identifiable as authorized or unauthorized.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Uniform Electronic Transactions Act Section 16.
Purpose:
1. The section defines "control" for electronic documents of title and derives its rules from the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act § 16 on transferrable records. Unlike UETA § 16, however, a document of title may be reissued in
an alternative medium pursuant to Section 7-105. At any point in time in which a document of title is in electronic
form, the control concept of this section is relevant. As under UETA § 16, the control concept embodied in this
section provides the legal framework for developing systems for electronic documents of title.
2. Control of an electronic document of title substitutes for the concept of indorsement and possession in the
tangible document of title context. See Section 7-501. A person with a tangible document of title delivers the
document by voluntarily transferring possession and a person with an electronic document of title delivers the
document by voluntarily transferring control. (Delivery is defined in Section 1-201).
§ 7-106. CONTROL OF ELECTRONIC DOCUMENT OF TITLE
Page 2 of 3
3. Subsection (a) sets forth the general rule that the "system employed for evidencing the transfer of interests in
the electronic document reliably establishes that person as the person to which the electronic document was issued
or transferred." The key to having a system that satisfies this test is that identity of the person to which the
document was issued or transferred must be reliably established. Of great importance to the functioning of the
control concept is to be able to demonstrate, at any point in time, the person entitled under the electronic document.
For example, a carrier may issue an electronic bill of lading by having the required information in a database that is
encrypted and accessible by virtue of a password. If the computer system in which the required information is
maintained identifies the person as the person to which the electronic bill of lading was issued or transferred, that
person has control of the electronic document of title. That identification may be by virtue of passwords or other
encryption methods. Registry systems may satisfy this test. For example, see the electronic warehouse receipt
system established pursuant to 7 C.F.R. Part 735. This Article leaves to the market place the development of
sufficient technologies and business practices that will meet the test.
An electronic document of title is evidenced by a record consisting of information stored in an electronic medium.
Section 1-201. For example, a record in a computer database could be an electronic document of title assuming
that it otherwise meets the definition of document of title. To the extent that third parties wish to deal in paper
mediums, Section 7-105 provides a mechanism for exiting the electronic environment by having the issuer reissue
the document of title in a tangible medium. Thus if a person entitled to enforce an electronic document of title
causes the information in the record to be printed onto paper without the issuer's involvement in issuing the
document of title pursuant to Section 7-105, that paper is not a document of title.
4. Subsection (a) sets forth the general test for control. Subsection (b) sets forth a safe harbor test that if satisfied,
results in control under the general test in subsection (a). The test in subsection (b) is also used in Section 9-105
although Section 9-105 does not include the general test of subsection (a). Under subsection (b), at any point in
time, a party should be able to identify the single authoritative copy which is unique and identifiable as the
authoritative copy. This does not mean that once created that the authoritative copy need be static and never
moved or copied from its original location. To the extent that backup systems exist which result in multiple copies,
the key to this idea is that at any point in time, the one authoritative copy needs to be unique and identifiable.
Parties may not by contract provide that control exists. The test for control is a factual test that depends upon
whether the general test in subsection (a) or the safe harbor in subsection (b) is satisfied.
5. Article 7 has historically provided for rights under documents of title and rights of transferees of documents of
title as those rights relate to the goods covered by the document. Third parties may possess or have control of
documents of title. While misfeasance or negligence in failure to transfer or misdelivery of the document by those
third parties may create serious issues, this Article has never dealt with those issues as it relates to tangible
documents of title, preferring to leave those issues to the law of contracts, agency and tort law. In the electronic
document of title regime, third party registry systems are just beginning to develop. It is very difficult to write rules
regulating those third parties without some definitive sense of how the third party registry systems will be structured.
Systems that are evolving to date tend to be "closed" systems in which all participants must sign on to the master
agreement which provides for rights as against the registry system as well as rights among the members. In those
closed systems, the document of title never leaves the system so the parties rely upon the master agreement as to
rights against the registry for its failures in dealing with the document. This article contemplates that those "closed"
systems will continue to evolve and that the control mechanism in this statute provides a method for the participants
in the closed system to achieve the benefits of obtaining control allowed by this article.
This article also contemplates that parties will evolve open systems where parties need not be subject to a master
agreement. In an open system a party that is expecting to obtain rights through an electronic document may not be
a party to the master agreement. To the extent that open systems evolve by use of the control concept contained in
this section, the law of contracts, agency, and torts as it applies to the registry's misfeasance or negligence
concerning the transfer of control of the electronic document will allocate the risks and liabilities of the parties as
that other law now does so for third parties who hold tangible documents and fail to deliver the documents.
Cross Reference: Sections 7-105 and 7-501.
§ 7-106. CONTROL OF ELECTRONIC DOCUMENT OF TITLE
Page 3 of 3
Definitional Cross-References:
"Delivery", 1-201.
"Document of title", 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-201
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-201. PERSON THAT MAY ISSUE A WAREHOUSE RECEIPT; STORAGE
UNDER BOND
(a) A warehouse receipt may be issued by any warehouse.
(b) If goods, including distilled spirits and agricultural commodities, are stored under a statute requiring a
bond against withdrawal or a license for the issuance of receipts in the nature of warehouse receipts, a
receipt issued for the goods is deemed to be a warehouse receipt even if issued by a person that is the
owner of the goods and is not a warehouse.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-201.
Changes: Update for style only.
Purposes:
It is not intended by re-enactment of subsection (a) to repeal any provisions of special licensing or other statutes
regulating who may become a warehouse. Limitations on the transfer of the receipts and criminal sanctions for
violation of such limitations are not impaired. Section 7-103. Compare Section 7-401(4) on the liability of the issuer
in such cases. Subsection (b) covers receipts issued by the owner for whiskey or other goods stored in bonded
warehouses under such statutes as 26 U.S.C. Chapter 51.
Cross References: Sections 7-103, 7-401.
Definitional Cross References:
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-202
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-202. FORM OF WAREHOUSE RECEIPT; EFFECT OF OMISSION
(a) A warehouse receipt need not be in any particular form.
(b) Unless a warehouse receipt provides for each of the following, the warehouse is liable for damages
caused to a person injured by its omission:
(1) a statement of the location of the warehouse facility where the goods are stored;
(2) the date of issue of the receipt;
(3) the unique identification code of the receipt;
(4) a statement whether the goods received will be delivered to the bearer, to a named person, or to a
named person or its order;
(5) the rate of storage and handling charges, unless goods are stored under a field warehousing
arrangement, in which case a statement of that fact is sufficient on a nonnegotiable receipt;
(6) a description of the goods or the packages containing them;
(7) the signature of the warehouse or its agent;
(8) if the receipt is issued for goods that the warehouse owns, either solely, jointly, or in common with
others, a statement of the fact of that ownership; and
(9) a statement of the amount of advances made and of liabilities incurred for which the warehouse
claims a lien or security interest, unless the precise amount of advances made or liabilities incurred, at
the time of the issue of the receipt, is unknown to the warehouse or to its agent that issued the receipt,
in which case a statement of the fact that advances have been made or liabilities incurred and the
purpose of the advances or liabilities is sufficient.
(c) A warehouse may insert in its receipt any terms that are not contrary to [the Uniform Commercial Code]
and do not impair its obligation of delivery under Section 7-403 or its duty of care under Section 7-204. Any
contrary provision is ineffective.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-202.
Changes: Language is updated to accommodate electronic commerce and to reflect modern style.
Purposes:
1. This section does not displace any particular legislation that requires other terms in a warehouse receipt or that
may require a particular form of a warehouse receipt. This section does not require that a warehouse receipt be
§ 7-202. FORM OF WAREHOUSE RECEIPT; EFFECT OF OMISSION
Page 2 of 2
issued. A warehouse receipt that is issued need not contain any of the terms listed in subsection (b) in order to
qualify as a warehouse receipt as long as the receipt falls within the definition of "warehouse receipt" in Article 1.
Thus the title has been changed to eliminate the phrase "essential terms" as provided in prior law. The only
consequence of a warehouse receipt not containing any term listed in subsection (b) is that a person injured by a
term's omission has a right as against the warehouse for harm caused by the omission. Cases, such as In re
Celotex Corp., 134 B. R. 993 (Bankr. M.D. Fla. 1991), that held that in order to have a valid warehouse receipt all of
the terms listed in this section must be contained in the receipt, are disapproved.
2. The unique identification code referred to in subsection (b)(3) can include any combination of letters, number,
signs, and/or symbols that provide a unique identification. Whether an electronic or tangible warehouse receipt
contains a signature will be resolved with the definition of sign in Section 7-102.
Cross References: Sections 7-103 and 7-401.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bearer". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Sign". Section 7-102.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-203
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-203. LIABILITY FOR NONRECEIPT OR MISDESCRIPTION
A party to or purchaser for value in good faith of a document of title, other than a bill of lading, that relies
upon the description of the goods in the document may recover from the issuer damages caused by the
nonreceipt or misdescription of the goods, except to the extent that:
(1) the document conspicuously indicates that the issuer does not know whether all or part of the
goods in fact were received or conform to the description, such as a case in which the description is in
terms of marks or labels or kind, quantity, or condition, or the receipt or description is qualified by
"contents, condition, and quality unknown", "said to contain", or words of similar import, if the indication
is true; or
(2) the party or purchaser otherwise has notice of the nonreceipt or misdescription.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-203.
Changes: Changes to this section are for style only.
Purpose:
This section is a simplified restatement of existing law as to the method by which a bailee may avoid responsibility
for the accuracy of descriptions which are made by or in reliance upon information furnished by the depositor. The
issuer is liable on documents issued by an agent, contrary to instructions of its principal, without receiving goods.
No disclaimer of the latter liability is permitted.
Cross Reference: Section 7-301.
Definitional Cross References:
"Conspicuous". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Good Faith". Section 1-201. [7-102]
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Notice". Section 1-202.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
§ 7-203. LIABILITY FOR NONRECEIPT OR MISDESCRIPTION
Page 2 of 2
"Receipt of goods". Section 2-103.
"Value". Section 1-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-204
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-204. DUTY OF CARE; CONTRACTUAL LIMITATION OF WAREHOUSE'S
LIABILITY
(a) A warehouse is liable for damages for loss of or injury to the goods caused by its failure to exercise
care with regard to the goods that a reasonably careful person would exercise under similar circumstances.
Unless otherwise agreed, the warehouse is not liable for damages that could not have been avoided by the
exercise of that care.
(b) Damages may be limited by a term in the warehouse receipt or storage agreement limiting the amount
of liability in case of loss or damage beyond which the warehouse is not liable. Such a limitation is not
effective with respect to the warehouse's liability for conversion to its own use. On request of the bailor in a
record at the time of signing the storage agreement or within a reasonable time after receipt of the
warehouse receipt, the warehouse's liability may be increased on part or all of the goods covered by the
storage agreement or the warehouse receipt. In this event, increased rates may be charged based on an
increased valuation of the goods.
(c) Reasonable provisions as to the time and manner of presenting claims and commencing actions based
on the bailment may be included in the warehouse receipt or storage agreement.
[(d) This section does not modify or repeal [Insert reference to any statute that imposes a higher
responsibility upon the warehouse or invalidates a contractual limitation that would be permissible under
this Article].]
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: Insert in subsection (d) a reference to any statute which imposes a higher responsibility upon the
warehouse or invalidates a contractual limitation that would be permissible under this Article. If no such statutes
exist, this section should be deleted.
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-204.
Changes: Updated to reflect modern, standard commercial practices.
Purposes of Changes:
1. Subsection (a) continues the rule without change from former Section 7-204 on the warehouse's obligation to
exercise reasonable care.
2. Former Section 7-204(2) required that the term limiting damages do so by setting forth a specific liability per
article or item or of a value per unit of weight. This requirement has been deleted as out of step with modern
industry practice. Under subsection (b) a warehouse may limit its liability for damages for loss of or damage to the
goods by a term in the warehouse receipt or storage agreement without the term constituting an impermissible
disclaimer of the obligation of reasonable care. The parties cannot disclaim by contract the warehouse's obligation
§ 7-204. DUTY OF CARE; CONTRACTUAL LIMITATION OF WAREHOUSE'S LIABILITY
Page 2 of 2
of care. Section 1-302. For example, limitations based upon per unit of weight, per package, per occurrence, or per
receipt as well as limitations based upon a multiple of the storage rate may be commercially appropriate. As
subsection (d) makes clear, the states or the federal government may supplement this section with more rigid
standards of responsibility for some or all bailees.
3. Former Section 7-204(2) also provided that an increased rate can not be charged if contrary to a tariff. That
language has been deleted. If a tariff is required under state or federal law, pursuant to Section 7-103(a), the tariff
would control over the rule of this section allowing an increased rate. The provisions of a non-mandatory tariff may
be incorporated by reference in the parties' agreement. See Comment 2 to Section 7-103. Subsection (c) deletes
the reference to tariffs for the same reason that the reference has been omitted in subsection (b).
4. As under former Section 7-204(2), subsection (b) provides that a limitation of damages is ineffective if the
warehouse has converted the goods to its own use. A mere failure to redeliver the goods is not conversion to the
warehouse's own use. See Adams v. Ryan & Christie Storage, Inc., 563 F. Supp. 409 (E.D. Pa. 1983) aff'd 725
F.2d 666 (3rd Cir. 1983). Cases such as I.C.C. Metals Inc. v. Municipal Warehouse Co., 409 N.E. 2d 849 (N.Y. Ct.
App. 1980) holding that mere failure to redeliver results in a presumption of conversion to the warehouse's own use
are disapproved. "Conversion to its own use" is narrower than the idea of conversion generally. Cases such as
Lipman v. Peterson, 575 P.2d 19 (Kan. 1978) holding to the contrary are disapproved.
5. Storage agreements commonly establish the contractual relationship between warehouses and depositors who
have an on-going relationship. The storage agreement may allow for the movement of goods into and out of a
warehouse without the necessity of issuing or amending a warehouse receipt upon each entry or exit of goods from
the warehouse.
Cross References: Sections 1-302, 7-103, 7-309 and 7-403.
Definitional Cross References:
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-204.
"Sign". Section 7-102.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-204.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-205
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-205. TITLE UNDER WAREHOUSE RECEIPT DEFEATED IN CERTAIN
CASES
A buyer in ordinary course of business of fungible goods sold and delivered by a warehouse that is also in the
business of buying and selling such goods takes the goods free of any claim under a warehouse receipt even if the
receipt is negotiable and has been duly negotiated.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-205.
Changes: Changes for style only.
Purposes:
1. The typical case covered by this section is that of the warehouse-dealer in grain, and the substantive question
at issue is whether in case the warehouse becomes insolvent the receipt holders shall be able to trace and recover
grain shipped to farmers and other purchasers from the elevator. This was possible under the old acts, although
courts were eager to find estoppels to prevent it. The practical difficulty of tracing fungible grain means that the
preservation of this theoretical right adds little to the commercial acceptability of negotiable grain receipts, which
really circulate on the credit of the warehouse. Moreover, on default of the warehouse, the receipt holders at least
share in what grain remains, whereas retaking the grain from a good faith cash purchaser reduces the purchaser
completely to the status of general creditor in a situation where there was very little the purchaser could do to guard
against the loss. Compare 15 U.S.C. Section 714p enacted in 1955.
2. This provision applies to both negotiable and nonnegotiable warehouse receipts. The concept of due
negotiation is provided for in 7-501. The definition of "buyer in ordinary course" is in Article 1 and provides, among
other things, that a buyer must either have possession or a right to obtain the goods under Article 2 in order to be a
buyer in ordinary course. This section requires actual delivery of the fungible goods to the buyer in ordinary course.
Delivery requires voluntary transfer of possession of the fungible goods to the buyer. See amended Section 2-103.
This section is not satisfied by the delivery of the document of title to the buyer in ordinary course.
Cross References: Sections 2-403 and 9-320.
Definitional Cross References:
"Buyer in ordinary course of business". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Fungible" goods. Section 1-201.
§ 7-205. TITLE UNDER WAREHOUSE RECEIPT DEFEATED IN CERTAIN CASES
Page 2 of 2
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Value". Section 1-204.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-206
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-206. TERMINATION OF STORAGE AT WAREHOUSE'S OPTION
(a) A warehouse, by giving notice to the person on whose account the goods are held and any other
person known to claim an interest in the goods, may require payment of any charges and removal of the
goods from the warehouse at the termination of the period of storage fixed by the document of title or, if a
period is not fixed, within a stated period not less than 30 days after the warehouse gives notice. If the
goods are not removed before the date specified in the notice, the warehouse may sell them pursuant to
Section 7-210.
(b) If a warehouse in good faith believes that goods are about to deteriorate or decline in value to less than
the amount of its lien within the time provided in subsection (a) and Section 7-210, the warehouse may
specify in the notice given under subsection (a) any reasonable shorter time for removal of the goods and, if
the goods are not removed, may sell them at public sale held not less than one week after a single
advertisement or posting.
(c) If, as a result of a quality or condition of the goods of which the warehouse did not have notice at the
time of deposit, the goods are a hazard to other property, the warehouse facilities, or other persons, the
warehouse may sell the goods at public or private sale without advertisement or posting on reasonable
notification to all persons known to claim an interest in the goods. If the warehouse, after a reasonable
effort, is unable to sell the goods, it may dispose of them in any lawful manner and does not incur liability by
reason of that disposition.
(d) A warehouse shall deliver the goods to any person entitled to them under this article upon due demand
made at any time before sale or other disposition under this section.
(e) A warehouse may satisfy its lien from the proceeds of any sale or disposition under this section but
shall hold the balance for delivery on the demand of any person to which the warehouse would have been
bound to deliver the goods.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-206.
Changes: Changes for style.
Purposes:
1. This section provides for three situations in which the warehouse may terminate storage for reasons other then
enforcement of its lien as permitted by Section 7-210. Most warehousing is for an indefinite term, the bailor being
entitled to delivery on reasonable demand. It is necessary to define the warehouse's power to terminate the
bailment, since it would be commercially intolerable to allow warehouses to order removal of the goods on short
notice. The thirty day period provided where the document does not carry its own period of termination corresponds
§ 7-206. TERMINATION OF STORAGE AT WAREHOUSE'S OPTION
Page 2 of 2
to commercial practice of computing rates on a monthly basis. The right to terminate under subsection (a) includes
a right to require payment of "any charges", but does not depend on the existence of unpaid charges.
2. In permitting expeditious disposition of perishable and hazardous goods the pre-Code Uniform Warehouse
Receipts Act, Section 34, made no distinction between cases where the warehouse knowingly undertook to store
such goods and cases where the goods were discovered to be of that character subsequent to storage. The former
situation presents no such emergency as justifies the summary power of removal and sale. Subsections (b) and (c)
distinguish between the two situations. The reason of this section should apply if the goods become hazardous
during the course of storage. The process for selling the goods described in Section 7-210 governs the sale of
goods under this section except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) for the situations described in those
subsections respectively.
3. Protection of its lien is the only interest which the warehouse has to justify summary sale of perishable goods
which are not hazardous. This same interest must be recognized when the stored goods, although not perishable,
decline in market value to a point which threatens the warehouse's security.
4. The right to order removal of stored goods is subject to provisions of the public warehousing laws of some
states forbidding warehouses from discriminating among customers. Nor does the section relieve the warehouse of
any obligation under the state laws to secure the approval of a public official before disposing of deteriorating
goods. Such regulatory statutes and the regulations under them remain in force and operative. Section 7-103.
Cross References: Sections 7-103 and 7-403.
Definitional Cross References:
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-102.
"Good faith". Section 1-201 [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Notice". Section 1-202.
"Notification". Section 1-202.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-205.
"Value". Section 1-204.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-207
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-207. GOODS MUST BE KEPT SEPARATE; FUNGIBLE GOODS
(a) Unless the warehouse receipt provides otherwise, a warehouse shall keep separate the goods covered
by each receipt so as to permit at all times identification and delivery of those goods. However, different lots
of fungible goods may be commingled.
(b) If different lots of fungible goods are commingled, the goods are owned in common by the persons
entitled thereto and the warehouse is severally liable to each owner for that owner's share. If, because of
overissue, a mass of fungible goods is insufficient to meet all the receipts the warehouse has issued
against it, the persons entitled include all holders to which overissued receipts have been duly negotiated.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-207.
Changes: Changes for style only.
Purposes:
No change of substance is made from former Section 7-207. Holders to whom overissued receipts have been
duly negotiated shall share in a mass of fungible goods. Where individual ownership interests are merged into
claims on a common fund, as is necessarily the case with fungible goods, there is no policy reason for
discriminating between successive purchasers of similar claims.
Definitional Cross References:
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Fungible goods". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Holder". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 7-207. GOODS MUST BE KEPT SEPARATE; FUNGIBLE GOODS
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-208
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-208. ALTERED WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS
If a blank in a negotiable tangible warehouse receipt has been filled in without authority, a good-faith purchaser for
value and without notice of the lack of authority may treat the insertion as authorized. Any other unauthorized
alteration leaves any tangible or electronic warehouse receipt enforceable against the issuer according to its
original tenor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-208.
Changes: To accommodate electronic documents of title.
Purpose:
1. The execution of tangible warehouse receipts in blank is a dangerous practice. As between the issuer and an
innocent purchaser the risks should clearly fall on the former. The purchaser must have purchased the tangible
negotiable warehouse receipt in good faith and for value to be protected under the rule of the first sentence which is
a limited exception to the general rule in the second sentence. Electronic document of title systems should have
protection against unauthorized access and unauthorized changes. See 7-106. Thus the protection for good faith
purchasers found in the first sentence is not necessary in the context of electronic documents.
2. Under the second sentence of this section, an unauthorized alteration whether made with or without fraudulent
intent does not relieve the issuer of its liability on the warehouse receipt as originally executed. The unauthorized
alteration itself is of course ineffective against the warehouse. The rule stated in the second sentence applies to
both tangible and electronic warehouse receipts.
Definitional Cross References:
"Good faith". Section 1-201 [7-102].
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Notice". Section 1-202.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-204.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 7-208. ALTERED WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-209
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-209. LIEN OF WAREHOUSE
(a) A warehouse has a lien against the bailor on the goods covered by a warehouse receipt or storage
agreement or on the proceeds thereof in its possession for charges for storage or transportation, including
demurrage and terminal charges, insurance, labor, or other charges, present or future, in relation to the
goods, and for expenses necessary for preservation of the goods or reasonably incurred in their sale
pursuant to law. If the person on whose account the goods are held is liable for similar charges or expenses
in relation to other goods whenever deposited and it is stated in the warehouse receipt or storage
agreement that a lien is claimed for charges and expenses in relation to other goods, the warehouse also
has a lien against the goods covered by the warehouse receipt or storage agreement or on the proceeds
thereof in its possession for those charges and expenses, whether or not the other goods have been
delivered by the warehouse. However, as against a person to which a negotiable warehouse receipt is duly
negotiated, a warehouse's lien is limited to charges in an amount or at a rate specified in the warehouse
receipt or, if no charges are so specified, to a reasonable charge for storage of the specific goods covered
by the receipt subsequent to the date of the receipt.
(b) A warehouse may also reserve a security interest against the bailor for the maximum amount specified
on the receipt for charges other than those specified in subsection (a), such as for money advanced and
interest. The security interest is governed by Article 9.
(c) A warehouse's lien for charges and expenses under subsection (a) or a security interest under
subsection (b) is also effective against any person that so entrusted the bailor with possession of the goods
that a pledge of them by the bailor to a good-faith purchaser for value would have been valid. However, the
lien or security interest is not effective against a person that before issuance of a document of title had a
legal interest or a perfected security interest in the goods and that did not:
(1) deliver or entrust the goods or any document of title covering the goods to the bailor or the bailor's
nominee with:
(A) actual or apparent authority to ship, store, or sell;
(B) power to obtain delivery under Section 7-403; or
(C) power of disposition under Sections 2-403, 2A-304(2), 2A-305(2), 9-320, or 9-321(c) or other
statute or rule of law; or
(2) acquiesce in the procurement by the bailor or its nominee of any document.
(d) A warehouse's lien on household goods for charges and expenses in relation to the goods under
subsection (a) is also effective against all persons if the depositor was the legal possessor of the goods at
the time of deposit. In this subsection, "household goods" means furniture, furnishings, or personal effects
used by the depositor in a dwelling.
(e) A warehouse loses its lien on any goods that it voluntarily delivers or unjustifiably refuses to deliver.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 7-209. LIEN OF WAREHOUSE
Page 2 of 5
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Sections 7-209 and 7-503.
Changes: Expanded to recognize warehouse lien when a warehouse receipt is not issued but goods are covered
by a storage agreement.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (a) defines the warehouse's statutory lien. Other than allowing a warehouse to claim a lien under
this section when there is a storage agreement and not a warehouse receipt, this section remains unchanged in
substance from former Section 7-209(1). Under the first sentence, a specific lien attaches automatically without
express notation on the receipt or storage agreement with regard to goods stored under the receipt or the storage
agreement. That lien is limited to the usual charges arising out of a storage transaction.
Example 1: Bailor stored goods with a warehouse and the warehouse issued a warehouse receipt. A lien against
those goods arose as set forth in subsection (a), the first sentence, for the charges for storage and the other
expenses of those goods. The warehouse may enforce its lien under Section 7-210 as against the bailor. Whether
the warehouse receipt is negotiable or nonnegotiable is not important to the warehouse's rights as against the
bailor.
Under the second sentence, by notation on the receipt or storage agreement, the lien can be made a general lien
extending to like charges in relation to other goods. Both the specific lien and general lien are as to goods in the
possession of the warehouse and extend to proceeds from the goods as long as the proceeds are in the
possession of the warehouse. The same rules apply whether the receipt is negotiable or non-negotiable.
Example 2: Bailor stored goods (lot A) with a warehouse and the warehouse issued a warehouse receipt for those
goods. In the warehouse receipt it is stated that the warehouse will also have a lien on goods covered by the
warehouse receipt for storage charges and the other expenses for any other goods that are stored with the
warehouse by the bailor. The statement about the lien on other goods does not specify an amount or a rate. Bailor
then stored other goods (lot B) with the warehouse. Under subsection (a), first sentence, the warehouse has a lien
on the specific goods (lot A) covered by the warehouse receipt. Under subsection (a), second sentence, the
warehouse has a lien on the goods in lot A for the storage charges and the other expenses arising from the goods
in lot B. That lien is enforceable as against the bailor regardless of whether the receipt is negotiable or
nonnegotiable.
Under the third sentence, if the warehouse receipt is negotiable, the lien as against a holder of that receipt by due
negotiation is limited to the amount or rate specified on the receipt for the specific lien or the general lien, or, if none
is specified, to a reasonable charge for storage of the specific goods covered by the receipt for storage after the
date of the receipt.
Example 3: Same facts as Example 1 except that the warehouse receipt is negotiable and has been duly
negotiated (Section 7-501) to a person other than the bailor. Under the last sentence of subsection (a), the
warehouse may enforce its lien against the bailor's goods stored in the warehouse as against the person to whom
the negotiable warehouse receipt has been duly negotiated. Section 7-502. That lien is limited to the charges or
rates specified in the receipt or a reasonable charge for storage as stated in the last sentence of subsection (a).
Example 4: Same facts as Example 2 except that the warehouse receipt is negotiable and has been duly
negotiated (Section 7-501) to a person other than the bailor. Under the last sentence of subsection (a), the lien on
lot A goods for the storage charges and the other expenses arising from storage of lot B goods is not enforceable
as against the person to whom the receipt has been duly negotiated. Without a statement of a specified amount or
rate for the general lien, the warehouse's general lien is not enforceable as against the person to whom the
negotiable document has been duly negotiated. However, the warehouse lien for charges and expenses related to
storage of lot A goods is still enforceable as against the person to whom the receipt was duly negotiated.
Example 5. Same facts as Examples 2 and 4 except the warehouse had stated on the negotiable warehouse
receipt a specified amount or rate for the general lien on other goods (lot B). Under the last sentence of subsection
§ 7-209. LIEN OF WAREHOUSE
Page 3 of 5
(a), the general lien on lot A goods for the storage charges and the other expenses arising from storage of lot B
goods is enforceable as against the person to whom the receipt has been duly negotiated.
2. Subsection (b) provides for a security interest based upon agreement. Such a security interest arises out of
relations between the parties other than bailment for storage or transportation, as where the bailee assumes the
role of financier or performs a manufacturing operation, extending credit in reliance upon the goods covered by the
receipt. Such a security interest is not a statutory lien. Compare Sections 9-109 and 9-333. It is governed in all
respects by Article 9, except that subsection (b) requires that the receipt specify a maximum amount and limits the
security interest to the amount specified. A warehouse could also take a security interest to secure its charges for
storage and the other expenses listed in subsection (a) to protect these claims upon the loss of the statutory
possessory warehouse lien if the warehouse loses possession of the goods as provided in subsection (e).
Example 6: Bailor stores goods with a warehouse and the warehouse issues a warehouse receipt that states that
the warehouse is taking a security interest in the bailed goods for charges of storage, expenses, for money
advanced, for manufacturing services rendered, and all other obligations that the bailor may owe the warehouse.
That is a security interest covered in all respects by Article 9. Subsection (b). As allowed by this section, a
warehouse may rely upon its statutory possessory lien to protect its charges for storage and the other expenses
related to storage. For those storage charges covered by the statutory possessory lien, the warehouse is not
required to use a security interest under subsection (b).
3. Subsections (a) and (b) validate the lien and security interest "against the bailor." Under basic principles of
derivative rights as provided in Section 7-504, the warehouse lien is also valid as against parties who obtain their
rights from the bailor except as otherwise provided in subsection (a), third sentence, or subsection (c).
Example 7: Bailor stores goods with a warehouse and the warehouse issues a nonnegotiable warehouse receipt
that also claims a general lien in other goods stored with the warehouse. A lien on the bailed goods for the charges
for storage and the other expenses arises under subsection (a). Bailor notifies the warehouse that the goods have
been sold to Buyer and the bailee acknowledges that fact to the Buyer. Section 2-503. The warehouse lien for
storage of those goods is effective against Buyer for both the specific lien and the general lien. Section 7-504.
Example 8: Bailor stores goods with a warehouse and the warehouse issues a nonnegotiable warehouse receipt.
A lien on the bailed goods for the charges for storage and the other expenses arises under subsection (a). Bailor
grants a security interest in the goods while the goods are in the warehouse's possession to Secured Party (SP)
who properly perfects a security interest in the goods. See Revised 9-312(d). The warehouse lien is superior in
priority over SP's security interest. See Revised 9-203(b)(2) (debtor can grant a security interest to the extent of
debtor's rights in the collateral).
Example 9: Bailor stores goods with a warehouse and the warehouse issues a negotiable warehouse receipt. A
lien on the bailed goods for the charges for storage and the other expenses arises under subsection (a). Bailor
grants a security interest in the negotiable document to SP. SP properly perfects its interest in the negotiable
document by taking possession through a 'due negotiation.' Revised 9-312(c). SP's security interest is subordinate
to the warehouse lien. Section 7-209(a), third sentence. Given that bailor's rights are subject to the warehouse lien,
the bailor cannot grant to the SP greater rights than the bailor has under Section 9-203(b)(2), perfection of the
security interest in the negotiable document and the goods covered by the document through SP's filing of a
financing statement should not give a different result.
As against third parties who have interests in the goods prior to the storage with the warehouse, subsection (c)
continues the rule under the prior uniform statutory provision that to validate the lien or security interest of the
warehouse, the owner must have entrusted the goods to the depositor, and that the circumstances must be such
that a pledge by the depositor to a good faith purchaser for value would have been valid. Thus the owner's interest
will not be subjected to a lien or security interest arising out of a deposit of its goods by a thief. The warehouse may
be protected because of the actual, implied or apparent authority of the depositor, because of a Factor's Act, or
because of other circumstances which would protect a bona fide pledgee, unless those circumstances are denied
effect under the second sentence of subsection (c). The language of Section 7-503 is brought into subsection (c) for
purposes of clarity. The comments to Section 7-503 are helpful in interpreting delivery, entrustment or
acquiescence.
§ 7-209. LIEN OF WAREHOUSE
Page 4 of 5
Where the third party is the holder of a security interest, obtained prior to the issuance of a negotiable warehouse
receipt, the rights of the warehouse depend on the priority given to a hypothetical bona fide pledgee by Article 9,
particularly Section 9-322. Thus the special priority granted to statutory liens by Section 9-333 does not apply to
liens under subsection (a) of this section, since subsection (c), second sentence, "expressly provides otherwise"
within the meaning of Section 9-333.
As to household goods, however, subsection (d) makes the warehouse's lien "for charges and expenses in
relation to the goods" effective against all persons if the depositor was the legal possessor. The purpose of the
exception is to permit the warehouse to accept household goods for storage in sole reliance on the value of the
goods themselves, especially in situations of family emergency.
Example 10: Bailor grants a perfected security interest in the goods to SP prior to storage of the goods with the
warehouse. Bailor then stores goods with the warehouse and the warehouse issues a warehouse receipt for the
goods. A warehouse lien on the bailed goods for the charges for storage or other expenses arises under subsection
(a). The warehouse lien is not effective as against SP unless SP entrusted the goods to the bailor with actual or
apparent authority to ship store, or sell the goods or with power of disposition under subsection (c)(1) or acquiesced
in the bailor's procurement of a document of title under subsection (c)(2). This result obtains whether the receipt is
negotiable or nonnegotiable.
Example 11: Sheriff who had lawfully repossessed household goods in an eviction action stored the goods with a
warehouse. A lien on the bailed goods arises under subsection (a). The lien is effective as against the owner of the
goods. Subsection (d).
4. As under previous law, this section creates a statutory possessory lien in favor of the warehouse on the goods
stored with the warehouse or on the proceeds of the goods. The warehouse loses its lien if it loses possession of
the goods or the proceeds. Subsection (e).
5. Where goods have been stored under a non-negotiable warehouse receipt and are sold by the person to whom
the receipt has been issued, frequently the goods are not withdrawn by the new owner. The obligations of the seller
of the goods in this situation are set forth in Section 2-503(4) on tender of delivery and include procurement of an
acknowledgment by the bailee of the buyer's right to possession of the goods. If a new receipt is requested, such
an acknowledgment can be withheld until storage charges have been paid or provided for. The statutory lien for
charges on the goods sold, granted by the first sentence of subsection (a), continues valid unless the bailee gives it
up. See Section 7-403. But once a new receipt is issued to the buyer, the buyer becomes "the person on whose
account the goods are held" under the second sentence of subsection (a); unless the buyer undertakes liability for
charges in relation to other goods stored by the seller, there is no general lien against the buyer for such charges.
Of course, the bailee may preserve the general lien in such a case either by an arrangement by which the buyer "is
liable for" such charges, or by reserving a security interest under subsection (b).
6. A possessory warehouse lien arises as provided under subsection (a) if the parties to the bailment have a
storage agreement or a warehouse receipt is issued. In the modern warehouse, the bailor and the bailee may enter
into a master contract governing the bailment with the bailee and bailor keeping track of the goods stored pursuant
to the master contract by notation on their respective books and records and the parties send notification via
electronic communication as to what goods are covered by the master contract. Warehouse receipts are not issued.
See Comment 4 to Section 7-204. There is no particular form for a warehouse receipt and failure to contain any of
the terms listed in Section 7-202 does not deprive the warehouse of its lien that arises under subsection (a). See
the comment to Section 7-202.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 7-501 and 7-502.
Point 2: Sections 9-109 and 9-333.
Point 3: Sections 2-503, 7-503, 7-504, 9-203, 9-312, and 9-322.
Point 4: Sections 2-503, 7-501, 7-502, 7-504, 9-312, 9-331, 9-333, 9-401.
§ 7-209. LIEN OF WAREHOUSE
Page 5 of 5
Point 5: Sections 2-503 and 7-403.
Point 6: Sections 7-202 and 7-204.
Definitional Cross References:
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of Title". Section 1-201
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Money". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Right". Section 1-201.
"Security interest". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-204.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-210
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 2. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-210. ENFORCEMENT OF WAREHOUSE'S LIEN
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), a warehouse's lien may be enforced by public or
private sale of the goods, in bulk or in packages, at any time or place and on any terms that are
commercially reasonable, after notifying all persons known to claim an interest in the goods. The
notification must include a statement of the amount due, the nature of the proposed sale, and the time and
place of any public sale. The fact that a better price could have been obtained by a sale at a different time
or in a method different from that selected by the warehouse is not of itself sufficient to establish that the
sale was not made in a commercially reasonable manner. The warehouse sells in a commercially
reasonable manner if the warehouse sells the goods in the usual manner in any recognized market
therefor, sells at the price current in that market at the time of the sale, or otherwise sells in conformity with
commercially reasonable practices among dealers in the type of goods sold. A sale of more goods than
apparently necessary to be offered to ensure satisfaction of the obligation is not commercially reasonable,
except in cases covered by the preceding sentence.
(b) A warehouse may enforce its lien on goods, other than goods stored by a merchant in the course of its
business, only if the following requirements are satisfied:
(1) All persons known to claim an interest in the goods must be notified.
(2) The notification must include an itemized statement of the claim, a description of the goods subject
to the lien, a demand for payment within a specified time not less than 10 days after receipt of the
notification, and a conspicuous statement that unless the claim is paid within that time the goods will be
advertised for sale and sold by auction at a specified time and place.
(3) The sale must conform to the terms of the notification.
(4) The sale must be held at the nearest suitable place to where the goods are held or stored.
(5) After the expiration of the time given in the notification, an advertisement of the sale must be
published once a week for two weeks consecutively in a newspaper of general circulation where the
sale is to be held. The advertisement must include a description of the goods, the name of the person
on whose account the goods are being held, and the time and place of the sale. The sale must take
place at least 15 days after the first publication. If there is no newspaper of general circulation where
the sale is to be held, the advertisement must be posted at least 10 days before the sale in not fewer
than six conspicuous places in the neighborhood of the proposed sale.
(c) Before any sale pursuant to this section, any person claiming a right in the goods may pay the amount
necessary to satisfy the lien and the reasonable expenses incurred in complying with this section. In that
event, the goods may not be sold but must be retained by the warehouse subject to the terms of the receipt
and this article.
(d) A warehouse may buy at any public sale held pursuant to this section.
(e) A purchaser in good faith of goods sold to enforce a warehouse's lien takes the goods free of any rights
of persons against which the lien was valid, despite the warehouse's noncompliance with this section.
(f) A warehouse may satisfy its lien from the proceeds of any sale pursuant to this section but shall hold
the balance, if any, for delivery on demand to any person to which the warehouse would have been bound
to deliver the goods.
§ 7-210. ENFORCEMENT OF WAREHOUSE'S LIEN
Page 2 of 3
(g) The rights provided by this section are in addition to all other rights allowed by law to a creditor against
a debtor.
(h) If a lien is on goods stored by a merchant in the course of its business, the lien may be enforced in
accordance with subsection (a) or (b).
(i) A warehouse is liable for damages caused by failure to comply with the requirements for sale under this
section and, in case of willful violation, is liable for conversion.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-210.
Changes: Update to accommodate electronic commerce and for style.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (a) makes "commercial reasonableness" the standard for foreclosure proceedings in all cases
except non-commercial storage with a warehouse. The latter category embraces principally storage of household
goods by private owners; and for such cases the detailed provisions as to notification, publication and public sale
are retained in subsection (b) with one change. The requirement in former Section 7-210(2)(b) that the notification
must be sent in person or by registered or certified mail has been deleted. Notification may be sent by any
reasonable means as provided in Section 1-202. The swifter, more flexible procedure of subsection (a) is
appropriate to commercial storage. Compare seller's power of resale on breach by buyer under the provisions of
the Article on Sales (Section 2-706). Commercial reasonableness is a flexible concept that allows for a wide variety
of actions to satisfy the rule of this section, including electronic means of posting and sale.
2. The provisions of subsections (d) and (e) permitting the bailee to bid at public sales and confirming the title of
purchasers at foreclosure sales are designed to secure more bidding and better prices and remain unchanged from
former Section 7-210.
3. A warehouses may have recourse to an interpleader action in appropriate circumstances. See Section 7-603.
4. If a warehouse has both a warehouse lien and a security interest, the warehouse may enforce both the lien and
the security interest simultaneously by using the procedures of Article 9. Section 7-210 adopts as its touchstone
"commercial reasonableness" for the enforcement of a warehouse lien. Following the procedures of Article 9
satisfies "commercial reasonableness."
Cross Reference: Sections 2-706, 7-403, 7-603 and Part 6 of Article 9.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Conspicuous". Section 1-201.
"Creditor". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of Title". Section 1-201.
"Good faith". Section 1-201 [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
§ 7-210. ENFORCEMENT OF WAREHOUSE'S LIEN
Page 3 of 3
"Notification". Section 1-202.
"Notifies". Section 1-202.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-301
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-301. LIABILITY FOR NONRECEIPT OR MISDESCRIPTION; "SAID TO
CONTAIN"; "SHIPPER'S WEIGHT, LOAD, AND COUNT"; IMPROPER
HANDLING
(a) A consignee of a nonnegotiable bill of lading which has given value in good faith, or a holder to which a
negotiable bill has been duly negotiated, relying upon the description of the goods in the bill or upon the
date shown in the bill, may recover from the issuer damages caused by the misdating of the bill or the
nonreceipt or misdescription of the goods, except to the extent that the bill indicates that the issuer does not
know whether any part or all of the goods in fact were received or conform to the description, such as in a
case in which the description is in terms of marks or labels or kind, quantity, or condition or the receipt or
description is qualified by "contents or condition of contents of packages unknown", "said to contain",
"shipper's weight, load, and count," or words of similar import, if that indication is true.
(b) If goods are loaded by the issuer of a bill of lading;
(1) the issuer shall count the packages of goods if shipped in packages and ascertain the kind and
quantity if shipped in bulk; and
(2) words such as "shipper's weight, load, and count," or words of similar import indicating that the
description was made by the shipper are ineffective except as to goods concealed in packages.
(c) If bulk goods are loaded by a shipper that makes available to the issuer of a bill of lading adequate
facilities for weighing those goods, the issuer shall ascertain the kind and quantity within a reasonable time
after receiving the shipper's request in a record to do so. In that case, "shipper's weight" or words of similar
import are ineffective.
(d) The issuer of a bill of lading, by including in the bill the words "shipper's weight, load, and count," or
words of similar import, may indicate that the goods were loaded by the shipper, and, if that statement is
true, the issuer is not liable for damages caused by the improper loading. However, omission of such words
does not imply liability for damages caused by improper loading.
(e) A shipper guarantees to an issuer the accuracy at the time of shipment of the description, marks,
labels, number, kind, quantity, condition, and weight, as furnished by the shipper, and the shipper shall
indemnify the issuer against damage caused by inaccuracies in those particulars. This right of indemnity
does not limit the issuer's responsibility or liability under the contract of carriage to any person other than
the shipper.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-301.
Changes: Changes for clarity, style and to recognize deregulation in the transportation industry.
§ 7-301. LIABILITY FOR NONRECEIPT OR MISDESCRIPTION; "SAID TO CONTAIN"; "SHIPPER'S WEIGHT,
LOAD, AND COUNT"; IMPROPER HANDLING
Page 2 of 3
Purposes:
1. This section continues the rules from former Section 7-301 with one substantive change. The obligations of the
issuer of the bill of lading under former subsections (2) and (3) were limited to issuers who were common carriers.
Subsections (b) and (c) apply the same rules to all issuers not just common carriers. This section is compatible with
the policies stated in the federal Bills of Lading Act, 49 U.S.C. § 80113 (2000).
2. The language of the pre-Code Uniform Bills of Lading Act suggested that a carrier is ordinarily liable for
damage caused by improper loading, but may relieve itself of liability by disclosing on the bill that shipper actually
loaded. A more accurate statement of the law is that the carrier is not liable for losses caused by act or default of
the shipper, which would include improper loading. D. H. Overmyer Co. v. Nelson Brantley Glass Go., 168 S.E.2d
176 (Ga. Ct. App. 1969). There was some question whether under pre-Code law a carrier was liable even to a good
faith purchaser of a negotiable bill for such losses, if the shipper's faulty loading in fact caused the loss. Subsection
(d) permits the carrier to bar, by disclosure of shipper's loading, liability to a good faith purchaser. There is no
implication that decisions such as Modern Tool Corp. v. Pennsylvania R. Co., 100 F.Supp. 595 (D.N.J.1951), are
disapproved.
3. This section is a restatement of existing law as to the method by which a bailee may avoid responsibility for the
accuracy of descriptions which are made by or in reliance upon information furnished by the depositor or shipper.
The wording in this section - "contents or condition of contents of packages unknown" or "shipper's weight, load and
count" - to indicate that the shipper loaded the goods or that the carrier does not know the description, condition, or
contents of the loaded packages continues to be appropriate as commonly understood in the transportation
industry. The reasons for this wording are as important in 2002 as when the prior section initially was approved. The
issuer is liable on documents issued by an agent, contrary to instructions of his principal, without receiving goods.
No disclaimer of this liability is permitted since it is not a matter either of the care of the goods or their description.
4. The shipper's erroneous report to the carrier concerning the goods may cause damage to the carrier.
Subsection (e) therefore provides appropriate indemnity.
5. The word "freight" in the former Section 7-301 has been changed to "goods" to conform to international and
domestic land transport usage in which "freight" means the price paid for carriage of the goods and not the goods
themselves. Hence, changing the word "freight" to the word "goods" is a clarifying change that fits both international
and domestic practice.
Cross References: Sections 7-203, 7-309 and 7-501.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Consignee". Section 7-102.
"Document of Title". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Good faith". Section 1-201. [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Holder". Section 1-201.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Notice". Section 1-202.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser." Section 1-201.
§ 7-301. LIABILITY FOR NONRECEIPT OR MISDESCRIPTION; "SAID TO CONTAIN"; "SHIPPER'S WEIGHT,
LOAD, AND COUNT"; IMPROPER HANDLING
Page 3 of 3
"Receipt of Goods". Section 2-103.
"Value". Section 1-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-302
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-302. THROUGH BILLS OF LADING AND SIMILAR DOCUMENTS OF TITLE
(a) The issuer of a through bill of lading, or other document of title embodying an undertaking to be
performed in part by a person acting as its agent or by a performing carrier, is liable to any person entitled
to recover on the bill or other document for any breach by the other person or the performing carrier of its
obligation under the bill or other document. However, to the extent that the bill or other document covers an
undertaking to be performed overseas or in territory not contiguous to the continental United States or an
undertaking including matters other than transportation, this liability for breach by the other person or the
performing carrier may be varied by agreement of the parties.
(b) If goods covered by a through bill of lading or other document of title embodying an undertaking to be
performed in part by a person other than the issuer are received by that person, the person is subject, with
respect to its own performance while the goods are in its possession, to the obligation of the issuer. The
person's obligation is discharged by delivery of the goods to another person pursuant to the bill or other
document and does not include liability for breach by any other person or by the issuer.
(c) The issuer of a through bill of lading or other document of title described in subsection (a) is entitled to
recover from the performing carrier, or other person in possession of the goods when the breach of the
obligation under the bill or other document occurred:
(1) the amount it may be required to pay to any person entitled to recover on the bill or other document
for the breach, as may be evidenced by any receipt, judgment, or transcript of judgment; and
(2) the amount of any expense reasonably incurred by the issuer in defending any action commenced
by any person entitled to recover on the bill or other document for the breach.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-302.
Changes: To conform to current terminology and for style.
Purposes:
1. This section continues the rules from former Section 7-302 without substantive change. The term "performing
carrier" is substituted for the term "connecting carrier" to conform the terminology of this section with terminology
used in recent UNCITRAL and OAS proposals concerning transportation and through bills of lading. This change in
terminology is not substantive. This section is compatible with liability on carriers under federal law. See 49 U.S.C.
§§ 11706, 14706 and 15906.
The purpose of this section is to subject the initial carrier under a through bill to suit for breach of the contract of
carriage by any performing carrier and to make it clear that any such performing carrier holds the goods on terms
which are defined by the document of title even though such performing carrier did not issue the document. Since
§ 7-302. THROUGH BILLS OF LADING AND SIMILAR DOCUMENTS OF TITLE
Page 2 of 2
the performing carrier does hold the goods on the terms of the document, it must honor a proper demand for
delivery or a diversion order just as the original bailee would have to. Similarly it has the benefits of the excuses for
non-delivery and limitations of liability provided for the original bailee who issued the bill. Unlike the original baileeissuer,
the performing carrier's responsibility is limited to the period while the goods are in its possession. The
section does not impose any obligation to issue through bills.
2. The reference to documents other than through bills looks to the possibility that multi-purpose documents may
come into use, e.g., combination warehouse receipts and bills of lading. As electronic documents of title come into
common usage, storage documents (e.g. warehouse receipts) and transportation documents (e.g. bills of lading)
may merge seamlessly into one electronic document that can serve both the storage and transportation segments
of the movement of goods.
3. Under subsection (a) the issuer of a through bill of lading may become liable for the fault of another person.
Subsection (c) gives the issuer appropriate rights of recourse.
4. Despite the broad language of subsection (a), Section 7-302 is subject to preemption by federal laws and
treaties. Section 7-103. The precise scope of federal preemption in the transportation sector is a question
determined under federal law.
Cross reference: Section 7-103
Definitional Cross References:
"Agreement". Section 1-201.
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Party". Section 1-201.
"Person". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-303
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-303. DIVERSION; RECONSIGNMENT; CHANGE OF INSTRUCTIONS
(a) Unless the bill of lading otherwise provides, a carrier may deliver the goods to a person or destination
other than that stated in the bill or may otherwise dispose of the goods, without liability for misdelivery, on
instructions from:
(1) the holder of a negotiable bill;
(2) the consignor on a nonnegotiable bill, even if the consignee has given contrary instructions;
(3) the consignee on a nonnegotiable bill in the absence of contrary instructions from the consignor, if
the goods have arrived at the billed destination or if the consignee is in possession of the tangible bill or
in control of the electronic bill; or
(4) the consignee on a nonnegotiable bill, if the consignee is entitled as against the consignor to
dispose of the goods.
(b) Unless instructions described in subsection (a) are included in a negotiable bill of lading, a person to
which the bill is duly negotiated may hold the bailee according to the original terms.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-303.
Changes: To accommodate electronic documents and for style.
Purposes:
1. Diversion is a very common commercial practice which defeats delivery to the consignee originally named in a
bill of lading. This section continues former Section 7-303's safe harbor rules for carriers in situations involving
diversion and adapts those rules to electronic documents of title. This section works compatibly with Section 2-705.
Carriers may as a business matter be willing to accept instructions from consignees in which case the carrier will be
liable for misdelivery if the consignee was not the owner or otherwise empowered to dispose of the goods under
subsection (a)(4). The section imposes no duty on carriers to undertake diversion. The carrier is of course subject
to the provisions of mandatory filed tariffs as provided in Section 7-103.
2. It should be noted that the section provides only an immunity for carriers against liability for "misdelivery." It
does not, for example, defeat the title to the goods which the consignee-buyer may have acquired from the
consignor-seller upon delivery of the goods to the carrier under a non- negotiable bill of lading. Thus if the carrier,
upon instructions from the consignor, returns the goods to the consignor, the consignee may recover the goods
from the consignor or the consignor's insolvent estate. However, under certain circumstances, the consignee's title
may be defeated by diversion of the goods in transit to a different consignee. The rights that arise between the
consignor-seller and the consignee-buyer out of a contract for the sale of goods are governed by Article 2.
§ 7-303. DIVERSION; RECONSIGNMENT; CHANGE OF INSTRUCTIONS
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-705 and 7-103.
Point 2: Article 2, Sections 7-403 and 7-504(3).
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Carrier". Section 7-102
"Consignee". Section 7-102.
"Consignor". Section 7-102.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Holder". Section 1-201.
"Notice". Section 1-202.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-304
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-304. TANGIBLE BILLS OF LADING IN A SET
(a) Except as customary in international transportation, a tangible bill of lading may not be issued in a set
of parts. The issuer is liable for damages caused by violation of this subsection.
(b) If a tangible bill of lading is lawfully issued in a set of parts, each of which contains an identification
code and is expressed to be valid only if the goods have not been delivered against any other part, the
whole of the parts constitutes one bill.
(c) If a tangible negotiable bill of lading is lawfully issued in a set of parts and different parts are negotiated
to different persons, the title of the holder to which the first due negotiation is made prevails as to both the
document of title and the goods even if any later holder may have received the goods from the carrier in
good faith and discharged the carrier's obligation by surrendering its part.
(d) A person that negotiates or transfers a single part of a tangible bill of lading issued in a set is liable to
holders of that part as if it were the whole set.
(e) The bailee shall deliver in accordance with Part 4 against the first presented part of a tangible bill of
lading lawfully issued in a set. Delivery in this manner discharges the bailee's obligation on the whole bill.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-304.
Changes: To limit bills in a set to tangible bills of lading and to use terminology more consistent with modern
usage.
Purposes:
1. Tangible bills of lading in a set are still used in some nations in international trade. Consequently, a tangible bill
of lading part of a set could be at issue in a lawsuit that might come within Article 7. The statement of the legal
effect of a lawfully issued set is in accord with existing commercial law relating to maritime and other international
tangible bills of lading. This law has been codified in the Hague and Warsaw Conventions and in the Carriage of
Goods by Sea Act, the provisions of which would ordinarily govern in situations where bills in a set are recognized
by this Article. Tangible bills of lading in a set are prohibited in domestic trade.
2. Electronic bills of lading in domestic or international trade will not be issued in a set given the requirements of
control necessary to deliver the bill to another person. An electronic bill of lading will be a single, authoritative copy.
Section 7-106. Hence, this section differentiates between electronic bills of lading and tangible bills of lading. This
section does not prohibit electronic data messages about goods in transit because these electronic data messages
are not the issued bill of lading. Electronic data messages contain information for the carrier's management and
handling of the cargo but this information for the carrier's use is not the issued bill of lading.
§ 7-304. TANGIBLE BILLS OF LADING IN A SET
Page 2 of 2
Cross Reference: Section 7-103, 7-303 and 7-106.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Good faith". Section 1-201. [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Holder". Section 1-201.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Receipt of goods". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-305
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-305. DESTINATION BILLS
(a) Instead of issuing a bill of lading to the consignor at the place of shipment, a carrier, at the request of
the consignor, may procure the bill to be issued at destination or at any other place designated in the
request.
(b) Upon request of any person entitled as against a carrier to control the goods while in transit and on
surrender of possession or control of any outstanding bill of lading or other receipt covering the goods, the
issuer, subject to Section 7-105, may procure a substitute bill to be issued at any place designated in the
request.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-305.
Changes: To accommodate electronic bills of lading and for style.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (a) continues the rules of former Section 7-305(1) without substantive change. This proposal is
designed to facilitate the use of order bills in connection with fast shipments. Use of order bills on high speed
shipments is impeded by the fact that the goods may arrive at destination before the documents, so that no one is
ready to take delivery from the carrier. This is especially inconvenient for carriers by truck and air, who do not have
terminal facilities where shipments can be held to await the consignee's appearance. Order bills would be useful to
take advantage of bank collection. This may be preferable to C.O.D. shipment in which the carrier, e.g. a truck
driver, is the collecting and remitting agent. Financing of shipments under this plan would be handled as follows:
seller at San Francisco delivers the goods to an airline with instructions to issue a bill in New York to a named bank.
Seller receives a receipt embodying this undertaking to issue a destination bill. Airline wires its New York freight
agent to issue the bill as instructed by the seller. Seller wires the New York bank a draft on buyer. New York bank
indorses the bill to buyer when the buyer honors the draft. Normally seller would act through its own bank in San
Francisco, which would extend credit in reliance on the airline's contract to deliver a bill to the order of its New York
correspondent. This section is entirely permissive; it imposes no duty to issue such bills. Whether a performing
carrier will act as issuing agent is left to agreement between carriers.
2. Subsection (b) continues the rule from former Section 7-305(2) with accommodation for electronic bills of
lading. If the substitute bill changes from an electronic to a tangible medium or vice versa, the issuance of the
substitute bill must comply with Section 7-105 to give the substitute bill validity and effect.
Cross Reference: Section 7-105.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
§ 7-305. DESTINATION BILLS
Page 2 of 2
"Consignor". Section 7-102.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Receipt of goods". Section 2-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-306
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-306. ALTERED BILLS OF LADING
An unauthorized alteration or filling in of a blank in a bill of lading leaves the bill enforceable according to its original
tenor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-306.
Changes: None
Purposes:
An unauthorized alteration or filling in of a blank, whether made with or without fraudulent intent, does not relieve
the issuer of its liability on the document as originally executed. This section applies to both tangible and electronic
bills of lading, applying the same rule to both types of bills of lading. The control concept of Section 7-106 requires
that any changes to the electronic document of title be readily identifiable as authorized or unauthorized. Section 7-
306 should be compared to Section 7-208 where a different rule applies to the unauthorized filling in of a blank for
tangible warehouse receipts.
Cross Reference: Sections 7-106 and 7-208.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-307
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-307. LIEN OF CARRIER
(a) A carrier has a lien on the goods covered by a bill of lading or on the proceeds thereof in its possession
for charges after the date of the carrier's receipt of the goods for storage or transportation, including
demurrage and terminal charges, and for expenses necessary for preservation of the goods incident to their
transportation or reasonably incurred in their sale pursuant to law. However, against a purchaser for value
of a negotiable bill of lading, a carrier's lien is limited to charges stated in the bill or the applicable tariffs or,
if no charges are stated, a reasonable charge.
(b) A lien for charges and expenses under subsection (a) on goods that the carrier was required by law to
receive for transportation is effective against the consignor or any person entitled to the goods unless the
carrier had notice that the consignor lacked authority to subject the goods to those charges and expenses.
Any other lien under subsection (a) is effective against the consignor and any person that permitted the
bailor to have control or possession of the goods unless the carrier had notice that the bailor lacked
authority.
(c) A carrier loses its lien on any goods that it voluntarily delivers or unjustifiably refuses to deliver.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-307.
Changes: Expanded to cover proceeds of the goods transported.
Purposes:
1. The section is intended to give carriers a specific statutory lien for charges and expenses similar to that given
to warehouses by the first sentence of Section 7-209(a) and extends that lien to the proceeds of the goods as long
as the carrier has possession of the proceeds. But because carriers do not commonly claim a lien for charges in
relation to other goods or lend money on the security of goods in their hands, provisions for a general lien or a
security interest similar to those in Section 7-209(a) and (b) are omitted. Carriers may utilize Article 9 to obtain a
security interest and become a secured party or a carrier may agree to limit its lien rights in a transportation
agreement with the shipper. As the lien given by this section is specific, and the storage or transportation often
preserves or increases the value of the goods, subsection (b) validates the lien against anyone who permitted the
bailor to have possession of the goods. Where the carrier is required to receive the goods for transportation, the
owner's interest may be subjected to charges and expenses arising out of deposit of his goods by a thief. The
crucial mental element is the carrier's knowledge or reason to know of the bailor's lack of authority. If the carrier
does not know or have reason to know of the bailor's lack of authority, the carrier has a lien under this section
against any person so long as the conditions of subsection (b) are satisfied. In light of the crucial mental element,
Sections 7-307 and 9-333 combine to give priority to a carrier's lien over security interests in the goods. In this
§ 7-307. LIEN OF CARRIER
Page 2 of 2
regard, the judicial decision in In re Sharon Steel Corp., 25 U.C.C. Rep.2d 503, 176 B.R. 384 (W.D. Pa. 1995) is
correct and is the controlling precedent.
2. The reference to charges in this section means charges relating to the bailment relationship for transportation.
Charges does not mean that the bill of lading must state a specific rate or a specific amount. However, failure to
state a specific rate or a specific amount has legal consequences under the second sentence of subsection (a).
3. The carrier's specific lien under this section is a possessory lien. See subsection (c). Part 3 of Article 7 does
not require any particular form for a bill of lading. The carrier's lien arises when the carrier has issued a bill of
lading.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 7-209, 9-109 and 9-333.
Point 3. Section 7-202 and 7-209.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Carrier". Section 7-102.
"Consignor". Section 7-102.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-308
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-308. ENFORCEMENT OF CARRIER'S LIEN
(a) A carrier's lien on goods may be enforced by public or private sale of the goods, in bulk or in packages,
at any time or place and on any terms that are commercially reasonable, after notifying all persons known
to claim an interest in the goods. The notification must include a statement of the amount due, the nature of
the proposed sale, and the time and place of any public sale. The fact that a better price could have been
obtained by a sale at a different time or in a method different from that selected by the carrier is not of itself
sufficient to establish that the sale was not made in a commercially reasonable manner. The carrier sells
goods in a commercially reasonable manner if the carrier sells the goods in the usual manner in any
recognized market therefor, sells at the price current in that market at the time of the sale, or otherwise sells
in conformity with commercially reasonable practices among dealers in the type of goods sold. A sale of
more goods than apparently necessary to be offered to ensure satisfaction of the obligation is not
commercially reasonable, except in cases covered by the preceding sentence.
(b) Before any sale pursuant to this section, any person claiming a right in the goods may pay the amount
necessary to satisfy the lien and the reasonable expenses incurred in complying with this section. In that
event, the goods may not be sold but must be retained by the carrier, subject to the terms of the bill of
lading and this article.
(c) A carrier may buy at any public sale pursuant to this section.
(d) A purchaser in good faith of goods sold to enforce a carrier's lien takes the goods free of any rights of
persons against which the lien was valid, despite the carrier's noncompliance with this section.
(e) A carrier may satisfy its lien from the proceeds of any sale pursuant to this section but shall hold the
balance, if any, for delivery on demand to any person to which the carrier would have been bound to deliver
the goods.
(f) The rights provided by this section are in addition to all other rights allowed by law to a creditor against
a debtor.
(g) A carrier's lien may be enforced pursuant to either subsection (a) or the procedure set forth in Section
7-210(b).
(h) A carrier is liable for damages caused by failure to comply with the requirements for sale under this
section and, in case of willful violation, is liable for conversion.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-308.
Changes: To conform language to modern usage and for style.
Purposes:
§ 7-308. ENFORCEMENT OF CARRIER'S LIEN
Page 2 of 2
This section is intended to give the carrier an enforcement procedure of its lien coextensive with that given the
warehouse in cases other than those covering noncommercial storage by the warehouse. See Section 7-210 and
comments.
Cross Reference: Section 7-210.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Carrier". Section 7-102.
"Creditor". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Good faith". Section 1-201. [7-102]
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Notification". Section 1-202.
"Notifies". Section 1-202.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-309
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 3. BILLS OF LADING: SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-309. DUTY OF CARE; CONTRACTUAL LIMITATION OF CARRIER'S
LIABILITY
(a) A carrier that issues a bill of lading, whether negotiable or nonnegotiable, shall exercise the degree of
care in relation to the goods which a reasonably careful person would exercise under similar
circumstances. This subsection does not affect any statute, regulation, or rule of law that imposes liability
upon a common carrier for damages not caused by its negligence.
(b) Damages may be limited by a term in the bill of lading or in a transportation agreement that the carrier's
liability may not exceed a value stated in the bill or transportation agreement if the carrier's rates are
dependent upon value and the consignor is afforded an opportunity to declare a higher value and the
consignor is advised of the opportunity. However, such a limitation is not effective with respect to the
carrier's liability for conversion to its own use.
(c) Reasonable provisions as to the time and manner of presenting claims and commencing actions based
on the shipment may be included in a bill of lading or a transportation agreement.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-309.
Changes: References to tariffs eliminated because of deregulation, adding reference to transportation
agreements, and for style.
Purposes:
1. A bill of lading may also serve as the contract between the carrier and the bailor. Parties in their contract should
be able to limit the amount of damages for breach of that contract including breach of the duty to take reasonable
care of the goods. The parties cannot disclaim by contract the carrier's obligation of care. Section 1-302.
Federal statutes and treaties for air, maritime and rail transport may alter the standard of care. These federal
statutes and treaties preempt this section when applicable. Section 7-103. Subsection (a) does not impair any rule
of law imposing the liability of an insurer on a common carrier in intrastate commerce. Subsection (b), however,
applies to the common carrier's liability as an insurer as well as to liability based on negligence. Subsection (b)
allows the term limiting damages to appear either in the bill of lading or in the parties' transportation agreement.
Compare 7-204(b). Subsection (c) allows the parties to agree to provisions regarding time and manner of
presenting claims or commencing actions if the provisions are either in the bill of lading or the transportation
agreement. Compare 7-204(c). Transportation agreements are commonly used to establish agreed terms between
carriers and shippers that have an on-going relationship.
2. References to public tariffs in former Section 7-309(2) and (3) have been deleted in light of the modern era of
deregulation. See Comment 2 to Section 7-103. If a tariff is required under state or federal law, pursuant to Section
§ 7-309. DUTY OF CARE; CONTRACTUAL LIMITATION OF CARRIER'S LIABILITY
Page 2 of 2
7-103(a), the tariff would control over the rule of this section. As governed by contract law, parties may incorporate
by reference the limits on the amount of damages or the reasonable provisions as to the time and manner of
presenting claims set forth in applicable tariffs, e.g. a maximum unit value beyond which goods are not taken or a
disclaimer of responsibility for undeclared articles of extraordinary value.
3. As under former Section 7-309(2), subsection (b) provides that a limitation of damages is ineffective if the
carrier has converted the goods to its own use. A mere failure to redeliver the goods is not conversion to the
carrier's own use. "Conversion to its own use"is narrower than the idea of conversion generally. Art Masters
Associates, Ltd. v. United Parcel Service, 77 N.Y.2d 200, 567 N.E.2d 226 (1990); See, Kemper Ins. Co. v. Fed. Ex.
Corp., 252 F.3d 509 (1st Cir), cert. denied 534 U.S. 1020 (2001) (opinion interpreting federal law).
4. As used in this section, damages may include damages arising from delay in delivery. Delivery dates and times
are often specified in the parties' contract. See Section 7-403.
Cross Reference: Sections 1-302, 7-103, 7-204, 7-403.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Carrier". Section 7-102.
"Consignor". Section 7-102.
"Document of Title". Section 1-102.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Value". Section 1-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-401
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 4. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
§ 7-401. IRREGULARITIES IN ISSUE OF RECEIPT OR BILL OR CONDUCT OF
ISSUER
The obligations imposed by this article on an issuer apply to a document of title even if:
(1) the document does not comply with the requirements of this article or of any other statute, rule, or
regulation regarding its issuance, form, or content;
(2) the issuer violated laws regulating the conduct of its business;
(3) the goods covered by the document were owned by the bailee when the document was issued; or
(4) the person issuing the document is not a warehouse but the document purports to be a warehouse
receipt.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-401.
Changes: Changes for style only.
Purposes:
The bailee's liability on its document despite non-receipt or misdescription of the goods is affirmed in Sections 7-
203 and 7-301. The purpose of this section is to make it clear that regardless of irregularities a document which falls
within the definition of document of title imposes on the issuer the obligations stated in this Article. For example, a
bailee will not be permitted to avoid its obligation to deliver the goods (Section 7-403) or its obligation of due care
with respect to them (Sections 7-204 and 7-309) by taking the position that no valid "document" was issued
because it failed to file a statutory bond or did not pay stamp taxes or did not disclose the place of storage in the
document. Tate v. Action Moving & Storage, Inc., 383 S.E.2d 229 (N.C. App. 1989), rev. denied 389 S.E.2d 104
(N.C. 1990). Sanctions against violations of statutory or administrative duties with respect to documents should be
limited to revocation of license or other measures prescribed by the regulation imposing the duty. See Section 7-
103.
Cross References: Sections 7-103, 7-203, 7-204, 7-301, 7-309.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
§ 7-401. IRREGULARITIES IN ISSUE OF RECEIPT OR BILL OR CONDUCT OF ISSUER
Page 2 of 2
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-402
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 4. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
§ 7-402. DUPLICATE DOCUMENT OF TITLE; OVERISSUE
A duplicate or any other document of title purporting to cover goods already represented by an outstanding
document of the same issuer does not confer any right in the goods, except as provided in the case of tangible bills
of lading in a set of parts, overissue of documents for fungible goods, substitutes for lost, stolen, or destroyed
documents, or substitute documents issued pursuant to Section 7-105. The issuer is liable for damages caused by
its overissue or failure to identify a duplicate document by a conspicuous notation.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-402.
Changes: Changes to accommodate electronic documents.
Purposes:
1. This section treats a duplicate which is not properly identified as a duplicate like any other overissue of
documents: a purchaser of such a document acquires no title but only a cause of action for damages against the
person that made the deception possible, except in the cases noted in the section. But parts of a tangible bill
lawfully issued in a set of parts are not "overissue" (Section 7-304). Of course, if the issuer has clearly indicated that
a document is a duplicate so that no one can be deceived by it, and in fact the duplicate is a correct copy of the
original, the issuer is not liable for preparing and delivering such a duplicate copy.
Section 7-105 allows documents of title to be reissued in another medium. Re-issuance of a document in an
alternative medium under Section 7-105 requires that the original document be surrendered to the issuer in order to
make the substitute document the effective document. If the substitute document is not issued in compliance with
section 7-105, then the document should be treated as a duplicate under this section.
2. The section applies to nonnegotiable documents to the extent of providing an action for damages for one who
acquires an unmarked duplicate from a transferor who knew the facts and would therefore have had no cause of
action against the issuer of the duplicate. Ordinarily the transferee of a nonnegotiable document acquires only the
rights of its transferor.
3. Overissue is defined so as to exclude the common situation where two valid documents of different issuers are
outstanding for the same goods at the same time. Thus freight forwarders commonly issue bills of lading to their
customers for small shipments to be combined into carload shipments for which the railroad will issue a bill of lading
to the forwarder. So also a warehouse receipt may be outstanding against goods, and the holder of the receipt may
issue delivery orders against the same goods. In these cases dealings with the subsequently issued documents
may be effective to transfer title; e.g. negotiation of a delivery order will effectively transfer title in the ordinary case
where no dishonesty has occurred and the goods are available to satisfy the orders. Section 7-503 provides for
cases of conflict between documents of different issuers.
§ 7-402. DUPLICATE DOCUMENT OF TITLE; OVERISSUE
Page 2 of 2
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 7-105, 7-207, 7-304, and 7-601.
Point 3: Section 7-503.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Conspicuous". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Fungible goods." Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Right". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-403
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 4. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
§ 7-403. OBLIGATION OF BAILEE TO DELIVER; EXCUSE
(a) A bailee shall deliver the goods to a person entitled under a document of title if the person complies
with subsections (b) and (c), unless and to the extent that the bailee establishes any of the following:
(1) delivery of the goods to a person whose receipt was rightful as against the claimant;
(2) damage to or delay, loss, or destruction of the goods for which the bailee is not liable;
(3) previous sale or other disposition of the goods in lawful enforcement of a lien or on a warehouse's
lawful termination of storage;
(4) the exercise by a seller of its right to stop delivery pursuant to Section 2-705 or by a lessor of its
right to stop delivery pursuant to Section 2A-526;
(5) a diversion, reconsignment, or other disposition pursuant to Section 7-303;
(6) release, satisfaction, or any other personal defense against the claimant; or
(7) any other lawful excuse.
(b) A person claiming goods covered by a document of title shall satisfy the bailee's lien if the bailee so
requests or if the bailee is prohibited by law from delivering the goods until the charges are paid.
(c) Unless a person claiming the goods is a person against which the document of title does not confer a
right under Section 7-503(a):
(1) the person claiming under a document shall surrender possession or control of any outstanding
negotiable document covering the goods for cancellation or indication of partial deliveries; and
(2) the bailee shall cancel the document or conspicuously indicate in the document the partial delivery
or the bailee is liable to any person to which the document is duly negotiated.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-403.
Changes: Definition in former Section 7-403(4) moved to Section 7-102; bracketed language in former Section 7-
403(1)(b) deleted; added cross reference to Section 2A-526; changes for style.
Purposes:
1. The present section, following former Section 7-403, is constructed on the basis of stating what previous
deliveries or other circumstances operate to excuse the bailee's normal obligation on the document. Accordingly,
"justified" deliveries under the pre-Code uniform acts now find their place as "excuse" under subsection (a).
§ 7-403. OBLIGATION OF BAILEE TO DELIVER; EXCUSE
Page 2 of 3
2. The principal case covered by subsection (a)(1) is delivery to a person whose title is paramount to the rights
represented by the document. For example, if a thief deposits stolen goods in a warehouse facility and takes a
negotiable receipt, the warehouse is not liable on the receipt if it has surrendered the goods to the true owner, even
though the receipt is held by a good faith purchaser. See Section 7-503(a). However, if the owner entrusted the
goods to a person with power of disposition, and that person deposited the goods and took a negotiable document,
the owner receiving delivery would not be rightful as against a holder to whom the negotiable document was duly
negotiated, and delivery to the owner would not give the bailee a defense against such a holder. See Sections 7-
502(a)(2), 7-503(a)(1).
3. Subsection (a)(2) amounts to a cross reference to all the tort law that determines the varying responsibilities
and standards of care applicable to commercial bailees. A restatement of this tort law would be beyond the scope of
this Act. Much of the applicable law as to responsibility of bailees for the preservation of the goods and limitation of
liability in case of loss has been codified for particular classes of bailees in interstate and foreign commerce by
federal legislation and treaty and for intrastate carriers and other bailees by the regulatory state laws preserved by
Section 7-103. In the absence of governing legislation the common law will prevail subject to the minimum standard
of reasonable care prescribed by Sections 7-204 and 7-309 of this Article.
The bracketed language found in former Section 7-403(1)(b) has been deleted thereby leaving the allocations of
the burden of going forward with the evidence and the burden of proof to the procedural law of the various states.
Subsection (a)(4) contains a cross reference to both the seller's and the lessor's rights to stop delivery under
Article 2 and Article 2A respectively.
4. As under former Section 7-403, there is no requirement that a request for delivery must be accompanied by a
formal tender of the amount of the charges due. Rather, the bailee must request payment of the amount of its lien
when asked to deliver, and only in case this request is refused is it justified in declining to deliver because of
nonpayment of charges. Where delivery without payment is forbidden by law, the request is treated as implicit.
Such a prohibition reflects a policy of uniformity to prevent discrimination by failure to request payment in particular
cases. Subsection (b) must be read in conjunction with the priorities given to the warehouse lien and the carrier lien
under Section 7-209 and 7-307, respectively. If the parties are in dispute about whether the request for payment of
the lien is legally proper, the bailee may have recourse to interpleader. See Section 7-603.
5. Subsection (c) states the obvious duty of a bailee to take up a negotiable document or note partial deliveries
conspicuously thereon, and the result of failure in that duty. It is subject to only one exception, that stated in
subsection (a)(1) of this section and in Section 7-503(a). Subsection (c) is limited to cases of delivery to a claimant;
it has no application, for example, where goods held under a negotiable document are lawfully sold to enforce the
bailee's lien.
6. When courts are considering subsection (a)(7), "any other lawful excuse," among others, refers to compliance
with court orders under Sections 7-601, 7-602 and 7-603.
Cross References:
Point 2: Sections 7-502 and 7-503.
Point 3: Sections 2-705, 2A-526, 7-103, 7-204, and 7-309 and 10-103.
Point 4: Sections 7-209, 7-307 and 7-603.
Point 5: Section 7-503(1).
Point 6: Sections 7-601, 7-602, and 7-603.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Conspicuous". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
§ 7-403. OBLIGATION OF BAILEE TO DELIVER; EXCUSE
Page 3 of 3
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Lessor". Section 2A-103.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Receipt of goods". Section 2-103.
"Right". Section 1-201.
"Terms". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse". Section 7-102.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-404
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 4. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
§ 7-404. NO LIABILITY FOR GOOD-FAITH DELIVERY PURSUANT TO
DOCUMENT OF TITLE
A bailee that in good faith has received goods and delivered or otherwise disposed of the goods according
to the terms of a document of title or pursuant to this article is not liable for the goods even if:
(1) the person from which the bailee received the goods did not have authority to procure the
document or to dispose of the goods; or
(2) the person to which the bailee delivered the goods did not have authority to receive the goods.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-404.
Changes: Changes reflect the definition of good faith in Section 1-201 [7-102] and for style.
Purposes:
This section uses the test of good faith, as defined in Section 1-201 [7-102], to continue the policy of former
Section 7-404. Good faith now means "honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of
fair dealing." The section states explicitly that the common law rule of "innocent conversion" by unauthorized
"intermeddling" with another's property is inapplicable to the operations of commercial carriers and warehousemen
that in good faith perform obligations that they have assumed and that generally they are under a legal compulsion
to assume. The section applies to delivery to a fraudulent holder of a valid document as well as to delivery to the
holder of an invalid document. Of course, in appropriate circumstances, a bailee may use interpleader or other
dispute resolution process. See Section 7-603.
Cross Reference: Section 7-603.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Good faith". Section 1-201. [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Receipt of goods". Section 2-103.
§ 7-404. NO LIABILITY FOR GOOD-FAITH DELIVERY PURSUANT TO DOCUMENT OF TITLE
Page 2 of 2
"Term". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-501
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER
§ 7-501. FORM OF NEGOTIATION AND REQUIREMENTS OF DUE
NEGOTIATION
(a) The following rules apply to a negotiable tangible document of title:
(1) If the document's original terms run to the order of a named person, the document is negotiated by
the named person's indorsement and delivery. After the named person's indorsement in blank or to
bearer, any person may negotiate the document by delivery alone.
(2) If the document's original terms run to bearer, it is negotiated by delivery alone.
(3) If the document's original terms run to the order of a named person and it is delivered to the named
person, the effect is the same as if the document had been negotiated.
(4) Negotiation of the document after it has been indorsed to a named person requires indorsement by
the named person and delivery.
(5) A document is duly negotiated if it is negotiated in the manner stated in this subsection to a holder
that purchases it in good faith, without notice of any defense against or claim to it on the part of any
person, and for value, unless it is established that the negotiation is not in the regular course of
business or financing or involves receiving the document in settlement or payment of a monetary
obligation.
(b) The following rules apply to a negotiable electronic document of title:
(1) If the document's original terms run to the order of a named person or to bearer, the document is
negotiated by delivery of the document to another person. Indorsement by the named person is not
required to negotiate the document.
(2) If the document's original terms run to the order of a named person and the named person has
control of the document, the effect is the same as if the document had been negotiated.
(3) A document is duly negotiated if it is negotiated in the manner stated in this subsection to a holder
that purchases it in good faith, without notice of any defense against or claim to it on the part of any
person, and for value, unless it is established that the negotiation is not in the regular course of
business or financing or involves taking delivery of the document in settlement or payment of a
monetary obligation.
(c) Indorsement of a nonnegotiable document of title neither makes it negotiable nor adds to the
transferee's rights.
(d) The naming in a negotiable bill of lading of a person to be notified of the arrival of the goods does not
limit the negotiability of the bill or constitute notice to a purchaser of the bill of any interest of that person in
the goods.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 7-501. FORM OF NEGOTIATION AND REQUIREMENTS OF DUE NEGOTIATION
Page 2 of 3
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-501.
Changes: To accommodate negotiable electronic documents of title.
Purpose:
1. Subsection (a) has been limited to tangible negotiable documents of title but otherwise remains unchanged in
substance from the rules in former Section 7-501. Subsection (b) is new and applies to negotiable electronic
documents of title. Delivery of a negotiable electronic document is through voluntary transfer of control. Section 1-
201 definition of "delivery." The control concept as applied to negotiable electronic documents of title is the
substitute for both possession and indorsement as applied to negotiable tangible documents of title. Section 7-106.
Article 7 does not separately define the term "duly negotiated." However, the elements of "duly negotiated" are set
forth in subsection (a)(5) for tangible documents and (b)(3) for electronic documents. As under former Section 7-
501, in order to effect a "due negotiation" the negotiation must be in the "regular course of business or financing" in
order to transfer greater rights than those held by the person negotiating. The foundation of the mercantile doctrine
of good faith purchase for value has always been, as shown by the case situations, the furtherance and protection
of the regular course of trade. The reason for allowing a person, in bad faith or in error, to convey away rights which
are not its own has from the beginning been to make possible the speedy handling of that great run of commercial
transactions which are patently usual and normal.
There are two aspects to the usual and normal course of mercantile dealings, namely, the person making the
transfer and the nature of the transaction itself. The first question which arises is: Is the transferor a person with
whom it is reasonable to deal as having full powers? In regard to documents of title the only holder whose
possession or control appears, commercially, to be in order is almost invariably a person in the trade. No
commercial purpose is served by allowing a tramp or a professor to "duly negotiate" an order bill of lading for hides
or cotton not their own, and since such a transfer is obviously not in the regular course of business, it is excluded
from the scope of the protection of subsections (a)(5) or (b)(3).
The second question posed by the "regular course" qualification is: Is the transaction one which is normally
proper to pass full rights without inquiry, even though the transferor itself may not have such rights to pass, and
even though the transferor may be acting in breach of duty? In raising this question the "regular course" criterion
has the further advantage of limiting, the effective wrongful disposition to transactions whose protection will really
further trade. Obviously, the snapping up of goods for quick resale at a price suspiciously below the market
deserves no protection as a matter of policy: it is also clearly outside the range of regular course.
Any notice on the document sufficient to put a merchant on inquiry as to the "regular course" quality of the
transaction will frustrate a "due negotiation". Thus irregularity of the document or unexplained staleness of a bill of
lading may appropriately be recognized as negating a negotiation in "regular" course.
A pre-existing claim constitutes value, and "due negotiation" does not require "new value." A usual and ordinary
transaction in which documents are received as security for credit previously extended may be in "regular" course,
even though there is a demand for additional collateral because the creditor "deems himself insecure." But the
matter has moved out of the regular course of financing if the debtor is thought to be insolvent, the credit previously
extended is in effect cancelled, and the creditor snatches a plank in the shipwreck under the guise of a demand for
additional collateral. Where a money debt is "paid" in commodity paper, any question of "regular" course
disappears, as the case is explicitly excepted from "due negotiation".
2. Negotiation under this section may be made by any holder no matter how the holder acquired possession or
control of the document.
3. Subsections (a)(3) and (b)(2) make explicit a matter upon which the intent of the pre-Code law was clear but
the language somewhat obscure: a negotiation results from a delivery to a banker or buyer to whose order the
document has been taken by the person making the bailment. There is no presumption of irregularity in such a
negotiation; it may very well be in "regular course."
§ 7-501. FORM OF NEGOTIATION AND REQUIREMENTS OF DUE NEGOTIATION
Page 3 of 3
4. This Article does not contain any provision creating a presumption of due negotiation to, and full rights in, a
holder of a document of title akin to that created by Uniform Commercial Code Article 3. But the reason of the
provisions of this Act (Section 1-307) on the prima facie authenticity and accuracy of third party documents, joins
with the reason of the present section to work such a presumption in favor of any person who has power to make a
due negotiation. It would not make sense for this Act to authorize a purchaser to indulge the presumption of
regularity if the courts were not also called upon to do so. Allocations of the burden of going forward with the
evidence and the burden of proof are left to the procedural law of the various states.
5. Subsections (c) and (d) are unchanged from prior law and apply to both tangible and electronic documents of
title.
Cross References: Sections 1-307, 7-502 and 7-503.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bearer". Section 1-201.
"Control". Section 7-106.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Good faith". Section 1-201 [7-102].
"Holder". Section 1-201.
"Notice". Section 1-202.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchase". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-502
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER
§ 7-502. RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY DUE NEGOTIATION
(a) Subject to Sections 7-205 and 7-503, a holder to which a negotiable document of title has been duly
negotiated acquires thereby:
(1) title to the document;
(2) title to the goods;
(3) all rights accruing under the law of agency or estoppel, including rights to goods delivered to the
bailee after the document was issued; and
(4) the direct obligation of the issuer to hold or deliver the goods according to the terms of the
document free of any defense or claim by the issuer except those arising under the terms of the
document or under this article, but in the case of a delivery order, the bailee's obligation accrues only
upon the bailee's acceptance of the delivery order and the obligation acquired by the holder is that the
issuer and any indorser will procure the acceptance of the bailee.
(b) Subject to Section 7-503, title and rights acquired by due negotiation are not defeated by any stoppage
of the goods represented by the document of title or by surrender of the goods by the bailee and are not
impaired even if:
(1) the due negotiation or any prior due negotiation constituted a breach of duty;
(2) any person has been deprived of possession of a negotiable tangible document or control of a
negotiable electronic document by misrepresentation, fraud, accident, mistake, duress, loss, theft, or
conversion; or
(3) a previous sale or other transfer of the goods or document has been made to a third person.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-502.
Changes: To accommodate electronic documents of title and for style.
Purpose:
1. This section applies to both tangible and electronic documents of title. The elements of duly negotiated, which
constitutes a due negotiation, are set forth in Section 7-501. The several necessary qualifications of the broad
principle that the holder of a document acquired in a due negotiation is the owner of the document and the goods
have been brought together in the next section (Section 7-503).
§ 7-502. RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY DUE NEGOTIATION
Page 2 of 2
2. Subsection (a)(3) covers the case of "feeding" of a duly negotiated document by subsequent delivery to the
bailee of such goods as the document falsely purported to cover; the bailee in such case is estopped as against the
holder of the document.
3. The explicit statement in subsection (a)(4) of the bailee's direct obligation to the holder precludes the defense
that the document in question was "spent" after the carrier had delivered the goods to a previous holder. But the
holder is subject to such defenses as non-negligent destruction even though not apparent on the document. The
sentence on delivery orders applies only to delivery orders in negotiable form which have been duly negotiated. On
delivery orders, see also Section 7-503(b) and Comment.
4. Subsection (b) continues the law which gave full effect to the issuance or due negotiation of a negotiable
document. The subsection adds nothing to the effect of the rules stated in subsection (a), but it has been included
since such explicit reference was provided under former Section 7-502 to preserve the right of a purchaser by due
negotiation. The listing is not exhaustive. The language"any stoppage" is included lest an inference be drawn that a
stoppage of the goods before or after transit might cut off or otherwise impair the purchaser's rights.
Cross References: Sections 7-103, 7-205, 7-403, 7-501, and 7-503.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Control". Section 7-106.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Delivery order". Section 7-102.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Fungible". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Holder". Section 1-201.
"Issuer". Section 7-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
"Term". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-503
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER
§ 7-503. DOCUMENT OF TITLE TO GOODS DEFEATED IN CERTAIN CASES
(a) A document of title confers no right in goods against a person that before issuance of the document
had a legal interest or a perfected security interest in the goods and that did not:
(1) deliver or entrust the goods or any document of title covering the goods to the bailor or the bailor's
nominee with:
(A) actual or apparent authority to ship, store, or sell;
(B) power to obtain delivery under Section 7-403; or
(C) power of disposition under Section 2-403, 2A-304(2), 2A-305(2), 9-320, or 9-321(c) or other
statute or rule of law; or
(2) acquiesce in the procurement by the bailor or its nominee of any document.
(b) Title to goods based upon an unaccepted delivery order is subject to the rights of any person to which a
negotiable warehouse receipt or bill of lading covering the goods has been duly negotiated. That title may
be defeated under Section 7-504 to the same extent as the rights of the issuer or a transferee from the
issuer.
(c) Title to goods based upon a bill of lading issued to a freight forwarder is subject to the rights of any
person to which a bill issued by the freight forwarder is duly negotiated. However, delivery by the carrier in
accordance with Part 4 pursuant to its own bill of lading discharges the carrier's obligation to deliver.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-503.
Changes: Changes to cross-reference to Article 2A and for style.
Purposes:
1. In general it may be said that the title of a purchaser by due negotiation prevails over almost any interest in the
goods which existed prior to the procurement of the document of title if the possession of the goods by the person
obtaining the document derived from any action by the prior claimant which introduced the goods into the stream of
commerce or carried them along that stream. A thief of the goods cannot indeed by shipping or storing them to the
thief's own order acquire power to transfer them to a good faith purchaser. Nor can a tenant or mortgagor defeat
any rights of a landlord or mortgagee which have been perfected under the local law merely by wrongfully shipping
or storing a portion of the crop or other goods. However, "acquiescence" by the landlord or mortgagee does not
require active consent under subsection (a)(2) and knowledge of the likelihood of storage or shipment with no
objection or effort to control it is sufficient to defeat the landlord's or the mortgagee's rights as against one who
§ 7-503. DOCUMENT OF TITLE TO GOODS DEFEATED IN CERTAIN CASES
Page 2 of 3
takes by due negotiation of a negotiable document. In re Sharon Steel, 176 B.R. 384 (Bankr. W.D. Pa. 1995); In re
R.V. Segars Co, 54 B.R. 170 (Bankr. S.C. 1985); In re Jamestown Elevators, Inc., 49 B.R. 661 (Bankr. N.D. 1985).
On the other hand, where goods are delivered to a factor for sale, even though the factor has made no advances
and is limited in its duty to sell for cash, the goods are "entrusted" to the factor "with actual . . . authority . . . to sell"
under subsection (a)(1), and if the factor procures a negotiable document of title it can transfer the owner's interest
to a purchaser by due negotiation. Further, where the factor is in the business of selling, goods entrusted to it
simply for safekeeping or storage may be entrusted under circumstances which give the factor "apparent authority
to ship, store or sell" under subsection (a)(1), or power of disposition under Section 2-403, 2A-304(2), 2A-305(2), 7-
205, 9-320, or 9-321(c) or under a statute such as the earlier Factors Acts, or under a rule of law giving effect to
apparent ownership. See Section 1-103.
Persons having an interest in goods also frequently deliver or entrust them to agents or servants other than
factors for the purpose of shipping or warehousing or under circumstances reasonably contemplating such action.
This Act is clear that such persons assume full risk that the agent to whom the goods are so delivered may ship or
store in breach of duty, take a document to the agent's own order and then proceed to misappropriate the
negotiable document of title that embodies the goods. This Act makes no distinction between possession or mere
custody in such situations and finds no exception in the case of larceny by a bailee or the like. The safeguard in
such situations lies in the requirement that a due negotiation can occur only "in the regular course of business or
financing" and that the purchase be in good faith and without notice. See Section 7-501. Documents of title have no
market among the commercially inexperienced and the commercially experienced do not take them without inquiry
from persons known to be truck drivers or petty clerks even though such persons purport to be operating in their
own names.
Again, where the seller allows a buyer to receive goods under a contract for sale, though as a "conditional
delivery" or under "cash sale" terms and on explicit agreement for immediate payment, the buyer thereby acquires
power to defeat the seller's interest by transfer of the goods to certain good faith purchasers. See Section 2-403.
Both in policy and under the language of subsection (a)(1) that same power must be extended to accomplish the
same result if the buyer procures a negotiable document of title to the goods and duly negotiates it.
This comment 1 should be considered in interpreting delivery, entrustment or acquiescence in application of
Section 7-209(c)).
2. Under subsection (a) a delivery order issued by a person having no right in or power over the goods is
ineffective unless the owner acts as provided in subsection (a)(1) or (2). Thus the rights of a transferee of a nonnegotiable
warehouse receipt can be defeated by a delivery order subsequently issued by the transferor only if the
transferee "delivers or entrusts" to the "person procuring" the delivery order or "acquiesces" in that person's
procurement. Similarly, a second delivery order issued by the same issuer for the same goods will ordinarily be
subject to the first, both under this section and under Section 7-402. After a delivery order is validly issued but
before it is accepted, it may nevertheless be defeated under subsection (b) in much the same way that the rights of
a transferee may be defeated under Section 7-504. For example, a buyer in ordinary course from the issuer may
defeat the rights of the holder of a prior delivery order if the bailee receives notification of the buyer's rights before
notification of the holder's rights. Section 7-504(b)(2). But an accepted delivery order has the same effect as a
document issued by the bailee.
3. Under subsection (c) a bill of lading issued to a freight forwarder is subordinated to the freight forwarder's
document of title, since the bill on its face gives notice of the fact that a freight forwarder is in the picture and the
freight forwarder has in all probability issued a document of title. But the carrier is protected in following the terms of
its own bill of lading.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 1-103, 2-403, 2A-304(2), 2A-305(2), 7-205, 7-209, 7-501, 9-320, 9-321(c), and 9-331.
Point 2: Sections 7-402 and 7-504.
Point 3: Sections 7-402, 7-403 and 7-404.
§ 7-503. DOCUMENT OF TITLE TO GOODS DEFEATED IN CERTAIN CASES
Page 3 of 3
Definitional Cross References:
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Delivery order". Section 7-102.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Right". Section 1-201.
"Warehouse receipt". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-504
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER
§ 7-504. RIGHTS ACQUIRED IN ABSENCE OF DUE NEGOTIATION; EFFECT
OF DIVERSION; STOPPAGE OF DELIVERY
(a) A transferee of a document of title, whether negotiable or nonnegotiable, to which the document has
been delivered but not duly negotiated, acquires the title and rights that its transferor had or had actual
authority to convey.
(b) In the case of a transfer of a nonnegotiable document of title, until but not after the bailee receives
notice of the transfer, the rights of the transferee may be defeated:
(1) by those creditors of the transferor which could treat the transfer as void under Section 2-402 or
2A-308;
(2) by a buyer from the transferor in ordinary course of business if the bailee has delivered the goods
to the buyer or received notification of the buyer's rights;
(3) by a lessee from the transferor in ordinary course of business if the bailee has delivered the goods
to the lessee or received notification of the lessee's rights; or
(4) as against the bailee, by good-faith dealings of the bailee with the transferor.
(c) A diversion or other change of shipping instructions by the consignor in a nonnegotiable bill of lading
which causes the bailee not to deliver the goods to the consignee defeats the consignee's title to the goods
if the goods have been delivered to a buyer in ordinary course of business or a lessee in ordinary course of
business and, in any event, defeats the consignee's rights against the bailee.
(d) Delivery of the goods pursuant to a nonnegotiable document of title may be stopped by a seller under
Section 2-705 or a lessor under Section 2A-526, subject to the requirements of due notification in those
sections. A bailee that honors the seller's or lessor's instructions is entitled to be indemnified by the seller or
lessor against any resulting loss or expense.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-504.
Changes: To include cross-references to Article 2A and for style.
Purposes:
1. Under the general principles controlling negotiable documents, it is clear that in the absence of due negotiation
a transferor cannot convey greater rights than the transferor has, even when the negotiation is formally perfect. This
section recognizes the transferor's power to transfer rights which the transferor has or has "actual authority to
convey." Thus, where a negotiable document of title is being transferred the operation of the principle of estoppel is
§ 7-504. RIGHTS ACQUIRED IN ABSENCE OF DUE NEGOTIATION; EFFECT OF DIVERSION; STOPPAGE
OF DELIVERY
Page 2 of 3
not recognized, as contrasted with situations involving the transfer of the goods themselves. (Compare Section 2-
403 on good faith purchase of goods.) This section applies to both tangible and electronic documents of title.
A necessary part of the price for the protection of regular dealings with negotiable documents of title is an
insistence that no dealing which is in any way irregular shall be recognized as a good faith purchase of the
document or of any rights pertaining to it. So, where the transfer of a negotiable document fails as a negotiation
because a requisite indorsement is forged or otherwise missing, the purchaser in good faith and for value may be in
the anomalous position of having less rights, in part, than if the purchaser had purchased the goods themselves.
True, the purchaser's rights are not subject to defeat by attachment of the goods or surrender of them to the
purchaser's transferor (contrast subsection (b)); but on the other hand, the purchaser cannot acquire enforceable
rights to control or receive the goods over the bailee's objection merely by giving notice to the bailee. Similarly, a
consignee who makes payment to its consignor against a straight bill of lading can thereby acquire the position of a
good faith purchaser of goods under provisions of the Article of this Act on Sales (Section 2-403), whereas the
same payment made in good faith against an unendorsed order bill would not have such effect. The appropriate
remedy of a purchaser in such a situation is to regularize its status by compelling indorsement of the document (see
Section 7-506).
2. As in the case of transfer--as opposed to "due negotiation"--of negotiable documents, subsection (a) empowers
the transferor of a nonnegotiable document to transfer only such rights as the transferor has or has "actual
authority" to convey. In contrast to situations involving the goods themselves the operation of estoppel or agency
principles is not here recognized to enable the transferor to convey greater rights than the transferor actually has.
Subsection (b) makes it clear, however, that the transferee of a nonnegotiable document may acquire rights greater
in some respects than those of his transferor by giving notice of the transfer to the bailee. New subsection (b)(3)
provides for the rights of a lessee in the ordinary course.
Subsection (b)(2)&(3) require delivery of the goods. Delivery of the goods means the voluntary transfer of physical
possession of the goods. See amended 2-103.
3. Subsection (c) is in part a reiteration of the carrier's immunity from liability if it honors instructions of the
consignor to divert, but there is added a provision protecting the title of the substituted consignee if the latter is a
buyer in ordinary course of business. A typical situation would be where a manufacturer, having shipped a lot of
standardized goods to A on nonnegotiable bill of lading, diverts the goods to customer B who pays for them. Under
pre-Code passage-of-title-by-appropriation doctrine A might reclaim the goods from B. However, no consideration
of commercial policy supports this involvement of an innocent third party in the default of the manufacturer on his
contract to A; and the common commercial practice of diverting goods in transit suggests a trade understanding in
accordance with this subsection. The same result should obtain if the substituted consignee is a lessee in ordinary
course. The extent of the lessee's interest in the goods is less than a buyer's interest in the goods. However, as
against the first consignee and the lessee in ordinary course as the substituted consignee, the lessee's rights in the
goods as granted under the lease are superior to the first consignee's rights.
4. Subsection (d) gives the carrier an express right to indemnity where the carrier honors a seller's request to stop
delivery.
5. Section 1-202 gives the bailee protection, if due diligence is exercised where the bailee's organization has not
had time to act on a notification.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-403 and 7-506.
Point 2: Sections 2-403 and 2A-304.
Point 3: Sections 7-303, 7-403(a)(5) and 7-404.
Point 4: Sections 2-705 and 7-403(a)(4).
Point 5: Section 1-202.
§ 7-504. RIGHTS ACQUIRED IN ABSENCE OF DUE NEGOTIATION; EFFECT OF DIVERSION; STOPPAGE
OF DELIVERY
Page 3 of 3
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Bill of lading". Section 1-201.
"Buyer in ordinary course of business". Section 1-201.
"Consignee". Section 7-102.
"Consignor". Section 7-102.
"Creditor". Section 1-201.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of Title". Section 1-201.
"Duly negotiate". Section 7-501.
"Good faith". Section 1-201. [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Honor". Section 1-201.
"Lessee in ordinary course". Section 2A-103.
"Notification" Section 1-202.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-505
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER
§ 7-505. INDORSER NOT GUARANTOR FOR OTHER PARTIES
The indorsement of a tangible document of title issued by a bailee does not make the indorser liable for any default
by the bailee or previous indorsers.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-505.
Changes: Limited to tangible documents of title.
Purposes:
This section is limited to tangible documents of title as the concept of indorsement is irrelevant to electronic
documents of title. Electronic documents of title will be transferred by delivery of control. Section 7-106. The
indorsement of a tangible document of title is generally understood to be directed towards perfecting the
transferee's rights rather than towards assuming additional obligations. The language of the present section,
however, does not preclude the one case in which an indorsement given for value guarantees future action,
namely, that in which the bailee has not yet become liable upon the document at the time of the indorsement. Under
such circumstances the indorser, of course, engages that appropriate honor of the document by the bailee will
occur. See Section 7-502(a)(4) as to negotiable delivery orders. However, even in such a case, once the bailee
attorns to the transferee, the indorser's obligation has been fulfilled and the policy of this section excludes any
continuing obligation on the part of the indorser for the bailee's ultimate actual performance.
Cross Reference: Sections 7-106 and 7-502.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Party". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-506
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER
§ 7-506. DELIVERY WITHOUT INDORSEMENT: RIGHT TO COMPEL
INDORSEMENT
The transferee of a negotiable tangible document of title has a specifically enforceable right to have its transferor
supply any necessary indorsement, but the transfer becomes a negotiation only as of the time the indorsement is
supplied.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-506.
Changes: Limited to tangible documents of title.
Purposes:
1. This section is limited to tangible documents of title as the concept of indorsement is irrelevant to electronic
documents of title. Electronic documents of title will be transferred by delivery of control. Section 7-106. From a
commercial point of view the intention to transfer a tangible negotiable document of title which requires an
indorsement for its transfer, is incompatible with an intention to withhold such indorsement and so defeat the
effective use of the document. Further, the preceding section and the Comment thereto make it clear that an
indorsement generally imposes no responsibility on the indorser.
2. Although this section provides that delivery of a tangible document of title without the necessary indorsement is
effective as a transfer, the transferee, of course, has not regularized its position until such indorsement is supplied.
Until this is done the transferee cannot claim rights under due negotiation within the requirements of this Article
(Section 7-501(a)(5)) on "due negotiation". Similarly, despite the transfer to the transferee of the transferor's title,
the transferee cannot demand the goods from the bailee until the negotiation has been completed and the
document is in proper form for surrender. See Section 7-403(c).
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 7-106 and 7-505.
Point 2: Sections 7-501(a)(5) and 7-403(c).
Definitional Cross References:
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Rights". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 7-506. DELIVERY WITHOUT INDORSEMENT: RIGHT TO COMPEL INDORSEMENT
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-507
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER
§ 7-507. WARRANTIES ON NEGOTIATION OR DELIVERY OF DOCUMENT OF
TITLE
If a person negotiates or delivers a document of title for value, otherwise than as a mere intermediary under
Section 7-508, unless otherwise agreed, the transferor, in addition to any warranty made in selling or
leasing the goods, warrants to its immediate purchaser only that:
(1) the document is genuine;
(2) the transferor does not have knowledge of any fact that would impair the document's validity or
worth; and
(3) the negotiation or delivery is rightful and fully effective with respect to the title to the document and
the goods it represents.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-507.
Changes: Substitution of the word "delivery" for the word "transfer," reference leasing transactions and style.
Purposes:
1. Delivery of goods by use of a document of title does not limit or displace the ordinary obligations of a seller or
lessor as to any warranties regarding the goods that arises under other law. If the transfer of documents attends or
follows the making of a contract for the sale or lease of goods, the general obligations on warranties as to the goods
(Sections 2-312 through 2-318 and Sections 2A-210 through 2A-316) are brought to bear as well as the special
warranties under this section.
2. The limited warranties of a delivering or collecting intermediary, including a collecting bank, are stated in
Section 7-508.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 2-312 through 2-318 and 2A-310-through 2A-316.
Point 2: Section 7-508.
Definitional Cross References:
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Genuine". Section 1-201.
§ 7-507. WARRANTIES ON NEGOTIATION OR DELIVERY OF DOCUMENT OF TITLE
Page 2 of 2
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchaser". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-508
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER
§ 7-508. WARRANTIES OF COLLECTING BANK AS TO DOCUMENTS OF
TITLE
A collecting bank or other intermediary known to be entrusted with documents of title on behalf of another or with
collection of a draft or other claim against delivery of documents warrants by the delivery of the documents only its
own good faith and authority even if the collecting bank or other intermediary has purchased or made advances
against the claim or draft to be collected.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-508.
Changes: Changes for style only.
Purposes:
1. To state the limited warranties given with respect to the documents accompanying a documentary draft.
2. In warranting its authority a collecting bank or other intermediary only warrants its authority from its transferor.
See Section 4-203. It does not warrant the genuineness or effectiveness of the document. Compare Section 7-507.
3. Other duties and rights of banks handling documentary drafts for collection are stated in Article 4, Part 5. On
the meaning of draft, see Section 4-104 and Section 5-102, comment 11.
Cross References:
Sections 4-104, 4-203, 4-501 through 4-504, 5-102, and 7-507.
Definitional Cross References:
"Collecting bank". Section 4-105.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-102.
"Documentary draft". Section 4-104.
"Intermediary bank". Section 4-105.
"Good faith". Section 1-201 [7-102.]
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 7-508. WARRANTIES OF COLLECTING BANK AS TO DOCUMENTS OF TITLE
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-509
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 5. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER
§ 7-509. ADEQUATE COMPLIANCE WITH COMMERCIAL CONTRACT
Whether a document of title is adequate to fulfill the obligations of a contract for sale, a contract for lease, or the
conditions of a letter of credit is determined by Article 2, 2A, or 5.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-509.
Changes: To reference Article 2A.
Purposes:
To cross-refer to the Articles of this Act which deal with the substantive issues of the type of document of title
required under the contract entered into by the parties.
Cross References: Articles 2, 2A and 5.
Definitional Cross References:
"Contract for sale". Section 2-106.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Lease". Section 2A-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-601
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 6. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 7-601. LOST, STOLEN, OR DESTROYED DOCUMENTS OF TITLE
(a) If a document of title is lost, stolen, or destroyed, a court may order delivery of the goods or issuance of
a substitute document and the bailee may without liability to any person comply with the order. If the
document was negotiable, a court may not order delivery of the goods or issuance of a substitute document
without the claimant's posting security unless it finds that any person that may suffer loss as a result of
nonsurrender of possession or control of the document is adequately protected against the loss. If the
document was nonnegotiable, the court may require security. The court may also order payment of the
bailee's reasonable costs and attorney's fees in any action under this subsection.
(b) A bailee that, without a court order, delivers goods to a person claiming under a missing negotiable
document of title is liable to any person injured thereby. If the delivery is not in good faith, the bailee is liable
for conversion. Delivery in good faith is not conversion if the claimant posts security with the bailee in an
amount at least double the value of the goods at the time of posting to indemnify any person injured by the
delivery which files a notice of claim within one year after the delivery.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provision: Former Section 7-601.
Changes: To accommodate electronic documents; to provide flexibility to courts similar to the flexibility in Section
3-309; to update to the modern era of deregulation; and for style.
Purposes:
1. Subsection (a) authorizes courts to order compulsory delivery of the goods or compulsory issuance of a
substitute document. Compare Section 7-402. Using language similar to that found in Section 3-309, courts are
given discretion as to what is adequate protection when the lost, stolen or destroyed document was negotiable or
whether security should be required when the lost, stolen or destroyed document was nonnegotiable. In
determining whether a party is adequately protected against loss in the case of a negotiable document, the court
should consider the likelihood that the party will suffer a loss. The court is also given discretion as to the bailee's
costs and attorney fees. The rights and obligations of a bailee under this section depend upon whether the
document of title is lost, stolen or destroyed and is in addition to the ability of the bailee to bring an action for
interpleader. See Section 7-603.
2. Courts have the authority under this section to order a substitute document for either tangible or electronic
documents. If the substitute document will be in a different medium than the original document, the court should
fashion its order in light of the requirements of Section 7-105.
3. Subsection (b) follows prior Section 7-601 in recognizing the legality of the well established commercial
practice of bailees making delivery in good faith when they are satisfied that the claimant is the person entitled
under a missing (i.e. lost, stolen, or destroyed) negotiable document. Acting without a court order, the bailee
§ 7-601. LOST, STOLEN, OR DESTROYED DOCUMENTS OF TITLE
Page 2 of 2
remains liable on the original negotiable document and, to avoid conversion liability, the bailee may insist that the
claimant provide an indemnity bond. Cf. Section 7-403.
4. Claimants on non-negotiable instruments are permitted to avail themselves of the subsection (a) procedure
because straight (non-negotiable) bills of lading sometimes contain provisions that the goods shall not be delivered
except upon production of the bill. If the carrier should choose to insist upon production of the bill, the consignee
should have some means of compelling delivery on satisfactory proof of entitlement. Without a court order, a bailee
may deliver, subject to Section 7-403, to a person claiming goods under a non-negotiable document that the same
person claims is lost, stolen, or destroyed.
5. The bailee's lien should be protected when a court orders delivery of the goods pursuant to this section.
Cross References:
Point 1: Sections 3-309, 7-402 and 7-603.
Point 2: Section 7-105.
Point 3: Section 7-403.
Point 4: Section 7-403.
Point 5: Sections 7-209 and 7-307.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Good faith". Section 1-201 [7-102].
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Person". Section 1-201.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-602
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 6. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 7-602. JUDICIAL PROCESS AGAINST GOODS COVERED BY NEGOTIABLE
DOCUMENT OF TITLE
Unless a document of title was originally issued upon delivery of the goods by a person that did not have power to
dispose of them, a lien does not attach by virtue of any judicial process to goods in the possession of a bailee for
which a negotiable document of title is outstanding unless possession or control of the document is first
surrendered to the bailee or the document's negotiation is enjoined. The bailee may not be compelled to deliver the
goods pursuant to process until possession or control of the document is surrendered to the bailee or to the court. A
purchaser of the document for value without notice of the process or injunction takes free of the lien imposed by
judicial process.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provisions: Former Section 7-602.
Changes: Changes to accommodate electronic documents of title and for style.
Purposes:
1. The purpose of the section is to protect the bailee from conflicting claims of the document of title holder and the
judgment creditors of the person who deposited the goods. The rights of the former prevail unless, in effect, the
judgment creditors immobilize the negotiable document of title through the surrender of possession of a tangible
document or control of an electronic document. However, if the document of title was issued upon deposit of the
goods by a person who had no power to dispose of the goods so that the document is ineffective to pass title,
judgment liens are valid to the extent of the debtor's interest in the goods.
2. The last sentence covers the possibility that the holder of a document who has been enjoined from negotiating
it will violate the injunction by negotiating to an innocent purchaser for value. In such case the lien will be defeated.
Cross Reference:
Sections 7-106 and 7-501 through 7-503.
Definitional Cross References:
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Document of title". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
"Notice". Section 1-202.
§ 7-602. JUDICIAL PROCESS AGAINST GOODS COVERED BY NEGOTIABLE DOCUMENT OF TITLE
Page 2 of 2
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Purchase". Section 1-201.
"Value". Section 1-204.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-603
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 6. WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 7-603. CONFLICTING CLAIMS; INTERPLEADER
If more than one person claims title to or possession of the goods, the bailee is excused from delivery until the
bailee has a reasonable time to ascertain the validity of the adverse claims or to commence an action for
interpleader. The bailee may assert an interpleader either in defending an action for nondelivery of the goods or by
original action.
Annotations
Commentary
LEGISLATIVE NOTE: The following provisions should be used to apply to both the Article 7 provisions and the
conforming amendments to other articles of the Uniform Commercial Code attached as Appendix I.
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Prior Uniform Statutory Provisions: Former Section 7-603.
Changes: Changes for style only.
Purposes:
1. The section enables a bailee faced with conflicting claims to the goods to compel the claimants to litigate their
claims with each other rather than with the bailee. The bailee is protected from legal liability when the bailee
complies with court orders from the interpleader. See e.g. Northwestern National Sales, Inc. v. Commercial Cold
Storage, Inc., 162 Ga. App. 741, 293 S.E.2d. 30 (1982).
2. This section allows the bailee to bring an interpleader action but does not provide an exclusive basis for
allowing interpleader. If either state or federal procedural rules allow an interpleader in other situations, the bailee
may commence an interpleader under those rules. Even in an interpleader to which this section applies, the state or
federal process of interpleader applies to the bailee's action for interpleader. For example, state or federal
interpleader statutes or rules may permit a bailee to protect its lien or to seek attorney's fees and costs in the
interpleader action.
Cross reference:
Point 1: Section 7-403.
Definitional Cross References:
"Action". Section 1-201.
"Bailee". Section 7-102.
"Delivery". Section 1-201.
"Goods". Section 7-102.
§ 7-603. CONFLICTING CLAIMS; INTERPLEADER
Page 2 of 2
"Person". Section 1-201.
"Reasonable time". Section 1-205.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-701
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 7. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 7-701. EFFECTIVE DATE
This [Act] takes effect on [ ].
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-702
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 7. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 7-702. REPEALS
[Existing Article 7] and [Section 10-104 of the Uniform Commercial Code] are repealed.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
A state should repeal its prior version of Uniform Commercial Code Article 7 on documents of title and Uniform
Commercial Code section 10-204. The substance of Section 10-104 has been incorporated into Section 7-103(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-703
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 7. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 7-703. APPLICABILITY
This [Act] applies to a document of title that is issued or a bailment that arises on or after the effective date of this
[Act]. This [Act] does not apply to a document of title that is issued or a bailment that arises before the effective date
of this [Act] even if the document of title or bailment would be subject to this [Act] if the document of title had been
issued or bailment had arisen on or after the effective date of this [Act]. This [Act] does not apply to a right of action
that has accrued before the effective date of this [Act].
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This Act will apply prospectively only to documents of title issued or bailments that arise after the effective date of
the Act.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 7-704
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE >
PART 7. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 7-704. SAVINGS CLAUSE
A document of title issued or a bailment that arises before the effective date of this [Act] and the rights, obligations,
and interests flowing from that document or bailment are governed by any statute or other rule amended or
repealed by this [Act] as if amendment or repeal had not occurred and may be terminated, completed,
consummated, or enforced under that statute or other rule.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This Act will apply prospectively only to documents of title issued or bailments that arise after the effective date of
the Act. To the extent that issues arise based upon documents of title or rights or obligations that arise prior to the
effective date of this Act, prior law will apply to resolve those issues.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-101. SHORT TITLE
This Article may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code--Investment Securities.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-102. DEFINITIONS
(a) In this Article:
(1) "Adverse claim" means a claim that a claimant has a property interest in a financial asset and that it
is a violation of the rights of the claimant for another person to hold, transfer, or deal with the financial
asset.
(2) "Bearer form," as applied to a certificated security, means a form in which the security is payable to
the bearer of the security certificate according to its terms but not by reason of an indorsement.
(3) "Broker" means a person defined as a broker or dealer under the federal securities laws, but
without excluding a bank acting in that capacity.
(4) "Certificated security" means a security that is represented by a certificate.
(5) "Clearing corporation" means:
(i) a person that is registered as a "clearing agency" under the federal securities laws;
(ii) a federal reserve bank; or
(iii) any other person that provides clearance or settlement services with respect to financial
assets that would require it to register as a clearing agency under the federal securities laws but for
an exclusion or exemption from the registration requirement, if its activities as a clearing
corporation, including promulgation of rules, are subject to regulation by a federal or state
governmental authority.
(6) "Communicate" means to:
(i) send a signed writing; or
(ii) transmit information by any mechanism agreed upon by the persons transmitting and receiving
the information.
(7) "Entitlement holder" means a person identified in the records of a securities intermediary as the
person having a security entitlement against the securities intermediary. If a person acquires a security
entitlement by virtue of Section 8-501(b)(2) or (3), that person is the entitlement holder.
(8) "Entitlement order" means a notification communicated to a securities intermediary directing
transfer or redemption of a financial asset to which the entitlement holder has a security entitlement.
(9) "Financial asset," except as otherwise provided in Section 8-103, means:
(i) a security;
(ii) an obligation of a person or a share, participation, or other interest in a person or in property or
an enterprise of a person, which is, or is of a type, dealt in or traded on financial markets, or which
is recognized in any area in which it is issued or dealt in as a medium for investment; or
(iii) any property that is held by a securities intermediary for another person in a securities account
if the securities intermediary has expressly agreed with the other person that the property is to be
treated as a financial asset under this Article.
§ 8-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 8
As context requires, the term means either the interest itself or the means by which a person's
claim to it is evidenced, including a certificated or uncertificated security, a security certificate, or a
security entitlement.
(10) "Good faith," for purposes of the obligation of good faith in the performance or enforcement of
contracts or duties within this Article, means honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable
commercial standards of fair dealing.
(11) "Indorsement" means a signature that alone or accompanied by other words is made on a security
certificate in registered form or on a separate document for the purpose of assigning, transferring, or
redeeming the security or granting a power to assign, transfer, or redeem it.
(12) "Instruction" means a notification communicated to the issuer of an uncertificated security which
directs that the transfer of the security be registered or that the security be redeemed.
(13) "Registered form," as applied to a certificated security, means a form in which:
(i) the security certificate specifies a person entitled to the security; and
(ii) a transfer of the security may be registered upon books maintained for that purpose by or on
behalf of the issuer, or the security certificate so states.
(14) "Securities intermediary" means:
(i) a clearing corporation; or
(ii) a person, including a bank or broker, that in the ordinary course of its business maintains
securities accounts for others and is acting in that capacity.
(15) "Security," except as otherwise provided in Section 8-103, means an obligation of an issuer or a
share, participation, or other interest in an issuer or in property or an enterprise of an issuer:
(i) which is represented by a security certificate in bearer or registered form, or the transfer of
which may be registered upon books maintained for that purpose by or on behalf of the issuer;
(ii) which is one of a class or series or by its terms is divisible into a class or series of shares,
participations, interests, or obligations; and
(iii) which:
(A) is, or is of a type, dealt in or traded on securities exchanges or securities markets; or
(B) is a medium for investment and by its terms expressly provides that it is a security
governed by this Article.
(16) "Security certificate" means a certificate representing a security.
(17) "Security entitlement" means the rights and property interest of an entitlement holder with respect
to a financial asset specified in Part 5.
(18) "Uncertificated security" means a security that is not represented by a certificate.
(b) Other definitions applying to this Article and the sections in which they appear are:
Appropriate person
Section 8-107
Control
Section 8-106
Delivery
Section 8-301
§ 8-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 3 of 8
Investment company security
Section 8-103
Issuer
Section 8-201
Overissue
Section 8-210
Protected purchaser
Section 8-303
Securities account
Section 8-501
(c) In addition, Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of construction and interpretation
applicable throughout this Article.
(d) The characterization of a person, business, or transaction for purposes of this Article does not
determine the characterization of the person, business, or transaction for purposes of any other law,
regulation, or rule.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. "Adverse claim." The definition of the term "adverse claim" has two components. First, the term refers only to
property interests. Second, the term means not merely that a person has a property interest in a financial asset but
that it is a violation of the claimant's property interest for the other person to hold or transfer the security or other
financial asset.
The term adverse claim is not, of course, limited to ownership rights, but extends to other property interests
established by other law. A security interest, for example, would be an adverse claim with respect to a transferee
from the debtor since any effort by the secured party to enforce the security interest against the property would be
an interference with the transferee's interest.
The definition of adverse claim in the prior version of Article 8 might have been read to suggest that any wrongful
action concerning a security, even a simple breach of contract, gave rise to an adverse claim. Insofar as such cases
as Fallon v. Wall Street Clearing Corp., 586 N.Y.S.2d 953, 182 A.D.2d 245, (1992) and Pentech Intl. v. Wall St.
Clearing Co., 983 F.2d 441 (2d Cir. 1993), were based on that view, they are rejected by the new definition which
explicitly limits the term adverse claim to property interests. Suppose, for example, that A contracts to sell or deliver
securities to B, but fails to do so and instead sells or pledges the securities to C. B, the promisee, has an action
against A for breach of contract, but absent unusual circumstances the action for breach would not give rise to a
property interest in the securities. Accordingly, B does not have an adverse claim. An adverse claim might,
however, be based upon principles of equitable remedies that give rise to property claims. It would, for example,
cover a right established by other law to rescind a transaction in which securities were transferred. Suppose, for
example, that A holds securities and is induced by B's fraud to transfer them to B. Under the law of contract or
restitution, A may have a right to rescind the transfer, which gives A a property claim to the securities. If so, A has
an adverse claim to the securities in B's hands. By contrast, if B had committed no fraud, but had merely committed
§ 8-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 4 of 8
a breach of contract in connection with the transfer from A to B, A may have only a right to damages for breach, not
a right to rescind. In that case, A would not have an adverse claim to the securities in B's hands.
2. "Bearer form." The definition of "bearer form" has remained substantially unchanged since the early drafts of
the original version of Article 8. The requirement that the certificate be payable to bearer by its terms rather than by
an indorsement has the effect of preventing instruments governed by other law, such as chattel paper or Article 3
negotiable instruments, from being inadvertently swept into the Article 8 definition of security merely by virtue of
blank indorsements. Although the other elements of the definition of security in Section 8-102(a)(14) probably
suffice for that purpose in any event, the language used in the prior version of Article 8 has been retained.
3. "Broker." Broker is defined by reference to the definitions of broker and dealer in the federal securities laws.
The only difference is that banks, which are excluded from the federal securities law definition, are included in the
Article 8 definition when they perform functions that would bring them within the federal securities law definition if it
did not have the clause excluding banks. The definition covers both those who act as agents ("brokers" in securities
parlance) and those who act as principals ("dealers" in securities parlance). Since the definition refers to persons
"defined" as brokers or dealers under the federal securities law, rather than to persons required to "register" as
brokers or dealers under the federal securities law, it covers not only registered brokers and dealers but also those
exempt from the registration requirement, such as purely intrastate brokers. The only substantive rules that turn on
the defined term broker are one provision of the section on warranties, Section 8-108(i), and the special perfection
rule in Article 9 for security interests granted by brokers, Section 9-115(4)(c).
4. "Certificated security." The term "certificated security" means a security that is represented by a security
certificate.
5. "Clearing corporation." The definition of clearing corporation limits its application to entities that are subject to a
rigorous regulatory framework. Accordingly, the definition includes only federal reserve banks, persons who are
registered as "clearing agencies" under the federal securities laws (which impose a comprehensive system of
regulation of the activities and rules of clearing agencies), and other entities subject to a comparable system of
regulatory oversight.
6. "Communicate." The term "communicate" assures that the Article 8 rules will be sufficiently flexible to adapt to
changes in information technology. Sending a signed writing always suffices as a communication, but the parties
can agree that a different means of transmitting information is to be used. Agreement is defined in Section 1-201(3)
as "the bargain of the parties in fact as found in their language or by implication from other circumstances including
course of dealing or usage of trade or course of performance." Thus, use of an information transmission method
might be found to be authorized by agreement, even though the parties have not explicitly so specified in a formal
agreement. The term communicate is used in Sections 8-102(a)(7) (definition of entitlement order), 8-102(a)(11)
(definition of instruction), and 8-403 (demand that issuer not register transfer).
7. "Entitlement holder." This term designates those who hold financial assets through intermediaries in the indirect
holding system. Because many of the rules of Part 5 impose duties on securities intermediaries in favor of
entitlement holders, the definition of entitlement holder is, in most cases, limited to the person specifically
designated as such on the records of the intermediary. The last sentence of the definition covers the relatively
unusual cases where a person may acquire a security entitlement under Section 8-501 even though the person
may not be specifically designated as an entitlement holder on the records of the securities intermediary.
A person may have an interest in a security entitlement, and may even have the right to give entitlement orders to
the securities intermediary with respect to it, even though the person is not the entitlement holder. For example, a
person who holds securities through a securities account in its own name may have given discretionary trading
authority to another person, such as an investment adviser. Similarly, the control provisions in Section 8-106 and
the related provisions in Article 9 are designed to facilitate transactions in which a person who holds securities
through a securities account uses them as collateral in an arrangement where the securities intermediary has
agreed that if the secured party so directs the intermediary will dispose of the positions. In such arrangements, the
debtor remains the entitlement holder but has agreed that the secured party can initiate entitlement orders.
Moreover, an entitlement holder may be acting for another person as a nominee, agent, trustee, or in another
capacity. Unless the entitlement holder is itself acting as a securities intermediary for the other person, in which
case the other person would be an entitlement holder with respect to the securities entitlement, the relationship
§ 8-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 5 of 8
between an entitlement holder and another person for whose benefit the entitlement holder holds a securities
entitlement is governed by other law.
8. "Entitlement order." This term is defined as a notification communicated to a securities intermediary directing
transfer or redemption of the financial asset to which an entitlement holder has a security entitlement. The term is
used in the rules for the indirect holding system in a fashion analogous to the use of the terms "indorsement" and
"instruction" in the rules for the direct holding system. If a person directly holds a certificated security in registered
form and wishes to transfer it, the means of transfer is an indorsement. If a person directly holds an uncertificated
security and wishes to transfer it, the means of transfer is an instruction. If a person holds a security entitlement, the
means of disposition is an entitlement order. An entitlement order includes a direction under Section 8-508 to the
securities intermediary to transfer a financial asset to the account of the entitlement holder at another financial
intermediary or to cause the financial asset to be transferred to the entitlement holder in the direct holding system
(e.g., the delivery of a securities certificate registered in the name of the former entitlement holder). As noted in
Comment 7, an entitlement order need not be initiated by the entitlement holder in order to be effective, so long as
the entitlement holder has authorized the other party to initiate entitlement orders. See Section 8-107(b).
9. "Financial asset." The definition of "financial asset," in conjunction with the definition of "securities account" in
Section 8-501, sets the scope of the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 of Revised Article 8. The Part 5 rules
apply not only to securities held through intermediaries, but also to other financial assets held through
intermediaries. The term financial asset is defined to include not only securities but also a broader category of
obligations, shares, participations, and interests.
Having separate definitions of security and financial asset makes it possible to separate the question of the proper
scope of the traditional Article 8 rules from the question of the proper scope of the new indirect holding system
rules. Some forms of financial assets should be covered by the indirect holding system rules of Part 5, but not by
the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4. The term financial asset is used to cover such property. Because the term security
entitlement is defined in terms of financial assets rather than securities, the rules concerning security entitlements
set out in Part 5 of Article 8 and in Revised Article 9 apply to the broader class of financial assets.
The fact that something does or could fall within the definition of financial asset does not, without more, trigger
Article 8 coverage. The indirect holding system rules of Revised Article 8 apply only if the financial asset is in fact
held in a securities account, so that the interest of the person who holds the financial asset through the securities
account is a security entitlement. Thus, questions of the scope of the indirect holding system rules cannot be
framed as "Is such-and-such a 'financial asset' under Article 8?" Rather, one must analyze whether the relationship
between an institution and a person on whose behalf the institution holds an asset falls within the scope of the term
securities account as defined in Section 8-501. That question turns in large measure on whether it makes sense to
apply the Part 5 rules to the relationship.
The term financial asset is used to refer both to the underlying asset and the particular means by which ownership
of that asset is evidenced. Thus, with respect to a certificated security, the term financial asset may, as context
requires, refer either to the interest or obligation of the issuer or to the security certificate representing that interest
or obligation. Similarly, if a person holds a security or other financial asset through a securities account, the term
financial asset may, as context requires, refer either to the underlying asset or to the person's security entitlement.
10. "Good faith." Good faith is defined in Article 8 for purposes of the application to Article 8 of Section 1-203,
which provides that "Every contract or duty within this Act imposes an obligation of good faith in its performance or
enforcement." The sole function of the good faith definition in Revised Article 8 is to give content to the Section 1-
203 obligation as it applies to contracts and duties that are governed by Article 8. The standard is one of
"reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing." The reference to commercial standards makes clear that
assessments of conduct are to be made in light of the commercial setting. The substantive rules of Article 8 have
been drafted to take account of the commercial circumstances of the securities holding and processing system. For
example, Section 8-115 provides that a securities intermediary acting on an effective entitlement order, or a broker
or other agent acting as a conduit in a securities transaction, is not liable to an adverse claimant, unless the
claimant obtained legal process or the intermediary acted in collusion with the wrongdoer. This, and other similar
provisions, see Sections 8-404 and 8-503(e), do not depend on notice of adverse claims, because it would impair
rather than advance the interest of investors in having a sound and efficient securities clearance and settlement
§ 8-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 6 of 8
system to require intermediaries to investigate the propriety of the transactions they are processing. The good faith
obligation does not supplant the standards of conduct established in provisions of this kind.
In Revised Article 8, the definition of good faith is not germane to the question whether a purchaser takes free
from adverse claims. The rules on such questions as whether a purchaser who takes in suspicious circumstances is
disqualified from protected purchaser status are treated not as an aspect of good faith but directly in the rules of
Section 8-105 on notice of adverse claims.
11. "Indorsement" is defined as a signature made on a security certificate or separate document for purposes of
transferring or redeeming the security. The definition is adapted from the language of Section 8-308(1) of the prior
version and from the definition of indorsement in the Negotiable Instruments Article, see Section 3-204(a). The
definition of indorsement does not include the requirement that the signature be made by an appropriate person or
be authorized. Those questions are treated in the separate substantive provision on whether the indorsement is
effective, rather than in the definition of indorsement. See Section 8-107.
12. "Instruction" is defined as a notification communicated to the issuer of an uncertificated security directing that
transfer be registered or that the security be redeemed. Instructions are the analog for uncertificated securities of
indorsements of certificated securities.
13. "Registered form." The definition of "registered form" is substantially the same as in the prior version of Article
8. Like the definition of bearer form, it serves primarily to distinguish Article 8 securities from instruments governed
by other law, such as Article 3.
14. "Securities intermediary." A "securities intermediary" is a person that in the ordinary course of its business
maintains securities accounts for others and is acting in that capacity. The most common examples of securities
intermediaries would be clearing corporations holding securities for their participants, banks acting as securities
custodians, and brokers holding securities on behalf of their customers. Clearing corporations are listed separately
as a category of securities intermediary in subparagraph (i) even though in most circumstances they would fall
within the general definition in subparagraph (ii). The reason is to simplify the analysis of arrangements such as the
NSCC-DTC system in which NSCC performs the comparison, clearance, and netting function, while DTC acts as
the depository. Because NSCC is a registered clearing agency under the federal securities laws, it is a clearing
corporation and hence a securities intermediary under Article 8, regardless of whether it is at any particular time or
in any particular aspect of its operations holding securities on behalf of its participants.
The terms securities intermediary and broker have different meanings. Broker means a person engaged in the
business of buying and selling securities, as agent for others or as principal. Securities intermediary means a
person maintaining securities accounts for others. A stockbroker, in the colloquial sense, may or may not be acting
as a securities intermediary.
The definition of securities intermediary includes the requirement that the person in question is "acting in the
capacity" of maintaining securities accounts for others. This is to take account of the fact that a particular entity,
such as a bank, may act in many different capacities in securities transactions. A bank may act as a transfer agent
for issuers, as a securities custodian for institutional investors and private investors, as a dealer in government
securities, as a lender taking securities as collateral, and as a provider of general payment and collection services
that might be used in connection with securities transactions. A bank that maintains securities accounts for its
customers would be a securities intermediary with respect to those accounts; but if it takes a pledge of securities
from a borrower to secure a loan, it is not thereby acting as a securities intermediary with respect to the pledged
securities, since it holds them for its own account rather than for a customer. In other circumstances, those two
functions might be combined. For example, if the bank is a government securities dealer it may maintain securities
accounts for customers and also provide the customers with margin credit to purchase or carry the securities, in
much the same way that brokers provide margin loans to their customers.
15. "Security." The definition of "security" has three components. First, there is the subparagraph (i) test that the
interest or obligation be fully transferable, in the sense that the issuer either maintains transfer books or the
obligation or interest is represented by a certificate in bearer or registered form. Second, there is the subparagraph
(ii) test that the interest or obligation be divisible, that is, one of a class or series, as distinguished from individual
obligations of the sort governed by ordinary contract law or by Article 3. Third, there is the subparagraph (iii)
functional test, which generally turns on whether the interest or obligation is, or is of a type, dealt in or traded on
§ 8-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 7 of 8
securities markets or securities exchanges. There is, however, an "opt-in" provision in subparagraph (iii) which
permits the issuer of any interest or obligation that is "a medium of investment" to specify that it is a security
governed by Article 8.
The divisibility test of subparagraph (ii) applies to the security -- that is, the underlying intangible interest -- not the
means by which that interest is evidenced. Thus, securities issued in book-entry only form meet the divisibility test
because the underlying intangible interest is divisible via the mechanism of the indirect holding system. This is so
even though the clearing corporation is the only eligible direct holder of the security.
The third component, the functional test in subparagraph (iii), provides flexibility while ensuring that the Article 8
rules do not apply to interests or obligations in circumstances so unconnected with the securities markets that
parties are unlikely to have thought of the possibility that Article 8 might apply. Subparagraph (iii)(A) covers
interests or obligations that either are dealt in or traded on securities exchanges or securities markets, or are of a
type dealt in or traded on securities exchanges or securities markets. The "is dealt in or traded on" phrase
eliminates problems in the characterization of new forms of securities which are to be traded in the markets, even
though no similar type has previously been dealt in or traded in the markets. Subparagraph (iii)(B) covers the
broader category of media for investment, but it applies only if the terms of the interest or obligation specify that it is
an Article 8 security. This opt-in provision allows for deliberate expansion of the scope of Article 8.
Section 8-103 contains additional rules on the treatment of particular interests as securities or financial assets.
16. "Security certificate." The term "security" refers to the underlying asset, e.g., 1000 shares of common stock of
Acme, Inc. The term "security certificate" refers to the paper certificates that have traditionally been used to embody
the underlying intangible interest.
17. "Security entitlement" means the rights and property interest of a person who holds securities or other
financial assets through a securities intermediary. A security entitlement is both a package of personal rights
against the securities intermediary and an interest in the property held by the securities intermediary. A security
entitlement is not, however, a specific property interest in any financial asset held by the securities intermediary or
by the clearing corporation through which the securities intermediary holds the financial asset. See Sections 8-
104(c) and 8-503. The formal definition of security entitlement set out in subsection (a)(17) of this section is a crossreference
to the rules of Part 5. In a sense, then, the entirety of Part 5 is the definition of security entitlement. The
Part 5 rules specify the rights and property interest that comprise a security entitlement.
18. "Uncertificated security." The term "uncertificated security" means a security that is not represented by a
security certificate. For uncertificated securities, there is no need to draw any distinction between the underlying
asset and the means by which a direct holder's interest in that asset is evidenced. Compare "certificated security"
and "security certificate."
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Agreement"
Section 1-201(3)
"Bank"
Section 1-201(4)
"Person" Section 1-201(30)
"Send"
Section 1-201(38)
"Signed" Section 1-201(39)
"Writing"
Section 1-201(46)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 8-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 8 of 8
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-103. RULES FOR DETERMINING WHETHER CERTAIN OBLIGATIONS
AND INTERESTS ARE SECURITIES OR FINANCIAL ASSETS
(a) A share or similar equity interest issued by a corporation, business trust, joint stock company, or similar
entity is a security.
(b) An "investment company security" is a security. "Investment company security" means a share or
similar equity interest issued by an entity that is registered as an investment company under the federal
investment company laws, an interest in a unit investment trust that is so registered, or a face-amount
certificate issued by a face-amount certificate company that is so registered. Investment company security
does not include an insurance policy or endowment policy or annuity contract issued by an insurance
company.
(c) An interest in a partnership or limited liability company is not a security unless it is dealt in or traded on
securities exchanges or in securities markets, its terms expressly provide that it is a security governed by
this Article, or it is an investment company security. However, an interest in a partnership or limited liability
company is a financial asset if it is held in a securities account.
(d) A writing that is a security certificate is governed by this Article and not by Article 3, even though it also
meets the requirements of that Article. However, a negotiable instrument governed by Article 3 is a financial
asset if it is held in a securities account.
(e) An option or similar obligation issued by a clearing corporation to its participants is not a security, but is
a financial asset.
(f) A commodity contract, as defined in Section 9-102(a)(15), is not a security or a financial asset.
(g) A document of title is not a financial asset unless Section 8-102(a)(9)(iii)applies.
As amended in 1999 and 2003.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section contains rules that supplement the definitions of "financial asset" and "security" in Section 8-102.
The Section 8-102 definitions are worded in general terms, because they must be sufficiently comprehensive and
flexible to cover the wide variety of investment products that now exist or may develop. The rules in this section are
intended to foreclose interpretive issues concerning the application of the general definitions to several specific
investment products. No implication is made about the application of the Section 8-102 definitions to investment
products not covered by this section.
2. Subsection (a) establishes an unconditional rule that ordinary corporate stock is a security. That is so whether
or not the particular issue is dealt in or traded on securities exchanges or in securities markets. Thus, shares of
closely held corporations are Article 8 securities.
§ 8-103. RULES FOR DETERMINING WHETHER CERTAIN OBLIGATIONS AND INTERESTS ARE
SECURITIES OR FINANCIAL ASSETS
Page 2 of 3
3. Subsection (b) establishes that the Article 8 term "security" includes the various forms of the investment
vehicles offered to the public by investment companies registered as such under the federal Investment Company
Act of 1940, as amended. This clarification is prompted principally by the fact that the typical transaction in shares
of open-end investment companies is an issuance or redemption, rather than a transfer of shares from one person
to another as is the case with ordinary corporate stock. For similar reasons, the definitions of indorsement,
instruction, and entitlement order in Section 8-102 refer to "redemptions" as well as "transfers," to ensure that the
Article 8 rules on such matters as signature guaranties, Section 8-306, assurances, Sections 8-402 and 8-507, and
effectiveness, Section 8-107, apply to directions to redeem mutual fund shares. The exclusion of insurance
products is needed because some insurance company separate accounts are registered under the Investment
Company Act of 1940, but these are not traded under the usual Article 8 mechanics.
4. Subsection (c) is designed to foreclose interpretive questions that might otherwise be raised by the application
of the "of a type" language of Section 8-102(a)(15)(iii) to partnership interests. Subsection (c) establishes the
general rule that partnership interests or shares of limited liability companies are not Article 8 securities unless they
are in fact dealt in or traded on securities exchanges or in securities markets. The issuer, however, may explicitly
"opt-in" by specifying that the interests or shares are securities governed by Article 8. Partnership interests or
shares of limited liability companies are included in the broader term "financial asset." Thus, if they are held through
a securities account, the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 apply, and the interest of a person who holds them
through such an account is a security entitlement.
5. Subsection (d) deals with the line between Article 3 negotiable instruments and Article 8 investment securities.
It continues the rule of the prior version of Article 8 that a writing that meets the Article 8 definition is covered by
Article 8 rather than Article 3, even though it also meets the definition of negotiable instrument. However,
subsection (d) provides that an Article 3 negotiable instrument is a "financial asset" so that the indirect holding
system rules apply if the instrument is held through a securities intermediary. This facilitates making items such as
money market instruments eligible for deposit in clearing corporations.
6. Subsection (e) is included to clarify the treatment of investment products such as traded stock options, which
are treated as financial assets but not securities. Thus, the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 apply, but the
direct holding system rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 do not.
7. Subsection (f) excludes commodity contracts from all of Article 8. However, the Article 9 rules on security
interests in investment property do apply to security interests in commodity positions. See Section 9-115 and
Comment 8 thereto. "Commodity contract" is defined in Section 9-115.
8. Subsection (g) allows a document of title to be a financial asset and thus subject to the indirect holding system
rules of Part 5 only to the extent that the intermediary and the person entitled under the document agree to do so.
This is to prevent the inadvertent application of the Part 5 rules to intermediaries who may hold either electronic or
tangible documents of title.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Clearing corporation"
Section 8-102(a)(5)
"Commodity contract"
Section 9-115
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 8-103. RULES FOR DETERMINING WHETHER CERTAIN OBLIGATIONS AND INTERESTS ARE
SECURITIES OR FINANCIAL ASSETS
Page 3 of 3
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-104. ACQUISITION OF SECURITY OR FINANCIAL ASSET OR INTEREST
THEREIN
(a) A person acquires a security or an interest therein, under this Article, if:
(1) the person is a purchaser to whom a security is delivered pursuant to Section 8-301; or
(2) the person acquires a security entitlement to the security pursuant to Section 8-501.
(b) A person acquires a financial asset, other than a security, or an interest therein, under this Article, if the
person acquires a security entitlement to the financial asset.
(c) A person who acquires a security entitlement to a security or other financial asset has the rights
specified in Part 5, but is a purchaser of any security, security entitlement, or other financial asset held by
the securities intermediary only to the extent provided in Section 8-503.
(d) Unless the context shows that a different meaning is intended, a person who is required by other law,
regulation, rule, or agreement to transfer, deliver, present, surrender, exchange, or otherwise put in the
possession of another person a security or financial asset satisfies that requirement by causing the other
person to acquire an interest in the security or financial asset pursuant to subsection (a) or (b).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section lists the ways in which interests in securities and other financial assets are acquired under Article
8. In that sense, it describes the scope of Article 8. Subsection (a) describes the two ways that a person may
acquire a security or interest therein under this Article: (1) by delivery (Section 8-301), and (2) by acquiring a
security entitlement. Each of these methods is described in detail in the relevant substantive provisions of this
Article. Part 3, beginning with the definition of "delivery" in Section 8-301, describes how interests in securities are
acquired in the direct holding system. Part 5, beginning with the rules of Section 8-501 on how security entitlements
are acquired, describes how interests in securities are acquired in the indirect holding system.
Subsection (b) specifies how a person may acquire an interest under Article 8 in a financial asset other than a
security. This Article deals with financial assets other than securities only insofar as they are held in the indirect
holding system. For example, a bankers' acceptance falls within the definition of "financial asset," so if it is held
through a securities account the entitlement holder's right to it is a security entitlement governed by Part 5. The
bankers' acceptance itself, however, is a negotiable instrument governed by Article 3, not by Article 8. Thus, the
provisions of Parts 2, 3, and 4 of this Article that deal with the rights of direct holders of securities are not
applicable. Article 3, not Article 8, specifies how one acquires a direct interest in a bankers' acceptance. If a
bankers' acceptance is delivered to a clearing corporation to be held for the account of the clearing corporation's
participants, the clearing corporation becomes the holder of the bankers' acceptance under the Article 3 rules
specifying how negotiable instruments are transferred. The rights of the clearing corporation's participants,
however, are governed by Part 5 of this Article.
§ 8-104. ACQUISITION OF SECURITY OR FINANCIAL ASSET OR INTEREST THEREIN
Page 2 of 3
2. The distinction in usage in Article 8 between the term "security" (and its correlatives "security certificate" and
"uncertificated security") on the one hand, and "security entitlement" on the other, corresponds to the distinction
between the direct and indirect holding systems. For example, with respect to certificated securities that can be held
either directly or through intermediaries, obtaining possession of a security certificate and acquiring a security
entitlement are both means of holding the underlying security. For many other purposes, there is no need to draw a
distinction between the means of holding. For purposes of commercial law analysis, however, the form of holding
may make a difference. Where an item of property can be held in different ways, the rules on how one deals with it,
including how one transfers it or how one grants a security interest in it, differ depending on the form of holding.
Although a security entitlement is means of holding the underlying security or other financial asset, a person who
has a security entitlement does not have any direct claim to a specific asset in the possession of the securities
intermediary. Subsection (c) provides explicitly that a person who acquires a security entitlement is a "purchaser" of
any security, security entitlement, or other financial asset held by the securities intermediary only in the sense that
under Section 8-503 a security entitlement is treated as a sui generis form of property interest.
3. Subsection (d) is designed to ensure that parties will retain their expected legal rights and duties under Revised
Article 8. One of the major changes made by the revision is that the rules for the indirect holding system are stated
in terms of the "security entitlements" held by investors, rather than speaking of them as holding direct interests in
securities. Subsection (d) is designed as a translation rule to eliminate problems of co-ordination of terminology,
and facilitate the continued use of systems for the efficient handling of securities and financial assets through
securities intermediaries and clearing corporations. The efficiencies of a securities intermediary or clearing
corporation are, in part, dependent on the ability to transfer securities credited to securities accounts in the
intermediary or clearing corporation to the account of an issuer, its agent, or other person by book entry in a
manner that permits exchanges, redemptions, conversions, and other transactions (which may be governed by preexisting
or new agreements, constitutional documents, or other instruments) to occur and to avoid the need to
withdraw from immobilization in an intermediary or clearing corporation physical securities in order to deliver them
for such purposes. Existing corporate charters, indentures and like documents may require the "presentation,"
"surrender," "delivery," or "transfer" of securities or security certificates for purposes of exchange, redemption,
conversion or other reason. Likewise, documents may use a wide variety of terminology to describe, in the context
for example of a tender or exchange offer, the means of putting the offeror or the issuer or its agent in possession
of the security. Subsection (d) takes the place of provisions of prior law which could be used to reach the legal
conclusion that book-entry transfers are equivalent to physical delivery to the person to whose account the book
entry is credited.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Delivery"
Section 8-301
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Person" Section 1-201(30)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 8-104. ACQUISITION OF SECURITY OR FINANCIAL ASSET OR INTEREST THEREIN
Page 3 of 3
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-105. NOTICE OF ADVERSE CLAIM
(a) A person has notice of an adverse claim if:
(1) the person knows of the adverse claim;
(2) the person is aware of facts sufficient to indicate that there is a significant probability that the
adverse claim exists and deliberately avoids information that would establish the existence of the
adverse claim; or
(3) the person has a duty, imposed by statute or regulation, to investigate whether an adverse claim
exists, and the investigation so required would establish the existence of the adverse claim.
(b) Having knowledge that a financial asset or interest therein is or has been transferred by a
representative imposes no duty of inquiry into the rightfulness of a transaction and is not notice of an
adverse claim. However, a person who knows that a representative has transferred a financial asset or
interest therein in a transaction that is, or whose proceeds are being used, for the individual benefit of the
representative or otherwise in breach of duty has notice of an adverse claim.
(c) An act or event that creates a right to immediate performance of the principal obligation represented by
a security certificate or sets a date on or after which the certificate is to be presented or surrendered for
redemption or exchange does not itself constitute notice of an adverse claim except in the case of a
transfer more than:
(1) one year after a date set for presentment or surrender for redemption or exchange; or
(2) six months after a date set for payment of money against presentation or surrender of the
certificate, if money was available for payment on that date.
(d) A purchaser of a certificated security has notice of an adverse claim if the security certificate:
(1) whether in bearer or registered form, has been indorsed "for collection" or "for surrender" or for
some other purpose not involving transfer; or
(2) is in bearer form and has on it an unambiguous statement that it is the property of a person other
than the transferor, but the mere writing of a name on the certificate is not such a statement.
(e) Filing of a financing statement under Article 9 is not notice of an adverse claim to a financial asset.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The rules specifying whether adverse claims can be asserted against persons who acquire securities or
security entitlements, Sections 8-303, 8-502, and 8-510, provide that one is protected against an adverse claim only
if one takes without notice of the claim. This section defines notice of an adverse claim.
The general Article 1 definition of "notice" in Section 1-201(25) -- which provides that a person has notice of a fact
if "from all the facts and circumstances known to him at the time in question he has reason to know that it exists" --
§ 8-105. NOTICE OF ADVERSE CLAIM
Page 2 of 4
does not apply to the interpretation of "notice of adverse claims." The Section 1-201(25) definition of "notice" does,
however, apply to usages of that term and its cognates in Article 8 in contexts other than notice of adverse claims.
2. This section must be interpreted in light of the definition of "adverse claim" in Section 8-102(a)(1). "Adverse
claim" does not include all circumstances in which a third party has a property interest in securities, but only those
situations where a security is transferred in violation of the claimant's property interest. Therefore, awareness that
someone other than the transferor has a property interest is not notice of an adverse claim. The transferee must be
aware that the transfer violates the other party's property interest. If A holds securities in which B has some form of
property interest, and A transfers the securities to C, C may know that B has an interest, but infer that A is acting in
accordance with A's obligations to B. The mere fact that C knew that B had a property interest does not mean that
C had notice of an adverse claim. Whether C had notice of an adverse claim depends on whether C had sufficient
awareness that A was acting in violation of B's property rights. The rule in subsection (b) is a particularization of this
general principle.
3. Paragraph (a)(1) provides that a person has notice of an adverse claim if the person has knowledge of the
adverse claim. Knowledge is defined in Section 1-201(25) as actual knowledge.
4. Paragraph (a)(2) provides that a person has notice of an adverse claim if the person is aware of a significant
probability that an adverse claim exists and deliberately avoids information that might establish the existence of the
adverse claim. This is intended to codify the "willful blindness" test that has been applied in such cases. See May v.
Chapman, 16 M. & W. 355, 153 Eng. Rep. 1225 (1847); Goodman v. Simonds, 61 U.S. 343 (1857).
The first prong of the willful blindness test of paragraph (a)(2) turns on whether the person is aware facts sufficient
to indicate that there is a significant probability that an adverse claim exists. The "awareness" aspect necessarily
turns on the actor's state of mind. Whether facts known to a person make the person aware of a "significant
probability" that an adverse claim exists turns on facts about the world and the conclusions that would be drawn
from those facts, taking account of the experience and position of the person in question. A particular set of facts
might indicate a significant probability of an adverse claim to a professional with considerable experience in the
usual methods and procedures by which securities transactions are conducted, even though the same facts would
not indicate a significant probability of an adverse claim to a non-professional.
The second prong of the willful blindness test of paragraph (a)(2) turns on whether the person "deliberately avoids
information" that would establish the existence of the adverse claim. The test is the character of the person's
response to the information the person has. The question is whether the person deliberately failed to seek further
information because of concern that suspicions would be confirmed.
Application of the "deliberate avoidance" test to a transaction by an organization focuses on the knowledge and
the actions of the individual or individuals conducting the transaction on behalf of the organization. Thus, an
organization that purchases a security is not willfully blind to an adverse claim unless the officers or agents who
conducted that purchase transaction are willfully blind to the adverse claim. Under the two prongs of the willful
blindness test, the individual or individuals conducting a transaction must know of facts indicating a substantial
probability that the adverse claim exists and deliberately fail to seek further information that might confirm or refute
the indication. For this purpose, information known to individuals within an organization who are not conducting or
aware of a transaction, but not forwarded to the individuals conducting the transaction, is not pertinent in
determining whether the individuals conducting the transaction had knowledge of a substantial probability of the
existence of the adverse claim. Cf. Section 1-201(27). An organization may also "deliberately avoid information" if it
acts to preclude or inhibit transmission of pertinent information to those individuals responsible for the conduct of
purchase transactions.
5. Paragraph (a)(3) provides that a person has notice of an adverse claim if the person would have learned of the
adverse claim by conducting an investigation that is required by other statute or regulation. This rule applies only if
there is some other statute or regulation that explicitly requires persons dealing with securities to conduct some
investigation. The federal securities laws require that brokers and banks, in certain specified circumstances, check
with a stolen securities registry to determine whether securities offered for sale or pledge have been reported as
stolen. If securities that were listed as stolen in the registry are taken by an institution that failed to comply with
requirement to check the registry, the institution would be held to have notice of the fact that they were stolen under
§ 8-105. NOTICE OF ADVERSE CLAIM
Page 3 of 4
paragraph (a)(3). Accordingly, the institution could not qualify as a protected purchaser under Section 8-303. The
same result has been reached under the prior version of Article 8. See First Nat'l Bank of Cicero v. Lewco
Securities, 860 F.2d 1407 (7th Cir. 1988).
6. Subsection (b) provides explicitly for some situations involving purchase from one described or identifiable as a
representative. Knowledge of the existence of the representative relation is not enough in itself to constitute "notice
of an adverse claim" that would disqualify the purchaser from protected purchaser status. A purchaser may take a
security on the inference that the representative is acting properly. Knowledge that a security is being transferred to
an individual account of the representative or that the proceeds of the transaction will be paid into that account is
not sufficient to constitute "notice of an adverse claim," but knowledge that the proceeds will be applied to the
personal indebtedness of the representative is. See State Bank of Binghamton v. Bache, 162 Misc. 128, 293 N.Y.S.
667 (1937).
7. Subsection (c) specifies whether a purchaser of a "stale" security is charged with notice of adverse claims, and
therefore disqualified from protected purchaser status under Section 8-303. The fact of "staleness" is viewed as
notice of certain defects after the lapse of stated periods, but the maturity of the security does not operate
automatically to affect holders' rights. The periods of time here stated are shorter than those appearing in the
provisions of this Article on staleness as notice of defects or defenses of an issuer (Section 8-203) since a
purchaser who takes a security after funds or other securities are available for its redemption has more reason to
suspect claims of ownership than issuer's defenses. An owner will normally turn in a security rather than transfer it
at such a time. Of itself, a default never constitutes notice of a possible adverse claim. To provide otherwise would
not tend to drive defaulted securities home and would serve only to disrupt current financial markets where many
defaulted securities are actively traded. Unpaid or overdue coupons attached to a bond do not bring it within the
operation of this subsection, though they may be relevant under the general test of notice of adverse claims in
subsection (a).
8. Subsection (d) provides the owner of a certificated security with a means of protection while a security
certificate is being sent in for redemption or exchange. The owner may endorse it "for collection" or "for surrender,"
and this constitutes notice of the owner's claims, under subsection (d).
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Adverse claim"
Section 8-102(a)(1)
"Bearer form"
Section 8-102(a)(2)
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Knowledge"
Section 1-201(25)
"Person" Section 1-201(30)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Registered form"
Section 8-102(a)(13)
"Representative"
Section 1-201(35)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
§ 8-105. NOTICE OF ADVERSE CLAIM
Page 4 of 4
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-106. CONTROL
(a) A purchaser has "control" of a certificated security in bearer form if the certificated security is delivered
to the purchaser.
(b) A purchaser has "control" of a certificated security in registered form if the certificated security is
delivered to the purchaser, and:
(1) the certificate is indorsed to the purchaser or in blank by an effective indorsement; or
(2) the certificate is registered in the name of the purchaser, upon original issue or registration of
transfer by the issuer.
(c) A purchaser has "control" of an uncertificated security if:
(1) the uncertificated security is delivered to the purchaser; or
(2) the issuer has agreed that it will comply with instructions originated by the purchaser without further
consent by the registered owner.
(d) A purchaser has "control" of a security entitlement if:
(1) the purchaser becomes the entitlement holder;
(2) the securities intermediary has agreed that it will comply with entitlement orders originated by the
purchaser without further consent by the entitlement holder; or
(3) another person has control of the security entitlement on behalf of the purchaser or, having
previously acquired control of the security entitlement, acknowledges that it has control on behalf of the
purchaser.
(e) If an interest in a security entitlement is granted by the entitlement holder to the entitlement holder's
own securities intermediary, the securities intermediary has control.
(f) A purchaser who has satisfied the requirements of subsection (c) or (d) has control, even if the
registered owner in the case of subsection (c) or the entitlement holder in the case of subsection (d) retains
the right to make substitutions for the uncertificated security or security entitlement, to originate instructions
or entitlement orders to the issuer or securities intermediary, or otherwise to deal with the uncertificated
security or security entitlement.
(g) An issuer or a securities intermediary may not enter into an agreement of the kind described in
subsection (c)(2) or (d)(2) without the consent of the registered owner or entitlement holder, but an issuer or
a securities intermediary is not required to enter into such an agreement even though the registered owner
or entitlement holder so directs. An issuer or securities intermediary that has entered into such an
agreement is not required to confirm the existence of the agreement to another party unless requested to
do so by the registered owner or entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 8-106. CONTROL
Page 2 of 5
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The concept of "control" plays a key role in various provisions dealing with the rights of purchasers, including
secured parties. See Sections 8-303 (protected purchasers); 8-503(e) (purchasers from securities intermediaries);
8-510 (purchasers of security entitlements from entitlement holders); 9-314 (perfection of security interests); 9-328
(priorities among conflicting security interests).
Obtaining "control" means that the purchaser has taken whatever steps are necessary, given the manner in which
the securities are held, to place itself in a position where it can have the securities sold, without further action by the
owner.
2. Subsection (a) provides that a purchaser obtains "control" with respect to a certificated security in bearer form
by taking "delivery," as defined in Section 8-301. Subsection (b) provides that a purchaser obtains "control" with
respect to a certificated security in registered form by taking "delivery," as defined in Section 8-301, provided that
the security certificate has been indorsed to the purchaser or in blank. Section 8-301 provides that delivery of a
certificated security occurs when the purchaser obtains possession of the security certificate, or when an agent for
the purchaser (other than a securities intermediary) either acquires possession or acknowledges that the agent
holds for the purchaser.
3. Subsection (c) specifies the means by which a purchaser can obtain control over uncertificated securities which
the transferor holds directly. Two mechanisms are possible.
Under subsection (c)(1), securities can be "delivered" to a purchaser. Section 8-301(b) provides that "delivery" of
an uncertificated security occurs when the purchaser becomes the registered holder. So far as the issuer is
concerned, the purchaser would then be entitled to exercise all rights of ownership. See Section 8-207. As between
the parties to a purchase transaction, however, the rights of the purchaser are determined by their contract. Cf.
Section 9-202. Arrangements covered by this paragraph are analogous to arrangements in which bearer certificates
are delivered to a secured party -- so far as the issuer or any other parties are concerned, the secured party
appears to be the outright owner, although it is in fact holding as collateral property that belongs to the debtor.
Under subsection (c)(2), a purchaser has control if the issuer has agreed to act on the instructions of the
purchaser, even though the owner remains listed as the registered owner. The issuer, of course, would be acting
wrongfully against the registered owner if it entered into such an agreement without the consent of the registered
owner. Subsection (g) makes this point explicit. The subsection (c)(2) provision makes it possible for issuers to offer
a service akin to the registered pledge device of the 1978 version of Article 8, without mandating that all issuers
offer that service.
4. Subsection (d) specifies the means by which a purchaser can obtain control of a security entitlement. Three
mechanisms are possible, analogous to those provided in subsection (c) for uncertificated securities. Under
subsection (d)(1), a purchaser has control if it is the entitlement holder. This subsection would apply whether the
purchaser holds through the same intermediary that the debtor used, or has the securities position transferred to its
own intermediary. Subsection (d)(2) provides that a purchaser has control if the securities intermediary has agreed
to act on entitlement orders originated by the purchaser if no further consent by the entitlement holder is required.
Under subsection (d)(2), control may be achieved even though the original entitlement holder remains as the
entitlement holder. Finally, a purchaser may obtain control under subsection (d)(3) if another person has control and
the person acknowledges that it has control on the purchaser's behalf. Control under subsection (d)(3) parallels the
delivery of certificated securities and uncertificated securities under Section 8-301. Of course, the acknowledging
person cannot be the debtor.
This section specifies only the minimum requirements that such an arrangement must meet to confer "control";
the details of the arrangement can be specified by agreement. The arrangement might cover all of the positions in a
particular account or subaccount, or only specified positions. There is no requirement that the control party's right to
give entitlement orders be exclusive. The arrangement might provide that only the control party can give entitlement
orders, or that either the entitlement holder or the control party can give entitlement orders. See subsection (f).
The following examples illustrate the application of subsection (d):
Example 1. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Alpha also has an account with Able. Debtor
instructs Able to transfer the shares to Alpha, and Able does so by crediting the shares to Alpha's account. Alpha
§ 8-106. CONTROL
Page 3 of 5
has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1). Although Debtor may have become the beneficial owner of
the new securities entitlement, as between Debtor and Alpha, Able has agreed to act on Alpha's entitlement orders
because, as between Able and Alpha Alpha has become the entitlement holder. See Section 8-506.
Example 2. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Alpha does not have an account with Able.
Alpha uses Beta as its securities custodian. Debtor instructs Able to transfer the shares to Beta, for the account of
Alpha, and Able does so. Alpha has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1). As in Example 1, although
Debtor may have become the beneficial owner of the new securities entitlement, as between Debtor and Alpha,
Beta has agreed to act on Alpha's entitlement orders because, as between Beta and Alpha, Alpha has become the
entitlement holder.
Example 3. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Debtor, Able, and Alpha enter into an
agreement under which Debtor will continue to receive dividends and distributions, and will continue to have the
right to direct dispositions, but Alpha also has the right to direct dispositions. Alpha has control of the 1000 shares
under subsection (d)(2).
Example 4. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Able causes
Clearing Corporation to transfer the shares into Alpha's account at Clearing Corporation. As in Example 1, Alpha
has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1).
Example 5. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Alpha does
not have an account with Clearing Corporation. It holds its securities through Beta Bank, which does have an
account with Clearing Corporation. Able causes Clearing Corporation to transfer the shares into Beta's account at
Clearing Corporation. Beta credits the position to Alpha's account with Beta. As in Example 2, Alpha has control of
the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1).
Example 6. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Able causes
Clearing Corporation to transfer the shares into a pledge account, pursuant to an agreement under which Able will
continue to receive dividends, distributions, and the like, but Alpha has the right to direct dispositions. As in
Example 3, Alpha has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(2).
Example 7. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Able, Alpha,
and Clearing Corporation enter into an agreement under which Clearing Corporation will act on instructions from
Alpha with respect to the XYZ Co. stock carried in Able's account, but Able will continue to receive dividends,
distributions, and the like, and will also have the right to direct dispositions. As in Example 3, Alpha has control of
the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(2).
Example 8. Able & Co., a securities dealer, holds a wide range of securities through its account at Clearing
Corporation. Able enters into an arrangement with Alpha Bank pursuant to which Alpha provides financing to Able
secured by securities identified as the collateral on lists provided by Able to Alpha on a daily or other periodic basis.
Able, Alpha, and Clearing Corporation enter into an agreement under which Clearing Corporation agrees that if at
any time Alpha directs Clearing Corporation to do so, Clearing Corporation will transfer any securities from Able's
account at Alpha's instructions. Because Clearing Corporation has agreed to act on Alpha's instructions with
respect to any securities carried in Able's account, at the moment that Alpha's security interest attaches to
securities listed by Able, Alpha obtains control of those securities under subsection (d)(2). There is no requirement
that Clearing Corporation be informed of which securities Able has pledged to Alpha.
Example 9. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Beta Bank agrees with Alpha to act as Alpha's
collateral agent with respect to the security entitlement. Debtor, Able, and Beta enter into an agreement under
which Debtor will continue to receive dividends and distributions, and will continue to have the right to direct
dispositions, but Beta also has the right to direct dispositions. Because Able has agreed that it will comply with
§ 8-106. CONTROL
Page 4 of 5
entitlement orders originated by Beta without further consent by Debtor, Beta has control of the security entitlement
(see Example 3). Because Beta has control on behalf of Alpha, Alpha also has control under subsection (d)(3). It is
not necessary for Able to enter into an agreement directly with Alpha or for Able to be aware of Beta's agency
relationship with Alpha.
5. For a purchaser to have "control" under subsection (c)(2) or (d)(2), it is essential that the issuer or securities
intermediary, as the case may be, actually be a party to the agreement. If a debtor gives a secured party a power of
attorney authorizing the secured party to act in the name of the debtor, but the issuer or securities intermediary
does not specifically agree to this arrangement, the secured party does not have "control" within the meaning of
subsection (c)(2) or (d)(2) because the issuer or securities intermediary is not a party to the agreement. The
secured party does not have control under subsection (c)(1) or (d)(1) because, although the power of attorney might
give the secured party authority to act on the debtor's behalf as an agent, the secured party has not actually
become the registered owner or entitlement holder.
6. Subsection (e) provides that if an interest in a security entitlement is granted by an entitlement holder to the
securities intermediary through which the security entitlement is maintained, the securities intermediary has control.
A common transaction covered by this provision is a margin loan from a broker to its customer.
7. The term "control" is used in a particular defined sense. The requirements for obtaining control are set out in
this section. The concept is not to be interpreted by reference to similar concepts in other bodies of law. In
particular, the requirements for "possession" derived from the common law of pledge are not to be used as a basis
for interpreting subsection (c)(2) or (d)(2). Those provisions are designed to supplant the concepts of "constructive
possession" and the like. A principal purpose of the "control" concept is to eliminate the uncertainty and confusion
that results from attempting to apply common law possession concepts to modern securities holding practices.
The key to the control concept is that the purchaser has the ability to have the securities sold or transferred
without further action by the transferor. There is no requirement that the powers held by the purchaser be exclusive.
For example, in a secured lending arrangement, if the secured party wishes, it can allow the debtor to retain the
right to make substitutions, to direct the disposition of the uncertificated security or security entitlement, or otherwise
to give instructions or entitlement orders. (As explained in Section 8-102, Comment 8, an entitlement order includes
a direction under Section 8-508 to the securities intermediary to transfer a financial asset to the account of the
entitlement holder at another financial intermediary or to cause the financial asset to be transferred to the
entitlement holder in the direct holding system (e.g., by delivery of a securities certificate registered in the name of
the former entitlement holder).) Subsection (f) is included to make clear the general point stated in subsections (c)
and (d) that the test of control is whether the purchaser has obtained the requisite power, not whether the debtor
has retained other powers. There is no implication that retention by the debtor of powers other than those
mentioned in subsection (f) is inconsistent with the purchaser having control. Nor is there a requirement that the
purchaser's powers be unconditional, provided that further consent of the entitlement holder is not a condition.
Example 10. Debtor grants to Alpha Bank and to Beta Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. By agreement among
the parties, Alpha's security interest is senior and Beta's is junior. Able agrees to act on the entitlement orders of
either Alpha or Beta. Alpha and Beta each has control under subsection (d)(2). Moreover, Beta has control
notwithstanding a term of Able's agreement to the effect that Able's obligation to act on Beta's entitlement orders is
conditioned on Alpha's consent. The crucial distinction is that Able's agreement to act on Beta's entitlement orders
is not conditioned on Debtor's further consent.
Example 11. Debtor grants to Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Able agrees to act on the entitlement orders of
Alpha, but Alpha's right to give entitlement orders to the securities intermediary is conditioned on the Debtor's
default. Alternatively, Alpha's right to give entitlement orders is conditioned upon Alpha's statement to Able that
Debtor is in default. Because Able's agreement to act on Alpha's* entitlement orders is not conditioned on Debtor's
further consent, Alpha has control of the securities entitlement under either alternative. *Amendments in italics
approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code January 15, 2000.
In many situations, it will be better practice for both the securities intermediary and the purchaser to insist that any
conditions relating in any way to the entitlement holder be effective only as between the purchaser and the
§ 8-106. CONTROL
Page 5 of 5
entitlement holder. That practice would avoid the risk that the securities intermediary could be caught between
conflicting assertions of the entitlement holder and the purchaser as to whether the conditions in fact have been
met. Nonetheless, the existence of unfulfilled conditions effective against the intermediary would not preclude the
purchaser from having control.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Bearer form"
Section 8-102(a)(2)
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Delivery"
Section 8-301
"Effective"
Section 8-107
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
"Entitlement order"
Section 8-102(a)(8)
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Registered form"
Section 8-102(a)(13)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-107. WHETHER INDORSEMENT, INSTRUCTION, OR ENTITLEMENT
ORDER IS EFFECTIVE
(a) "Appropriate person" means:
(1) with respect to an indorsement, the person specified by a security certificate or by an effective
special indorsement to be entitled to the security;
(2) with respect to an instruction, the registered owner of an uncertificated security;
(3) with respect to an entitlement order, the entitlement holder;
(4) if the person designated in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) is deceased, the designated person's
successor taking under other law or the designated person's personal representative acting for the
estate of the decedent; or
(5) if the person designated in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) lacks capacity, the designated person's
guardian, conservator, or other similar representative who has power under other law to transfer the
security or financial asset.
(b) An indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order is effective if:
(1) it is made by the appropriate person;
(2) it is made by a person who has power under the law of agency to transfer the security or financial
asset on behalf of the appropriate person, including, in the case of an instruction or entitlement order, a
person who has control under Section 8-106(c)(2) or (d)(2); or
(3) the appropriate person has ratified it or is otherwise precluded from asserting its ineffectiveness.
(c) An indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order made by a representative is effective even if:
(1) the representative has failed to comply with a controlling instrument or with the law of the State
having jurisdiction of the representative relationship, including any law requiring the representative to
obtain court approval of the transaction; or
(2) the representative's action in making the indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order or using the
proceeds of the transaction is otherwise a breach of duty.
(d) If a security is registered in the name of or specially indorsed to a person described as a
representative, or if a securities account is maintained in the name of a person described as a
representative, an indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order made by the person is effective even
though the person is no longer serving in the described capacity.
(e) Effectiveness of an indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order is determined as of the date the
indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order is made, and an indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order
does not become ineffective by reason of any later change of circumstances.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 8-107. WHETHER INDORSEMENT, INSTRUCTION, OR ENTITLEMENT ORDER IS EFFECTIVE
Page 2 of 4
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section defines two concepts, "appropriate person" and "effective." Effectiveness is a broader concept
than appropriate person. For example, if a security or securities account is registered in the name of Mary Roe,
Mary Roe is the "appropriate person," but an indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order made by John Doe is
"effective" if, under agency or other law, Mary Roe is precluded from denying Doe's authority. Treating these two
concepts separately facilitates statement of the rules of Article 8 that state the legal effect of an indorsement,
instruction, or entitlement order. For example, a securities intermediary is protected against liability if it acts on an
effective entitlement order, but has a duty to comply with an entitlement order only if it is originated by an
appropriate person. See Sections 8-115 and 8-507.
One important application of the "effectiveness" concept is in the direct holding system rules on the rights of
purchasers. A purchaser of a certificated security in registered form can qualify as a protected purchaser who takes
free from adverse claims under Section 8-303 only if the purchaser obtains "control." Section 8-106 provides that a
purchaser of a certificated security in registered form obtains control if there has been an "effective" indorsement.
2. Subsection (a) provides that the term "appropriate person" covers two categories: (1) the person who is
actually designated as the person entitled to the security or security entitlement, and (2) the successor or legal
representative of that person if that person has died or otherwise lacks capacity. Other law determines who has
power to transfer a security on behalf of a person who lacks capacity. For example, if securities are registered in the
name of more than one person and one of the designated persons dies, whether the survivor is the appropriate
person depends on the form of tenancy. If the two were registered joint tenants with right of survivorship, the
survivor would have that power under other law and thus would be the "appropriate person." If securities are
registered in the name of an individual and the individual dies, the law of decedents' estates determines who has
power to transfer the decedent's securities. That would ordinarily be the executor or administrator, but if a "small
estate statute" permits a widow to transfer a decedent's securities without administration proceedings, she would be
the appropriate person. If the registration of a security or a securities account contains a designation of a death
beneficiary under the Uniform Transfer on Death Security Registration Act or comparable legislation, the designated
beneficiary would, under that law, have power to transfer upon the person's death and so would be the appropriate
person. Article 8 does not contain a list of such representatives, because any list is likely to become outdated by
developments in other law.
3. Subsection (b) sets out the general rule that an indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order is effective if it is
made by the appropriate person or by a person who has power to transfer under agency law or if the appropriate
person is precluded from denying its effectiveness. The control rules in Section 8-106 provide for arrangements
where a person who holds securities through a securities intermediary, or holds uncertificated securities directly,
enters into a control agreement giving the secured party the right to initiate entitlement orders of instructions.
Paragraph 2 of subsection (b) states explicitly that an entitlement order or instruction initiated by a person who has
obtained such a control agreement is "effective."
Subsections (c), (d), and (e) supplement the general rule of subsection (b) on effectiveness. The term
"representative," used in subsections (c) and (d), is defined in Section 1-201(35).
4. Subsection (c) provides that an indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order made by a representative is
effective even though the representative's action is a violation of duties. The following example illustrates this
subsection:
Example 1. Certificated securities are registered in the name of John Doe. Doe dies and Mary Roe is appointed
executor. Roe indorses the security certificate and transfers it to a purchaser in a transaction that is a violation of
her duties as executor.
Roe's indorsement is effective, because Roe is the appropriate person under subsection (a)(4). This is so even
though Roe's transfer violated her obligations as executor. The policies of free transferability of securities that
underlie Article 8 dictate that neither a purchaser to whom Roe transfers the securities nor the issuer who registers
transfer should be required to investigate the terms of the will to determine whether Roe is acting properly. Although
Roe's indorsement is effective under this section, her breach of duty may be such that her beneficiary has an
adverse claim to the securities that Roe transferred. The question whether that adverse claim can be asserted
§ 8-107. WHETHER INDORSEMENT, INSTRUCTION, OR ENTITLEMENT ORDER IS EFFECTIVE
Page 3 of 4
against purchasers is governed not by this section but by Section 8-303. Under Section 8-404, the issuer has no
duties to an adverse claimant unless the claimant obtains legal process enjoining the issuer from registering
transfer.
5. Subsection (d) deals with cases where a security or a securities account is registered in the name of a person
specifically designated as a representative. The following example illustrates this subsection:
Example 2. Certificated securities are registered in the name of "John Jones, trustee of the Smith Family Trust."
John Jones is removed as trustee and Martha Moe is appointed successor trustee. The securities, however, are not
reregistered, but remain registered in the name of "John Jones, trustee of the Smith Family Trust." Jones indorses
the security certificate and transfers it to a purchaser.
Subsection (d) provides that an indorsement by John Jones as trustee is effective even though Jones is no longer
serving in that capacity. Since the securities were registered in the name of "John Jones, trustee of the Smith
Family Trust," a purchaser, or the issuer when called upon to register transfer, should be entitled to assume without
further inquiry that Jones has the power to act as trustee for the Smith Family Trust.
Note that subsection (d) does not apply to a case where the security or securities account is registered in the
name of principal rather than the representative as such. The following example illustrates this point:
Example 3. Certificated securities are registered in the name of John Doe. John Doe dies and Mary Roe is
appointed executor. The securities are not reregistered in the name of Mary Roe as executor. Later, Mary Roe is
removed as executor and Martha Moe is appointed as her successor. After being removed, Mary Roe indorses the
security certificate that is registered in the name of John Doe and transfers it to a purchaser.
Mary Roe's indorsement is not made effective by subsection (d), because the securities were not registered in the
name of Mary Roe as representative. A purchaser or the issuer registering transfer should be required to determine
whether Roe has power to act for John Doe. Purchasers and issuers can protect themselves in such cases by
requiring signature guaranties. See Section 8-306.
6. Subsection (e) provides that the effectiveness of an indorsement, instruction, or entitlement order is determined
as of the date it is made. The following example illustrates this subsection:
Example 4. Certificated securities are registered in the name of John Doe. John Doe dies and Mary Roe is
appointed executor. Mary Roe indorses the security certificate that is registered in the name of John Doe and
transfers it to a purchaser. After the indorsement and transfer, but before the security certificate is presented to the
issuer for registration of transfer, Mary Roe is removed as executor and Martha Moe is appointed as her successor.
Mary Roe's indorsement is effective, because at the time Roe indorsed she was the appropriate person under
subsection (a)(4). Her later removal as executor does not render the indorsement ineffective. Accordingly, the
issuer would not be liable for registering the transfer. See Section 8-404.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Entitlement order"
Section 8-102(a)(8)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Representative"
Section 1-201(35)
"Securities account"
Section 8-501
"Security"
§ 8-107. WHETHER INDORSEMENT, INSTRUCTION, OR ENTITLEMENT ORDER IS EFFECTIVE
Page 4 of 4
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-108
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-108. WARRANTIES IN DIRECT HOLDING
(a) A person who transfers a certificated security to a purchaser for value warrants to the purchaser, and
an indorser, if the transfer is by indorsement, warrants to any subsequent purchaser, that:
(1) the certificate is genuine and has not been materially altered;
(2) the transferor or indorser does not know of any fact that might impair the validity of the security;
(3) there is no adverse claim to the security;
(4) the transfer does not violate any restriction on transfer;
(5) if the transfer is by indorsement, the indorsement is made by an appropriate person, or if the
indorsement is by an agent, the agent has actual authority to act on behalf of the appropriate person;
and
(6) the transfer is otherwise effective and rightful.
(b) A person who originates an instruction for registration of transfer of an uncertificated security to a
purchaser for value warrants to the purchaser that:
(1) the instruction is made by an appropriate person, or if the instruction is by an agent, the agent has
actual authority to act on behalf of the appropriate person;
(2) the security is valid;
(3) there is no adverse claim to the security; and
(4) at the time the instruction is presented to the issuer:
(i) the purchaser will be entitled to the registration of transfer;
(ii) the transfer will be registered by the issuer free from all liens, security interests, restrictions,
and claims other than those specified in the instruction;
(iii) the transfer will not violate any restriction on transfer; and
(iv) the requested transfer will otherwise be effective and rightful.
(c) A person who transfers an uncertificated security to a purchaser for value and does not originate an
instruction in connection with the transfer warrants that:
(1) the uncertificated security is valid;
(2) there is no adverse claim to the security;
(3) the transfer does not violate any restriction on transfer; and
(4) the transfer is otherwise effective and rightful.
(d) A person who indorses a security certificate warrants to the issuer that:
(1) there is no adverse claim to the security; and
(2) the indorsement is effective.
§ 8-108. WARRANTIES IN DIRECT HOLDING
Page 2 of 3
(e) A person who originates an instruction for registration of transfer of an uncertificated security warrants
to the issuer that:
(1) the instruction is effective; and
(2) at the time the instruction is presented to the issuer the purchaser will be entitled to the registration
of transfer.
(f) A person who presents a certificated security for registration of transfer or for payment or exchange
warrants to the issuer that the person is entitled to the registration, payment, or exchange, but a purchaser
for value and without notice of adverse claims to whom transfer is registered warrants only that the person
has no knowledge of any unauthorized signature in a necessary indorsement.
(g) If a person acts as agent of another in delivering a certificated security to a purchaser, the identity of
the principal was known to the person to whom the certificate was delivered, and the certificate delivered by
the agent was received by the agent from the principal or received by the agent from another person at the
direction of the principal, the person delivering the security certificate warrants only that the delivering
person has authority to act for the principal and does not know of any adverse claim to the certificated
security.
(h) A secured party who redelivers a security certificate received, or after payment and on order of the
debtor delivers the security certificate to another person, makes only the warranties of an agent under
subsection (g).
(i) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (g), a broker acting for a customer makes to the issuer and
a purchaser the warranties provided in subsections (a) through (f). A broker that delivers a security
certificate to its customer, or causes its customer to be registered as the owner of an uncertificated security,
makes to the customer the warranties provided in subsection (a) or (b), and has the rights and privileges of
a purchaser under this section. The warranties of and in favor of the broker acting as an agent are in
addition to applicable warranties given by and in favor of the customer.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsections (a), (b), and (c) deal with warranties by security transferors to purchasers. Subsections (d) and (e)
deal with warranties by security transferors to issuers. Subsection (f) deals with presentment warranties.
2. Subsection (a) specifies the warranties made by a person who transfers a certificated security to a purchaser
for value. Paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) make explicit several key points that are implicit in the general warranty of
paragraph (6) that the transfer is effective and rightful. Subsection (b) sets forth the warranties made to a purchaser
for value by one who originates an instruction. These warranties are quite similar to those made by one transferring
a certificated security, subsection (a), the principal difference being the absolute warranty of validity. If upon receipt
of the instruction the issuer should dispute the validity of the security, the burden of proving validity is upon the
transferor. Subsection (c) provides for the limited circumstances in which an uncertificated security could be
transferred without an instruction, see Section 8-301(b)(2). Subsections (d) and (e) give the issuer the benefit of the
warranties of an indorser or originator on those matters not within the issuer's knowledge.
3. Subsection (f) limits the warranties made by a purchaser for value without notice whose presentation of a
security certificate is defective in some way but to whom the issuer does register transfer. The effect is to deny the
issuer a remedy against such a person unless at the time of presentment the person had knowledge of an
unauthorized signature in a necessary indorsement. The issuer can protect itself by refusing to make the transfer
or, if it registers the transfer before it discovers the defect, by pursuing its remedy against a signature guarantor.
§ 8-108. WARRANTIES IN DIRECT HOLDING
Page 3 of 3
4. Subsection (g) eliminates all substantive warranties in the relatively unusual case of a delivery of certificated
security by an agent of a disclosed principal where the agent delivers the exact certificate that it received from or for
the principal. Subsection (h) limits the warranties given by a secured party who redelivers a certificate. Subsection
(i) specifies the warranties of brokers in the more common scenarios.
5. Under Section 1-102(3) the warranty provisions apply "unless otherwise agreed" and the parties may enter into
express agreements to allocate the risks of possible defects. Usual estoppel principles apply with respect to
transfers of both certificated and uncertificated securities whenever the purchaser has knowledge of the defect, and
these warranties will not be breached in such a case.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Adverse claim"
Section 8-102(a)(1)
"Appropriate person"
Section 8-107
"Broker" Section 8-102(a)(3)
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Person" Section 1-201(30)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Secured party"
Section 9-105(1)(m)
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
"Value"
Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-109
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-109. WARRANTIES IN INDIRECT HOLDING
(a) A person who originates an entitlement order to a securities intermediary warrants to the securities
intermediary that:
(1) the entitlement order is made by an appropriate person, or if the entitlement order is by an agent,
the agent has actual authority to act on behalf of the appropriate person; and
(2) there is no adverse claim to the security entitlement.
(b) A person who delivers a security certificate to a securities intermediary for credit to a securities account
or originates an instruction with respect to an uncertificated security directing that the uncertificated security
be credited to a securities account makes to the securities intermediary the warranties specified in Section
8-108(a) or (b).
(c) If a securities intermediary delivers a security certificate to its entitlement holder or causes its
entitlement holder to be registered as the owner of an uncertificated security, the securities intermediary
makes to the entitlement holder the warranties specified in Section 8-108(a) or (b).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) provides that a person who originates an entitlement order warrants to the securities
intermediary that the order is authorized, and warrants the absence of adverse claims. Subsection (b) specifies the
warranties that are given when a person who holds securities directly has the holding converted into indirect form. A
person who delivers a certificate to a securities intermediary or originates an instruction for an uncertificated
security gives to the securities intermediary the transfer warranties under Section 8-108. If the securities
intermediary in turn delivers the certificate to a higher level securities intermediary, it gives the same warranties.
2. Subsection (c) states the warranties that a securities intermediary gives when a customer who has been
holding securities in an account with the securities intermediary requests that certificates be delivered or that
uncertificated securities be registered in the customer's name. The warranties are the same as those that brokers
make with respect to securities that the brokers sell to or buy on behalf of the customers. See Section 8-108(i).
3. As with the Section 8-108 warranties, the warranties specified in this section may be modified by agreement
under Section 1-102(3).
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Adverse claim"
Section 8-102(a)(1)
"Appropriate person"
Section 8-107
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
§ 8-109. WARRANTIES IN INDIRECT HOLDING
Page 2 of 2
"Entitlement order"
Section 8-102(a)(8)
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Person" Section 1-201(30)
"Securities account"
Section 8-501
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-110
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-110. APPLICABILITY; CHOICE OF LAW
(a) The local law of the issuer's jurisdiction, as specified in subsection (d), governs:
(1) the validity of a security;
(2) the rights and duties of the issuer with respect to registration of transfer;
(3) the effectiveness of registration of transfer by the issuer;
(4) whether the issuer owes any duties to an adverse claimant to a security; and
(5) whether an adverse claim can be asserted against a person to whom transfer of a certificated or
uncertificated security is registered or a person who obtains control of an uncertificated security.
(b) The local law of the securities intermediary's jurisdiction, as specified in subsection (e), governs:
(1) acquisition of a security entitlement from the securities intermediary;
(2) the rights and duties of the securities intermediary and entitlement holder arising out of a security
entitlement;
(3) whether the securities intermediary owes any duties to an adverse claimant to a security
entitlement; and
(4) whether an adverse claim can be asserted against a person who acquires a security entitlement
from the securities intermediary or a person who purchases a security entitlement or interest therein
from an entitlement holder.
(c) The local law of the jurisdiction in which a security certificate is located at the time of delivery governs
whether an adverse claim can be asserted against a person to whom the security certificate is delivered.
(d) "Issuer's jurisdiction" means the jurisdiction under which the issuer of the security is organized or, if
permitted by the law of that jurisdiction, the law of another jurisdiction specified by the issuer. An issuer
organized under the law of this State may specify the law of another jurisdiction as the law governing the
matters specified in subsection (a)(2) through (5).
(e) The following rules determine a "securities intermediary's jurisdiction" for purposes of this section:
(1) If an agreement between the securities intermediary and its entitlement holder governing the
securities account expressly provides that a particular jurisdiction is the securities intermediary's
jurisdiction for purposes of this part, this article, or this [Act], that jurisdiction is the securities
intermediary's jurisdiction.
(2) If paragraph (1) does not apply and an agreement between the securities intermediary and its
entitlement holder governing the securities account expressly provides that the agreement is governed
by the law of a particular jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the securities intermediary's jurisdiction.
(3) If neither paragraph (1) nor paragraph (2) applies and an agreement between the securities
intermediary and its entitlement holder governing the securities account expressly provides that the
securities account is maintained at an office in a particular jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the securities
intermediary's jurisdiction.
§ 8-110. APPLICABILITY; CHOICE OF LAW
Page 2 of 5
(4) If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the securities intermediary's jurisdiction is the
jurisdiction in which the office identified in an account statement as the office serving the entitlement
holder's account is located.
(5) If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the securities intermediary's jurisdiction is the
jurisdiction in which the chief executive office of the securities intermediary is located.
(f) A securities intermediary's jurisdiction is not determined by the physical location of certificates
representing financial assets, or by the jurisdiction in which is organized the issuer of the financial asset
with respect to which an entitlement holder has a security entitlement, or by the location of facilities for data
processing or other record keeping concerning the account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section deals with applicability and choice of law issues concerning Article 8. The distinction between the
direct and indirect holding systems plays a significant role in determining the governing law. An investor in the direct
holding system is registered on the books of the issuer and/or has possession of a security certificate. Accordingly,
the jurisdiction of incorporation of the issuer or location of the certificate determine the applicable law. By contrast,
an investor in the indirect holding system has a security entitlement, which is a bundle of rights against the
securities intermediary with respect to a security, rather than a direct interest in the underlying security. Accordingly,
in the rules for the indirect holding system, the jurisdiction of incorporation of the issuer of the underlying security or
the location of any certificates that might be held by the intermediary or a higher tier intermediary, do not determine
the applicable law.
The phrase "local law" refers to the law of a jurisdiction other than its conflict of laws rules. See Restatement
(Second) of Conflict of Laws § 4.
2. Subsection (a) provides that the law of an issuer's jurisdiction governs certain issues where the substantive
rules of Article 8 determine the issuer's rights and duties. Paragraph (1) of subsection (a) provides that the law of
the issuer's jurisdiction governs the validity of the security. This ensures that a single body of law will govern the
questions addressed in Part 2 of Article 8, concerning the circumstances in which an issuer can and cannot assert
invalidity as a defense against purchasers. Similarly, paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of subsection (a) ensure that the
issuer will be able to look to a single body of law on the questions addressed in Part 4 of Article 8, concerning the
issuer's duties and liabilities with respect to registration of transfer.
Paragraph (5) of subsection (a) applies the law of an issuer's jurisdiction to the question whether an adverse
claim can be asserted against a purchaser to whom transfer has been registered, or who has obtained control over
an uncertificated security. Although this issue deals with the rights of persons other than the issuer, the law of the
issuer's jurisdiction applies because the purchasers to whom the provision applies are those whose protection
against adverse claims depends on the fact that their interests have been recorded on the books of the issuer.
The principal policy reflected in the choice of law rules in subsection (a) is that an issuer and others should be
able to look to a single body of law on the matters specified in subsection (a), rather than having to look to the law
of all of the different jurisdictions in which security holders may reside. The choice of law policies reflected in this
subsection do not require that the body of law governing all of the matters specified in subsection (a) be that of the
jurisdiction in which the issuer is incorporated. Thus, subsection (d) provides that the term "issuer's jurisdiction"
means the jurisdiction in which the issuer is organized, or, if permitted by that law, the law of another jurisdiction
selected by the issuer. Subsection (d) also provides that issuers organized under the law of a State which adopts
this Article may make such a selection, except as to the validity issue specified in paragraph (1). The question
whether an issuer can assert the defense of invalidity may implicate significant policies of the issuer's jurisdiction of
incorporation. See, e.g., Section 8-202 and Comments thereto.
§ 8-110. APPLICABILITY; CHOICE OF LAW
Page 3 of 5
Although subsection (a) provides that the issuer's rights and duties concerning registration of transfer are
governed by the law of the issuer's jurisdiction, other matters related to registration of transfer, such as appointment
of a guardian for a registered owner or the existence of agency relationships, might be governed by another
jurisdiction's law. Neither this section nor Section 1-105 deals with what law governs the appointment of the
administrator or executor; that question is determined under generally applicable choice of law rules.
3. Subsection (b) provides that the law of the securities intermediary's jurisdiction governs the issues concerning
the indirect holding system that are dealt with in Article 8. Paragraphs (1) and (2) cover the matters dealt with in the
Article 8 rules defining the concept of security entitlement and specifying the duties of securities intermediaries.
Paragraph (3) provides that the law of the security intermediary's jurisdiction determines whether the intermediary
owes any duties to an adverse claimant. Paragraph (4) provides that the law of the security intermediary's
jurisdiction determines whether adverse claims can be asserted against entitlement holders and others.
Subsection (e) determines what is a "securities intermediary's jurisdiction." The policy of subsection (b) is to
ensure that a securities intermediary and all of its entitlement holders can look to a single, readily-identifiable body
of law to determine their rights and duties. Accordingly, subsection (e) sets out a sequential series of tests to
facilitate identification of that body of law. Paragraph (1) of subsection (e) permits specification of the securities
intermediary's jurisdiction by agreement. In the absence of such a specification, the law chosen by the parties to
govern the securities account determines the securities intermediary's jurisdiction. See paragraph (2). Because the
policy of this section is to enable parties to determine, in advance and with certainty, what law will apply to
transactions governed by this Article, the validation of the parties' selection of governing law by agreement is not
conditioned upon a determination that the jurisdiction whose law is chosen bear a "reasonable relation" to the
transaction. See Section 4A-507; compare Section 1-105(1). That is also true with respect to the similar provisions
in subsection (d) of this section and in Section 9-305. The remaining paragraphs in subsection (e) contain additional
default rules for determining the securities intermediary's jurisdiction.
Subsection (f) makes explicit a point that is implicit in the Article 8 description of a security entitlement as a bundle
of rights against the intermediary with respect to a security or other financial asset, rather than as a direct interest in
the underlying security or other financial asset. The governing law for relationships in the indirect holding system is
not determined by such matters as the jurisdiction of incorporation of the issuer of the securities held through the
intermediary, or the location of any physical certificates held by the intermediary or a higher tier intermediary.
4. Subsection (c) provides a choice of law rule for adverse claim issues that may arise in connection with delivery
of security certificates in the direct holding system. It applies the law of the place of delivery. If a certificated security
issued by an Idaho corporation is sold, and the sale is settled by physical delivery of the certificate from Seller to
Buyer in New York, under subsection (c), New York law determines whether Buyer takes free from adverse claims.
The domicile of Seller, Buyer, and any adverse claimant is irrelevant.
5. The following examples illustrate how a court in a jurisdiction which has enacted this section would determine
the governing law:
Example 1. John Doe, a resident of Kansas, maintains a securities account with Able & Co. Able is incorporated
in Delaware. Its chief executive offices are located in Illinois. The office where Doe transacts business with Able is
located in Missouri. The agreement between Doe and Able specifies that Illinois is the securities intermediary's
(Able's) jurisdiction. Through the account, Doe holds securities of a Colorado corporation, which Able holds through
Clearing Corporation. The rules of Clearing Corporation provide that the rights and duties of Clearing Corporation
and its participants are governed by New York law. Subsection (a) specifies that a controversy concerning the rights
and duties as between the issuer and Clearing Corporation is governed by Colorado law. Subsections (b) and (e)
specify that a controversy concerning the rights and duties as between the Clearing Corporation and Able is
governed by New York law, and that a controversy concerning the rights and duties as between Able and Doe is
governed by Illinois law.
Example 2. Same facts as to Doe and Able as in Example 1. Through the account, Doe holds securities of a
Senegalese corporation, which Able holds through Clearing Corporation. Clearing Corporation's operations are
located in Belgium, and its rules and agreements with its participants provide that they are governed by Belgian law.
Clearing Corporation holds the securities through a custodial account at the Paris branch office of Global Bank,
which is organized under English law. The agreement between Clearing Corporation and Global Bank provides that
§ 8-110. APPLICABILITY; CHOICE OF LAW
Page 4 of 5
it is governed by French law. Subsection (a) specifies that a controversy concerning the rights and duties as
between the issuer and Global Bank is governed by Senegalese law. Subsections (b) and (e) specify that a
controversy concerning the rights and duties as between Global Bank and Clearing Corporation is governed by
French law, that a controversy concerning the rights and duties as between Clearing Corporation and Able is
governed by Belgian law, and that a controversy concerning the rights and duties as between Able and Doe is
governed by Illinois law.
6. To the extent that this section does not specify the governing law, general choice of law rules apply. For
example, suppose that in either of the examples in the preceding Comment, Doe enters into an agreement with
Roe, also a resident of Kansas, in which Doe agrees to transfer all of his interests in the securities held through
Able to Roe. Article 8 does not deal with whether such an agreement is enforceable or whether it gives Roe some
interest in Doe's security entitlement. This section specifies what jurisdiction's law governs the issues that are dealt
with in Article 8. Article 8, however, does specify that securities intermediaries have only limited duties with respect
to adverse claims. See Section 8-115. Subsection (b)(3) of this section provides that Illinois law governs whether
Able owes any duties to an adverse claimant. Thus, if Illinois has adopted Revised Article 8, Section 8-115 as
enacted in Illinois determines whether Roe has any rights against Able.
7. The choice of law provisions concerning security interests in securities and security entitlements are set out in
Section 9-305.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Adverse claim"
Section 8-102(a)(1)
"Agreement"
Section 1-201(3)
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Person" Section 1-201(30)
"Purchase"
Section 1-201(32)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 8-110. APPLICABILITY; CHOICE OF LAW
Page 5 of 5
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-111
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-111. CLEARING CORPORATION RULES
A rule adopted by a clearing corporation governing rights and obligations among the clearing corporation and its
participants in the clearing corporation is effective even if the rule conflicts with this [Act] and affects another party
who does not consent to the rule.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The experience of the past few decades shows that securities holding and settlement practices may develop
rapidly, and in unforeseeable directions. Accordingly, it is desirable that the rules of Article 8 be adaptable both to
ensure that commercial law can conform to changing practices and to ensure that commercial law does not operate
as an obstacle to developments in securities practice. Even if practices were unchanging, it would not be possible in
a general statute to specify in detail the rules needed to provide certainty in the operations of the clearance and
settlement system.
The provisions of this Article and Article 1 on the effect of agreements provide considerable flexibility in the
specification of the details of the rights and obligations of participants in the securities holding system by
agreement. See Sections 8-504 through 8-509, and Section 1-102(3) and (4). Given the magnitude of the
exposures involved in securities transactions, however, it may not be possible for the parties in developing practices
to rely solely on private agreements, particularly with respect to matters that might affect others, such as creditors.
For example, in order to be fully effective, rules of clearing corporations on the finality or reversibility of securities
settlements must not only bind the participants in the clearing corporation but also be effective against their
creditors. Section 8-111 provides that clearing corporation rules are effective even if they indirectly affect third
parties, such as creditors of a participant. This provision does not, however, permit rules to be adopted that would
govern the rights and obligations of third parties other than as a consequence of rules that specify the rights and
obligations of the clearing corporation and its participants.
2. The definition of clearing corporation in Section 8-102 covers only federal reserve banks, entities registered as
clearing agencies under the federal securities laws, and others subject to comparable regulation. The rules of
registered clearing agencies are subject to regulatory oversight under the federal securities laws.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Clearing corporation"
Section 8-102(a)(5)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-112
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-112. CREDITOR'S LEGAL PROCESS
(a) The interest of a debtor in a certificated security may be reached by a creditor only by actual seizure of
the security certificate by the officer making the attachment or levy, except as otherwise provided in
subsection (d). However, a certificated security for which the certificate has been surrendered to the issuer
may be reached by a creditor by legal process upon the issuer.
(b) The interest of a debtor in an uncertificated security may be reached by a creditor only by legal process
upon the issuer at its chief executive office in the United States, except as otherwise provided in subsection
(d).
(c) The interest of a debtor in a security entitlement may be reached by a creditor only by legal process
upon the securities intermediary with whom the debtor's securities account is maintained, except as
otherwise provided in subsection (d).
(d) The interest of a debtor in a certificated security for which the certificate is in the possession of a
secured party, or in an uncertificated security registered in the name of a secured party, or a security
entitlement maintained in the name of a secured party, may be reached by a creditor by legal process upon
the secured party.
(e) A creditor whose debtor is the owner of a certificated security, uncertificated security, or security
entitlement is entitled to aid from a court of competent jurisdiction, by injunction or otherwise, in reaching
the certificated security, uncertificated security, or security entitlement or in satisfying the claim by means
allowed at law or in equity in regard to property that cannot readily be reached by other legal process.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. In dealing with certificated securities the instrument itself is the vital thing, and therefore a valid levy cannot be
made unless all possibility of the certificate's wrongfully finding its way into a transferee's hands has been removed.
This can be accomplished only when the certificate is in the possession of a public officer, the issuer, or an
independent third party. A debtor who has been enjoined can still transfer the security in contempt of court. See
Overlock v. Jerome-Portland Copper Mining Co., 29 Ariz. 560, 243 P. 400 (1926). Therefore, although injunctive
relief is provided in subsection (e) so that creditors may use this method to gain control of the certificated security,
the security certificate itself must be reached to constitute a proper levy whenever the debtor has possession.
2. Subsection (b) provides that when the security is uncertificated and registered in the debtor's name, the
debtor's interest can be reached only by legal process upon the issuer. The most logical place to serve the issuer
would be the place where the transfer records are maintained, but that location might be difficult to identify,
especially when the separate elements of a computer network might be situated in different places. The chief
executive office is selected as the appropriate place by analogy to Section 9-103(3)(d). See Comment 5(c) to that
section. This section indicates only how attachment is to be made, not when it is legally justified. For that reason
there is no conflict between this section and Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186 (1977).
§ 8-112. CREDITOR'S LEGAL PROCESS
Page 2 of 2
3. Subsection (c) provides that a security entitlement can be reached only by legal process upon the debtor's
security intermediary. Process is effective only if directed to the debtor's own security intermediary. If Debtor holds
securities through Broker, and Broker in turn holds through Clearing Corporation, Debtor's property interest is a
security entitlement against Broker. Accordingly, Debtor's creditor cannot reach Debtor's interest by legal process
directed to the Clearing Corporation. See also Section 8-115.
4. Subsection (d) provides that when a certificated security, an uncertificated security, or a security entitlement is
controlled by a secured party, the debtor's interest can be reached by legal process upon the secured party. This
section does not attempt to provide for rights as between the creditor and the secured party, as, for example,
whether or when the secured party must liquidate the security.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Secured party"
Section 9-105(1)(m)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-113
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-113. STATUTE OF FRAUDS INAPPLICABLE
A contract or modification of a contract for the sale or purchase of a security is enforceable whether or not there is
a writing signed or record authenticated by a party against whom enforcement is sought, even if the contract or
modification is not capable of performance within one year of its making.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section provides that the statute of frauds does not apply to contracts for the sale of securities, reversing
prior law which had a special statute of frauds in Section 8-319 (1978). With the increasing use of electronic means
of communication, the statute of frauds is unsuited to the realities of the securities business. For securities
transactions, whatever benefits a statute of frauds may play in filtering out fraudulent claims are outweighed by the
obstacles it places in the development of modern commercial practices in the securities business.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Action" Section 1-201(1)
"Contract"
Section 1-201(11)
"Writing"
Section 1-201(46)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-114
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-114. EVIDENTIARY RULES CONCERNING CERTIFICATED SECURITIES
The following rules apply in an action on a certificated security against the issuer:
(1) Unless specifically denied in the pleadings, each signature on a security certificate or in a
necessary indorsement is admitted.
(2) If the effectiveness of a signature is put in issue, the burden of establishing effectiveness is on the
party claiming under the signature, but the signature is presumed to be genuine or authorized.
(3) If signatures on a security certificate are admitted or established, production of the certificate
entitles a holder to recover on it unless the defendant establishes a defense or a defect going to the
validity of the security.
(4) If it is shown that a defense or defect exists, the plaintiff has the burden of establishing that the
plaintiff or some person under whom the plaintiff claims is a person against whom the defense or defect
cannot be asserted.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section adapts the rules of negotiable instruments law concerning procedure in actions on instruments, see
Section 3-308, to actions on certificated securities governed by this Article. An "action on a security" includes any
action or proceeding brought against the issuer to enforce a right or interest that is part of the security, such as an
action to collect principal or interest or a dividend, or to establish a right to vote or to receive a new security under
an exchange offer or plan of reorganization. This section applies only to certificated securities; actions on
uncertificated securities are governed by general evidentiary principles.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Action" Section 1-201(1)
"Burden of establishing"
Section 1-201(8)
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Presumed"
Section 1-201(31)
"Security"
§ 8-114. EVIDENTIARY RULES CONCERNING CERTIFICATED SECURITIES
Page 2 of 2
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-115
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-115. SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY AND OTHERS NOT LIABLE TO
ADVERSE CLAIMANT
A securities intermediary that has transferred a financial asset pursuant to an effective entitlement order, or
a broker or other agent or bailee that has dealt with a financial asset at the direction of its customer or
principal, is not liable to a person having an adverse claim to the financial asset, unless the securities
intermediary, or broker or other agent or bailee:
(1) took the action after it had been served with an injunction, restraining order, or other legal process
enjoining it from doing so, issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, and had a reasonable opportunity
to act on the injunction, restraining order, or other legal process; or
(2) acted in collusion with the wrongdoer in violating the rights of the adverse claimant; or
(3) in the case of a security certificate that has been stolen, acted with notice of the adverse claim.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Other provisions of Article 8 protect certain purchasers against adverse claims, both for the direct holding
system and the indirect holding system. See Sections 8-303 and 8-502. This section deals with the related question
of the possible liability of a person who acted as the "conduit" for a securities transaction. It covers both securities
intermediaries -- the "conduits" in the indirect holding system -- and brokers or other agents or bailees -- the
"conduits" in the direct holding system. The following examples illustrate its operation:
Example 1. John Doe is a customer of the brokerage firm of Able & Co. Doe delivers to Able a certificate for 100
shares of XYZ Co. common stock, registered in Doe's name and properly indorsed, and asks the firm to sell it for
him. Able does so. Later, John Doe's spouse Mary Doe brings an action against Able asserting that Able's action
was wrongful against her because the XYZ Co. stock was marital property in which she had an interest, and John
Doe was acting wrongfully against her in transferring the securities.
Example 2. Mary Roe is a customer of the brokerage firm of Baker & Co. and holds her securities through a
securities account with Baker. Roe instructs Baker to sell 100 shares of XYZ Co. common stock that she carried in
her account. Baker does so. Later, Mary Roe's spouse John Roe brings an action against Baker asserting that
Baker's action was wrongful against him because the XYZ Co. stock was marital property in which he had an
interest, and Mary Roe was acting wrongfully against him in transferring the securities.
Under common law conversion principles, Mary Doe might be able to assert that Able & Co. is liable to her in
Example 1 for exercising dominion over property inconsistent with her rights in it. On that or some similar theory
John Roe might assert that Baker is liable to him in Example 2. Section 8-115 protects both Able and Baker from
liability.
2. The policy of this section is similar to that of many other rules of law that protect agents and bailees from
liability as innocent converters. If a thief steals property and ships it by mail, express service, or carrier, to another
person, the recipient of the property does not obtain good title, even though the recipient may have given value to
§ 8-115. SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY AND OTHERS NOT LIABLE TO ADVERSE CLAIMANT
Page 2 of 3
the thief and had no notice or knowledge that the property was stolen. Accordingly, the true owner can recover the
property from the recipient or obtain damages in a conversion or similar action. An action against the postal service,
express company, or carrier presents entirely different policy considerations. Accordingly, general tort law protects
agents or bailees who act on the instructions of their principals or bailors. See Restatement (Second) of Torts §
235. See also UCC Section 7-404.
3. Except as provided in paragraph 3, this section applies even though the securities intermediary, or the broker
or other agent or bailee, had notice or knowledge that another person asserts a claim to the securities. Consider the
following examples:
Example 3. Same facts as in Example 1, except that before John Doe brought the XYZ Co. security certificate to
Able for sale, Mary Doe telephoned or wrote to the firm asserting that she had an interest in all of John Doe's
securities and demanding that they not trade for him.
Example 4. Same facts as in Example 2, except that before Mary Roe gave an entitlement order to Baker to sell
the XYZ Co. securities from her account, John Roe telephoned or wrote to the firm asserting that he had an interest
in all of Mary Roe's securities and demanding that they not trade for her.
Section 8-115 protects Able and Baker from liability. The protections of Section 8-115 do not depend on the
presence or absence of notice of adverse claims. It is essential to the securities settlement system that brokers and
securities intermediaries be able to act promptly on the directions of their customers. Even though a firm has notice
that someone asserts a claim to a customer's securities or security entitlements, the firm should not be placed in
the position of having to make a legal judgment about the validity of the claim at the risk of liability either to its
customer or to the third party for guessing wrong. Under this section, the broker or securities intermediary is
privileged to act on the instructions of its customer or entitlement holder, unless it has been served with a
restraining order or other legal process enjoining it from doing so. This is already the law in many jurisdictions. For
example a section of the New York Banking Law provides that banks need not recognize any adverse claim to
funds or securities on deposit with them unless they have been served with legal process. N.Y. Banking Law § 134.
Other sections of the UCC embody a similar policy. See Sections 3-602, 5-114(2)(b).
Paragraph (1) of this section refers only to a court order enjoining the securities intermediary or the broker or
other agent or bailee from acting at the instructions of the customer. It does not apply to cases where the adverse
claimant tells the intermediary or broker that the customer has been enjoined, or shows the intermediary or broker a
copy of a court order binding the customer.
Paragraph (3) takes a different approach in one limited class of cases, those where a customer sells stolen
certificated securities through a securities firm. Here the policies that lead to protection of securities firms against
assertions of other sorts of claims must be weighed against the desirability of having securities firms guard against
the disposition of stolen securities. Accordingly, paragraph (3) denies protection to a broker, custodian, or other
agent or bailee who receives a stolen security certificate from its customer, if the broker, custodian, or other agent
or bailee had notice of adverse claims. The circumstances that give notice of adverse claims are specified in
Section 8-105. The result is that brokers, custodians, and other agents and bailees face the same liability for selling
stolen certificated securities that purchasers face for buying them.
4. As applied to securities intermediaries, this section embodies one of the fundamental principles of the Article 8
indirect holding system rules -- that a securities intermediary owes duties only to its own entitlement holders. The
following examples illustrate the operation of this section in the multi-tiered indirect holding system:
Example 5. Able & Co., a broker-dealer, holds 50,000 shares of XYZ Co. stock in its account at Clearing
Corporation. Able acquired the XYZ shares from another firm, Baker & Co., in a transaction that Baker contends
was tainted by fraud, giving Baker a right to rescind the transaction and recover the XYZ shares from Able. Baker
sends notice to Clearing Corporation stating that Baker has a claim to the 50,000 shares of XYZ Co. in Able's
account. Able then initiates an entitlement order directing Clearing Corporation to transfer the 50,000 shares of XYZ
Co. to another firm in settlement of a trade. Under Section 8-115, Clearing Corporation is privileged to comply with
Able's entitlement order, without fear of liability to Baker. This is so even though Clearing Corporation has notice of
Baker's claim, unless Baker obtains a court order enjoining Clearing Corporation from acting on Able's entitlement
order.
§ 8-115. SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY AND OTHERS NOT LIABLE TO ADVERSE CLAIMANT
Page 3 of 3
Example 6. Able & Co., a broker-dealer, holds 50,000 shares of XYZ Co. stock in its account at Clearing
Corporation. Able initiates an entitlement order directing Clearing Corporation to transfer the 50,000 shares of XYZ
Co. to another firm in settlement of a trade. That trade was made by Able for its own account, and the proceeds
were devoted to its own use. Able becomes insolvent, and it is discovered that Able has a shortfall in the shares of
XYZ Co. stock that it should have been carrying for its customers. Able's customers bring an action against
Clearing Corporation asserting that Clearing Corporation acted wrongfully in transferring the XYZ shares on Able's
order because those were shares that should have been held by Able for its customers. Under Section 8-115,
Clearing Corporation is not liable to Able's customers, because Clearing Corporation acted on an effective
entitlement order of its own entitlement holder, Able. Clearing Corporation's protection against liability does not
depend on the presence or absence of notice or knowledge of the claim by Clearing Corporation.
5. If the conduct of a securities intermediary or a broker or other agent or bailee rises to a level of complicity in the
wrongdoing of its customer or principal, the policies that favor protection against liability do not apply. Accordingly,
paragraph (2) provides that the protections of this section do not apply if the securities intermediary or broker or
other agent or bailee acted in collusion with the customer or principal in violating the rights of another person. The
collusion test is intended to adopt a standard akin to the tort rules that determine whether a person is liable as an
aider or abettor for the tortious conduct of a third party. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 876.
Knowledge that the action of the customer is wrongful is a necessary but not sufficient condition of the collusion
test. The aspect of the role of securities intermediaries and brokers that Article 8 deals with is the clerical or
ministerial role of implementing and recording the securities transactions that their customers conduct. Faithful
performance of this role consists of following the instructions of the customer. It is not the role of the record-keeper
to police whether the transactions recorded are appropriate, so mere awareness that the customer may be acting
wrongfully does not itself constitute collusion. That, of course, does not insulate an intermediary or broker from
responsibility in egregious cases where its action goes beyond the ordinary standards of the business of
implementing and recording transactions, and reaches a level of affirmative misconduct in assisting the customer in
the commission of a wrong.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Broker" Section 8-102(a)(3)
"Effective"
Section 8-107
"Entitlement order"
Section 8-102(a)(8)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-116
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 1. SHORT TITLE AND GENERAL MATTERS
§ 8-116. SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY AS PURCHASER FOR VALUE
A securities intermediary that receives a financial asset and establishes a security entitlement to the financial asset
in favor of an entitlement holder is a purchaser for value of the financial asset. A securities intermediary that
acquires a security entitlement to a financial asset from another securities intermediary acquires the security
entitlement for value if the securities intermediary acquiring the security entitlement establishes a security
entitlement to the financial asset in favor of an entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section is intended to make explicit two points that, while implicit in other provisions, are of sufficient
importance to the operation of the indirect holding system that they warrant explicit statement. First, it makes clear
that a securities intermediary that receives a financial asset and establishes a security entitlement in respect thereof
in favor of an entitlement holder is a "purchaser" of the financial asset that the securities intermediary received.
Second, it makes clear that by establishing a security entitlement in favor of an entitlement holder a securities
intermediary gives value for any corresponding financial asset that the securities intermediary receives or acquires
from another party, whether the intermediary holds directly or indirectly.
In many cases a securities intermediary that receives a financial asset will also be transferring value to the person
from whom the financial asset was received. That, however, is not always the case. Payment may occur through a
different system than settlement of the securities side of the transaction, or the securities might be transferred
without a corresponding payment, as when a person moves an account from one securities intermediary to another.
Even though the securities intermediary does not give value to the transferor, it does give value by incurring
obligations to its own entitlement holder. Although the general definition of value in Section 1-201(44)(d) should be
interpreted to cover the point, this section is included to make this point explicit.
2. The following examples illustrate the effect of this section:
Example 1. Buyer buys 1000 shares of XYZ Co. common stock through Buyer's broker Able & Co. to be held in
Buyer's securities account. In settlement of the trade, the selling broker delivers to Able a security certificate in
street name, indorsed in blank, for 1000 shares XYZ Co. stock, which Able holds in its vault. Able credits Buyer's
account for securities in that amount. Section 8-116 specifies that Able is a purchaser of the XYZ Co. stock
certificate, and gave value for it. Thus, Able can obtain the benefit of Section 8-303, which protects purchasers for
value, if it satisfies the other requirements of that section.
Example 2. Buyer buys 1000 shares XYZ Co. common stock through Buyer's broker Able & Co. to be held in
Buyer's securities account. The trade is settled by crediting 1000 shares XYZ Co. stock to Able's account at
Clearing Corporation. Able credits Buyer's account for securities in that amount. When Clearing Corporation credits
Able's account, Able acquires a security entitlement under Section 8-501. Section 8-116 specifies that Able
acquired this security entitlement for value. Thus, Able can obtain the benefit of Section 8-502, which protects
persons who acquire security entitlements for value, if it satisfies the other requirements of that section.
Example 3. Thief steals a certificated bearer bond from Owner. Thief sends the certificate to his broker Able & Co.
to be held in his securities account, and Able credits Thief's account for the bond. Section 8-116 specifies that Able
§ 8-116. SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY AS PURCHASER FOR VALUE
Page 2 of 2
is a purchaser of the bond and gave value for it. Thus, Able can obtain the benefit of Section 8-303, which protects
purchasers for value, if it satisfies the other requirements of that section.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-201
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER
§ 8-201. ISSUER
(a) With respect to an obligation on or a defense to a security, an "issuer" includes a person that:
(1) places or authorizes the placing of its name on a security certificate, other than as authenticating
trustee, registrar, transfer agent, or the like, to evidence a share, participation, or other interest in its
property or in an enterprise, or to evidence its duty to perform an obligation represented by the
certificate;
(2) creates a share, participation, or other interest in its property or in an enterprise, or undertakes an
obligation, that is an uncertificated security;
(3) directly or indirectly creates a fractional interest in its rights or property, if the fractional interest is
represented by a security certificate; or
(4) becomes responsible for, or in place of, another person described as an issuer in this section.
(b) With respect to an obligation on or defense to a security, a guarantor is an issuer to the extent of its
guaranty, whether or not its obligation is noted on a security certificate.
(c) With respect to a registration of a transfer, issuer means a person on whose behalf transfer books are
maintained.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The definition of "issuer" in this section functions primarily to describe the persons whose defenses may be cut
off under the rules in Part 2. In large measure it simply tracks the language of the definition of security in Section 8-
102(a)(15).
2. Subsection (b) distinguishes the obligations of a guarantor as issuer from those of the principal obligor.
However, it does not exempt the guarantor from the impact of subsection (d) of Section 8-202. Whether or not the
obligation of the guarantor is noted on the security is immaterial. Typically, guarantors are parent corporations, or
stand in some similar relationship to the principal obligor. If that relationship existed at the time the security was
originally issued the guaranty would probably have been noted on the security. However, if the relationship arose
afterward, e.g., through a purchase of stock or properties, or through merger or consolidation, probably the notation
would not have been made. Nonetheless, the holder of the security is entitled to the benefit of the obligation of the
guarantor.
3. Subsection (c) narrows the definition of "issuer" for purposes of Part 4 of this Article (registration of transfer). It
is supplemented by Section 8-407.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Person" Section 1-201(30)
"Security"
§ 8-201. ISSUER
Page 2 of 2
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-202
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER
§ 8-202. ISSUER'S RESPONSIBILITY AND DEFENSES; NOTICE OF DEFECT
OR DEFENSE
(a) Even against a purchaser for value and without notice, the terms of a certificated security include terms
stated on the certificate and terms made part of the security by reference on the certificate to another
instrument, indenture, or document or to a constitution, statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, order, or the
like, to the extent the terms referred to do not conflict with terms stated on the certificate. A reference under
this subsection does not of itself charge a purchaser for value with notice of a defect going to the validity of
the security, even if the certificate expressly states that a person accepting it admits notice. The terms of an
uncertificated security include those stated in any instrument, indenture, or document or in a constitution,
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, order, or the like, pursuant to which the security is issued.
(b) The following rules apply if an issuer asserts that a security is not valid:
(1) A security other than one issued by a government or governmental subdivision, agency, or
instrumentality, even though issued with a defect going to its validity, is valid in the hands of a
purchaser for value and without notice of the particular defect unless the defect involves a violation of a
constitutional provision. In that case, the security is valid in the hands of a purchaser for value and
without notice of the defect, other than one who takes by original issue.
(2) Paragraph (1) applies to an issuer that is a government or governmental subdivision, agency, or
instrumentality only if there has been substantial compliance with the legal requirements governing the
issue or the issuer has received a substantial consideration for the issue as a whole or for the particular
security and a stated purpose of the issue is one for which the issuer has power to borrow money or
issue the security.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in Section 8-205, lack of genuineness of a certificated security is a
complete defense, even against a purchaser for value and without notice.
(d) All other defenses of the issuer of a security, including nondelivery and conditional delivery of a
certificated security, are ineffective against a purchaser for value who has taken the certificated security
without notice of the particular defense.
(e) This section does not affect the right of a party to cancel a contract for a security "when, as and if
issued" or "when distributed" in the event of a material change in the character of the security that is the
subject of the contract or in the plan or arrangement pursuant to which the security is to be issued or
distributed.
(f) If a security is held by a securities intermediary against whom an entitlement holder has a security
entitlement with respect to the security, the issuer may not assert any defense that the issuer could not
assert if the entitlement holder held the security directly.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
§ 8-202. ISSUER'S RESPONSIBILITY AND DEFENSES; NOTICE OF DEFECT OR DEFENSE
Page 2 of 4
1. In this Article the rights of the purchaser for value without notice are divided into two aspects, those against the
issuer, and those against other claimants to the security. Part 2 of this Article, and especially this section, deal with
rights against the issuer.
Subsection (a) states, in accordance with the prevailing case law, the right of the issuer (who prepares the text of
the security) to include terms incorporated by adequate reference to an extrinsic source, so long as the terms so
incorporated do not conflict with the stated terms. Thus, the standard practice of referring in a bond or debenture to
the trust indenture under which it is issued without spelling out its necessarily complex and lengthy provisions is
approved. Every stock certificate refers in some manner to the charter or articles of incorporation of the issuer. At
least where there is more than one class of stock authorized applicable corporation codes specifically require a
statement or summary as to preferences, voting powers and the like. References to constitutions, statutes,
ordinances, rules, regulations or orders are not so common, except in the obligations of governments or
governmental agencies or units; but where appropriate they fit into the rule here stated.
Courts have generally held that an issuer is estopped from denying representations made in the text of a security.
Delaware-New Jersey Ferry Co. v. Leeds, 21 Del.Ch. 279, 186 A. 913 (1936). Nor is a defect in form or the
invalidity of a security normally available to the issuer as a defense. Bonini v. Family Theatre Corporation, 327 Pa.
273, 194 A. 498 (1937); First National Bank of Fairbanks v. Alaska Airmotive, 119 F.2d 267 (C.C.A.A laska 1941).
2. The rule in subsection (a) requiring that the terms of a security be noted or referred to on the certificate is
based on practices and expectations in the direct holding system for certificated securities. This rule does not
express a general rule or policy that the terms of a security are effective only if they are communicated to beneficial
owners in some particular fashion. Rather, subsection (a) is based on the principle that a purchaser who does
obtain a certificate is entitled to assume that the terms of the security have been noted or referred to on the
certificate. That policy does not come into play in a securities holding system in which purchasers do not take
delivery of certificates.
The provisions of subsection (a) concerning notation of terms on security certificates are necessary only because
paper certificates play such an important role for certificated securities that a purchaser should be protected against
assertion of any defenses or rights that are not noted on the certificate. No similar problem exists with respect to
uncertificated securities. The last sentence of subsection (a) is, strictly speaking, unnecessary, since it only
recognizes the fact that the terms of an uncertificated security are determined by whatever other law or agreement
governs the security. It is included only to preclude any inference that uncertificated securities are subject to any
requirement analogous to the requirement of notation of terms on security certificates.
The rule of subsection (a) applies to the indirect holding system only in the sense that if a certificated security has
been delivered to the clearing corporation or other securities intermediary, the terms of the security should be noted
or referred to on the certificate. If the security is uncertificated, that principle does not apply even at the issuerclearing
corporation level. The beneficial owners who hold securities through the clearing corporation are bound by
the terms of the security, even though they do not actually see the certificate. Since entitlement holders in an
indirect holding system have not taken delivery of certificates, the policy of subsection (a) does not apply.
3. The penultimate sentence of subsection (a) and all of subsection (b) embody the concept that it is the duty of
the issuer, not of the purchaser, to make sure that the security complies with the law governing its issue. The
penultimate sentence of subsection (a) makes clear that the issuer cannot, by incorporating a reference to a statute
or other document, charge the purchaser with notice of the security's invalidity. Subsection (b) gives to a purchaser
for value without notice of the defect the right to enforce the security against the issuer despite the presence of a
defect that otherwise would render the security invalid. There are three circumstances in which a purchaser does
not gain such rights: first, if the defect involves a violation of constitutional provisions, these rights accrue only to a
subsequent purchaser, that is, one who takes other than by original issue. This Article leaves to the law of each
particular State the rights of a purchaser on original issue of a security with a constitutional defect. No negative
implication is intended by the explicit grant of rights to a subsequent purchaser.
Second, governmental issuers are distinguished in subsection (b) from other issuers as a matter of public policy,
and additional safeguards are imposed before governmental issues are validated. Governmental issuers are
estopped from asserting defenses only if there has been substantial compliance with the legal requirements
§ 8-202. ISSUER'S RESPONSIBILITY AND DEFENSES; NOTICE OF DEFECT OR DEFENSE
Page 3 of 4
governing the issue or if substantial consideration has been received and a stated purpose of the issue is one for
which the issuer has power to borrow money or issue the security. The purpose of the substantial compliance
requirement is to make certain that a mere technicality as, e.g., in the manner of publishing election notices, shall
not be a ground for depriving an innocent purchaser of rights in the security. The policy is here adopted of such
cases as Tommie v. City of Gadsden, 229 Ala. 521, 158 So. 763 (1935), in which minor discrepancies in the form of
the election ballot used were overlooked and the bonds were declared valid since there had been substantial
compliance with the statute.
A long and well established line of federal cases recognizes the principle of estoppel in favor of purchasers for
value without notices where municipalities issue bonds containing recitals of compliance with governing
constitutional and statutory provisions, made by the municipal authorities entrusted with determining such
compliance. Chaffee County v. Potter, 142 U.S. 355 (1892); Oregon v. Jennings, 119 U.S. 74 (1886); Gunnison
County Commissioners v. Rollins, 173 U.S. 255 (1898). This rule has been qualified, however, by requiring that the
municipality have power to issue the security. Anthony v. County of Jasper, 101 U.S. 693 (1879); Town of South
Ottawa v. Perkins, 94 U.S. 260 (1876). This section follows the case law trend, simplifying the rule by setting up two
conditions for an estoppel against a governmental issuer: (1) substantial consideration given, and (2) power in the
issuer to borrow money or issue the security for the stated purpose. As a practical matter the problem of policing
governmental issuers has been alleviated by the present practice of requiring legal opinions as to the validity of the
issue. The bulk of the case law on this point is nearly 100 years old and it may be assumed that the question now
seldom arises.
Section 8-210, regarding overissue, provides the third exception to the rule that an innocent purchase for value
takes a valid security despite the presence of a defect that would otherwise give rise to invalidity. See that section
and its Comment for further explanation.
4. Subsection (e) is included to make clear that this section does not affect the presently recognized right of either
party to a "when, as and if" or "when distributed" contract to cancel the contract on substantial change.
5. Subsection (f) has been added because the introduction of the security entitlement concept requires some
adaptation of the Part 2 rules, particularly those that distinguish between purchasers who take by original issue and
subsequent purchasers. The basic concept of Part 2 is to apply to investment securities the principle of negotiable
instruments law that an obligor is precluded from asserting most defenses against purchasers for value without
notice. Section 8-202 describes in some detail which defenses issuers can raise against purchasers for value and
subsequent purchasers for value. Because these rules were drafted with the direct holding system in mind, some
interpretive problems might be presented in applying them to the indirect holding. For example, if a municipality
issues a bond in book-entry only form, the only direct "purchaser" of that bond would be the clearing corporation.
The policy of precluding the issuer from asserting defenses is, however, equally applicable. Subsection (f) is
designed to ensure that the defense preclusion rules developed for the direct holding system will also apply to the
indirect holding system.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Notice" Section 1-201(25)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
"Value"
Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
§ 8-202. ISSUER'S RESPONSIBILITY AND DEFENSES; NOTICE OF DEFECT OR DEFENSE
Page 4 of 4
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-203
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER
§ 8-203. STALENESS AS NOTICE OF DEFECT OR DEFENSE
After an act or event, other than a call that has been revoked, creating a right to immediate performance of
the principal obligation represented by a certificated security or setting a date on or after which the security
is to be presented or surrendered for redemption or exchange, a purchaser is charged with notice of any
defect in its issue or defense of the issuer, if the act or event:
(1) requires the payment of money, the delivery of a certificated security, the registration of transfer of
an uncertificated security, or any of them on presentation or surrender of the security certificate, the
money or security is available on the date set for payment or exchange, and the purchaser takes the
security more than one year after that date; or
(2) is not covered by paragraph (1) and the purchaser takes the security more than two years after the
date set for surrender or presentation or the date on which performance became due.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The problem of matured or called securities is here dealt with in terms of the effect of such events in giving
notice of the issuer's defenses and not in terms of "negotiability". The substance of this section applies only to
certificated securities because certificates may be transferred to a purchaser by delivery after the security has
matured, been called, or become redeemable or exchangeable. It is contemplated that uncertificated securities
which have matured or been called will merely be canceled on the books of the issuer and the proceeds sent to the
registered owner. Uncertificated securities which have become redeemable or exchangeable, at the option of the
owner, may be transferred to a purchaser, but the transfer is effectuated only by registration of transfer, thus
necessitating communication with the issuer. If defects or defenses in such securities exist, the issuer will
necessarily have the opportunity to bring them to the attention of the purchaser.
2. The fact that a security certificate is in circulation long after it has been called for redemption or exchange must
give rise to the question in a purchaser's mind as to why it has not been surrendered. After the lapse of a
reasonable period of time a purchaser can no longer claim "no reason to know" of any defects or irregularities in its
issue. Where funds are available for the redemption the security certificate is normally turned in more promptly and
a shorter time is set as the "reasonable period" than is set where funds are not available.
Defaulted certificated securities may be traded on financial markets in the same manner as unmatured and
undefaulted instruments and a purchaser might not be placed upon notice of irregularity by the mere fact of default.
An issuer, however, should at some point be placed in a position to determine definitely its liability on an invalid or
improper issue, and for this purpose a security under this section becomes "stale" two years after the default. A
different rule applies when the question is notice not of issuer's defenses but of claims of ownership. Section 8-105
and Comment.
3. Nothing in this section is designed to extend the life of preferred stocks called for redemption as "shares of
stock" beyond the redemption date. After such a call, the security represents only a right to the funds set aside for
redemption.
§ 8-203. STALENESS AS NOTICE OF DEFECT OR DEFENSE
Page 2 of 2
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Notice" Section 1-201(25)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-204
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER
§ 8-204. EFFECT OF ISSUER'S RESTRICTION ON TRANSFER
A restriction on transfer of a security imposed by the issuer, even if otherwise lawful, is ineffective against a
person without knowledge of the restriction unless:
(1) the security is certificated and the restriction is noted conspicuously on the security certificate; or
(2) the security is uncertificated and the registered owner has been notified of the restriction.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Restrictions on transfer of securities are imposed by issuers in a variety of circumstances and for a variety of
purposes, such as to retain control of a close corporation or to ensure compliance with federal securities laws.
Other law determines whether such restrictions are permissible. This section deals only with the consequences of
failure to note the restriction on a security certificate.
This section imposes no bar to enforcement of a restriction on transfer against a person who has actual
knowledge of it.
2. A restriction on transfer of a certificated security is ineffective against a person without knowledge of the
restriction unless the restriction is noted conspicuously on the certificate. The word "noted" is used to make clear
that the restriction need not be set forth in full text. Refusal by an issuer to register a transfer on the basis of an
unnoted restriction would be a violation of the issuer's duty to register under Section 8-401.
3. The policy of this section is the same as in Section 8-202. A purchaser who takes delivery of a certificated
security is entitled to rely on the terms stated on the certificate. That policy obviously does not apply to
uncertificated securities. For uncertificated securities, this section requires only that the registered owner has been
notified of the restriction. Suppose, for example, that A is the registered owner of an uncertificated security, and that
the issuer has notified A of a restriction on transfer. A agrees to sell the security to B, in violation of the restriction. A
completes a written instruction directing the issuer to register transfer to B, and B pays A for the security at the time
A delivers the instruction to B. A does not inform B of the restriction, and B does not otherwise have notice or
knowledge of it at the time B pays and receives the instruction. B presents the instruction to the issuer, but the
issuer refuses to register the transfer on the grounds that it would violate the restriction. The issuer has complied
with this section, because it did notify the registered owner A of the restriction. The issuer's refusal to register
transfer is not wrongful. B has an action against A for breach of transfer warranty, see Section 8-108(b)(4)(iii). B's
mistake was treating an uncertificated security transaction in the fashion appropriate only for a certificated security.
The mechanism for transfer of uncertificated securities is registration of transfer on the books of the issuer; handing
over an instruction only initiates the process. The purchaser should make arrangements to ensure that the price is
not paid until it knows that the issuer has or will register transfer.
4. In the indirect holding system, investors neither take physical delivery of security certificates nor have
uncertificated securities registered in their names. So long as the requirements of this section have been satisfied at
the level of the relationship between the issuer and the securities intermediary that is a direct holder, this section
does not preclude the issuer from enforcing a restriction on transfer. See Section 8-202(a) and Comment 2 thereto.
§ 8-204. EFFECT OF ISSUER'S RESTRICTION ON TRANSFER
Page 2 of 2
5. This section deals only with restrictions imposed by the issuer. Restrictions imposed by statute are not affected.
See Quiner v. Marblehead Social Co., 10 Mass. 476 (1813); Madison Bank v. Price, 79 Kan. 289, 100 P. 280
(1909); Healey v. Steele Center Creamery Ass'n, 115 Minn. 451, 133 N.W. 69 (1911). Nor does it deal with private
agreements between stockholders containing restrictive covenants as to the sale of the security.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Conspicuous"
Section 1-201(10)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Knowledge"
Section 1-201(25)
"Notify" Section 1-201(25)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-205
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER
§ 8-205. EFFECT OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE ON SECURITY
CERTIFICATE
An unauthorized signature placed on a security certificate before or in the course of issue is ineffective, but
the signature is effective in favor of a purchaser for value of the certificated security if the purchaser is
without notice of the lack of authority and the signing has been done by:
(1) an authenticating trustee, registrar, transfer agent, or other person entrusted by the issuer with the
signing of the security certificate or of similar security certificates, or the immediate preparation for
signing of any of them; or
(2) an employee of the issuer, or of any of the persons listed in paragraph (1), entrusted with
responsible handling of the security certificate.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The problem of forged or unauthorized signatures may arise where an employee of the issuer, transfer agent,
or registrar has access to securities which the employee is required to prepare for issue by affixing the corporate
seal or by adding a signature necessary for issue. This section is based upon the issuer's duty to avoid the
negligent entrusting of securities to such persons. Issuers have long been held responsible for signatures placed
upon securities by parties whom they have held out to the public as authorized to prepare such securities. See Fifth
Avenue Bank of New York v. The Forty-Second & Grand Street Ferry Railroad Co., 137 N.Y. 231, 33 N.E. 378, 19
L.R.A. 331, 33 Am.St.Rep. 712 (1893); Jarvis v. Manhattan Beach Co., 148 N.Y. 652, 43 N.E. 68, 31 L.R.A. 776, 51
Am.St.Rep. 727 (1896). The "apparent authority" concept of some of the case-law, however, is here extended and
this section expressly rejects the technical distinction, made by courts reluctant to recognize forged signatures,
between cases where forgers sign signatures they are authorized to sign under proper circumstances and those in
which they sign signatures they are never authorized to sign. Citizens' & Southern National Bank v. Trust Co. of
Georgia, 50 Ga.App. 681, 179 S.E. 278 (1935). Normally the purchaser is not in a position to determine which
signature a forger, entrusted with the preparation of securities, has "apparent authority" to sign. The issuer, on the
other hand, can protect itself against such fraud by the careful selection and bonding of agents and employees, or
by action over against transfer agents and registrars who in turn may bond their personnel.
2. The issuer cannot be held liable for the honesty of employees not entrusted, directly or indirectly, with the
signing, preparation, or responsible handling of similar securities and whose possible commission of forgery it has
no reason to anticipate. The result in such cases as Hudson Trust Co. v. American Linseed Co., 232 N.Y. 350, 134
N.E. 178 (1922), and Dollar Savings Fund & Trust Co. v. Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co., 213 Pa. 307, 62 A. 916, 5
Ann.Cas. 248 (1906) is here adopted.
3. This section is not concerned with forged or unauthorized indorsements, but only with unauthorized signatures
of issuers, transfer agents, etc., placed upon security certificates during the course of their issue. The protection
here stated is available to all purchasers for value without notice and not merely to subsequent purchasers.
§ 8-205. EFFECT OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNATURE ON SECURITY CERTIFICATE
Page 2 of 2
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Notice" Section 1-201(25)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Unauthorized signature"
Section 1-201(43)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-206
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER
§ 8-206. COMPLETION OR ALTERATION OF SECURITY CERTIFICATE
(a) If a security certificate contains the signatures necessary to its issue or transfer but is incomplete in any
other respect:
(1) any person may complete it by filling in the blanks as authorized; and
(2) even if the blanks are incorrectly filled in, the security certificate as completed is enforceable by a
purchaser who took it for value and without notice of the incorrectness.
(b) A complete security certificate that has been improperly altered, even if fraudulently, remains
enforceable, but only according to its original terms.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The problem of forged or unauthorized signatures necessary for the issue or transfer of a security is not
involved here, and a person in possession of a blank certificate is not, by this section, given authority to fill in blanks
with such signatures. Completion of blanks left in a transfer instruction is dealt with elsewhere (Section 8-305(a)).
2. Blanks left upon issue of a security certificate are the only ones dealt with here, and a purchaser for value
without notice is protected. A purchaser is not in a good position to determine whether blanks were completed by
the issuer or by some person not authorized to complete them. On the other hand the issuer can protect itself by
not placing its signature on the writing until the blanks are completed or, if it does sign before all blanks are
completed, by carefully selecting the agents and employees to whom it entrusts the writing after authentication.
With respect to a security certificate that is completed by the issuer but later is altered, the issuer has done
everything it can to protect the purchaser and thus is not charged with the terms as altered. However, it is charged
according to the original terms, since it is not thereby prejudiced. If the completion or alteration is obviously
irregular, the purchaser may not qualify as a purchaser who took without notice under this section.
3. Only the purchaser who physically takes the certificate is directly protected. However, a transferee may receive
protection indirectly through Section 8-302(a).
4. The protection granted a purchaser for value without notice under this section is modified to the extent that an
overissue may result where an incorrect amount is inserted into a blank (Section 8-210).
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Notice" Section 1-201(25)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Unauthorized signature"
Section 1-201(43)
§ 8-206. COMPLETION OR ALTERATION OF SECURITY CERTIFICATE
Page 2 of 2
"Value"
Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-207
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER
§ 8-207. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF ISSUER WITH RESPECT TO REGISTERED
OWNERS
(a) Before due presentment for registration of transfer of a certificated security in registered form or of an
instruction requesting registration of transfer of an uncertificated security, the issuer or indenture trustee
may treat the registered owner as the person exclusively entitled to vote, receive notifications, and
otherwise exercise all the rights and powers of an owner.
(b) This Article does not affect the liability of the registered owner of a security for a call, assessment, or
the like.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) states the issuer's right to treat the registered owner of a security as the person entitled to
exercise all the rights of an owner. This right of the issuer is limited by the provisions of Part 4 of this article. Once
there has been due presentation for registration of transfer, the issuer has a duty to register ownership in the name
of the transferee. Section 8-401. Thus its right to treat the old registered owner as exclusively entitled to the rights
of ownership must cease.
The issuer may under this section make distributions of money or securities to the registered owners of securities
without requiring further proof of ownership, provided that such distributions are distributable to the owners of all
securities of the same issue and the terms of the security do not require surrender of a security certificate as a
condition of payment or exchange. Any such distribution shall constitute a defense against a claim for the same
distribution by a person, even if that person is in possession of the security certificate and is a protected purchaser
of the security. See PEB Commentary No. 4, dated March 10, 1990.
2. Subsection (a) is permissive and does not require that the issuer deal exclusively with the registered owner. It
is free to require proof of ownership before paying out dividends or the like if it chooses to. Barbato v. Breeze
Corporation, 128 N.J.L. 309, 26 A.2d 53 (1942).
3. This section does not operate to determine who is finally entitled to exercise voting and other rights or to
receive payments and distributions. The parties are still free to incorporate their own arrangements as to these
matters in seller-purchaser agreements which may be definitive as between them.
4. No change in existing state laws as to the liability of registered owners for calls and assessments is here
intended; nor is anything in this section designed to estop record holders from denying ownership when
assessments are levied if they are otherwise entitled to do so under state law. See State ex rel. Squire v. Murfey,
Blosson & Co., 131 Ohio St. 289, 2 N.E.2d 866 (1936); Willing v. Delaplaine, 23 F.Supp. 579 (1937).
5. No interference is intended with the common practice of closing the transfer books or taking a record date for
dividend, voting, and other purposes, as provided for in by-laws, charters, and statutes.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
§ 8-207. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF ISSUER WITH RESPECT TO REGISTERED OWNERS
Page 2 of 2
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Registered form"
Section 8-102(a)(13)
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-208
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER
§ 8-208. EFFECT OF SIGNATURE OF AUTHENTICATING TRUSTEE,
REGISTRAR, OR TRANSFER AGENT
(a) A person signing a security certificate as authenticating trustee, registrar, transfer agent, or the like,
warrants to a purchaser for value of the certificated security, if the purchaser is without notice of a particular
defect, that:
(1) the certificate is genuine;
(2) the person's own participation in the issue of the security is within the person's capacity and within
the scope of the authority received by the person from the issuer; and
(3) the person has reasonable grounds to believe that the certificated security is in the form and within
the amount the issuer is authorized to issue.
(b) Unless otherwise agreed, a person signing under subsection (a) does not assume responsibility for the
validity of the security in other respects.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The warranties here stated express the current understanding and prevailing case law as to the effect of the
signatures of authenticating trustees, transfer agents, and registrars. See Jarvis v. Manhattan Beach Co., 148 N.Y.
652, 43 N.E. 68, 31 L.R.A. 776, 51 Am.St.Rep. 727 (1896). Although it has generally been regarded as the
particular obligation of the transfer agent to determine whether securities are in proper form as provided by the bylaws
and Articles of Incorporation, neither a registrar nor an authenticating trustee should properly place a signature
upon a certificate without determining whether it is at least regular on its face. The obligations of these parties in
this respect have therefore been made explicit in terms of due care. See Feldmeier v. Mortgage Securities, Inc., 34
Cal.App.2d 201, 93 P.2d 593 (1939).
2. Those cases which hold that an authenticating trustee is not liable for any defect in the mortgage or property
which secures the bond or for any fraudulent misrepresentations made by the issuer are not here affected since
these matters do not involve the genuineness or proper form of the security. Ainsa v. Mercantile Trust Co., 174 Cal.
504, 163 P. 898 (1917); Tschetinian v. City Trust Co., 186 N.Y. 432, 79 N.E. 401 (1906); Davidge v. Guardian Trust
Co. of New York, 203 N.Y. 331, 96 N.E. 751 (1911).
3. The charter or an applicable statute may affect the capacity of a bank or other corporation undertaking to act as
an authenticating trustee, registrar, or transfer agent. See, for example, the Federal Reserve Act (U.S.C.A., Title 12,
Banks and Banking, Section 248) under which the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Bank is authorized to
grant special permits to National Banks permitting them to act as trustees. Such corporations are therefore held to
certify as to their legal capacity to act as well as to their authority.
§ 8-208. EFFECT OF SIGNATURE OF AUTHENTICATING TRUSTEE, REGISTRAR, OR TRANSFER AGENT
Page 2 of 2
4. Authenticating trustees, registrars, and transfer agents have normally been held liable for an issue in excess of
the authorized amount. Jarvis v. Manhattan Beach Co., supra; Mullen v. Eastern Trust & Banking Co., 108 Me.
498, 81 A. 948 (1911). In imposing upon these parties a duty of due care with respect to the amount they are
authorized to help issue, this section does not necessarily validate the security, but merely holds persons
responsible for the excess issue liable in damages for any loss suffered by the purchaser.
5. A side from questions of genuineness and excess issue, these parties are not held to certify as to the validity of
the security unless they specifically undertake to do so. The case law which has recognized a unique responsibility
on the transfer agent's part to testify as to the validity of any security which it countersigns is rejected.
6. This provision does not prevent a transfer agent or issuer from agreeing with a registrar of stock to protect the
registrar in respect of the genuineness and proper form of a security certificate signed by the issuer or the transfer
agent or both. Nor does it interfere with proper indemnity arrangements between the issuer and trustees, transfer
agents, registrars, and the like.
7. An unauthorized signature is a signature for purposes of this section if and only if it is made effective by Section
8-205.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Genuine"
Section 1-201(18)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Notice" Section 1-201(25)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
"Value"
Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-209
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER
§ 8-209. ISSUER'S LIEN
A lien in favor of an issuer upon a certificated security is valid against a purchaser only if the right of the issuer to
the lien is noted conspicuously on the security certificate.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section is similar to Sections 8-202 and 8-204 which require that the terms of a certificated security and any
restriction on transfer imposed by the issuer be noted on the security certificate. This section differs from those two
sections in that the purchaser's know ledge of the issuer's claim is irrelevant. "Noted" makes clear that the text of
the lien provisions need not be set forth in full. However, this would not override a provision of an applicable
corporation code requiring statement in haec verba. This section does not apply to uncertificated securities. It
applies to the indirect holding system in the same fashion as Sections 8-202 and 8-204, see Comment 2 to Section
8-202.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-210
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 2. ISSUE AND ISSUER
§ 8-210. OVERISSUE
(a) In this section, "overissue" means the issue of securities in excess of the amount the issuer has
corporate power to issue, but an overissue does not occur if appropriate action has cured the overissue.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (c) and (d), the provisions of this Article which validate a
security or compel its issue or reissue do not apply to the extent that validation, issue, or reissue would
result in overissue.
(c) If an identical security not constituting an overissue is reasonably available for purchase, a person
entitled to issue or validation may compel the issuer to purchase the security and deliver it if certificated or
register its transfer if uncertificated, against surrender of any security certificate the person holds.
(d) If a security is not reasonably available for purchase, a person entitled to issue or validation may
recover from the issuer the price the person or the last purchaser for value paid for it with interest from the
date of the person's demand.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Deeply embedded in corporation law is the conception that "corporate power" to issue securities stems from
the statute, either general or special, under which the corporation is organized. Corporation codes universally
require that the charter or articles of incorporation state, at least as to capital shares, maximum limits in terms of
number of shares or total dollar capital. Historically, special incorporation statutes are similarly drawn and
sometimes similarly limit the face amount of authorized debt securities. The theory is that issue of securities in
excess of the authorized amounts is prohibited. See, for example, McWilliams v. Geddes & Moss Undertaking Co.,
169 So. 894 (1936, La.); Crawford v. Twin City Oil Co., 216 Ala. 216, 113 So. 61 (1927); New York and New Haven
R.R. Co. v. Schuyler, 34 N.Y. 30 (1865). This conception persists despite modern corporation codes under which,
by action of directors and stockholders, additional shares can be authorized by charter amendment and thereafter
issued. This section does not give a person entitled to validation, issue, or reissue of a security, the right to compel
amendment of the charter to authorize additional shares. Therefore, in a case where issue of an additional security
would require charter amendment, the plaintiff is limited to the two alternate remedies set forth in subsections (c)
and (d). The last clause of subsection (a), which is added in Revised Article 8, does, however, recognize that under
modern conditions, overissue may be a relatively minor technical problem that can be cured by appropriate action
under governing corporate law.
2. Where an identical security is reasonably available for purchase, whether because traded on an organized
market, or because one or more security owners may be willing to sell at a not unreasonable price, the issuer,
although unable to issue additional shares, will be able to purchase them and may be compelled to follow that
procedure. West v. Tintic Standard Mining Co., 71 Utah 158, 263 P. 490 (1928).
§ 8-210. OVERISSUE
Page 2 of 2
3. The right to recover damages from an issuer who has permitted an overissue to occur is well settled. New
York and New Haven R.R. Co. v. Schuyler, 34 N.Y. 30 (1865). The measure of such damages, however, has been
open to question, some courts basing them upon the value of stock at the time registration is refused; some upon
the value at the time of trial; and some upon the highest value between the time of refusal and the time of trial.
Allen v. South Boston Railroad, 150 Mass. 200, 22 N.E. 917, 5 L.R.A. 716, 15 Am.St.Rep. 185 (1889); Commercial
Bank v. Kortright, 22 Wend. (N.Y.) 348 (1839). The purchase price of the security to the last purchaser who gave
value for it is here adopted as being the fairest means of reducing the possibility of speculation by the purchaser.
Interest may be recovered as the best available measure of compensation for delay.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-301
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 3. TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATED AND UNCERTIFICATED SECURITIES
§ 8-301. DELIVERY
(a) Delivery of a certificated security to a purchaser occurs when:
(1) the purchaser acquires possession of the security certificate;
(2) another person, other than a securities intermediary, either acquires possession of the security
certificate on behalf of the purchaser or, having previously acquired possession of the certificate,
acknowledges that it holds for the purchaser; or
(3) a securities intermediary acting on behalf of the purchaser acquires possession of the security
certificate, only if the certificate is in registered form and is (i) registered in the name of the purchaser,
(ii) payable to the order of the purchaser, or (iii) specially indorsed to the purchaser by an effective
indorsement and has not been indorsed to the securities intermediary or in blank.
(b) Delivery of an uncertificated security to a purchaser occurs when:
(1) the issuer registers the purchaser as the registered owner, upon original issue or registration of
transfer; or
(2) another person, other than a securities intermediary, either becomes the registered owner of the
uncertificated security on behalf of the purchaser or, having previously become the registered owner,
acknowledges that it holds for the purchaser.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section specifies the requirements for "delivery" of securities. Delivery is used in Article 8 to describe the
formal steps necessary for a purchaser to acquire a direct interest in a security under this Article. The concept of
delivery refers to the implementation of a transaction, not the legal categorization of the transaction which is
consummated by delivery. Issuance and transfer are different kinds of transaction, though both may be
implemented by delivery. Sale and pledge are different kinds of transfers, but both may be implemented by delivery.
2. Subsection (a) defines delivery with respect to certificated securities. Paragraph (1) deals with simple cases
where purchasers themselves acquire physical possession of certificates. Paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (a)
specify the circumstances in which delivery to a purchaser can occur although the certificate is in the possession of
a person other than the purchaser. Paragraph (2) contains the general rule that a purchaser can take delivery
through another person, so long as the other person is actually acting on behalf of the purchaser or acknowledges
that it is holding on behalf of the purchaser. Paragraph (2) does not apply to acquisition of possession by a
securities intermediary, because a person who holds securities through a securities account acquires a security
entitlement, rather than having a direct interest. See Section 8-501. Subsection (a)(3) specifies the limited
circumstances in which delivery of security certificates to a securities intermediary is treated as a delivery to the
customer. Note that delivery is a method of perfecting a security interest in a certificated security. See Section 9-
313(a), (e).
§ 8-301. DELIVERY
Page 2 of 2
3. Subsection (b) defines delivery with respect to uncertificated securities. Use of the term "delivery" with respect
to uncertificated securities, does, at least on first hearing, seem a bit solecistic. The word "delivery" is, however,
routinely used in the securities business in a broader sense than manual tradition. For example, settlement by
entries on the books of a clearing corporation is commonly called "delivery," as in the expression "delivery versus
payment." The diction of this section has the advantage of using the same term for uncertificated securities as for
certificated securities, for which delivery is conventional usage. Paragraph (1) of subsection (b) provides that
delivery occurs when the purchaser becomes the registered owner of an uncertificated security, either upon original
issue or registration of transfer. Paragraph (2) provides for delivery of an uncertificated security through a third
person, in a fashion analogous to subsection (a)(2).
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Effective"
Section 8-107
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Registered form"
Section 8-102(a)(13)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Special indorsement"
Section 8-304(a)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-302
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 3. TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATED AND UNCERTIFICATED SECURITIES
§ 8-302. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c), a purchaser of a certificated or uncertificated
security acquires all rights in the security that the transferor had or had power to transfer.
(b) A purchaser of a limited interest acquires rights only to the extent of the interest purchased.
(c) A purchaser of a certificated security who as a previous holder had notice of an adverse claim does not
improve its position by taking from a protected purchaser.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) provides that a purchaser of a certificated or uncertificated security acquires all rights that the
transferor had or had power to transfer. This statement of the familiar "shelter" principle is qualified by the
exceptions that a purchaser of a limited interest acquires only that interest, subsection (b), and that a person who
does not qualify as a protected purchaser cannot improve its position by taking from a subsequent protected
purchaser, subsection (c).
2. Although this section provides that a purchaser acquires a property interest in a certificated or uncertificated
security, it does not state that a person can acquire an interest in a security only by purchase. Article 8 also is not a
comprehensive codification of all of the law governing the creation or transfer of interests in securities by pur*. For
example, the grant of a security interest is a transfer of a property interest, but the formal steps necessary to
effectuate such a transfer are governed by Article 9, not by Article 8. Under the Article 9 rules, a security interest in
a certificated or uncertificated security can be created by execution of a security agreement under Section 9-203
and can be perfected by filing. A transfer of an Article 9 security interest can be implemented by an Article 8
delivery, but need not be. *Amendments in italics approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform
Commercial Code January 15, 2000.
Similarly, Article 8 does not determine whether a property interest in certificated or uncertificated security is
acquired under other law, such as the law of gifts, trusts, or equitable remedies. Nor does Article 8 deal with
transfers by operation of law. For example, transfers from decedent to administrator, from ward to guardian, and
from bankrupt to trustee in bankruptcy are governed by other law as to both the time they occur and the substance
of the transfer. The Article 8 rules do, however, determine whether the issuer is obligated to recognize the rights
that a third party, such as a transferee, may acquire under other law. See Sections 8-207, 8-401, and 8-404.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Notice of adverse claim"
Section 8-105
"Protected purchaser"
§ 8-302. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER
Page 2 of 2
Section 8-303
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
"Delivery"
Section 8-301
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-303
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 3. TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATED AND UNCERTIFICATED SECURITIES
§ 8-303. PROTECTED PURCHASER
(a) "Protected purchaser" means a purchaser of a certificated or uncertificated security, or of an interest
therein, who:
(1) gives value;
(2) does not have notice of any adverse claim to the security; and
(3) obtains control of the certificated or uncertificated security.
(b) In addition to acquiring the rights of a purchaser, a protected purchaser also acquires its interest in the
security free of any adverse claim.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) lists the requirements that a purchaser must meet to qualify as a "protected purchaser."
Subsection (b) provides that a protected purchaser takes its interest free from adverse claims. "Purchaser" is
defined broadly in Section 1-201. A secured party as well as an outright buyer can qualify as a protected purchaser.
Also, "purchase" includes taking by issue, so a person to whom a security is originally issued can qualify as a
protected purchaser.
2. To qualify as a protected purchaser, a purchaser must give value, take without notice of any adverse claim, and
obtain control. Value is used in the broad sense defined in Section 1-201(44). See also Section 8-116 (securities
intermediary as purchaser for value). Adverse claim is defined in Section 8-102(a)(1). Section 8-105 specifies
whether a purchaser has notice of an adverse claim. Control is defined in Section 8-106. To qualify as a protected
purchaser there must be a time at which all of the requirements are satisfied. Thus if a purchaser obtains notice of
an adverse claim before giving value or satisfying the requirements for control, the purchaser cannot be a protected
purchaser. See also Section 8-304(d).
The requirement that a protected purchaser obtain control expresses the point that to qualify for the adverse claim
cut-off rule a purchaser must take through a transaction that is implemented by the appropriate mechanism. By
contrast, the rules in Part 2 provide that any purchaser for value of a security without notice of a defense may take
free of the issuer's defense based on that defense. See Section 8-202.
3. The requirements for control differ depending on the form of the security. For securities represented by bearer
certificates, a purchaser obtains control by delivery. See Sections 8-106(a) and 8-301(a). For securities represented
by certificates in registered form, the requirements for control are: (1) delivery as defined in Section 8-301(b), plus
(2) either an effective indorsement or registration of transfer by the issuer. See Section 8-106(b). Thus, a person
who takes through a forged indorsement does not qualify as a protected purchaser by virtue of the delivery alone. If,
however, the purchaser presents the certificate to the issuer for registration of transfer, and the issuer registers
transfer over the forged indorsement, the purchaser can qualify as a protected purchaser of the new certificate. If
the issuer registers transfer on a forged indorsement, the true owner will be able to recover from the issuer for
wrongful registration, see Section 8-404, unless the owner's delay in notifying the issuer of a loss or theft of the
certificate results in preclusion under Section 8-406.
§ 8-303. PROTECTED PURCHASER
Page 2 of 2
For uncertificated securities, a purchaser can obtain control either by delivery, see Sections 8-106(c)(1) and 8-
301(b), or by obtaining an agreement pursuant to which the issuer agrees to act on instructions from the purchaser
without further consent from the registered owner, see Section 8-106(c)(2). The control agreement device of
Section 8-106(c)(2) takes the place of the "registered pledge" concept of the 1978 version of Article 8. A secured
lender who obtains a control agreement under Section 8-106(c)(2) can qualify as a protected purchaser of an
uncertificated security.
4. This section states directly the rules determining whether one takes free from adverse claims without using the
phrase "good faith." Whether a person who takes under suspicious circumstances is disqualified is determined by
the rules of Section 8-105 on notice of adverse claims. The term "protected purchaser," which replaces the term
"bona fide purchaser" used in the prior version of Article 8, is derived from the term "protected holder" used in the
Convention on International Bills and Notes prepared by the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law ("UNCITRAL").
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Adverse claim"
Section 8-102(a)(1)
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Control"
Section 8-106
"Notice of adverse claim"
Section 8-105
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
"Value"
Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-304
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 3. TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATED AND UNCERTIFICATED SECURITIES
§ 8-304. INDORSEMENT
(a) An indorsement may be in blank or special. An indorsement in blank includes an indorsement to bearer.
A special indorsement specifies to whom a security is to be transferred or who has power to transfer it. A
holder may convert a blank indorsement to a special indorsement.
(b) An indorsement purporting to be only of part of a security certificate representing units intended by the
issuer to be separately transferable is effective to the extent of the indorsement.
(c) An indorsement, whether special or in blank, does not constitute a transfer until delivery of the
certificate on which it appears or, if the indorsement is on a separate document, until delivery of both the
document and the certificate.
(d) If a security certificate in registered form has been delivered to a purchaser without a necessary
indorsement, the purchaser may become a protected purchaser only when the indorsement is supplied.
However, against a transferor, a transfer is complete upon delivery and the purchaser has a specifically
enforceable right to have any necessary indorsement supplied.
(e) An indorsement of a security certificate in bearer form may give notice of an adverse claim to the
certificate, but it does not otherwise affect a right to registration that the holder possesses.
(f) Unless otherwise agreed, a person making an indorsement assumes only the obligations provided in
Section 8-108 and not an obligation that the security will be honored by the issuer.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. By virtue of the definition of indorsement in Section 8-102 and the rules of this section, the simplified method of
indorsing certificated securities previously set forth in the Uniform Stock Transfer Act is continued. Although more
than one special indorsement on a given security certificate is possible, the desire for dividends or interest, as the
case may be, should operate to bring the certificate home for registration of transfer within a reasonable period of
time. The usual form of assignment which appears on the back of a stock certificate or in a separate "power" may
be filled up either in the form of an assignment, a power of attorney to transfer, or both. If it is not filled up at all but
merely signed, the indorsement is in blank. If filled up either as an assignment or as a power of attorney to transfer,
the indorsement is special.
2. Subsection (b) recognizes the validity of a "partial" indorsement, e.g., as to fifty shares of the one hundred
represented by a single certificate. The rights of a transferee under a partial indorsement to the status of a
protected purchaser are left to the case law.
3. Subsection (c) deals with the effect of an indorsement without delivery. There must be a voluntary parting with
control in order to effect a valid transfer of a certificated security as between the parties. Levey v. Nason, 279
Mass. 268, 181 N.E. 193 (1932), and National Surety Co. v. Indemnity Insurance Co. of North America, 237
App.Div. 485, 261 N.Y.S. 605 (1933). The provision in Section 10 of the Uniform Stock Transfer Act that an
attempted transfer without delivery amounts to a promise to transfer is omitted. Even under that Act the effect of
§ 8-304. INDORSEMENT
Page 2 of 2
such a promise was left to the applicable law of contracts, and this Article by making no reference to such situations
intends to achieve a similar result. With respect to delivery there is no counterpart to subsection (d) on right to
compel indorsement, such as is envisaged in Johnson v. Johnson, 300 Mass. 24, 13 N.E.2d 788 (1938), where the
transferee under a written assignment was given the right to compel a transfer of the certificate.
4. Subsection (d) deals with the effect of delivery without indorsement. As between the parties the transfer is
made complete upon delivery, but the transferee cannot become a protected purchaser until indorsement is made.
The indorsement does not operate retroactively, and notice may intervene between delivery and indorsement so as
to prevent the transferee from becoming a protected purchaser. Although a purchaser taking without a necessary
indorsement may be subject to claims of ownership, any issuer's defense of which the purchaser had no notice at
the time of delivery will be cut off, since the provisions of this Article protect all purchasers for value without notice
(Section 8-202).
The transferee's right to compel an indorsement where a security certificate has been delivered with intent to
transfer is recognized in the case law. See Coats v. Guaranty Bank & Trust Co., 170 La. 871, 129 So. 513 (1930). A
proper indorsement is one of the requisites of transfer which a purchaser of a certificated security has a right to
obtain (Section 8-307). A purchaser may not only compel an indorsement under that section but may also recover
for any reasonable expense incurred by the transferor's failure to respond to the demand for an indorsement.
5. Subsection (e) deals with the significance of an indorsement on a security certificate in bearer form. The
concept of indorsement applies only to registered securities. A purported indorsement of bearer paper is normally of
no effect. An indorsement "for collection," "for surrender" or the like, charges a purchaser with notice of adverse
claims (Section 8-105(d)) but does not operate beyond this to interfere with any right the holder may otherwise
possess to have the security registered.
6. Subsection (f) makes clear that the indorser of a security certificate does not warrant that the issuer will honor
the underlying obligation. In view of the nature of investment securities and the circumstances under which they are
normally transferred, a transferor cannot be held to warrant as to the issuer's actions. As a transferor the indorser,
of course, remains liable for breach of the warranties set forth in this Article (Section 8-108).
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Bearer form"
Section 8-102(a)(2)
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Registered form"
Section 8-102(a)(13)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-305
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 3. TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATED AND UNCERTIFICATED SECURITIES
§ 8-305. INSTRUCTION
(a) If an instruction has been originated by an appropriate person but is incomplete in any other respect,
any person may complete it as authorized and the issuer may rely on it as completed, even though it has
been completed incorrectly.
(b) Unless otherwise agreed, a person initiating an instruction assumes only the obligations imposed by
Section 8-108 and not an obligation that the security will be honored by the issuer.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The term instruction is defined in Section 8-102(a)(12) as a notification communicated to the issuer of an
uncertificated security directing that transfer be registered. Section 8-107 specifies who may initiate an effective
instruction.
Functionally, presentation of an instruction is quite similar to the presentation of an indorsed certificate for
reregistration. Note that instruction is defined in terms of "communicate," see Section 8-102(a)(6). Thus, the
instruction may be in the form of a writing signed by the registered owner or in any other form agreed upon by the
issuer and the registered owner. Allowing nonwritten forms of instructions will permit the development and
employment of means of transmitting instructions electronically.
When a person who originates an instruction leaves a blank and the blank later is completed, subsection (a) gives
the issuer the same rights it would have had against the originating person had that person completed the blank.
This is true regardless of whether the person completing the instruction had authority to complete it. Compare
Section 8-206 and its Comment, dealing with blanks left upon issue.
2. Subsection (b) makes clear that the originator of an instruction, like the indorser of a security certificate, does
not warrant that the issuer will honor the underlying obligation, but does make warranties as a transferor under
Section 8-108.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Appropriate person"
Section 8-107
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 8-305. INSTRUCTION
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-306
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 3. TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATED AND UNCERTIFICATED SECURITIES
§ 8-306. EFFECT OF GUARANTEEING SIGNATURE, INDORSEMENT, OR
INSTRUCTION
(a) A person who guarantees a signature of an indorser of a security certificate warrants that at the time of
signing:
(1) the signature was genuine;
(2) the signer was an appropriate person to indorse, or if the signature is by an agent, the agent had
actual authority to act on behalf of the appropriate person; and
(3) the signer had legal capacity to sign.
(b) A person who guarantees a signature of the originator of an instruction warrants that at the time of
signing:
(1) the signature was genuine;
(2) the signer was an appropriate person to originate the instruction, or if the signature is by an agent,
the agent had actual authority to act on behalf of the appropriate person, if the person specified in the
instruction as the registered owner was, in fact, the registered owner, as to which fact the signature
guarantor does not make a warranty; and
(3) the signer had legal capacity to sign.
(c) A person who specially guarantees the signature of an originator of an instruction makes the warranties
of a signature guarantor under subsection (b) and also warrants that at the time the instruction is presented
to the issuer:
(1) the person specified in the instruction as the registered owner of the uncertificated security will be
the registered owner; and
(2) the transfer of the uncertificated security requested in the instruction will be registered by the issuer
free from all liens, security interests, restrictions, and claims other than those specified in the
instruction.
(d) A guarantor under subsections (a) and (b) or a special guarantor under subsection (c) does not
otherwise warrant the rightfulness of the transfer.
(e) A person who guarantees an indorsement of a security certificate makes the warranties of a signature
guarantor under subsection (a) and also warrants the rightfulness of the transfer in all respects.
(f) A person who guarantees an instruction requesting the transfer of an uncertificated security makes the
warranties of a special signature guarantor under subsection (c) and also warrants the rightfulness of the
transfer in all respects.
(g) An issuer may not require a special guaranty of signature, a guaranty of indorsement, or a guaranty of
instruction as a condition to registration of transfer.
(h) The warranties under this section are made to a person taking or dealing with the security in reliance
on the guaranty, and the guarantor is liable to the person for loss resulting from their breach. An indorser or
§ 8-306. EFFECT OF GUARANTEEING SIGNATURE, INDORSEMENT, OR INSTRUCTION
Page 2 of 3
originator of an instruction whose signature, indorsement, or instruction has been guaranteed is liable to a
guarantor for any loss suffered by the guarantor as a result of breach of the warranties of the guarantor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) provides that a guarantor of the signature of the indorser of a security certificate warrants that
the signature is genuine, that the signer is an appropriate person or has actual authority to indorse on behalf of the
appropriate person, and that the signer has legal capacity. Subsection (b) provides similar, though not identical,
warranties for the guarantor of a signature of the originator of an instruction for transfer of an uncertificated security.
Appropriate person is defined in Section 8-107(a) to include a successor or person who has power under other
law to act for a person who is deceased or lacks capacity. Thus if a certificate registered in the name of Mary Roe is
indorsed by Jane Doe as executor of Mary Roe, a guarantor of the signature of Jane Doe warrants that she has
power to act as executor.
Although the definition of appropriate person in Section 8-107(a) does not itself include an agent, an indorsement
by an agent is effective under Section 8-107(b) if the agent has authority to act for the appropriate person.
Accordingly, this section provides an explicit warranty of authority for agents.
2. The rationale of the principle that a signature guarantor warrants the authority of the signer, rather than simply
the genuineness of the signature, was explained in the leading case of Jennie Clarkson Home for Children v.
Missouri, K. & T. R. Co., 182 N.Y. 47, 74 N.E. 571, 70 A.L.R. 787 (1905), which dealt with a guaranty of the
signature of a person indorsing on behalf of a corporation. "If stock is held by an individual who is executing a
power of attorney for its transfer, the member of the exchange who signs as a witness thereto guaranties not only
the genuineness of the signature affixed to the power of attorney, but that the person signing is the individual in
whose name the stock stands. With reference to stock standing in the name of a corporation, which can only sign a
power of attorney through its authorized officers or agents, a different situation is presented. If the witnessing of the
signature of the corporation is only that of the signature of a person who signs for the corporation, then the guaranty
is of no value, and there is nothing to protect purchasers or the companies who are called upon to issue new stock
in the place of that transferred from the frauds of persons who have signed the names of corporations without
authority. If such is the only effect of the guaranty, purchasers and transfer agents must first go to the corporation in
whose name the stock stands and ascertain whether the individual who signed the power of attorney had authority
to so do. This will require time, and in many cases will necessitate the postponement of the completion of the
purchase by the payment of the money until the facts can be ascertained. The broker who is acting for the owner
has an opportunity to become acquainted with his customer, and may readily before sale ascertain, in case of a
corporation, the name of the officer who is authorized to execute the power of attorney. It was therefore, we think,
the purpose of the rule to cast upon the broker who witnesses the signature the duty of ascertaining whether the
person signing the name of the corporation had authority to so do, and making the witness a guarantor that it is the
signature of the corporation in whose name the stock stands."
3. Subsection (b) sets forth the warranties that can reasonably be expected from the guarantor of the signature of
the originator of an instruction, who, though familiar with the signer, does not have any evidence that the purported
owner is in fact the owner of the subject uncertificated security. This is in contrast to the position of the person
guaranteeing a signature on a certificate who can see a certificate in the signer's possession in the name of or
indorsed to the signer or in blank. Thus, the warranty in paragraph (2) of subsection (b) is expressly conditioned on
the actual registration's conforming to that represented by the originator. If the signer purports to be the owner, the
guarantor under paragraph (2), warrants only the identity of the signer. If, however, the signer is acting in a
representative capacity, the guarantor warrants both the signer's identity and authority to act for the purported
owner. The issuer needs no warranty as to the facts of registration because those facts can be ascertained from the
issuer's own records.
§ 8-306. EFFECT OF GUARANTEEING SIGNATURE, INDORSEMENT, OR INSTRUCTION
Page 3 of 3
4. Subsection (c) sets forth a "special guaranty of signature" under which the guarantor additionally warrants both
registered ownership and freedom from undisclosed defects of record. The guarantor of the signature of an indorser
of a security certificate effectively makes these warranties to a purchaser for value on the evidence of a clean
certificate issued in the name of the indorser, indorsed to the indorser or indorsed in blank. By specially
guaranteeing under subsection (c), the guarantor warrants that the instruction will, when presented to the issuer,
result in the requested registration free from defects not specified.
5. Subsection (d) makes clear that the warranties of a signature guarantor are limited to those specified in this
section and do not include a general warranty of rightfulness. On the other hand subsections (e) and (f) provide that
a person guaranteeing an indorsement or an instruction does warrant that the transfer is rightful in all respects.
6. Subsection (g) makes clear what can be inferred from the combination of Sections 8-401 and 8-402, that the
issuer may not require as a condition to transfer a guaranty of the indorsement or instruction nor may it require a
special signature guaranty.
7. Subsection (h) specifies to whom the warranties in this section run, and also provides that a person who gives
a guaranty under this section has an action against the indorser or originator for any loss suffered by the guarantor.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Appropriate person"
Section 8-107
"Genuine"
Section 1-201(18)
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-307
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 3. TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATED AND UNCERTIFICATED SECURITIES
§ 8-307. PURCHASER'S RIGHT TO REQUISITES FOR REGISTRATION OF
TRANSFER
Unless otherwise agreed, the transferor of a security on due demand shall supply the purchaser with proof of
authority to transfer or with any other requisite necessary to obtain registration of the transfer of the security, but if
the transfer is not for value, a transferor need not comply unless the purchaser pays the necessary expenses. If the
transferor fails within a reasonable time to comply with the demand, the purchaser may reject or rescind the
transfer.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Because registration of the transfer of a security is a matter of vital importance, a purchaser is here provided
with the means of obtaining such formal requirements for registration as signature guaranties, proof of authority,
transfer tax stamps and the like. The transferor is the one in a position to supply most conveniently whatever
documentation may be requisite for registration of transfer, and the duty to do so upon demand within a reasonable
time is here stated affirmatively. If an essential item is peculiarly within the province of the transferor so that the
transferor is the only one who can obtain it, the purchaser may specifically enforce the right to obtain it. Compare
Section 8-304(d). If a transfer is not for value the transferor need not pay expenses.
2. If the transferor's duty is not performed the transferee may reject or rescind the contract to transfer. The
transferee is not bound to do so. An action for damages for breach of contract may be preferred.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Value"
Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-401
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 4. REGISTRATION
§ 8-401. DUTY OF ISSUER TO REGISTER TRANSFER
(a) If a certificated security in registered form is presented to an issuer with a request to register transfer or
an instruction is presented to an issuer with a request to register transfer of an uncertificated security, the
issuer shall register the transfer as requested if:
(1) under the terms of the security the person seeking registration of transfer is eligible to have the
security registered in its name;
(2) the indorsement or instruction is made by the appropriate person or by an agent who has actual
authority to act on behalf of the appropriate person;
(3) reasonable assurance is given that the indorsement or instruction is genuine and authorized (
Section 8-402);
(4) any applicable law relating to the collection of taxes has been complied with;
(5) the transfer does not violate any restriction on transfer imposed by the issuer in accordance with
Section 8-204;
(6) a demand that the issuer not register transfer has not become effective under Section 8-403, or the
issuer has complied with Section 8-403(b) but no legal process or indemnity bond is obtained as
provided in Section 8-403(d); and
(7) the transfer is in fact rightful or is to a protected purchaser.
(b) If an issuer is under a duty to register a transfer of a security, the issuer is liable to a person presenting
a certificated security or an instruction for registration or to the person's principal for loss resulting from
unreasonable delay in registration or failure or refusal to register the transfer.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section states the duty of the issuer to register transfers. A duty exists only if certain preconditions exist. If
any of the preconditions do not exist, there is no duty to register transfer. If an indorsement on a security certificate
is a forgery, there is no duty. If an instruction to transfer an uncertificated security is not originated by an appropriate
person, there is no duty. If there has not been compliance with applicable tax laws, there is no duty. If a security
certificate is properly indorsed but nevertheless the transfer is in fact wrongful, there is no duty unless the transfer is
to a protected purchaser (and the other preconditions exist).
This section does not constitute a mandate that the issuer must establish that all preconditions are met before the
issuer registers a transfer. The issuer may waive the reasonable assurances specified in paragraph (a)(3). If it has
confidence in the responsibility of the persons requesting transfer, it may ignore questions of compliance with tax
laws. Although an issuer has no duty if the transfer is wrongful, the issuer has no duty to inquire into adverse
claims, see Section 8-404.
§ 8-401. DUTY OF ISSUER TO REGISTER TRANSFER
Page 2 of 2
2. By subsection (b) the person entitled to registration may not only compel it but may hold the issuer liable in
damages for unreasonable delay.
3. Section 8-201(c) provides that with respect to registration of transfer, "issuer" means the person on whose
behalf transfer books are maintained. Transfer agents, registrars or the like within the scope of their respective
functions have rights and duties under this Part similar to those of the issuer. See Section 8-407.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Appropriate person"
Section 8-107
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Genuine"
Section 1-201(18)
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Protected purchaser"
Section 8-303
"Registered form"
Section 8-102(a)(13)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-402
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 4. REGISTRATION
§ 8-402. ASSURANCE THAT INDORSEMENT OR INSTRUCTION IS
EFFECTIVE
(a) An issuer may require the following assurance that each necessary indorsement or each instruction is
genuine and authorized:
(1) in all cases, a guaranty of the signature of the person making an indorsement or originating an
instruction including, in the case of an instruction, reasonable assurance of identity;
(2) if the indorsement is made or the instruction is originated by an agent, appropriate assurance of
actual authority to sign;
(3) if the indorsement is made or the instruction is originated by a fiduciary pursuant to Section 8-
107(a)(4) or (a)(5), appropriate evidence of appointment or incumbency;
(4) if there is more than one fiduciary, reasonable assurance that all who are required to sign have
done so; and
(5) if the indorsement is made or the instruction is originated by a person not covered by another
provision of this subsection, assurance appropriate to the case corresponding as nearly as may be to
the provisions of this subsection.
(b) An issuer may elect to require reasonable assurance beyond that specified in this section.
(c) In this section:
(1) "Guaranty of the signature" means a guaranty signed by or on behalf of a person reasonably
believed by the issuer to be responsible. An issuer may adopt standards with respect to responsibility if
they are not manifestly unreasonable.
(2) "Appropriate evidence of appointment or incumbency" means:
(i) in the case of a fiduciary appointed or qualified by a court, a certificate issued by or under the
direction or supervision of the court or an officer thereof and dated within 60 days before the date of
presentation for transfer; or
(ii) in any other case, a copy of a document showing the appointment or a certificate issued by or
on behalf of a person reasonably believed by an issuer to be responsible or, in the absence of that
document or certificate, other evidence the issuer reasonably considers appropriate.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. An issuer is absolutely liable for wrongful registration of transfer if the indorsement or instruction is ineffective.
See Section 8-404. Accordingly, an issuer is entitled to require such assurance as is reasonable under the
circumstances that all necessary indorsements are effective, and thus to minimize its risk. This section establishes
the requirements the issuer may make in terms of documentation which, except in the rarest of instances, should be
§ 8-402. ASSURANCE THAT INDORSEMENT OR INSTRUCTION IS EFFECTIVE
Page 2 of 2
easily furnished. Subsection (b) provides that an issuer may require additional assurances if that requirement is
reasonable under the circumstances, but if the issuer demands more than reasonable assurance that the instruction
or the necessary indorsements are genuine and authorized, the presenter may refuse the demand and sue for
improper refusal to register. Section 8-401(b).
2. Under subsection (a)(1), the issuer may require in all cases a guaranty of signature. See Section 8-306. When
an instruction is presented the issuer always may require reasonable assurance as to the identity of the originator.
Subsection (c) allows the issuer to require that the person making these guaranties be one reasonably believed to
be responsible, and the issuer may adopt standards of responsibility which are not manifestly unreasonable.
Regulations under the federal securities laws, however, place limits on the requirements transfer agents may
impose concerning the responsibility of eligible signature guarantors. See 17 CFR 240.17Ad-15.
3. This section, by paragraphs (2) through (5) of subsection (a), permits the issuer to seek confirmation that the
indorsement or instruction is genuine and authorized. The permitted methods act as a double check on matters
which are within the warranties of the signature guarantor. See Section 8-306. Thus, an agent may be required to
submit a power of attorney, a corporation to submit a certified resolution evidencing the authority of its signing
officer to sign, an executor or administrator to submit the usual "short-form certificate," etc. But failure of a fiduciary
to obtain court approval of the transfer or to comply with other requirements does not make the fiduciary's signature
ineffective. Section 8-107(c). Hence court orders and other controlling instruments are omitted from subsection (a).
Subsection (a)(3) authorizes the issuer to require "appropriate evidence" of appointment or incumbency, and
subsection (c) indicates what evidence will be "appropriate". In the case of a fiduciary appointed or qualified by a
court that evidence will be a court certificate dated within sixty days before the date of presentation, subsection
(c)(2)(i). Where the fiduciary is not appointed or qualified by a court, as in the case of a successor trustee,
subsection (c)(2)(ii) applies. In that case, the issuer may require a copy of a trust instrument or other document
showing the appointment, or it may require the certificate of a responsible person. In the absence of such a
document or certificate, it may require other appropriate evidence. If the security is registered in the name of the
fiduciary as such, the person's signature is effective even though the person is no longer serving in that capacity,
see Section 8-107(d), hence no evidence of incumbency is needed.
4. Circumstances may indicate that a necessary signature was unauthorized or was not that of an appropriate
person. Such circumstances would be ignored at risk of absolute liability. To minimize that risk the issuer may
properly exercise the option given by subsection (b) to require assurance beyond that specified in subsection (a).
On the other hand, the facts at hand may reflect only on the rightfulness of the transfer. Such facts do not create a
duty of inquiry, because the issuer is not liable to an adverse claimant unless the claimant obtains legal process.
See Section 8-404.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Appropriate person"
Section 8-107
"Genuine"
Section 1-201(18)
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-403
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 4. REGISTRATION
§ 8-403. DEMAND THAT ISSUER NOT REGISTER TRANSFER
(a) A person who is an appropriate person to make an indorsement or originate an instruction may demand
that the issuer not register transfer of a security by communicating to the issuer a notification that identifies
the registered owner and the issue of which the security is a part and provides an address for
communications directed to the person making the demand. The demand is effective only if it is received by
the issuer at a time and in a manner affording the issuer reasonable opportunity to act on it.
(b) If a certificated security in registered form is presented to an issuer with a request to register transfer or
an instruction is presented to an issuer with a request to register transfer of an uncertificated security after a
demand that the issuer not register transfer has become effective, the issuer shall promptly communicate to
(i) the person who initiated the demand at the address provided in the demand and (ii) the person who
presented the security for registration of transfer or initiated the instruction requesting registration of
transfer a notification stating that:
(1) the certificated security has been presented for registration of transfer or the instruction for
registration of transfer of the uncertificated security has been received;
(2) a demand that the issuer not register transfer had previously been received; and
(3) the issuer will withhold registration of transfer for a period of time stated in the notification in order
to provide the person who initiated the demand an opportunity to obtain legal process or an indemnity
bond.
(c) The period described in subsection (b)(3) may not exceed 30 days after the date of communication of
the notification. A shorter period may be specified by the issuer if it is not manifestly unreasonable.
(d) An issuer is not liable to a person who initiated a demand that the issuer not register transfer for any
loss the person suffers as a result of registration of a transfer pursuant to an effective indorsement or
instruction if the person who initiated the demand does not, within the time stated in the issuer's
communication, either:
(1) obtain an appropriate restraining order, injunction, or other process from a court of competent
jurisdiction enjoining the issuer from registering the transfer; or
(2) file with the issuer an indemnity bond, sufficient in the issuer's judgment to protect the issuer and
any transfer agent, registrar, or other agent of the issuer involved from any loss it or they may suffer by
refusing to register the transfer.
(e) This section does not relieve an issuer from liability for registering transfer pursuant to an indorsement
or instruction that was not effective.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
§ 8-403. DEMAND THAT ISSUER NOT REGISTER TRANSFER
Page 2 of 3
1. The general rule under this Article is that if there has been an effective indorsement or instruction, a person
who contends that registration of the transfer would be wrongful should not be able to interfere with the registration
process merely by sending notice of the assertion to the issuer. Rather, the claimant must obtain legal process. See
Section 8-404. Section 8-403 is an exception to this general rule. It permits the registered owner -- but not third
parties -- to demand that the issuer not register a transfer.
2. This section is intended to alleviate the problems faced by registered owners of certificated securities who lose
or misplace their certificates. A registered owner who realizes that a certificate may have been lost or stolen should
promptly report that fact to the issuer, lest the owner be precluded from asserting a claim for wrongful registration.
See Section 8-406. The usual practice of issuers and transfer agents is that when a certificate is reported as lost,
the owner is notified that a replacement can be obtained if the owner provides an indemnity bond. See Section 8-
405. If the registered owner does not plan to transfer the securities, the owner might choose not to obtain a
replacement, particularly if the owner suspects that the certificate has merely been misplaced.
Under this section, the owner's notification that the certificate has been lost would constitute a demand that the
issuer not register transfer. No indemnity bond or legal process is necessary. If the original certificate is presented
for registration of transfer, the issuer is required to notify the registered owner of that fact, and defer registration of
transfer for a stated period. In order to prevent undue delay in the process of registration, the stated period may not
exceed thirty days. This gives the registered owner an opportunity to either obtain legal process or post an
indemnity bond and thereby prevent the issuer from registering transfer.
3. Subsection (e) makes clear that this section does not relieve an issuer from liability for registering a transfer
pursuant to an ineffective indorsement. An issuer's liability for wrongful registration in such cases does not depend
on the presence or absence of notice that the indorsement was ineffective. Registered owners who are confident
that they neither indorsed the certificates, nor did anything that would preclude them from denying the effectiveness
of another's indorsement, see Sections 8-107(b) and 8-406, might prefer to pursue their rights against the issuer for
wrongful registration rather than take advantage of the opportunity to post a bond or seek a restraining order when
notified by the issuer under this section that their lost certificates have been presented for registration in apparently
good order.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Appropriate person"
Section 8-107
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Communicate"
Section 8-102(a)(6)
"Effective"
Section 8-107
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Registered form"
Section 8-102(a)(13)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
§ 8-403. DEMAND THAT ISSUER NOT REGISTER TRANSFER
Page 3 of 3
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-404
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 4. REGISTRATION
§ 8-404. WRONGFUL REGISTRATION
(a) Except as otherwise provided in Section 8-406, an issuer is liable for wrongful registration of transfer if
the issuer has registered a transfer of a security to a person not entitled to it, and the transfer was
registered:
(1) pursuant to an ineffective indorsement or instruction;
(2) after a demand that the issuer not register transfer became effective under Section 8-403(a) and
the issuer did not comply with Section 8-403(b);
(3) after the issuer had been served with an injunction, restraining order, or other legal process
enjoining it from registering the transfer, issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, and the issuer had
a reasonable opportunity to act on the injunction, restraining order, or other legal process; or
(4) by an issuer acting in collusion with the wrongdoer.
(b) An issuer that is liable for wrongful registration of transfer under subsection (a) on demand shall
provide the person entitled to the security with a like certificated or uncertificated security, and any
payments or distributions that the person did not receive as a result of the wrongful registration. If an
overissue would result, the issuer's liability to provide the person with a like security is governed by Section
8-210.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a) or in a law relating to the collection of taxes, an issuer is
not liable to an owner or other person suffering loss as a result of the registration of a transfer of a security
if registration was made pursuant to an effective indorsement or instruction.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a)(1) provides that an issuer is liable if it registers transfer pursuant to an indorsement or
instruction that was not effective. For example, an issuer that registers transfer on a forged indorsement is liable to
the registered owner. The fact that the issuer had no reason to suspect that the indorsement was forged or that the
issuer obtained the ordinary assurances under Section 8-402 does not relieve the issuer from liability. The reason
that issuers obtain signature guaranties and other assurances is that they are liable for wrongful registration.
Subsection (b) specifies the remedy for wrongful registration. Pre-Code cases established the registered owner's
right to receive a new security where the issuer had wrongfully registered a transfer, but some cases also allowed
the registered owner to elect between an equitable action to compel issue of a new security and an action for
damages. Cf. Casper v. Kalt-Zimmers Mfg. Co., 159 Wis. 517, 149 N.W. 754 (1914). Article 8 does not allow such
election. The true owner of a certificated security is required to take a new security except where an overissue
would result and a similar security is not reasonably available for purchase. See Section 8-210. The true owner of
an uncertificated security is entitled and required to take restoration of the records to their proper state, with a
similar exception for overissue.
§ 8-404. WRONGFUL REGISTRATION
Page 2 of 2
2. Read together, subsections (c) and (a) have the effect of providing that an issuer has no duties to an adverse
claimant unless the claimant serves legal process on the issuer to enjoin registration. Issuers, or their transfer
agents, perform a record-keeping function for the direct holding system that is analogous to the functions performed
by clearing corporations and securities intermediaries in the indirect holding system. This section applies to the
record-keepers for the direct holding system the same standard that Section 8-115 applies to the record-keepers for
the indirect holding system. Thus, issuers are not liable to adverse claimants merely on the basis of notice. As in
the case of the analogous rules for the indirect holding system, the policy of this section is to protect the right of
investors to have their securities transfers processed without the disruption or delay that might result if the recordkeepers
risked liability to third parties. It would be undesirable to apply different standards to the direct and indirect
holding systems, since doing so might operate as a disincentive to the development of a book-entry direct holding
system.
3. This section changes prior law under which an issuer could be held liable, even though it registered transfer on
an effective indorsement or instruction, if the issuer had in some fashion been notified that the transfer might be
wrongful against a third party, and the issuer did not appropriately discharge its duty to inquire into the adverse
claim. See Section 8-403 (1978).
The rule of former Section 8-403 was anomalous inasmuch as Section 8-207 provides that the issuer is entitled to
"treat the registered owner as the person exclusively entitled to vote, receive notifications, and otherwise exercise
all the rights and powers of an owner." Under Section 8-207, the fact that a third person notifies the issuer of a
claim does not preclude the issuer from treating the registered owner as the person entitled to the security. See
Kerrigan v. American Orthodontics Corp., 960 F.2d 43 (7th Cir. 1992). The change made in the present version of
Section 8-404 ensures that the rights of registered owners and the duties of issuers with respect to registration of
transfer will be protected against third-party interference in the same fashion as other rights of registered
ownership.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Effective"
Section 8-107
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Instruction"
Section 8-102(a)(12)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-405
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 4. REGISTRATION
§ 8-405. REPLACEMENT OF LOST, DESTROYED, OR WRONGFULLY TAKEN
SECURITY CERTIFICATE
(a) If an owner of a certificated security, whether in registered or bearer form, claims that the certificate has
been lost, destroyed, or wrongfully taken, the issuer shall issue a new certificate if the owner:
(1) so requests before the issuer has notice that the certificate has been acquired by a protected
purchaser;
(2) files with the issuer a sufficient indemnity bond; and
(3) satisfies other reasonable requirements imposed by the issuer.
(b) If, after the issue of a new security certificate, a protected purchaser of the original certificate presents it
for registration of transfer, the issuer shall register the transfer unless an overissue would result. In that
case, the issuer's liability is governed by Section 8-210. In addition to any rights on the indemnity bond, an
issuer may recover the new certificate from a person to whom it was issued or any person taking under that
person, except a protected purchaser.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section enables the owner to obtain a replacement of a lost, destroyed or stolen certificate, provided that
reasonable requirements are satisfied and a sufficient indemnity bond supplied.
2. Where an "original" security certificate has reached the hands of a protected purchaser, the registered owner --
who was in the best position to prevent the loss, destruction or theft of the security certificate -- is now deprived of
the new security certificate issued as a replacement. This changes the pre-UCC law under which the original
certificate was ineffective after the issue of a replacement except insofar as it might represent an action for
damages in the hands of a purchaser for value without notice. Keller v. Eureka Brick Mach. Mfg. Co., 43 Mo.App.
84, 11 L.R.A. 472 (1890). Where both the original and the new certificate have reached protected purchasers the
issuer is required to honor both certificates unless an overissue would result and the security is not reasonably
available for purchase. See Section 8-210. In the latter case alone, the protected purchaser of the original certificate
is relegated to an action for damages. In either case, the issuer itself may recover on the indemnity bond.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Bearer form"
Section 8-102(a)(2)
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
§ 8-405. REPLACEMENT OF LOST, DESTROYED, OR WRONGFULLY TAKEN SECURITY CERTIFICATE
Page 2 of 2
"Notice" Section 1-201(25)
"Overissue"
Section 8-210
"Protected purchaser"
Section 8-303
"Registered form"
Section 8-102(a)(13)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-406
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 4. REGISTRATION
§ 8-406. OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY ISSUER OF LOST, DESTROYED, OR
WRONGFULLY TAKEN SECURITY CERTIFICATE
If a security certificate has been lost, apparently destroyed, or wrongfully taken, and the owner fails to notify the
issuer of that fact within a reasonable time after the owner has notice of it and the issuer registers a transfer of the
security before receiving notification, the owner may not assert against the issuer a claim for registering the transfer
under Section 8-404 or a claim to a new security certificate under Section 8-405.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
An owner who fails to notify the issuer within a reasonable time after the owner knows or has reason to know of
the loss or theft of a security certificate is estopped from asserting the ineffectiveness of a forged or unauthorized
indorsement and the wrongfulness of the registration of the transfer. If the lost certificate was indorsed by the
owner, then the registration of the transfer was not wrongful under Section 8-404, unless the owner made an
effective demand that the issuer not register transfer under Section 8-403.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Notify" Section 1-201(25)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-407
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 4. REGISTRATION
§ 8-407. AUTHENTICATING TRUSTEE, TRANSFER AGENT, AND REGISTRAR
A person acting as authenticating trustee, transfer agent, registrar, or other agent for an issuer in the registration of
a transfer of its securities, in the issue of new security certificates or uncertificated securities, or in the cancellation
of surrendered security certificates has the same obligation to the holder or owner of a certificated or uncertificated
security with regard to the particular functions performed as the issuer has in regard to those functions.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Transfer agents, registrars, and the like are here expressly held liable both to the issuer and to the owner for
wrongful refusal to register a transfer as well as for wrongful registration of a transfer in any case within the scope of
their respective functions where the issuer would itself be liable. Those cases which have regarded these parties
solely as agents of the issuer and have therefore refused to recognize their liability to the owner for mere nonfeasance,
i.e., refusal to register a transfer, are rejected. Hulse v. Consolidated Quicksilver Mining Corp., 65 Idaho
768, 154 P.2d 149 (1944); Nicholson v. Morgan, 119 Misc. 309, 196 N.Y.Supp. 147 (1922); Lewis v. Hargadine-
McKittrick Dry Goods Co., 305 Mo. 396, 274 S.W. 1041 (1924).
2. The practice frequently followed by authenticating trustees of issuing certificates of indebtedness rather than
authenticating duplicate certificates where securities have been lost or stolen became obsolete in view of the
provisions of Section 8-405, which makes express provision for the issue of substitute securities. It is not a breach
of trust or lack of due diligence for trustees to authenticate new securities. Cf. Switzerland General Ins. Co. v.
N.Y.C. & H.R.R. Co., 152 App.Div. 70, 136 N.Y.S. 726 (1912).
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Certificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(4)
"Issuer"
Section 8-201
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security certificate"
Section 8-102(a)(16)
"Uncertificated security"
Section 8-102(a)(18)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 8-407. AUTHENTICATING TRUSTEE, TRANSFER AGENT, AND REGISTRAR
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-501
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-501. SECURITIES ACCOUNT; ACQUISITION OF SECURITY
ENTITLEMENT FROM SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY
(a) "Securities account" means an account to which a financial asset is or may be credited in accordance
with an agreement under which the person maintaining the account undertakes to treat the person for
whom the account is maintained as entitled to exercise the rights that comprise the financial asset.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (d) and (e), a person acquires a security entitlement if a
securities intermediary:
(1) indicates by book entry that a financial asset has been credited to the person's securities account;
(2) receives a financial asset from the person or acquires a financial asset for the person and, in either
case, accepts it for credit to the person's securities account; or
(3) becomes obligated under other law, regulation, or rule to credit a financial asset to the person's
securities account.
(c) If a condition of subsection (b) has been met, a person has a security entitlement even though the
securities intermediary does not itself hold the financial asset.
(d) If a securities intermediary holds a financial asset for another person, and the financial asset is
registered in the name of, payable to the order of, or specially indorsed to the other person, and has not
been indorsed to the securities intermediary or in blank, the other person is treated as holding the financial
asset directly rather than as having a security entitlement with respect to the financial asset.
(e) Issuance of a security is not establishment of a security entitlement.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Part 5 rules apply to security entitlements, and Section 8-501(b) provides that a person has a security
entitlement when a financial asset has been credited to a "securities account." Thus, the term "securities account"
specifies the type of arrangements between institutions and their customers that are covered by Part 5. A securities
account is a consensual arrangement in which the intermediary undertakes to treat the customer as entitled to
exercise the rights that comprise the financial asset. The consensual aspect is covered by the requirement that the
account be established pursuant to agreement. The term agreement is used in the broad sense defined in Section
1-201(3). There is no requirement that a formal or written agreement be signed.
As the securities business is presently conducted, several significant relationships clearly fall within the definition
of a securities account, including the relationship between a clearing corporation and its participants, a broker and
customers who leave securities with the broker, and a bank acting as securities custodian and its custodial
customers. Given the enormous variety of arrangements concerning securities that exist today, and the certainty
that new arrangements will evolve in the future, it is not possible to specify all of the arrangements to which the term
does and does not apply.
§ 8-501. SECURITIES ACCOUNT; ACQUISITION OF SECURITY ENTITLEMENT FROM SECURITIES
INTERMEDIARY
Page 2 of 4
Whether an arrangement between a firm and another person concerning a security or other financial asset is a
"securities account" under this Article depends on whether the firm has undertaken to treat the other person as
entitled to exercise the rights that comprise the security or other financial asset. Section 1-102, however, states the
fundamental principle of interpretation that the Code provisions should be construed and applied to promote their
underlying purposes and policies. Thus, the question whether a given arrangement is a securities account should
be decided not by dictionary analysis of the words of the definition taken out of context, but by considering whether
it promotes the objectives of Article 8 to include the arrangement within the term securities account.
The effect of concluding that an arrangement is a securities account is that the rules of Part 5 apply. Accordingly,
the definition of "securities account" must be interpreted in light of the substantive provisions in Part 5, which
describe the core features of the type of relationship for which the commercial law rules of Revised Article 8
concerning security entitlements were designed. There are many arrangements between institutions and other
persons concerning securities or other financial assets which do not fall within the definition of "securities account"
because the institutions have not undertaken to treat the other persons as entitled to exercise the ordinary rights of
an entitlement holder specified in the Part 5 rules. For example, the term securities account does not cover the
relationship between a bank and its depositors or the relationship between a trustee and the beneficiary of an
ordinary trust, because those are not relationships in which the holder of a financial asset has undertaken to treat
the other as entitled to exercise the rights that comprise the financial asset in the fashion contemplated by the Part
5 rules.
In short, the primary factor in deciding whether an arrangement is a securities account is whether application of
the Part 5 rules is consistent with the expectations of the parties to the relationship. Relationships not governed by
Part 5 may be governed by other parts of Article 8 if the relationship gives rise to a new security, or may be
governed by other law entirely.
2. Subsection (b) of this section specifies what circumstances give rise to security entitlements. Paragraph (1) of
subsection (b) sets out the most important rule. It turns on the intermediary's conduct, reflecting a basic operating
assumption of the indirect holding system that once a securities intermediary has acknowledged that it is carrying a
position in a financial asset for its customer or participant, the intermediary is obligated to treat the customer or
participant as entitled to the financial asset. Paragraph (1) does not attempt to specify exactly what accounting,
record-keeping, or information transmission steps suffice to indicate that the intermediary has credited the account.
That is left to agreement, trade practice, or rule in order to provide the flexibility necessary to accommodate varying
or changing accounting and information processing systems. The point of paragraph (1) is that once an
intermediary has acknowledged that it is carrying a position for the customer or participant, the customer or
participant has a security entitlement. The precise form in which the intermediary manifests that acknowledgment is
left to private ordering.
Paragraph (2) of subsection (b) sets out a different operational test, turning not on the intermediary's accounting
system but on the facts that accounting systems are supposed to represent. Under paragraph (b)(2) a person has a
security entitlement if the intermediary has received and accepted a financial asset for credit to the account of its
customer or participant. For example, if a customer of a broker or bank custodian delivers a security certificate in
proper form to the broker or bank to be held in the customer's account, the customer acquires a security
entitlement. Paragraph (b)(2) also covers circumstances in which the intermediary receives a financial asset from a
third person for credit to the account of the customer or participant. Paragraph (b)(2) is not limited to circumstances
in which the intermediary receives security certificates or other financial assets in physical form. Paragraph (b)(2)
also covers circumstances in which the intermediary acquires a security entitlement with respect to a financial asset
which is to be credited to the account of the intermediary's own customer. For example, if a customer transfers her
account from Broker A to Broker B, she acquires security entitlements against Broker B once the clearing
corporation has credited the positions to Broker B's account. It should be noted, however, that paragraph (b)(2)
provides that a person acquires a security entitlement when the intermediary not only receives but also accepts the
financial asset for credit to the account. This limitation is included to take account of the fact that there may be
circumstances in which an intermediary has received a financial asset but is not willing to undertake the obligations
that flow from establishing a security entitlement. For example, a security certificate which is sent to an intermediary
may not be in proper form, or may represent a type of financial asset which the intermediary is not willing to carry
§ 8-501. SECURITIES ACCOUNT; ACQUISITION OF SECURITY ENTITLEMENT FROM SECURITIES
INTERMEDIARY
Page 3 of 4
for others. It should be noted that in all but extremely unusual cases, the circumstances covered by paragraph (2)
will also be covered by paragraph (1), because the intermediary will have credited the positions to the customer's
account.
Paragraph (3) of subsection (b) sets out a residual test, to avoid any implication that the failure of an intermediary
to make the appropriate entries to credit a position to a customer's securities account would prevent the customer
from acquiring the rights of an entitlement holder under Part 5. As is the case with the paragraph (2) test, the
paragraph (3) test would not be needed for the ordinary cases, since they are covered by paragraph (1).
3. In a sense, Section 8-501(b) is analogous to the rules set out in the provisions of Sections 8-313(1)(d) and 8-
320 of the prior version of Article 8 that specified what acts by a securities intermediary or clearing corporation
sufficed as a transfer of securities held in fungible bulk. Unlike the prior version of Article 8, however, this section is
not based on the idea that an entitlement holder acquires rights only by virtue of a "transfer" from the securities
intermediary to the entitlement holder. In the indirect holding system, the significant fact is that the securities
intermediary has undertaken to treat the customer as entitled to the financial asset. It is up to the securities
intermediary to take the necessary steps to ensure that it will be able to perform its undertaking. It is, for example,
entirely possible that a securities intermediary might make entries in a customer's account reflecting that customer's
acquisition of a certain security at a time when the securities intermediary did not itself happen to hold any units of
that security. The person from whom the securities intermediary bought the security might have failed to deliver and
it might have taken some time to clear up the problem, or there may have been an operational gap in time between
the crediting of a customer's account and the receipt of securities from another securities intermediary. The
entitlement holder's rights against the securities intermediary do not depend on whether or when the securities
intermediary acquired its interests. Subsection (c) is intended to make this point clear. Subsection (c) does not
mean that the intermediary is free to create security entitlements without itself holding sufficient financial assets to
satisfy its entitlement holders. The duty of a securities intermediary to maintain sufficient assets is governed by
Section 8-504 and regulatory law. Subsection (c) is included only to make it clear the question whether a person
has acquired a security entitlement does not depend on whether the intermediary has complied with that duty.
4. Part 5 of Article 8 sets out a carefully designed system of rules for the indirect holding system. Persons who
hold securities through brokers or custodians have security entitlements that are governed by Part 5, rather than
being treated as the direct holders of securities. Subsection (d) specifies the limited circumstance in which a
customer who leaves a financial asset with a broker or other securities intermediary has a direct interest in the
financial asset, rather than a security entitlement.
The customer can be a direct holder only if the security certificate, or other financial asset, is registered in the
name of, payable to the order of, or specially indorsed to the customer, and has not been indorsed by the customer
to the securities intermediary or in blank. The distinction between those circumstances where the customer can be
treated as direct owner and those where the customer has a security entitlement is essentially the same as the
distinction drawn under the federal bankruptcy code between customer name securities and customer property. The
distinction does not turn on any form of physical identification or segregation. A customer who delivers certificates
to a broker with blank indorsements or stock powers is not a direct holder but has a security entitlement, even
though the broker holds those certificates in some form of separate safe-keeping arrangement for that particular
customer. The customer remains the direct holder only if there is no indorsement or stock power so that further
action by the customer is required to place the certificates in a form where they can be transferred by the broker.
The rule of subsection (d) corresponds to the rule set out in Section 8-301(a)(3) specifying when acquisition of
possession of a certificate by a securities intermediary counts as "delivery" to the customer.
5. Subsection (e) is intended to make clear that Part 5 does not apply to an arrangement in which a security is
issued representing an interest in underlying assets, as distinguished from arrangements in which the underlying
assets are carried in a securities account. A common mechanism by which new financial instruments are devised is
that a financial institution that holds some security, financial instrument, or pool thereof, creates interests in that
asset or pool which are sold to others. In many such cases, the interests so created will fall within the definition of
"security" in Section 8-102(a)(15). If so, then by virtue of subsection (e) of Section 8-501, the relationship between
the institution that creates the interests and the persons who hold them is not a security entitlement to which the
Part 5 rules apply. Accordingly, an arrangement such as an American depositary receipt facility which creates freely
§ 8-501. SECURITIES ACCOUNT; ACQUISITION OF SECURITY ENTITLEMENT FROM SECURITIES
INTERMEDIARY
Page 4 of 4
transferable interests in underlying securities will be issuance of a security under Article 8 rather than establishment
of a security entitlement to the underlying securities.
The subsection (e) rule can be regarded as an aspect of the definitional rules specifying the meaning of securities
account and security entitlement. Among the key components of the definition of security in Section 8-102(a)(15)
are the "transferability" and "divisibility" tests. Securities, in the Article 8 sense, are fungible interests or obligations
that are intended to be tradable. The concept of security entitlement under Part 5 is quite different. A security
entitlement is the package of rights that a person has against the person's own intermediary with respect to the
positions carried in the person's securities account. That package of rights is not, as such, something that is traded.
When a customer sells a security that she had held through a securities account, her security entitlement is
terminated; when she buys a security that she will hold through her securities account, she acquires a security
entitlement. In most cases, settlement of a securities trade will involve termination of one person's security
entitlement and acquisition of a security entitlement by another person. That transaction, however, is not a
"transfer" of the same entitlement from one person to another. That is not to say that an entitlement holder cannot
transfer an interest in her security entitlement as such; granting a security interest in a security entitlement is such a
transfer. On the other hand, the nature of a security entitlement is that the intermediary is undertaking duties only to
the person identified as the entitlement holder.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Indorsement"
Section 8-102(a)(11)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security"
Section 8-102(a)(15)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-502
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-502. ASSERTION OF ADVERSE CLAIM AGAINST ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
An action based on an adverse claim to a financial asset, whether framed in conversion, replevin, constructive
trust, equitable lien, or other theory, may not be asserted against a person who acquires a security entitlement
under Section 8-501 for value and without notice of the adverse claim.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The section provides investors in the indirect holding system with protection against adverse claims by
specifying that no adverse claim can be asserted against a person who acquires a security entitlement under
Section 8-501 for value and without notice of the adverse claim. It plays a role in the indirect holding system
analogous to the rule of the direct holding system that protected purchasers take free from adverse claims (Section
8-303).
This section does not use the locution "takes free from adverse claims" because that could be confusing as
applied to the indirect holding system. The nature of indirect holding system is that an entitlement holder has an
interest in common with others who hold positions in the same financial asset through the same intermediary. Thus,
a particular entitlement holder's interest in the financial assets held by its intermediary is necessarily "subject to" the
interests of others. See Section 8-503. The rule stated in this section might have been expressed by saying that a
person who acquires a security entitlement under Section 8-501 for value and without notice of adverse claims
takes "that security entitlement" free from adverse claims. That formulation has not been used, however, for fear
that it would be misinterpreted as suggesting that the person acquires a right to the underlying financial assets that
could not be affected by the competing rights of others claiming through common or higher tier intermediaries. A
security entitlement is a complex bundle of rights. This section does not deal with the question of what rights are in
the bundle. Rather, this section provides that once a person has acquired the bundle, someone else cannot take it
away on the basis of assertion that the transaction in which the security entitlement was created involved a violation
of the claimant's rights.
2. Because securities trades are typically settled on a net basis by book-entry movements, it would ordinarily be
impossible for anyone to trace the path of any particular security, no matter how the interest of parties who hold
through intermediaries is described. Suppose, for example, that S has a 1000 share position in XYZ common stock
through an account with a broker, Able & Co. S's identical twin impersonates S and directs Able to sell the
securities. That same day, B places an order with Baker & Co., to buy 1000 shares of XYZ common stock. Later, S
discovers the wrongful act and seeks to recover "her shares." Even if S can show that, at the stage of the trade, her
sell order was matched with B's buy order, that would not suffice to show that "her shares" went to B. Settlement
between Able and Baker occurs on a net basis for all trades in XYZ that day; indeed Able's net position may have
been such that it received rather than delivered shares in XYZ through the settlement system.
In the unlikely event that this was the only trade in XYZ common stock executed in the market that day, one could
follow the shares from S's account to B's account. The plaintiff in an action in conversion or similar legal action to
enforce a property interest must show that the defendant has an item of property that belongs to the plaintiff. In this
example, B's security entitlement is not the same item of property that formerly was held by S, it is a new package
§ 8-502. ASSERTION OF ADVERSE CLAIM AGAINST ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
Page 2 of 3
of rights that B acquired against Baker under Section 8-501. Principles of equitable remedies might, however,
provide S with a basis for contending that if the position B received was the traceable product of the wrongful taking
of S's property by S's twin, a constructive trust should be imposed on B's property in favor of S. See G. Palmer, The
Law of Restitution § 2.14. Section 8-502 ensures that no such claims can be asserted against a person, such as B
in this example, who acquires a security entitlement under Section 8-501 for value and without notice, regardless of
what theory of law or equity is used to describe the basis of the assertion of the adverse claim.
In the above example, S would ordinarily have no reason to pursue B unless Able is insolvent and S's claim will
not be satisfied in the insolvency proceedings. Because S did not give an entitlement order for the disposition of her
security entitlement, Able must recredit her account for the 1000 shares of XYZ common stock. See Section 8-
507(b).
3. The following examples illustrate the operation of Section 8-502.
Example 1. Thief steals bearer bonds from Owner. Thief delivers the bonds to Broker for credit to Thief's
securities account, thereby acquiring a security entitlement under Section 8-501(b). Under other law, Owner may
have a claim to have a constructive trust imposed on the security entitlement as the traceable product of the bonds
that Thief misappropriated. Because Thief was himself the wrongdoer, Thief obviously had notice of Owner's
adverse claim. Accordingly, Section 8-502 does not preclude Owner from asserting an adverse claim against Thief.
Example 2. Thief steals bearer bonds from Owner. Thief owes a personal debt to Creditor. Creditor has a
securities account with Broker. Thief agrees to transfer the bonds to Creditor as security for or in satisfaction of his
debt to Creditor. Thief does so by sending the bonds to Broker for credit to Creditor's securities account. Creditor
thereby acquires a security entitlement under Section 8-501(b). Under other law, Owner may have a claim to have a
constructive trust imposed on the security entitlement as the traceable product of the bonds that Thief
misappropriated. Creditor acquired the security entitlement for value, since Creditor acquired it as security for or in
satisfaction of Thief's debt to Creditor. See Section 1-201(44). If Creditor did not have notice of Owner's claim,
Section 8-502 precludes any action by Owner against Creditor, whether framed in constructive trust or other theory.
Section 8-105 specifies what counts as notice of an adverse claim.
Example 3. Father, as trustee for Son, holds XYZ Co. shares in a securities account with Able & Co. In violation of
his fiduciary duties, Father sells the XYZ Co. shares and uses the proceeds for personal purposes. Father dies, and
his estate is insolvent. Assume -- implausibly -- that Son is able to trace the XYZ Co. shares and show that the
"same shares" ended up in Buyer's securities account with Baker & Co. Section 8-502 precludes any action by Son
against Buyer, whether framed in constructive trust or other theory, provided that Buyer acquired the security
entitlement for value and without notice of adverse claims.
Example 4. Debtor holds XYZ Co. shares in a securities account with Able & Co. As collateral for a loan from
Bank, Debtor grants Bank a security interest in the security entitlement to the XYZ Co. shares. Bank perfects by a
method which leaves Debtor with the ability to dispose of the shares. See Section 9-312. In violation of the security
agreement, Debtor sells the XYZ Co. shares and absconds with the proceeds. Assume -- implausibly -- that Bank is
able to trace the XYZ Co. shares and show that the "same shares" ended up in Buyer's securities account with
Baker & Co. Section 8-502 precludes any action by Bank against Buyer, whether framed in constructive trust or
other theory, provided that Buyer acquired the security entitlement for value and without notice of adverse claims.
Example 5. Debtor owns controlling interests in various public companies, including Acme and Ajax. Acme owns
60% of the stock of another public company, Beta. Debtor causes the Beta stock to be pledged to Lending Bank as
collateral for Ajax's debt. Acme holds the Beta stock through an account with a securities custodian, C Bank, which
in turn holds through Clearing Corporation. Lending Bank is also a Clearing Corporation participant. The pledge of
the Beta stock is implemented by Acme instructing C Bank to instruct Clearing Corporation to debit C Bank's
account and credit Lending Bank's account. Acme and Ajax both become insolvent. The Beta stock is still valuable.
Acme's liquidator asserts that the pledge of the Beta stock for Ajax's debt was wrongful as against Acme and seeks
to recover the Beta stock from Lending Bank. Because the pledge was implemented by an outright transfer into
Lending Bank's account at Clearing Corporation, Lending Bank acquired a security entitlement to the Beta stock
under Section 8-501. Lending Bank acquired the security entitlement for value, since it acquired it as security for a
debt. See Section 1-201(44). If Lending Bank did not have notice of Acme's claim, Section 8-502 will preclude any
action by Acme against Lending Bank, whether framed in constructive trust or other theory.
§ 8-502. ASSERTION OF ADVERSE CLAIM AGAINST ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
Page 3 of 3
Example 6. Debtor grants Alpha Co. a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of XYZ
Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Alpha also has an account with Able. Debtor
instructs Able to transfer the shares to Alpha, and Able does so by crediting the shares to Alpha's account. Alpha
has control of the 1000 shares under Section 8-106(d). (The facts to this point are identical to those in Section 8-
106, Comment 4, Example 1, except that Alpha Co. was Alpha Bank.) Alpha next grants Beta Co. a security interest
in the 1000 shares included in Alpha's security entitlement. See Section 9-207(c)(3). Alpha instructs Able to transfer
the shares to Gamma Co., Beta's custodian. Able does so, and Gamma credits the 1000 shares to Beta's account.
Beta now has control under Section 8-106(d). By virtue of Debtor's explicit permission or by virtue of the permission
inherent in Debtor's creation of a security interest in favor of Alpha and Alpha's resulting power to grant a security
interest under Section 9-207, Debtor has no adverse claim to assert against Beta, assuming implausibly that Debtor
could "trace" an interest to the Gamma account. Moreover, even if Debtor did hold an adverse claim, if Beta did not
have notice of Debtor's claim, Section 8-502 will preclude any action by Debtor against Beta, whether framed in
constructive trust or other theory.
4. Although this section protects entitlement holders against adverse claims, it does not protect them against the
risk that their securities intermediary will not itself have sufficient financial assets to satisfy the claims of all of its
entitlement holders. Suppose that Customer A holds 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock in an account with her broker,
Able & Co. Able in turn holds 1000 shares of XYZ Co. through its account with Clearing Corporation, but has no
other positions in XYZ Co. shares, either for other customers or for its own proprietary account. Customer B places
an order with Able for the purchase of 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock, and pays the purchase price. Able credits B's
account with a 1000 share position in XYZ Co. stock, but Able does not itself buy any additional XYZ Co. shares.
Able fails, having only 1000 shares to satisfy the claims of A and B. Unless other insolvency law establishes a
different distributional rule, A and B would share the 1000 shares held by Able pro rata, without regard to the time
that their respective entitlements were established. See Section 8-503(b). Section 8-502 protects entitlement
holders, such as A and B, against adverse claimants. In this case, however, the problem that A and B face is not
that someone is trying to take away their entitlements, but that the entitlements are not worth what they thought.
The only role that Section 8-502 plays in this case is to preclude any assertion that A has some form of claim
against B by virtue of the fact that Able's establishment of an entitlement in favor of B diluted A's rights to the limited
assets held by Able.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Adverse claim"
Section 8-102(a)(1)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Notice of adverse claim"
Section 8-105
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
"Value"
Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-503
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-503. PROPERTY INTEREST OF ENTITLEMENT HOLDER IN FINANCIAL
ASSET HELD BY SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY
(a) To the extent necessary for a securities intermediary to satisfy all security entitlements with respect to a
particular financial asset, all interests in that financial asset held by the securities intermediary are held by
the securities intermediary for the entitlement holders, are not property of the securities intermediary, and
are not subject to claims of creditors of the securities intermediary, except as otherwise provided in Section
8-511.
(b) An entitlement holder's property interest with respect to a particular financial asset under subsection (a)
is a pro rata property interest in all interests in that financial asset held by the securities intermediary,
without regard to the time the entitlement holder acquired the security entitlement or the time the securities
intermediary acquired the interest in that financial asset.
(c) An entitlement holder's property interest with respect to a particular financial asset under subsection (a)
may be enforced against the securities intermediary only by exercise of the entitlement holder's rights
under Sections 8-505 through 8-508.
(d) An entitlement holder's property interest with respect to a particular financial asset under subsection (a)
may be enforced against a purchaser of the financial asset or interest therein only if:
(1) insolvency proceedings have been initiated by or against the securities intermediary;
(2) the securities intermediary does not have sufficient interests in the financial asset to satisfy the
security entitlements of all of its entitlement holders to that financial asset;
(3) the securities intermediary violated its obligations under Section 8-504 by transferring the financial
asset or interest therein to the purchaser; and
(4) the purchaser is not protected under subsection (e).
The trustee or other liquidator, acting on behalf of all entitlement holders having security entitlements
with respect to a particular financial asset, may recover the financial asset, or interest therein, from the
purchaser. If the trustee or other liquidator elects not to pursue that right, an entitlement holder whose
security entitlement remains unsatisfied has the right to recover its interest in the financial asset from
the purchaser.
(e) An action based on the entitlement holder's property interest with respect to a particular financial asset
under subsection (a), whether framed in conversion, replevin, constructive trust, equitable lien, or other
theory, may not be asserted against any purchaser of a financial asset or interest therein who gives value,
obtains control, and does not act in collusion with the securities intermediary in violating the securities
intermediary's obligations under Section 8-504.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
§ 8-503. PROPERTY INTEREST OF ENTITLEMENT HOLDER IN FINANCIAL ASSET HELD BY SECURITIES
INTERMEDIARY
Page 2 of 5
1. This section specifies the sense in which a security entitlement is an interest in the property held by the
securities intermediary. It expresses the ordinary understanding that securities that a firm holds for its customers
are not general assets of the firm subject to the claims of creditors. Since securities intermediaries generally do not
segregate securities in such fashion that one could identify particular securities as the ones held for customers, it
would not be realistic for this section to state that "customers' securities" are not subject to creditors' claims. Rather
subsection (a) provides that to the extent necessary to satisfy all customer claims, all units of that security held by
the firm are held for the entitlement holders, are not property of the securities intermediary, and are not subject to
creditors' claims, except as otherwise provided in Section 8-511.
An entitlement holder's property interest under this section is an interest with respect to a specific issue of
securities or financial assets. For example, customers of a firm who have positions in XYZ common stock have
security entitlements with respect to the XYZ common stock held by the intermediary, while other customers who
have positions in ABC common stock have security entitlements with respect to the ABC common stock held by the
intermediary.
Subsection (b) makes clear that the property interest described in subsection (a) is an interest held in common by
all entitlement holders who have entitlements to a particular security or other financial asset. Temporal factors are
irrelevant. One entitlement holder cannot claim that its rights to the assets held by the intermediary are superior to
the rights of another entitlement holder by virtue of having acquired those rights before, or after, the other
entitlement holder. Nor does it matter whether the intermediary had sufficient assets to satisfy all entitlement
holders' claims at one point, but no longer does. Rather, all entitlement holders have a pro rata interest in whatever
positions in that financial asset the intermediary holds.
Although this section describes the property interest of entitlement holders in the assets held by the intermediary,
it does not necessarily determine how property held by a failed intermediary will be distributed in insolvency
proceedings. If the intermediary fails and its affairs are being administered in an insolvency proceeding, the
applicable insolvency law governs how the various parties having claims against the firm are treated. For example,
the distributional rules for stockbroker liquidation proceedings under the Bankruptcy Code and Securities Investor
Protection Act ("SIPA") provide that all customer property is distributed pro rata among all customers in proportion
to the dollar value of their total positions, rather than dividing the property on an issue by issue basis. For
intermediaries that are not subject to the Bankruptcy Code and SIPA, other insolvency law would determine what
distributional rule is applied.
2. Although this section recognizes that the entitlement holders of a securities intermediary have a property
interest in the financial assets held by the intermediary, the incidents of this property interest are established by the
rules of Article 8, not by common law property concepts. The traditional Article 8 rules on certificated securities
were based on the idea that a paper certificate could be regarded as a nearly complete reification of the underlying
right. The rules on transfer and the consequences of wrongful transfer could then be written using the same basic
concepts as the rules for physical chattels. A person's claim of ownership of a certificated security is a right to a
specific identifiable physical object, and that right can be asserted against any person who ends up in possession of
that physical certificate, unless cut off by the rules protecting purchasers for value without notice. Those concepts
do not work for the indirect holding system. A security entitlement is not a claim to a specific identifiable thing; it is a
package of rights and interests that a person has against the person's securities intermediary and the property held
by the intermediary. The idea that discrete objects might be traced through the hands of different persons has no
place in the Revised Article 8 rules for the indirect holding system. The fundamental principles of the indirect
holding system rules are that an entitlement holder's own intermediary has the obligation to see to it that the
entitlement holder receives all of the economic and corporate rights that comprise the financial asset, and that the
entitlement holder can look only to that intermediary for performance of the obligations. The entitlement holder
cannot assert rights directly against other persons, such as other intermediaries through whom the intermediary
holds the positions, or third parties to whom the intermediary may have wrongfully transferred interests, except in
extremely unusual circumstances where the third party was itself a participant in the wrongdoing. Subsections (c)
through (e) reflect these fundamental principles.
Subsection (c) provides that an entitlement holder's property interest can be enforced against the intermediary
only by exercise of the entitlement holder's rights under Sections 8-505 through 8-508. These are the provisions
§ 8-503. PROPERTY INTEREST OF ENTITLEMENT HOLDER IN FINANCIAL ASSET HELD BY SECURITIES
INTERMEDIARY
Page 3 of 5
that set out the duty of an intermediary to see to it that the entitlement holder receives all of the economic and
corporate rights that comprise the security. If the intermediary is in insolvency proceedings and can no longer
perform in accordance with the ordinary Part 5 rules, the applicable insolvency law will determine how the
intermediary's assets are to be distributed.
Subsections (d) and (e) specify the limited circumstances in which an entitlement holder's property interest can be
asserted against a third person to whom the intermediary transferred a financial asset that was subject to the
entitlement holder's claim when held by the intermediary. Subsection (d) provides that the property interest of
entitlement holders cannot be asserted against any transferee except in the circumstances therein specified. So
long as the intermediary is solvent, the entitlement holders must look to the intermediary to satisfy their claims. If
the intermediary does not hold financial assets corresponding to the entitlement holders' claims, the intermediary
has the duty to acquire them. See Section 8-504. Thus, paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (d) specify that
the only occasion in which the entitlement holders can pursue transferees is when the intermediary is unable to
perform its obligation, and the transfer to the transferee was a violation of those obligations. Even in that case, a
transferee who gave value and obtained control is protected by virtue of the rule in subsection (e), unless the
transferee acted in collusion with the intermediary.
Subsections (d) and (e) have the effect of protecting transferees from an intermediary against adverse claims
arising out of assertions by the intermediary's entitlement holders that the intermediary acted wrongfully in
transferring the financial assets. These rules, however, operate in a slightly different fashion than traditional adverse
claim cut-off rules. Rather than specifying that a certain class of transferee takes free from all claims, subsections
(d) and (e) specify the circumstances in which this particular form of claim can be asserted against a transferee.
Revised Article 8 also contains general adverse claim cut-off rules for the indirect holding system. See Sections 8-
502 and 8-510. The rule of subsections (d) and (e) takes precedence over the general cut-off rules of those
sections, because Section 8-503 itself defines and sets limits on the assertion of the property interest of entitlement
holders. Thus, the question whether entitlement holders' property interest can be asserted as an adverse claim
against a transferee from the intermediary is governed by the collusion test of Section 8-503(e), rather than by the
"without notice" test of Sections 8-502 and 8-510.
3. The limitations that subsections (c) through (e) place on the ability of customers of a failed intermediary to
recover securities or other financial assets from transferees are consistent with the fundamental policies of investor
protection that underlie this Article and other bodies of law governing the securities business. The commercial law
rules for the securities holding and transfer system must be assessed from the forward-looking perspective of their
impact on the vast number of transactions in which no wrongful conduct occurred or will occur, rather than from the
post hoc perspective of what rule might be most advantageous to a particular class of persons in litigation that
might arise out of the occasional case in which someone has acted wrongfully. Although one can devise
hypothetical scenarios where particular customers might find it advantageous to be able to assert rights against
someone other than the customers' own intermediary, commercial law rules that permitted customers to do so
would impair rather than promote the interest of investors and the safe and efficient operation of the clearance and
settlement system. Suppose, for example, that Intermediary A transfers securities to B, that Intermediary A acted
wrongfully as against its customers in so doing, and that after the transaction Intermediary A did not have sufficient
securities to satisfy its obligations to its entitlement holders. Viewed solely from the standpoint of the customers of
Intermediary A, it would seem that permitting the property to be recovered from B, would be good for investors.
That, however, is not the case. B may itself be an intermediary with its own customers, or may be some other
institution through which individuals invest, such as a pension fund or investment company. There is no reason to
think that rules permitting customers of an intermediary to trace and recover securities that their intermediary
wrongfully transferred work to the advantage of investors in general. To the contrary, application of such rules
would often merely shift losses from one set of investors to another. The uncertainties that would result from rules
permitting such recoveries would work to the disadvantage of all participants in the securities markets.
The use of the collusion test in Section 8-503(e) furthers the interests of investors generally in the sound and
efficient operation of the securities holding and settlement system. The effect of the choice of this standard is that
customers of a failed intermediary must show that the transferee from whom they seek to recover was affirmatively
engaged in wrongful conduct, rather than casting on the transferee any burden of showing that the transferee had
§ 8-503. PROPERTY INTEREST OF ENTITLEMENT HOLDER IN FINANCIAL ASSET HELD BY SECURITIES
INTERMEDIARY
Page 4 of 5
no awareness of wrongful conduct by the failed intermediary. The rule of Section 8-503(e) is based on the longstanding
policy that it is undesirable to impose upon purchasers of securities any duty to investigate whether their
sellers may be acting wrongfully.
Rather than imposing duties to investigate, the general policy of the commercial law of the securities holding and
transfer system has been to eliminate legal rules that might induce participants to conduct investigations of the
authority of persons transferring securities on behalf of others for fear that they might be held liable for participating
in a wrongful transfer. The rules in Part 4 of Article 8 concerning transfers by fiduciaries provide a good example.
Under Lowry v. Commercial & Farmers' Bank, 15 F. Cas. 1040 (C.C.D. Md. 1848) (No. 8551), an issuer could be
held liable for wrongful transfer if it registered transfer of securities by a fiduciary under circumstances where it had
any reason to believe that the fiduciary may have been acting improperly. In one sense that seems to be
advantageous for beneficiaries who might be harmed by wrongful conduct by fiduciaries. The consequence of the
Lowry rule, however, was that in order to protect against risk of such liability, issuers developed the practice of
requiring extensive documentation for fiduciary stock transfers, making such transfers cumbersome and time
consuming. Accordingly, the rules in Part 4 of Article 8, and in the prior fiduciary transfer statutes, were designed to
discourage transfer agents from conducting investigations into the rightfulness of transfers by fiduciaries.
The rules of Revised Article 8 implement for the indirect holding system the same policies that the rules on
protected purchasers and registration of transfer adopt for the direct holding system. A securities intermediary is, by
definition, a person who is holding securities on behalf of other persons. There is nothing unusual or suspicious
about a transaction in which a securities intermediary sells securities that it was holding for its customers. That is
exactly what securities intermediaries are in business to do. The interests of customers of securities intermediaries
would not be served by a rule that required counterparties to transfers from securities intermediaries to investigate
whether the intermediary was acting wrongfully against its customers. Quite the contrary, such a rule would impair
the ability of securities intermediaries to perform the function that customers want.
The rules of Section 8-503(c) through (e) apply to transferees generally, including pledgees. The reasons for
treating pledgees in the same fashion as other transferees are discussed in the Comments to Section 8-511. The
statement in subsection (a) that an intermediary holds financial assets for customers and not as its own property
does not, of course, mean that the intermediary lacks power to transfer the financial assets to others. For example,
although Article 9 provides that for a security interest to attach the debtor must have "rights" in the collateral, see
Section 9-203, the fact that an intermediary is holding a financial asset in a form that permits ready transfer means
that it has such rights, even if the intermediary is acting wrongfully against its entitlement holders in granting the
security interest. The question whether the secured party takes subject to the entitlement holder's claim in such a
case is governed by Section 8-511, which is an application to secured transactions of the general principles
expressed in subsections (d) and (e) of this section.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Control"
Section 8-106
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Insolvency proceedings"
Section 1-201(22)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
§ 8-503. PROPERTY INTEREST OF ENTITLEMENT HOLDER IN FINANCIAL ASSET HELD BY SECURITIES
INTERMEDIARY
Page 5 of 5
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
"Value"
Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-504
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-504. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO MAINTAIN FINANCIAL
ASSET
(a) A securities intermediary shall promptly obtain and thereafter maintain a financial asset in a quantity
corresponding to the aggregate of all security entitlements it has established in favor of its entitlement
holders with respect to that financial asset. The securities intermediary may maintain those financial assets
directly or through one or more other securities intermediaries.
(b) Except to the extent otherwise agreed by its entitlement holder, a securities intermediary may not grant
any security interests in a financial asset it is obligated to maintain pursuant to subsection (a).
(c) A securities intermediary satisfies the duty in subsection (a) if:
(1) the securities intermediary acts with respect to the duty as agreed upon by the entitlement holder
and the securities intermediary; or
(2) in the absence of agreement, the securities intermediary exercises due care in accordance with
reasonable commercial standards to obtain and maintain the financial asset.
(d) This section does not apply to a clearing corporation that is itself the obligor of an option or similar
obligation to which its entitlement holders have security entitlements.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section expresses one of the core elements of the relationships for which the Part 5 rules were designed,
to wit, that a securities intermediary undertakes to hold financial assets corresponding to the security entitlements of
its entitlement holders. The locution "shall promptly obtain and shall thereafter maintain" is taken from the
corresponding regulation under federal securities law, 17 C.F.R. § 240.15c3-3. This section recognizes the reality
that as the securities business is conducted today, it is not possible to identify particular securities as belonging to
customers as distinguished from other particular securities that are the firm's own property. Securities firms typically
keep all securities in fungible form, and may maintain their inventory of a particular security in various locations and
forms, including physical securities held in vaults or in transit to transfer agents, and book entry positions at one or
more clearing corporations. Accordingly, this section states that a securities intermediary shall maintain a quantity
of financial assets corresponding to the aggregate of all security entitlements it has established. The last sentence
of subsection (a) provides explicitly that the securities intermediary may hold directly or indirectly. That point is
implicit in the use of the term "financial asset," inasmuch as Section 8-102(a)(9) provides that the term "financial
asset" may refer either to the underlying asset or the means by which it is held, including both security certificates
and security entitlements.
2. Subsection (b) states explicitly a point that is implicit in the notion that a securities intermediary must maintain
financial assets corresponding to the security entitlements of its entitlement holders, to wit, that it is wrongful for a
securities intermediary to grant security interests in positions that it needs to satisfy customers' claims, except as
§ 8-504. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO MAINTAIN FINANCIAL ASSET
Page 2 of 4
authorized by the customers. This statement does not determine the rights of a secured party to whom a securities
intermediary wrongfully grants a security interest; that issue is governed by Sections 8-503 and 8-511.
Margin accounts are common examples of arrangements in which an entitlement holder authorizes the securities
intermediary to grant security interests in the positions held for the entitlement holder. Securities firms commonly
obtain the funds needed to provide margin loans to their customers by "rehypothecating" the customers' securities.
In order to facilitate rehypothecation, agreements between margin customers and their brokers commonly authorize
the broker to commingle securities of all margin customers for rehypothecation to the lender who provides the
financing. Brokers commonly rehypothecate customer securities having a value somewhat greater than the amount
of the loan made to the customer, since the lenders who provide the necessary financing to the broker need some
cushion of protection against the risk of decline in the value of the rehypothecated securities. The extent and
manner in which a firm may rehypothecate customers' securities are determined by the agreement between the
intermediary and the entitlement holder and by applicable regulatory law. Current regulations under the federal
securities laws require that brokers obtain the explicit consent of customers before pledging customer securities or
commingling different customers' securities for pledge. Federal regulations also limit the extent to which a broker
may rehypothecate customer securities to 110% of the aggregate amount of the borrowings of all customers.
3. The statement in this section that an intermediary must obtain and maintain financial assets corresponding to
the aggregate of all security entitlements it has established is intended only to capture the general point that one of
the key elements that distinguishes securities accounts from other relationships, such as deposit accounts, is that
the intermediary undertakes to maintain a direct correspondence between the positions it holds and the claims of its
customers. This section is not intended as a detailed specification of precisely how the intermediary is to perform
this duty, nor whether there may be special circumstances in which an intermediary's general duty is excused.
Accordingly, the general statement of the duties of a securities intermediary in this and the following sections is
supplemented by two other provisions. First, each of Sections 8-504 through 8-508 contains an "agreement/due
care" provision. Second, Section 8-509 sets out general qualifications on the duties stated in these sections,
including the important point that compliance with corresponding regulatory provisions constitutes compliance with
the Article 8 duties.
4. The "agreement/due care" provision in subsection (c) of this section is necessary to provide sufficient flexibility
to accommodate the general duty stated in subsection (a) to the wide variety of circumstances that may be
encountered in the modern securities holding system. For the most common forms of publicly traded securities, the
modern depository-based indirect holding system has made the likelihood of an actual loss of securities remote,
though correctable errors in accounting or temporary interruptions of data processing facilities may occur. Indeed,
one of the reasons for the evolution of book-entry systems is to eliminate the risk of loss or destruction of physical
certificates. There are, however, some forms of securities and other financial assets which must still be held in
physical certificated form, with the attendant risk of loss or destruction. Risk of loss or delay may be a more
significant consideration in connection with foreign securities. An American securities intermediary may well be
willing to hold a foreign security in a securities account for its customer, but the intermediary may have relatively
little choice of or control over foreign intermediaries through which the security must in turn be held. Accordingly, it
is common for American securities intermediaries to disclaim responsibility for custodial risk of holding through
foreign intermediaries.
Subsection (c)(1) provides that a securities intermediary satisfies the duty stated in subsection (a) if the
intermediary acts with respect to that duty in accordance with the agreement between the intermediary and the
entitlement holder. Subsection (c)(2) provides that if there is no agreement on the matter, the intermediary satisfies
the subsection (a) duty if the intermediary exercises due care in accordance with reasonable commercial standards
to obtain and maintain the financial asset in question. This formulation does not state that the intermediary has a
universally applicable statutory duty of due care. Section 1-102(3) provides that statutory duties of due care cannot
be disclaimed by agreement, but the "agreement/due care" formula contemplates that there may be particular
circumstances where the parties do not wish to create a specific duty of due care, for example, with respect to
foreign securities. Under subsection (c)(1), compliance with the agreement constitutes satisfaction of the subsection
(a) duty, whether or not the agreement provides that the intermediary will exercise due care.
In each of the sections where the "agreement/due care" formula is used, it provides that entering into an
agreement and performing in accordance with that agreement is a method by which the securities intermediary may
§ 8-504. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO MAINTAIN FINANCIAL ASSET
Page 3 of 4
satisfy the statutory duty stated in that section. Accordingly, the general obligation of good faith performance of
statutory and contract duties, see Sections 1-203 and 8-102(a)(10), would apply to such an agreement. It would not
be consistent with the obligation of good faith performance for an agreement to purport to establish the usual sort of
arrangement between an intermediary and entitlement holder, yet disclaim altogether one of the basic elements that
define that relationship. For example, an agreement stating that an intermediary assumes no responsibilities
whatsoever for the safekeeping any of the entitlement holder's securities positions would not be consistent with
good faith performance of the intermediary's duty to obtain and maintain financial assets corresponding to the
entitlement holder's security entitlements.
To the extent that no agreement under subsection (c)(1) has specified the details of the intermediary's
performance of the subsection (a) duty, subsection (c)(2) provides that the intermediary satisfies that duty if it
exercises due care in accordance with reasonable commercial standards. The duty of care includes both care in the
intermediary's own operations and care in the selection of other intermediaries through whom the intermediary
holds the assets in question. The statement of the obligation of due care is meant to incorporate the principles of
the common law under which the specific actions or precautions necessary to meet the obligation of care are
determined by such factors as the nature and value of the property, the customs and practices of the business, and
the like.
5. This section necessarily states the duty of a securities intermediary to obtain and maintain financial assets only
at the very general and abstract level. For the most part, these matters are specified in great detail by regulatory
law. Broker-dealers registered under the federal securities laws are subject to detailed regulation concerning the
safeguarding of customer securities. See 17 C.F.R. § 240.15c3-3. Section 8-509(a) provides explicitly that if a
securities intermediary complies with such regulatory law, that constitutes compliance with Section 8-504. In certain
circumstances, these rules permit a firm to be in a position where it temporarily lacks a sufficient quantity of
financial assets to satisfy all customer claims. For example, if another firm has failed to make a delivery to the firm
in settlement of a trade, the firm is permitted a certain period of time to clear up the problem before it is obligated to
obtain the necessary securities from some other source.
6. Subsection (d) is intended to recognize that there are some circumstances, where the duty to maintain a
sufficient quantity of financial assets does not apply because the intermediary is not holding anything on behalf of
others. For example, the Options Clearing Corporation is treated as a "securities intermediary" under this Article,
although it does not itself hold options on behalf of its participants. Rather, it becomes the issuer of the options, by
virtue of guaranteeing the obligations of participants in the clearing corporation who have written or purchased the
options cleared through it. See Section 8-103(e). Accordingly, the general duty of an intermediary under subsection
(a) does not apply, nor would other provisions of Part 5 that depend upon the existence of a requirement that the
securities intermediary hold financial assets, such as Sections 8-503 and 8-508.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Agreement"
Section 1-201(3)
"Clearing corporation"
Section 8-102(a)(5)
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 8-504. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO MAINTAIN FINANCIAL ASSET
Page 4 of 4
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-505
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-505. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY WITH RESPECT TO
PAYMENTS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
(a) A securities intermediary shall take action to obtain a payment or distribution made by the issuer of a
financial asset. A securities intermediary satisfies the duty if:
(1) the securities intermediary acts with respect to the duty as agreed upon by the entitlement holder
and the securities intermediary; or
(2) in the absence of agreement, the securities intermediary exercises due care in accordance with
reasonable commercial standards to attempt to obtain the payment or distribution.
(b) A securities intermediary is obligated to its entitlement holder for a payment or distribution made by the
issuer of a financial asset if the payment or distribution is received by the securities intermediary.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. One of the core elements of the securities account relationships for which the Part 5 rules were designed is that
the securities intermediary passes through to the entitlement holders the economic benefit of ownership of the
financial asset, such as payments and distributions made by the issuer. Subsection (a) expresses the ordinary
understanding that a securities intermediary will take appropriate action to see to it that any payments or
distributions made by the issuer are received. One of the main reasons that investors make use of securities
intermediaries is to obtain the services of a professional in performing the record-keeping and other functions
necessary to ensure that payments and other distributions are received.
2. Subsection (a) incorporates the same "agreement/due care" formula as the other provisions of Part 5 dealing
with the duties of a securities intermediary. See Comment 4 to Section 8-504. This formulation permits the parties
to specify by agreement what action, if any, the intermediary is to take with respect to the duty to obtain payments
and distributions. In the absence of specification by agreement, the intermediary satisfies the duty if the
intermediary exercises due care in accordance with reasonable commercial standards. The provisions of Section 8-
509 also apply to the Section 8-505 duty, so that compliance with applicable regulatory requirements constitutes
compliance with the Section 8-505 duty.
3. Subsection (b) provides that a securities intermediary is obligated to its entitlement holder for those payments
or distributions made by the issuer that are in fact received by the intermediary. It does not deal with the details of
the time and manner of payment. Moreover, as with any other monetary obligation, the obligation to pay may be
subject to other rights of the obligor, by way of setoff counterclaim or the like. Section 8-509(c) makes this point
explicit.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Agreement"
Section 1-201(3)
§ 8-505. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY WITH RESPECT TO PAYMENTS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
Page 2 of 2
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-506
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-506. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO EXERCISE RIGHTS AS
DIRECTED BY ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
A securities intermediary shall exercise rights with respect to a financial asset if directed to do so by an
entitlement holder. A securities intermediary satisfies the duty if:
(1) the securities intermediary acts with respect to the duty as agreed upon by the entitlement holder
and the securities intermediary; or
(2) in the absence of agreement, the securities intermediary either places the entitlement holder in a
position to exercise the rights directly or exercises due care in accordance with reasonable commercial
standards to follow the direction of the entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Another of the core elements of the securities account relationships for which the Part 5 rules were designed is
that although the intermediary may, by virtue of the structure of the indirect holding system, be the party who has
the power to exercise the corporate and other rights that come from holding the security, the intermediary exercises
these powers as representative of the entitlement holder rather than at its own discretion. This characteristic is one
of the things that distinguishes a securities account from other arrangements where one person holds securities "on
behalf of" another, such as the relationship between a mutual fund and its shareholders or a trustee and its
beneficiary.
2. The fact that the intermediary exercises the rights of security holding as representative of the entitlement holder
does not, of course, preclude the entitlement holder from conferring discretionary authority upon the intermediary.
Arrangements are not uncommon in which investors do not wish to have their intermediaries forward proxy
materials or other information. Thus, this section provides that the intermediary shall exercise corporate and other
rights "if directed to do so" by the entitlement holder. Moreover, as with the other Part 5 duties, the "agreement/due
care" formulation is used in stating how the intermediary is to perform this duty. This section also provides that the
intermediary satisfies the duty if it places the entitlement holder in a position to exercise the rights directly. This is to
take account of the fact that some of the rights attendant upon ownership of the security, such as rights to bring
derivative and other litigation, are far removed from the matters that intermediaries are expected to perform.
3. This section, and the two that follow, deal with the aspects of securities holding that are related to investment
decisions. For example, one of the rights of holding a particular security that would fall within the purview of this
section would be the right to exercise a conversion right for a convertible security. It is quite common for investors
to confer discretionary authority upon another person, such as an investment adviser, with respect to these rights
and other investment decisions. Because this section, and the other sections of Part 5, all specify that a securities
intermediary satisfies the Part 5 duties if it acts in accordance with the entitlement holder's agreement, there is no
inconsistency between the statement of duties of a securities intermediary and these common arrangements.
4. Section 8-509 also applies to the Section 8-506 duty, so that compliance with applicable regulatory
requirements constitutes compliance with this duty. This is quite important in this context, since the federal
§ 8-506. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO EXERCISE RIGHTS AS DIRECTED BY
ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
Page 2 of 2
securities laws establish a comprehensive system of regulation of the distribution of proxy materials and exercise of
voting rights with respect to securities held through brokers and other intermediaries. By virtue of Section 8-509(a),
compliance with such regulatory requirement constitutes compliance with the Section 8-506 duty.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Agreement"
Section 1-201(3)
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-507
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-507. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO COMPLY WITH
ENTITLEMENT ORDER
(a) A securities intermediary shall comply with an entitlement order if the entitlement order is originated by
the appropriate person, the securities intermediary has had reasonable opportunity to assure itself that the
entitlement order is genuine and authorized, and the securities intermediary has had reasonable
opportunity to comply with the entitlement order. A securities intermediary satisfies the duty if:
(1) the securities intermediary acts with respect to the duty as agreed upon by the entitlement holder
and the securities intermediary; or
(2) in the absence of agreement, the securities intermediary exercises due care in accordance with
reasonable commercial standards to comply with the entitlement order.
(b) If a securities intermediary transfers a financial asset pursuant to an ineffective entitlement order, the
securities intermediary shall reestablish a security entitlement in favor of the person entitled to it, and pay or
credit any payments or distributions that the person did not receive as a result of the wrongful transfer. If
the securities intermediary does not reestablish a security entitlement, the securities intermediary is liable to
the entitlement holder for damages.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) of this section states another aspect of duties of securities intermediaries that make up security
entitlements -- the securities intermediary's duty to comply with entitlement orders. One of the main reasons for
holding securities through securities intermediaries is to enable rapid transfer in settlement of trades. Thus the right
to have one's orders for disposition of the security entitlement honored is an inherent part of the relationship.
Subsection (b) states the correlative liability of a securities intermediary for transferring a financial asset from an
entitlement holder's account pursuant to an entitlement order that was not effective.
2. The duty to comply with entitlement orders is subject to several qualifications. The intermediary has a duty only
with respect to an entitlement order that is in fact originated by the appropriate person. Moreover, the intermediary
has a duty only if it has had reasonable opportunity to assure itself that the order is genuine and authorized, and
reasonable opportunity to comply with the order. The same "agreement/due care" formula is used in this section as
in the other Part 5 sections on the duties of intermediaries, and the rules of Section 8-509 apply to the Section 8-
507 duty.
3. Appropriate person is defined in Section 8-107. In the usual case, the appropriate person is the entitlement
holder, see Section 8-107(a)(3). Entitlement holder is defined in Section 8-102(a)(7) as the person "identified in the
records of a securities intermediary as the person having a security entitlement." Thus, the general rule is that an
intermediary's duty with respect to entitlement orders runs only to the person with whom the intermediary has
established a relationship. One of the basic principles of the indirect holding system is that securities intermediaries
owe duties only to their own customers. See also Section 8-115. The only situation in which a securities
intermediary has a duty to comply with entitlement orders originated by a person other than the person with whom
§ 8-507. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO COMPLY WITH ENTITLEMENT ORDER
Page 2 of 3
the intermediary established a relationship is covered by Section 8-107(a)(4) and (a)(5), which provide that the term
"appropriate person" includes the successor or personal representative of a decedent, or the custodian or guardian
of a person who lacks capacity. If the entitlement holder is competent, another person does not fall within the
defined term "appropriate person" merely by virtue of having power to act as an agent for the entitlement holder.
Thus, an intermediary is not required to determine at its peril whether a person who purports to be authorized to act
for an entitlement holder is in fact authorized to do so. If an entitlement holder wishes to be able to act through
agents, the entitlement holder can establish appropriate arrangements in advance with the securities intermediary.
One important application of this principle is that if an entitlement holder grants a security interest in its security
entitlements to a third-party lender, the intermediary owes no duties to the secured party, unless the intermediary
has entered into a "control" agreement in which it agrees to act on entitlement orders originated by the secured
party. See Section 8-106. Even though the security agreement or some other document may give the secured party
authority to act as agent for the debtor, that would not make the secured party an "appropriate person" to whom the
security intermediary owes duties. If the entitlement holder and securities intermediary have agreed to such a
control arrangement, then the intermediary's action in following instructions from the secured party would satisfy the
subsection (a) duty. Although an agent, such as the secured party in this example, is not an "appropriate person,"
an entitlement order is "effective" if originated by an authorized person. See Section 8-107(a) and (b). Moreover,
Section 8-507(a) provides that the intermediary satisfies its duty if it acts in accordance with the entitlement holder's
agreement.
4. Subsection (b) provides that an intermediary is liable for a wrongful transfer if the entitlement order was
"ineffective." Section 8-107 specifies whether an entitlement order is effective. An "effective entitlement order" is
different from an "entitlement order originated by an appropriate person." An entitlement order is effective under
Section 8-107(b) if it is made by the appropriate person, or by a person who has power to act for the appropriate
person under the law of agency, or if the appropriate person has ratified the entitlement order or is precluded from
denying its effectiveness. Thus, although a securities intermediary does not have a duty to act on an entitlement
order originated by the entitlement holder's agent, the intermediary is not liable for wrongful transfer if it does so.
Subsection (b), together with Section 8-107, has the effect of leaving to other law most of the questions of the sort
dealt with by Article 4A for wire transfers of funds, such as allocation between the securities intermediary and the
entitlement holder of the risk of fraudulent entitlement orders.
5. The term entitlement order does not cover all directions that a customer might give a broker concerning
securities held through the broker. Article 8 is not a codification of all of the law of customers and stockbrokers.
Article 8 deals with the settlement of securities trades, not the trades. The term entitlement order does not refer to
instructions to a broker to make trades, that is, enter into contracts for the purchase or sale of securities. Rather, the
entitlement order is the mechanism of transfer for securities held through intermediaries, just as indorsements and
instructions are the mechanism for securities held directly. In the ordinary case the customer's direction to the
broker to deliver the securities at settlement is implicit in the customer's instruction to the broker to sell. The
distinction is, however, significant in that this section has no application to the relationship between the customer
and broker with respect to the trade itself. For example, assertions by a customer that it was damaged by a broker's
failure to execute a trading order sufficiently rapidly or in the proper manner are not governed by this Article.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Agreement"
Section 1-201(3)
"Appropriate person"
Section 8-107
"Effective"
Section 8-107
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
"Entitlement order"
§ 8-507. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO COMPLY WITH ENTITLEMENT ORDER
Page 3 of 3
Section 8-102(a)(8)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-508
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-508. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO CHANGE ENTITLEMENT
HOLDER'S POSITION TO OTHER FORM OF SECURITY HOLDING
A securities intermediary shall act at the direction of an entitlement holder to change a security entitlement
into another available form of holding for which the entitlement holder is eligible, or to cause the financial
asset to be transferred to a securities account of the entitlement holder with another securities intermediary.
A securities intermediary satisfies the duty if:
(1) the securities intermediary acts as agreed upon by the entitlement holder and the securities
intermediary; or
(2) in the absence of agreement, the securities intermediary exercises due care in accordance with
reasonable commercial standards to follow the direction of the entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section states another aspect of the duties of securities intermediaries that make up security entitlements -
- the obligation of the securities intermediary to change an entitlement holder's position into any other form of
holding for which the entitlement holder is eligible or to transfer the entitlement holder's position to an account at
another intermediary. This section does not state unconditionally that the securities intermediary is obligated to turn
over a certificate to the customer or to cause the customer to be registered on the books of the issuer, because the
customer may not be eligible to hold the security directly. For example, municipal bonds are now commonly issued
in "book-entry only" form, in which the only entity that the issuer will register on its own books is a depository.
If security certificates in registered form are issued for the security, and individuals are eligible to have the security
registered in their own name, the entitlement holder can request that the intermediary deliver or cause to be
delivered to the entitlement holder a certificate registered in the name of the entitlement holder or a certificate
indorsed in blank or specially indorsed to the entitlement holder. If security certificates in bearer form are issued for
the security, the entitlement holder can request that the intermediary deliver or cause to be delivered a certificate in
bearer form. If the security can be held by individuals directly in uncertificated form, the entitlement holder can
request that the security be registered in its name. The specification of this duty does not determine the pricing
terms of the agreement in which the duty arises.
2. The same "agreement/due care" formula is used in this section as in the other Part 5 sections on the duties of
intermediaries. So too, the rules of Section 8-509 apply to the Section 8-508 duty.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Agreement"
Section 1-201(3)
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
§ 8-508. DUTY OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY TO CHANGE ENTITLEMENT HOLDER'S POSITION TO
OTHER FORM OF SECURITY HOLDING
Page 2 of 2
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-509
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-509. SPECIFICATION OF DUTIES OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY BY
OTHER STATUTE OR REGULATION; MANNER OF PERFORMANCE OF
DUTIES OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY AND EXERCISE OF RIGHTS OF
ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
(a) If the substance of a duty imposed upon a securities intermediary by Sections 8-504 through 8-508 is
the subject of other statute, regulation, or rule, compliance with that statute, regulation, or rule satisfies the
duty.
(b) To the extent that specific standards for the performance of the duties of a securities intermediary or
the exercise of the rights of an entitlement holder are not specified by other statute, regulation, or rule or by
agreement between the securities intermediary and entitlement holder, the securities intermediary shall
perform its duties and the entitlement holder shall exercise its rights in a commercially reasonable manner.
(c) The obligation of a securities intermediary to perform the duties imposed by Sections 8-504 through 8-
508 is subject to:
(1) rights of the securities intermediary arising out of a security interest under a security agreement
with the entitlement holder or otherwise; and
(2) rights of the securities intermediary under other law, regulation, rule, or agreement to withhold
performance of its duties as a result of unfulfilled obligations of the entitlement holder to the securities
intermediary.
(d) Sections 8-504 through 8-508 do not require a securities intermediary to take any action that is
prohibited by other statute, regulation, or rule.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This Article is not a comprehensive statement of the law governing the relationship between broker-dealers or
other securities intermediaries and their customers. Most of the law governing that relationship is the common law
of contract and agency, supplemented or supplanted by regulatory law. This Article deals only with the most basic
commercial/property law principles governing the relationship. Although Sections 8-504 through 8-508 specify
certain duties of securities intermediaries to entitlement holders, the point of these sections is to identify what it
means to have a security entitlement, not to specify the details of performance of these duties.
For many intermediaries, regulatory law specifies in great detail the intermediary's obligations on such matters as
safekeeping of customer property, distribution of proxy materials, and the like. To avoid any conflict between the
general statement of duties in this Article and the specific statement of intermediaries' obligations in such regulatory
schemes, subsection (a) provides that compliance with applicable regulation constitutes compliance with the duties
specified in Sections 8-504 through 8-508.
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
§ 8-509. SPECIFICATION OF DUTIES OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY BY OTHER STATUTE OR
REGULATION; MANNER OF PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES OF SECURITIES INTERMEDIARY AND EXER....
Page 2 of 2
"Agreement"
Section 1-201(3)
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security agreement"
Section 9-105(1)(1)
"Security interest"
Section 1-201(37)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-510
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-510. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER OF SECURITY ENTITLEMENT FROM
ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
(a) In a case not covered by the priority rules in Article 9 or the rules stated in subsection (c), an action
based on an adverse claim to a financial asset or security entitlement, whether framed in conversion,
replevin, constructive trust, equitable lien, or other theory, may not be asserted against a person who
purchases a security entitlement, or an interest therein, from an entitlement holder if the purchaser gives
value, does not have notice of the adverse claim, and obtains control.
(b) If an adverse claim could not have been asserted against an entitlement holder under Section 8-502,
the adverse claim cannot be asserted against a person who purchases a security entitlement, or an interest
therein, from the entitlement holder.
(c) In a case not covered by the priority rules in Article 9, a purchaser for value of a security entitlement, or
an interest therein, who obtains control has priority over a purchaser of a security entitlement, or an interest
therein, who does not obtain control. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), purchasers who have
control rank according to priority in time of:
(1) the purchaser's becoming the person for whom the securities account, in which the security
entitlement is carried, is maintained, if the purchaser obtained control under Section 8-106(d)(1);
(2) the securities intermediary's agreement to comply with the purchaser's entitlement orders with
respect to security entitlements carried or to be carried in the securities account in which the security
entitlement is carried, if the purchaser obtained control under Section 8-106(d)(2); or
(3) if the purchaser obtained control through another person under Section 8-106(d)(3), the time on
which priority would be based under this subsection if the other person were the secured party.
(d) A securities intermediary as purchaser has priority over a conflicting purchaser who has control unless
otherwise agreed by the securities intermediary.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section specifies certain rules concerning the rights of persons who purchase interests in security
entitlements from entitlement holders. The rules of this section are provided to take account of cases where the
purchaser's rights are derivative from the rights of another person who is and continues to be the entitlement
holder.
2. Subsection (a) provides that no adverse claim can be asserted against a purchaser of an interest in a security
entitlement if the purchaser gives value, obtains control, and does not have notice of the adverse claim. The
primary purpose of this rule is to give adverse claim protection to persons who take security interests in security
entitlements and obtain control, but do not themselves become entitlement holders.
The following examples illustrate subsection (a):
§ 8-510. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER OF SECURITY ENTITLEMENT FROM ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
Page 2 of 3
Example 1. X steals a certificated bearer bond from Owner. X delivers the certificate to Able & Co. for credit to X's
securities account. Later, X borrows from Bank and grants bank a security interest in the security entitlement. Bank
obtains control under Section 8-106(d)(2) by virtue of an agreement in which Able agrees to comply with entitlement
orders originated by Bank. X absconds.
Example 2. Same facts as in Example 1, except that Bank does not obtain a control agreement. Instead, Bank
perfects by filing a financing statement.
In both of these examples, when X deposited the bonds X acquired a security entitlement under Section 8-501.
Under other law, Owner may be able to have a constructive trust imposed on the security entitlement as the
traceable product of the bonds that X misappropriated. X granted a security interest in that entitlement to Bank.
Bank was a purchaser of an interest in the security entitlement from X. In Example 1, although Bank was not a
person who acquired a security entitlement from the intermediary, Bank did obtain control. If Bank did not have
notice of Owner's claim, Section 8-510(a) precludes Owner from asserting an adverse claim against Bank. In
Example 2, Bank had a perfected security interest, but did not obtain control. Accordingly, Section 8-510(a) does
not preclude Owner from asserting its adverse claim against Bank.
3. Subsection (b) applies to the indirect holding system a limited version of the "shelter principle." The following
example illustrates the relatively limited class of cases for which it may be needed:
Example 3. Thief steals a certificated bearer bond from Owner. Thief delivers the certificate to Able & Co. for
credit to Thief's securities account. Able forwards the certificate to a clearing corporation for credit to Able's
account. Later Thief instructs Able to sell the positions in the bonds. Able sells to Baker & Co., acting as broker for
Buyer. The trade is settled by book-entries in the accounts of Able and Baker at the clearing corporation, and in the
accounts of Thief and Buyer at Able and Baker respectively. Owner may be able to reconstruct the trade records to
show that settlement occurred in such fashion that the "same bonds" that were carried in Thief's account at Able
are traceable into Buyer's account at Baker. Buyer later decides to donate the bonds to Alma Mater University and
executes an assignment of its rights as entitlement holder to Alma Mater.
Buyer had a position in the bonds, which Buyer held in the form of a security entitlement against Baker. Buyer
then made a gift of the position to Alma Mater. Although Alma Mater is a purchaser, Section 1-201(33), it did not
give value. Thus, Alma Mater is a person who purchased a security entitlement, or an interest therein, from an
entitlement holder (Buyer). Buyer was protected against Owner's adverse claim by the Section 8-502 rule. Thus, by
virtue of Section 8-510(b), Owner is also precluded from asserting an adverse claim against Alma Mater.
4. Subsection (c) specifies a priority rule for cases where an entitlement holder transfers conflicting interests in the
same security entitlement to different purchasers. It follows the same principle as the Article 9 priority rule for
investment property, that is, control trumps non-control. Indeed, the most significant category of conflicting
"purchasers" may be secured parties. Priority questions for security interests, however, are governed by the rules in
Article 9. Subsection (c) applies only to cases not covered by the Article 9 rules. It is intended primarily for disputes
over conflicting claims arising out of repurchase agreement transactions that are not covered by the other rules set
out in Articles 8 and 9.
The following example illustrates subsection (c):
Example 4. Dealer holds securities through an account at Alpha Bank. Alpha Bank in turn holds through a
clearing corporation account. Dealer transfers securities to RP1 in a "hold in custody" repo transaction. Dealer then
transfers the same securities to RP2 in another repo transaction. The repo to RP2 is implemented by transferring
the securities from Dealer's regular account at Alpha Bank to a special account maintained by Alpha Bank for
Dealer and RP2. The agreement among Dealer, RP2, and Alpha Bank provides that Dealer can make substitutions
for the securities but RP2 can direct Alpha Bank to sell any securities held in the special account. Dealer becomes
insolvent. RP1 claims a prior interest in the securities transferred to RP2.
In this example Dealer remained the entitlement holder but agreed that RP2 could initiate entitlement orders to
Dealer's security intermediary, Alpha Bank. If RP2 had become the entitlement holder, the adverse claim rule of
Section 8-502 would apply. Even if RP2 does not become the entitlement holder, the arrangement among Dealer,
Alpha Bank, and RP2 does suffice to give RP2 control. Thus, under Section 8-510(c), RP2 has priority over RP1,
because RP2 is a purchaser who obtained control, and RP1 is a purchaser who did not obtain control. The same
result could be reached under Section 8-510(a) which provides that RP1's earlier in time interest cannot be
§ 8-510. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER OF SECURITY ENTITLEMENT FROM ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
Page 3 of 3
asserted as an adverse claim against RP2. The same result would follow under the Article 9 priority rules if the
interests of RP1 and RP2 are characterized as "security interests," see Section 9-328(1). The main point of the
rules of Section 8-510(c) is to ensure that there will be clear rules to cover the conflicting claims of RP1 and RP2
without characterizing their interests as Article 9 security interests.
The priority rules in Article 9 for conflicting security interests also include a default temporal priority rule for cases
where multiple secured parties have obtained control but omitted to specify their respective rights by agreement.
See Section 9-328(2) and Comment 5 to Section 9-328. Because the purchaser priority rule in Section 8-510(c) is
intended to track the Article 9 priority rules, it too has a temporal priority rule for cases where multiple non-secured
party purchasers have obtained control but omitted to specify their respective rights by agreement. The rule is
patterned on Section 9-328(2).
5. If a securities intermediary itself is a purchaser, subsection (d) provides that it has priority over the interest of
another purchaser who has control. Article 9 contains a similar rule. See Section 9-328(3).
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Adverse claim"
Section 8-102(a)(1)
"Control"
Section 8-106
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
"Notice of adverse claim"
Section 8-105
"Purchase"
Section 1-201(32)
"Purchaser"
Sections 1-201(33) & 8-116
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
"Value"
Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-511
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 5. SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS
§ 8-511. PRIORITY AMONG SECURITY INTERESTS AND ENTITLEMENT
HOLDERS
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c), if a securities intermediary does not have
sufficient interests in a particular financial asset to satisfy both its obligations to entitlement holders who
have security entitlements to that financial asset and its obligation to a creditor of the securities
intermediary who has a security interest in that financial asset, the claims of entitlement holders, other than
the creditor, have priority over the claim of the creditor.
(b) A claim of a creditor of a securities intermediary who has a security interest in a financial asset held by
a securities intermediary has priority over claims of the securities intermediary's entitlement holders who
have security entitlements with respect to that financial asset if the creditor has control over the financial
asset.
(c) If a clearing corporation does not have sufficient financial assets to satisfy both its obligations to
entitlement holders who have security entitlements with respect to a financial asset and its obligation to a
creditor of the clearing corporation who has a security interest in that financial asset, the claim of the
creditor has priority over the claims of entitlement holders.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section sets out priority rules for circumstances in which a securities intermediary fails leaving an
insufficient quantity of securities or other financial assets to satisfy the claims of its entitlement holders and the
claims of creditors to whom it has granted security interests in financial assets held by it. Subsection (a) provides
that entitlement holders' claims have priority except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), and subsection (b)
provides that the secured creditor's claim has priority if the secured creditor obtains control, as defined in Section 8-
106. The following examples illustrate the operation of these rules.
Example 1. Able & Co., a broker, borrows from Alpha Bank and grants Alpha Bank a security interest pursuant to
a written agreement which identifies certain securities that are to be collateral for the loan, either specifically or by
category. Able holds these securities in a clearing corporation account. Able becomes insolvent and it is discovered
that Able holds insufficient securities to satisfy the claims of customers who have paid for securities that they held in
accounts with Able and the collateral claims of Alpha Bank. Alpha Bank's security interest in the security
entitlements that Able holds through the clearing corporation account may be perfected under the automatic
perfection rule of Section 9-115(4)(c), but Alpha Bank did not obtain control under Section 8-106. Thus, under
Section 8-511(a) the entitlement holders' claims have priority over Alpha Bank's claim.
Example 2. Able & Co., a broker, borrows from Beta Bank and grants Beta Bank a security interest in securities
that Able holds in a clearing corporation account. Pursuant to the security agreement, the securities are debited
from Alpha's account and credited to Beta's account in the clearing corporation account. Able becomes insolvent
and it is discovered that Able holds insufficient securities to satisfy the claims of customers who have paid for
securities that they held in accounts with Able and the collateral claims of Alpha Bank. Although the transaction
§ 8-511. PRIORITY AMONG SECURITY INTERESTS AND ENTITLEMENT HOLDERS
Page 2 of 3
between Able and Beta took the form of an outright transfer on the clearing corporation's books, as between Able
and Beta, Able remains the owner and Beta has a security interest. In that respect the situation is no different than if
Able had delivered bearer bonds to Beta in pledge to secure a loan. Beta's security interest is perfected, and Beta
obtained control. See Sections 8-106 and 9-115. Under Section 8-511(b), Beta Bank's security interest has priority
over claims of Able's customers.
The result in Example 2 is an application to this particular setting of the general principle expressed in Section 8-
503, and explained in the Comments thereto, that the entitlement holders of a securities intermediary cannot assert
rights against third parties to whom the intermediary has wrongfully transferred interests, except in extremely
unusual circumstances where the third party was itself a participant in the transferor's wrongdoing. Under
subsection (b) the claim of a secured creditor of a securities intermediary has priority over the claims of entitlement
holders if the secured creditor has obtained control. If, however, the secured creditor acted in collusion with the
intermediary in violating the intermediary's obligation to its entitlement holders, then under Section 8-503(e), the
entitlement holders, through their representative in insolvency proceedings, could recover the interest from the
secured creditor, that is, set aside the security interest.
2. The risk that investors who hold through an intermediary will suffer a loss as a result of a wrongful pledge by
the intermediary is no different than the risk that the intermediary might fail and not have the securities that it was
supposed to be holding on behalf of its customers, either because the securities were never acquired by the
intermediary or because the intermediary wrongfully sold securities that should have been kept to satisfy customers'
claims. Investors are protected against that risk by the regulatory regimes under which securities intermediaries
operate. Intermediaries are required to maintain custody, through clearing corporation accounts or in other
approved locations, of their customers' securities and are prohibited from using customers' securities in their own
business activities. Securities firms who are carrying both customer and proprietary positions are not permitted to
grant blanket liens to lenders covering all securities which they hold, for their own account or for their customers.
Rather, securities firms designate specifically which positions they are pledging. Under SEC Rules 8c-1 and 15c2-1,
customers' securities can be pledged only to fund loans to customers, and only with the consent of the customers.
Customers' securities cannot be pledged for loans for the firm's proprietary business; only proprietary positions can
be pledged for proprietary loans. SEC Rule 15c3-3 implements these prohibitions in a fashion tailored to modern
securities firm accounting systems by requiring brokers to maintain a sufficient inventory of securities, free from any
liens, to satisfy the claims of all of their customers for fully paid and excess margin securities. Revised Article 8
mirrors that requirement, specifying in Section 8-504 that a securities intermediary must maintain a sufficient
quantity of investment property to satisfy all security entitlements, and may not grant security interests in the
positions it is required to hold for customers, except as authorized by the customers.
If a failed brokerage has violated the customer protection regulations and does not have sufficient securities to
satisfy customers' claims, its customers are protected against loss from a shortfall by the Securities Investor
Protection Act ("SIPA"). Securities firms required to register as brokers or dealers are also required to become
members of the Securities Investor Protection Corporation ("SIPC"), which provides their customers with protection
somewhat similar to that provided by FDIC and other deposit insurance programs for bank depositors. When a
member firm fails, SIPC is authorized to initiate a liquidation proceeding under the provisions of SIPA. If the assets
of the securities firm are insufficient to satisfy all customer claims, SIPA makes contributions to the estate from a
fund financed by assessments on its members to protect customers against losses up to $ 500,000 for cash and
securities held at member firms.
Article 8 is premised on the view that the important policy of protecting investors against the risk of wrongful
conduct by their intermediaries is sufficiently treated by other law.
3. Subsection (c) sets out a special rule for secured financing provided to enable clearing corporations to
complete settlement. The reasons that secured financing arrangements are needed in such circumstances are
explained in Comment 7 to Section 9-115. In order to permit clearing corporations to establish liquidity facilities
where necessary to ensure completion of settlement, subsection (c) provides a priority for secured lenders to such
clearing corporations. Subsection (c) does not turn on control because the clearing corporation may be the top tier
securities intermediary for the securities pledged, so that there may be no practicable method for conferring control
on the lender.
§ 8-511. PRIORITY AMONG SECURITY INTERESTS AND ENTITLEMENT HOLDERS
Page 3 of 3
DEFINITIONAL CROSS REFERENCES
"Clearing corporation"
Section 8-102(a)(5)
"Control"
Section 8-106
"Entitlement holder"
Section 8-102(a)(7)
"Financial asset"
Section 8-102(a)(9)
"Securities intermediary"
Section 8-102(a)(14)
"Security entitlement"
Section 8-102(a)(17)
"Security interest"
Section 1-201(37)
"Value"
Sections 1-201(44) & 8-116
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-601
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 6. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR REVISED ARTICLE 8 AND CONFORMING
AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLES 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, AND 10
§ 8-601. EFFECTIVE DATE
This [Act] takes effect … .
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-602
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 6. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR REVISED ARTICLE 8 AND CONFORMING
AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLES 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, AND 10
§ 8-602. REPEALS
This [Act] repeals … .
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
If the State has adopted the Uniform Act for the Simplification of Fiduciary Security Transfers, or similar
legislation, it should be repealed.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 8-603
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
> PART 6. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR REVISED ARTICLE 8 AND CONFORMING
AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLES 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, AND 10
§ 8-603. SAVINGS CLAUSE
(a) This [Act] does not affect an action or proceeding commenced before this [Act] takes effect.
(b) If a security interest in a security is perfected at the date this [Act] takes effect, and the action by which
the security interest was perfected would suffice to perfect a security interest under this [Act], no further
action is required to continue perfection. If a security interest in a security is perfected at the date this [Act]
takes effect but the action by which the security interest was perfected would not suffice to perfect a
security interest under this [Act], the security interest remains perfected for a period of four months after the
effective date and continues perfected thereafter if appropriate action to perfect under this [Act] is taken
within that period. If a security interest is perfected at the date this [Act] takes effect and the security
interest can be perfected by filing under this [Act], a financing statement signed by the secured party
instead of the debtor may be filed within that period to continue perfection or thereafter to perfect.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
The revision of Article 8 should present few significant transition problems. Although the revision involves
significant changes in terminology and analysis, the substantive rules are, in large measure, based upon the current
practices and are consistent with results that could be reached, albeit at times with some struggle, by proper
interpretation of the rules of present law. Thus, the new rules can be applied, without significant dislocations, to
transactions and events that occurred prior to enactment.
The enacting provisions should not, whether by applicability, transition, or savings clause language, attempt to
provide that old Article 8 continues to apply to "transactions," "events," "rights," "duties," "liabilities," or the like that
occurred or accrued before the effective date and that new Article 8 applies to those that occur or accrue after the
effective date. The reason for revising Article 8 and corresponding provisions of Article 9 is the concern that the
provisions of old Article 8 could be interpreted or misinterpreted to yield results that impede the safe and efficient
operation of the national system for the clearance and settlement of securities transactions. Accordingly, it is not the
case that any effort should be made to preserve the applicability of old Article 8 to transactions and events that
occurred before the effective date.
Only two circumstances seem to warrant continued application of rules of old Article 8. First, to avoid disruption in
the conduct of litigation, it may make sense to provide for continued application of the old Article 8 rules to lawsuits
pending before the effective date. Second, there are some limited circumstances in which prior law permitted
perfection of security interests by methods that are not provided for in the revised version. Section 8-313(1)(h)
(1978) permitted perfection of security interests in securities held through intermediaries by notice to the
intermediary. Under Revised Articles 8 and 9, security interests can be perfected in such cases by control, which
requires the agreement of the intermediary, or by filing. It is likely that secured parties who relied strongly on such
collateral under prior law did not simply send notices but obtained agreements from the intermediaries that would
suffice for control under the new rules. However, it seems appropriate to include a provision that gives a secured
§ 8-603. SAVINGS CLAUSE
Page 2 of 2
creditor some opportunity after the effective date to perfect in this or any other case in which there is doubt whether
the method of perfection used under prior law would be sufficient under the new version.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS > SUBPART 1. SHORT TITLE, DEFINITIONS,
AND GENERAL CONCEPTS
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
This article may be cited as Uniform Commercial Code--Secured Transactions.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. This Article supersedes former Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) Article 9. As did its predecessor, it
provides a comprehensive scheme for the regulation of security interests in personal property and fixtures. For the
most part this Article follows the general approach and retains much of the terminology of former Article 9. In
addition to describing many aspects of the operation and interpretation of this Article, these Comments explain the
material changes that this Article makes to former Article 9. Former Article 9 superseded the wide variety of pre-
UCC security devices. Unlike the Comments to former Article 9, however, these Comments dwell very little on the
pre-UCC state of the law. For that reason, the Comments to former Article 9 will remain of substantial historical
value and interest. They also will remain useful in understanding the background and general conceptual approach
of this Article.
Citations to "Bankruptcy Code Section ___" in these Comments are to Title 11 of the United States Code as in
effect on July 1, 2010.
2. Background and History. In 1990, the Permanent Editorial Board for the UCC with the support of its
sponsors, The American Law Institute and the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws,
established a committee to study Article 9 of the UCC. The study committee issued its report as of December 1,
1992, recommending the creation of a drafting committee for the revision of Article 9 and also recommending
numerous specific changes to Article 9. Organized in 1993, a drafting committee met fifteen times from 1993 to
1998. This Article was approved by its sponsors in 1998. This Article was conformed to revised Article 1 in 2001
and to amendments to Article 7 in 2003. The sponsors approved amendments to selected sections of this Article in
2010.
3. Reorganization and Renumbering; Captions; Style. This Article reflects a substantial reorganization of
former Article 9 and renumbering of most sections. New Part 4 deals with several aspects of third-party rights and
duties that are unrelated to perfection and priority. Some of these were covered by Part 3 of former Article 9. Part 5
deals with filing (covered by former Part 4) and Part 6 deals with default and enforcement (covered by former Part
5). Appendix I contains conforming revisions to other articles of the UCC, and Appendix II contains model
provisions for production-money priority.
This Article also includes headings for the subsections as an aid to readers. Unlike section captions, which are
part of the UCC, see Section 1-107, subsection headings are not a part of the official text itself and have not been
approved by the sponsors. Each jurisdiction in which this Article is introduced may consider whether to adopt the
headings as a part of the statute and whether to adopt a provision clarifying the effect, if any, to be given to the
headings. This Article also has been conformed to current style conventions.
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 2 of 11
4. Summary of Revisions. Following is a brief summary of some of the more significant revisions of Article 9 that
are included in the 1998 revision of this Article.
a. Scope of Article 9. This Article expands the scope of Article 9 in several respects.
Deposit accounts. Section 9-109 includes within this Article's scope deposit accounts as original collateral, except
in consumer transactions. Former Article 9 dealt with deposit accounts only as proceeds of other collateral.
Sales of payment intangibles and promissory notes. Section 9-109 also includes within the scope of this Article
most sales of "payment intangibles" (defined in Section 9-102 as general intangibles under which an account
debtor's principal obligation is monetary) and "promissory notes" (also defined in Section 9-102). Former Article 9
included sales of accounts and chattel paper, but not sales of payment intangibles or promissory notes. In its
inclusion of sales of payment intangibles and promissory notes, this Article continues the drafting convention found
in former Article 9; it provides that the sale of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes
creates a "security interest." The definition of "account" in Section 9-102 also has been expanded to include various
rights to payment that were general intangibles under former Article 9.
Health-care-insurance receivables. Section 9-109 narrows Article 9's exclusion of transfers of interests in
insurance policies by carving out of the exclusion "health-care-insurance receivables" (defined in Section 9-102). A
health-care-insurance receivable is included within the definition of "account" in Section 9-102.
Nonpossessory statutory agricultural liens. Section 9-109 also brings nonpossessory statutory agricultural liens
within the scope of Article 9.
Consignments. Section 9-109 provides that "true" consignments--bailments for the purpose of sale by the bailee--
are security interests covered by Article 9, with certain exceptions. See Section 9-102 (defining "consignment").
Currently, many consignments are subject to Article 9's filing requirements by operation of former Section 2-326.
Supporting obligations and property securing rights to payment. This Article also addresses explicitly (i)
obligations, such as guaranties and letters of credit, that support payment or performance of collateral such as
accounts, chattel paper, and payment intangibles, and (ii) any property (including real property) that secures a right
to payment or performance that is subject to an Article 9 security interest. See Sections 9-203, 9-308.
Commercial tort claims. Section 9-109 expands the scope of Article 9 to include the assignment of commercial
tort claims by narrowing the exclusion of tort claims generally. However, this Article continues to exclude tort claims
for bodily injury and other non-business tort claims of a natural person. See Section 9-102 (defining "commercial
tort claim").
Transfers by States and governmental units of States. Section 9-109 narrows the exclusion of transfers by States
and their governmental units. It excludes only transfers covered by another statute (other than a statute generally
applicable to security interests) to the extent the statute governs the creation, perfection, priority, or enforcement of
security interests.
Nonassignable general intangibles, promissory notes, health-care-insurance receivables, and letter-of-credit
rights. This Article enables a security interest to attach to letter-of-credit rights, health-care-insurance receivables,
promissory notes, and general intangibles, including contracts, permits, licenses, and franchises, notwithstanding a
contractual or statutory prohibition against or limitation on assignment. This Article explicitly protects third parties
against any adverse effect of the creation or attempted enforcement of the security interest. See Sections 9-408, 9-
409.
Subject to Sections 9-408 and 9-409 and two other exceptions (Sections 9-406, concerning accounts, chattel
paper, and payment intangibles, and 9-407, concerning interests in leased goods), Section 9-401 establishes a
baseline rule that the inclusion of transactions and collateral within the scope of Article 9 has no effect on non-
Article 9 law dealing with the alienability or inalienability of property. For example, if a commercial tort claim is
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 3 of 11
nonassignable under other applicable law, the fact that a security interest in the claim is within the scope of Article 9
does not override the other applicable law's effective prohibition of assignment.
b. Duties of Secured Party. This Article provides for expanded duties of secured parties.
Release of control. Section 9-208 imposes upon a secured party having control of a deposit account, investment
property, or a letter-of-credit right the duty to release control when there is no secured obligation and no
commitment to give value. Section 9-209 contains analogous provisions when an account debtor has been notified
to pay a secured party.
Information. Section 9-210 expands a secured party's duties to provide the debtor with information concerning
collateral and the obligations that it secures.
Default and enforcement. Part 6 also includes some additional duties of secured parties in connection with default
and enforcement. See, e.g., Section 9-616 (duty to explain calculation of deficiency or surplus in a consumer-goods
transaction).
c. Choice of Law. The choice-of-law rules for the law governing perfection, the effect of perfection or
nonperfection, and priority are found in Part 3, Subpart 1 (Sections 9-301 through 9-307). See also Section 9-316.
Where to file: Location of debtor. This Article changes the choice-of-law rule governing perfection (i.e., where to
file) for most collateral to the law of the jurisdiction where the debtor is located. See Section 9-301. Under former
Article 9, the jurisdiction of the debtor's location governed only perfection and priority of a security interest in
accounts, general intangibles, mobile goods, and, for purposes of perfection by filing, chattel paper and investment
property.
Determining debtor's location. As a baseline rule, Section 9-307 follows former Section 9-103, under which the
location of the debtor is the debtor's place of business (or chief executive office, if the debtor has more than one
place of business). Section 9-307 contains three major exceptions. First, a "registered organization," such as a
corporation or limited liability company, is located in the State under whose law the debtor is organized, e.g., a
corporate debtor's State of incorporation. Second, an individual debtor is located at his or her principal residence.
Third, there are special rules for determining the location of the United States and registered organizations
organized under the law of the United States.
Location of non-U.S. debtors. If, applying the foregoing rules, a debtor is located in a jurisdiction whose law does
not require public notice as a condition of perfection of a nonpossessory security interest, the entity is deemed
located in the District of Columbia. See Section 9-307. Thus, to the extent that this Article applies to non-U.S.
debtors, perfection could be accomplished in many cases by a domestic filing.
Priority. For tangible collateral such as goods and instruments, Section 9-301 provides that the law applicable to
priority and the effect of perfection or nonperfection will remain the law of the jurisdiction where the collateral is
located, as under former Section 9-103 (but without the confusing "last event" test). For intangible collateral, such
as accounts, the applicable law for priority will be that of the jurisdiction in which the debtor is located.
Possessory security interests; agricultural liens. Perfection, the effect of perfection or nonperfection, and priority of
a possessory security interest or an agricultural lien are governed by the law of the jurisdiction where the collateral
subject to the security interest or lien is located. See Sections 9-301, 9-302.
Goods covered by certificates of title; deposit accounts; letter-of-credit rights; investment property. This Article
includes several refinements to the treatment of choice-of-law matters for goods covered by certificates of title. See
Section 9-303. It also provides special choice-of-law rules, similar to those for investment property under current
Articles 8 and 9, for deposit accounts (Section 9-304), investment property (Section 9-305), and letter-of-credit
rights (Section 9-306).
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 4 of 11
Change in applicable law. Section 9-316 addresses perfection following a change in applicable law.
d. Perfection. The rules governing perfection of security interests and agricultural liens are found in Part 3,
Subpart 2 (Sections 9-308 through 9-316).
Deposit accounts; letter-of-credit rights. With certain exceptions, this Article provides that a security interest in a
deposit account or a letter-of-credit right may be perfected only by the secured party's acquiring "control" of the
deposit account or letter-of-credit right. See Sections 9-312, 9-314. Under Section 9-104, a secured party has
"control" of a deposit account when, with the consent of the debtor, the secured party obtains the depositary bank's
agreement to act on the secured party's instructions (including when the secured party becomes the account
holder) or when the secured party is itself the depositary bank. The control requirements are patterned on Section
8-106, which specifies the requirements for control of investment property. Under Section 9-107, "control" of a
letter-of-credit right occurs when the issuer or nominated person consents to an assignment of proceeds under
Section 5-114.
Electronic chattel paper. Section 9-102 includes a new defined term: "electronic chattel paper." Electronic chattel
paper is a record or records consisting of information stored in an electronic medium (i.e., it is not written).
Perfection of a security interest in electronic chattel paper may be by control or filing. See Sections 9-105 (sui
generis definition of control of electronic chattel paper), 9-312 (perfection by filing), 9-314 (perfection by control).
Investment property. The perfection requirements for "investment property" (defined in Section 9-102), including
perfection by control under Section 9-106, remain substantially unchanged. However, a new provision in Section 9-
314 is designed to ensure that a secured party retains control in "repledge" transactions that are typical in the
securities markets.
Instruments, agricultural liens, and commercial tort claims. This Article expands the types of collateral in which a
security interest may be perfected by filing to include instruments. See Section 9-312. Agricultural liens and security
interests in commercial tort claims also are perfected by filing, under this Article. See Sections 9-308, 9-310.
Sales of payment intangibles and promissory notes. Although former Article 9 covered the outright sale of
accounts and chattel paper, sales of most other types of receivables also are financing transactions to which Article
9 should apply. Accordingly, Section 9-102 expands the definition of "account" to include many types of receivables
(including "health-care-insurance receivables," defined in Section 9-102) that former Article 9 classified as "general
intangibles." It thereby subjects to Article 9's filing system sales of more types of receivables than did former Article
9. Certain sales of payment intangibles--primarily bank loan participation transactions--should not be subject to the
Article 9 filing rules. These transactions fall in a residual category of collateral, "payment intangibles" (general
intangibles under which the account debtor's principal obligation is monetary), the sale of which is exempt from the
filing requirements of Article 9. See Sections 9-102, 9-109, 9-309 (perfection upon attachment). The perfection rules
for sales of promissory notes are the same as those for sales of payment intangibles.
Possessory security interests. Several provisions of this Article address aspects of security interests involving a
secured party or a third party who is in possession of the collateral. In particular, Section 9-313 resolves a number
of uncertainties under former Section 9-305. It provides that a security interest in collateral in the possession of a
third party is perfected when the third party acknowledges in an authenticated record that it holds for the secured
party's benefit. Section 9-313 also provides that a third party need not so acknowledge and that its acknowledgment
does not impose any duties on it, unless it otherwise agrees. A special rule in Section 9-313 provides that if a
secured party already is in possession of collateral, its security interest remains perfected by possession if it
delivers the collateral to a third party and the collateral is accompanied by instructions to hold it for the secured
party or to redeliver it to the secured party. Section 9-313 also clarifies the limited circumstances under which a
security interest in goods covered by a certificate of title may be perfected by the secured party's taking possession.
Automatic perfection. Section 9-309 lists various types of security interests as to which no public-notice step is
required for perfection (e.g., purchase-money security interests in consumer goods other than automobiles). This
automatic perfection also extends to a transfer of a health-care-insurance receivable to a health-care provider.
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 5 of 11
Those transfers normally will be made by natural persons who receive health-care services; there is little value in
requiring filing for perfection in that context. Automatic perfection also applies to security interests created by sales
of payment intangibles and promissory notes. Section 9-308 provides that a perfected security interest in collateral
supported by a "supporting obligation" (such as an account supported by a guaranty) also is a perfected security
interest in the supporting obligation, and that a perfected security interest in an obligation secured by a security
interest or lien on property (e.g., a real-property mortgage) also is a perfected security interest in the security
interest or lien.
e. Priority; Special Rules for Banks and Deposit Accounts. The rules governing priority of security interests
and agricultural liens are found in Part 3, Subpart 3 (Sections 9-317 through 9-342). This Article includes several
new priority rules and some special rules relating to banks and deposit accounts (Sections 9-340 through 9-342).
Purchase-money security interests: General; consumer-goods transactions; inventory. Section 9-103 substantially
rewrites the definition of purchase-money security interest (PMSI) (although the term is not formally "defined"). The
substantive changes, however, apply only to non-consumer-goods transactions. (Consumer transactions and
consumer-goods transactions are discussed below in Comment 4.j.) For non-consumer-goods transactions, Section
9-103 makes clear that a security interest in collateral may be (to some extent) both a PMSI as well as a non-PMSI,
in accord with the "dual status" rule applied by some courts under former Article 9 (thereby rejecting the
"transformation" rule). The definition provides an even broader conception of a PMSI in inventory, yielding a result
that accords with private agreements entered into in response to the uncertainty under former Article 9. It also treats
consignments as purchase-money security interests in inventory. Section 9-324 revises the PMSI priority rules, but
for the most part without material change in substance. Section 9-324 also clarifies the priority rules for competing
PMSIs in the same collateral.
Purchase-money security interests in livestock; agricultural liens. Section 9-324 provides a special PMSI priority,
similar to the inventory PMSI priority rule, for livestock. Section 9-322 (which contains the baseline first-to-file-orperfect
priority rule) also recognizes special non-Article 9 priority rules for agricultural liens, which can override the
baseline first-in-time rule.
Purchase-money security interests in software. Section 9-324 contains a new priority rule for a software
purchase-money security interest. (Section 9-102 includes a definition of "software.") Under Section 9-103, a
software PMSI includes a PMSI in software that is used in goods that are also subject to a PMSI. (Note also that the
definition of "chattel paper" has been expanded to include records that evidence a monetary obligation and a
security interest in specific goods and software used in the goods.)
Investment property. The priority rules for investment property are substantially similar to the priority rules found in
former Section 9-115, which was added in conjunction with the 1994 revisions to UCC Article 8. Under Section 9-
328, if a secured party has control of investment property (Sections 8-106, 9-106), its security interest is senior to a
security interest perfected in another manner (e.g., by filing). Also under Section 9-328, security interests perfected
by control generally rank according to the time that control is obtained or, in the case of a security entitlement or a
commodity contract carried in a commodity account, the time when the control arrangement is entered into. This is
a change from former Section 9-115, under which the security interests ranked equally. However, as between a
securities intermediary's security interest in a security entitlement that it maintains for the debtor and a security
interest held by another secured party, the securities intermediary's security interest is senior.
Deposit accounts. This Article's priority rules applicable to deposit accounts are found in Section 9-327. They are
patterned on and are similar to those for investment property in former Section 9-115 and Section 9-328 of this
Article. Under Section 9-327, if a secured party has control of a deposit account, its security interest is senior to a
security interest perfected in another manner (i.e., as cash proceeds). Also under Section 9-327, security interests
perfected by control rank according to the time that control is obtained, but as between a depositary bank's security
interest and one held by another secured party, the depositary bank's security interest is senior. A corresponding
rule in Section 9-340 makes a depositary bank's right of set-off generally senior to a security interest held by
another secured party. However, if the other secured party becomes the depositary bank's customer with respect to
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 6 of 11
the deposit account, then its security interest is senior to the depositary bank's security interest and right of set-off.
Sections 9-327, 9-340.
Letter-of-credit rights. The priority rules for security interests in letter-of-credit rights are found in Section 9-329.
They are somewhat analogous to those for deposit accounts. A security interest perfected by control has priority
over one perfected in another manner (i.e., as a supporting obligation for the collateral in which a security interest is
perfected). Security interests in a letter-of-credit right perfected by control rank according to the time that control is
obtained. However, the rights of a transferee beneficiary or a nominated person are independent and superior to
the extent provided in Section 5-114. See Section 9-109(c)(4).
Chattel paper and instruments. Section 9-330 is the successor to former Section 9-308. As under former Section
9-308, differing priority rules apply to purchasers of chattel paper who give new value and take possession (or, in
the case of electronic chattel paper, obtain control) of the collateral depending on whether a conflicting security
interest in the collateral is claimed merely as proceeds. The principal change relates to the role of knowledge and
the effect of an indication of a previous assignment of the collateral. Section 9-330 also affords priority to
purchasers of instruments who take possession in good faith and without knowledge that the purchase violates the
rights of the competing secured party. In addition, to qualify for priority, purchasers of chattel paper, but not of
instruments, must purchase in the ordinary course of business.
Proceeds. Section 9-322 contains new priority rules that clarify when a special priority of a security interest in
collateral continues or does not continue with respect to proceeds of the collateral. Other refinements to the priority
rules for proceeds are included in Sections 9-324 (purchase-money security interest priority) and 9-330 (priority of
certain purchasers of chattel paper and instruments).
Miscellaneous priority provisions. This Article also includes (i) clarifications of selected good-faith-purchase and
similar issues (Sections 9-317, 9-331); (ii) new priority rules to deal with the "double debtor" problem arising when a
debtor creates a security interest in collateral acquired by the debtor subject to a security interest created by
another person (Section 9-325); (iii) new priority rules to deal with the problems created when a change in corporate
structure or the like results in a new entity that has become bound by the original debtor's after-acquired property
agreement (Section 9-326); (iv) a provision enabling most transferees of funds from a deposit account or money to
take free of a security interest (Section 9-332); (v) substantially rewritten and refined priority rules dealing with
accessions and commingled goods (Sections 9-335, 9-336); (vi) revised priority rules for security interests in goods
covered by a certificate of title (Section 9-337); and (vii) provisions designed to ensure that security interests in
deposit accounts will not extend to most transferees of funds on deposit or payees from deposit accounts and will
not otherwise "clog" the payments system (Sections 9-341, 9-342).
Model provisions relating to production-money security interests. Appendix II to this Article contains model
definitions and priority rules relating to "production-money security interests" held by secured parties who give new
value used in the production of crops. Because no consensus emerged on the wisdom of these provisions during
the drafting process, the sponsors make no recommendation on whether these model provisions should be
enacted.
f. Proceeds. Section 9-102 contains an expanded definition of "proceeds" of collateral which includes additional
rights and property that arise out of collateral, such as distributions on account of collateral and claims arising out of
the loss or nonconformity of, defects in, or damage to collateral. The term also includes collections on account of
"supporting obligations," such as guarantees.
g. Part 4: Additional Provisions Relating to Third-Party Rights. New Part 4 contains several provisions
relating to the relationships between certain third parties and the parties to secured transactions. It contains new
Sections 9-401 (replacing former Section 9-311) (alienability of debtor's rights), 9-402 (replacing former Section 9-
317) (secured party not obligated on debtor's contracts), 9-403 (replacing former Section 9-206) (agreement not to
assert defenses against assignee), 9-404, 9-405, and 9-406 (replacing former Section 9-318) (rights acquired by
assignee, modification of assigned contract, discharge of account debtor, restrictions on assignment of account,
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 7 of 11
chattel paper, promissory note, or payment intangible ineffective), 9-407 (replacing some provisions of former
Section 2A-303) (restrictions on creation or enforcement of security interest in leasehold interest or lessor's residual
interest ineffective). It also contains new Sections 9-408 (restrictions on assignment of promissory notes, healthcare-
insurance receivables ineffective, and certain general intangibles ineffective) and 9-409 (restrictions on
assignment of letter-of-credit rights ineffective), which are discussed above.
h. Filing. Part 5 (formerly Part 4) of Article 9 has been substantially rewritten to simplify the statutory text and to
deal with numerous problems of interpretation and implementation that have arisen over the years.
Medium-neutrality. This Article is "medium-neutral"; that is, it makes clear that parties may file and otherwise
communicate with a filing office by means of records communicated and stored in media other than on paper.
Identity of person who files a record; authorization. Part 5 is largely indifferent as to the person who effects a
filing. Instead, it addresses whose authorization is necessary for a person to file a record with a filing office. The
filing scheme does not contemplate that the identity of a "filer" will be a part of the searchable records. This
approach is consistent with, and a necessary aspect of, eliminating signatures or other evidence of authorization
from the system (except to the extent that filing offices may choose to employ authentication procedures in
connection with electronic communications). As long as the appropriate person authorizes the filing, or, in the case
of a termination statement, the debtor is entitled to the termination, it is largely insignificant whether the secured
party or another person files any given record.
Section 9-509 collects in one place most of the rules that determine when a record may be filed. In general, the
debtor's authorization is required for the filing of an initial financing statement or an amendment that adds collateral.
With one further exception, a secured party of record's authorization is required for the filing of other amendments.
The exception arises if a secured party has failed to provide a termination statement that is required because there
is no outstanding secured obligation or commitment to give value. In that situation, a debtor is authorized to file a
termination statement indicating that it has been filed by the debtor.
Financing statement formal requisites. The formal requisites for a financing statement are set out in Section 9-
502. A financing statement must provide the name of the debtor and the secured party and an indication of the
collateral that it covers. Sections 9-503 and 9-506 address the sufficiency of a name provided on a financing
statement and clarify when a debtor's name is correct and when an incorrect name is insufficient. Section 9-504
addresses the indication of collateral covered. Under Section 9-504, a super-generic description (e.g., "all assets"
or "all personal property") in a financing statement is a sufficient indication of the collateral. (Note, however, that a
super-generic description is inadequate for purposes of a security agreement. See Sections 9-108, 9-203.) To
facilitate electronic filing, this Article does not require that the debtor's signature or other authorization appear on a
financing statement. Instead, it prohibits the filing of unauthorized financing statements and imposes liability upon
those who violate the prohibition. See Sections 9-509, 9-626.
Filing-office operations. Part 5 contains several provisions governing filing operations. First, it prohibits the filing
office from rejecting an initial financing statement or other record for a reason other than one of the few that are
specified. See Sections 9-520, 9-516. Second, the filing office is obliged to link all subsequent records (e.g.,
assignments, continuation statements, etc.) to the initial financing statement to which they relate. See Section 9-
519. Third, the filing office may delete a financing statement and related records from the files no earlier than one
year after lapse (lapse normally is five years after the filing date), and then only if a continuation statement has not
been filed. See Sections 9-515, 9-519, 9-522. Thus, a financing statement and related records would be discovered
by a search of the files even after the filing of a termination statement. This approach helps eliminate filing-office
discretion and also eases problems associated with multiple secured parties and multiple partial assignments.
Fourth, Part 5 mandates performance standards for filing offices. See Sections 9-519, 9-520, 9-523. Fifth, it
provides for the promulgation of filing-office rules to deal with details best left out of the statute and requires the
filing office to submit periodic reports. See Sections 9-526, 9-527.
Defaulting or missing secured parties and fraudulent filings. In some areas of the country, serious problems have
arisen from fraudulent financing statements that are filed against public officials and other persons. This Article
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 8 of 11
addresses the fraud problem by providing the opportunity for a debtor to file a termination statement when a
secured party wrongfully refuses or fails to provide a termination statement. See Section 9-509. This opportunity
also addresses the problem of secured parties that simply disappear through mergers or liquidations. In addition,
Section 9-518 affords a statutory method by which a debtor who believes that a filed record is inaccurate or was
wrongfully filed may indicate that fact in the files, albeit without affecting the efficacy, if any, of the challenged
record.
Extended period of effectiveness for certain financing statements. Section 9-515 contains an exception to the
usual rule that financing statements are effective for five years unless a continuation statement is filed to continue
the effectiveness for another five years. Under that section, an initial financing statement filed in connection with a
"public-finance transaction" or a "manufactured-home transaction" (terms defined in Section 9-102) is effective for
30 years.
National form of financing statement and related forms. Section 9-521 provides for uniform, national written forms
of financing statements and related written records that must be accepted by a filing office that accepts written
records.
i. Default and Enforcement. Part 6 of Article 9 extensively revises former Part 5. Provisions relating to
enforcement of consumer-goods transactions and consumer transactions are discussed in Comment 4.j.
Debtor, secondary obligor; waiver. Section 9-602 clarifies the identity of persons who have rights and persons to
whom a secured party owes specified duties under Part 6. Under that section, the rights and duties are enjoyed by
and run to the "debtor," defined in Section 9-102 to mean any person with a non-lien property interest in collateral,
and to any "obligor." However, with one exception (Section 9-616, as it relates to a consumer obligor), the rights
and duties concerned affect non-debtor obligors only if they are "secondary obligors." "Secondary obligor" is
defined in Section 9-102 to include one who is secondarily obligated on the secured obligation, e.g., a guarantor, or
one who has a right of recourse against the debtor or another obligor with respect to an obligation secured by
collateral. However, under Section 9-628, the secured party is relieved from any duty or liability to any person
unless the secured party knows that the person is a debtor or obligor. Resolving an issue on which courts disagreed
under former Article 9, this Article generally prohibits waiver by a secondary obligor of its rights and a secured
party's duties under Part 6. See Section 9-602. However, Section 9-624 permits a secondary obligor or debtor to
waive the right to notification of disposition of collateral and, in a non-consumer transaction, the right to redeem
collateral, if the secondary obligor or debtor agrees to do so after default.
Rights of collection and enforcement of collateral. Section 9-607 explains in greater detail than former 9-502 the
rights of a secured party who seeks to collect or enforce collateral, including accounts, chattel paper, and payment
intangibles. It also sets forth the enforcement rights of a depositary bank holding a security interest in a deposit
account maintained with the depositary bank. Section 9-607 relates solely to the rights of a secured party vis-a-vis a
debtor with respect to collections and enforcement. It does not affect the rights or duties of third parties, such as
account debtors on collateral, which are addressed elsewhere (e.g., Section 9-406). Section 9-608 clarifies the
manner in which proceeds of collection or enforcement are to be applied.
Disposition of collateral: Warranties of title. Section 9-610 imposes on a secured party who disposes of collateral
the warranties of title, quiet possession, and the like that are otherwise applicable under other law. It also provides
rules for the exclusion or modification of those warranties.
Disposition of collateral: Notification, application of proceeds, surplus and deficiency, other effects. Section 9-611
requires a secured party to give notification of a disposition of collateral to other secured parties and lienholders
who have filed financing statements against the debtor covering the collateral. (That duty was eliminated by the
1972 revisions to Article 9.) However, that section relieves the secured party from that duty when the secured party
undertakes a search of the records and a report of the results is unreasonably delayed. Section 9-613, which
applies only to non-consumer transactions, specifies the contents of a sufficient notification of disposition and
provides that a notification sent 10 days or more before the earliest time for disposition is sent within a reasonable
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 9 of 11
time. Section 9-615 addresses the application of proceeds of disposition, the entitlement of a debtor to any surplus,
and the liability of an obligor for any deficiency. Section 9-619 clarifies the effects of a disposition by a secured
party, including the rights of transferees of the collateral.
Rights and duties of secondary obligor. Section 9-618 provides that a secondary obligor obtains the rights and
assumes the duties of a secured party if the secondary obligor receives an assignment of a secured obligation,
agrees to assume the secured party's rights and duties upon a transfer to it of collateral, or becomes subrogated to
the rights of the secured party with respect to the collateral. The assumption, transfer, or subrogation is not a
disposition of collateral under Section 9-610, but it does relieve the former secured party of further duties. Former
Section 9-504(5) did not address whether a secured party was relieved of its duties in this situation.
Transfer of record or legal title. Section 9-619 contains a new provision making clear that a transfer of record or
legal title to a secured party is not of itself a disposition under Part 6. This rule applies regardless of the
circumstances under which the transfer of title occurs.
Strict foreclosure. Section 9-620, unlike former Section 9-505, permits a secured party to accept collateral in
partial satisfaction, as well as full satisfaction, of the obligations secured. This right of strict foreclosure extends to
intangible as well as tangible property. Section 9-622 clarifies the effects of an acceptance of collateral on the rights
of junior claimants. It rejects the approach taken by some courts--deeming a secured party to have constructively
retained collateral in satisfaction of the secured obligations--in the case of a secured party's unreasonable delay in
the disposition of collateral. Instead, unreasonable delay is relevant when determining whether a disposition under
Section 9-610 is commercially reasonable.
Effect of noncompliance: "Rebuttable presumption" test. Section 9-626 adopts the "rebuttable presumption" test
for the failure of a secured party to proceed in accordance with certain provisions of Part 6. (As discussed in
Comment 4.j., the test does not necessarily apply to consumer transactions.) Under this approach, the deficiency
claim of a noncomplying secured party is calculated by crediting the obligor with the greater of the actual net
proceeds of a disposition and the amount of net proceeds that would have been realized if the disposition had been
conducted in accordance with Part 6 (e.g., in a commercially reasonable manner). For non-consumer transactions,
Section 9-626 rejects the "absolute bar" test that some courts have imposed; that approach bars a noncomplying
secured party from recovering any deficiency, regardless of the loss (if any) the debtor suffered as a consequence
of the noncompliance.
"Low-price" dispositions: Calculation of deficiency and surplus. Section 9-615(f) addresses the problem of
procedurally regular dispositions that fetch a low price. Subsection (f) provides a special method for calculating a
deficiency if the proceeds of a disposition of collateral to a secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a
secondary obligor are "significantly below the range of proceeds that a complying disposition to a person other than
the secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor would have brought." ("Person
related to" is defined in Section 9-102.) In these situations there is reason to suspect that there may be inadequate
incentives to obtain a better price. Consequently, instead of calculating a deficiency (or surplus) based on the actual
net proceeds, the deficiency (or surplus) would be calculated based on the proceeds that would have been received
in a disposition to a person other than the secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a secondary
obligor.
j. Consumer Goods, Consumer-Goods Transactions, and Consumer Transactions. This Article (including
the accompanying conforming revisions (see Appendix I)) includes several special rules for "consumer goods,"
"consumer transactions," and "consumer-goods transactions." Each term is defined in Section 9-102.
(i) Revised Sections 2-502 and 2-716 provide a buyer of consumer goods with enhanced rights to possession of
the goods, thereby accelerating the opportunity to achieve "buyer in ordinary course of business" status under
Section 1-201.
(ii) Section 9-103(e) (allocation of payments for determining extent of purchase-money status), (f) (purchasemoney
status not affected by cross-collateralization, refinancing, restructuring, or the like), and (g) (secured party
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 10 of 11
has burden of establishing extent of purchase-money status) do not apply to consumer-goods transactions.
Sections 9-103 also provides that the limitation of those provisions to transactions other than consumer-goods
transactions leaves to the courts the proper rules for consumer-goods transactions and prohibits the courts from
drawing inferences from that limitation.
(iii) Section 9-108 provides that in a consumer transaction a description of consumer goods, a security
entitlement, securities account, or commodity account "only by [UCC-defined] type of collateral" is not a sufficient
collateral description in a security agreement.
(iv) Sections 9-403 and 9-404 make effective the Federal Trade Commission's anti-holder-in-due-course rule
(when applicable), 16 C.F.R. Part 433, even in the absence of the required legend.
(v) The 10-day safe-harbor for notification of a disposition provided by Section 9-612 does not apply in a
consumer transaction.
(vi) Section 9-613 (contents and form of notice of disposition) does not apply to a consumer-goods transaction.
(vii) Section 9-614 contains special requirements for the contents of a notification of disposition and a safe-harbor,
"plain English" form of notification, for consumer-goods transactions.
(viii) Section 9-616 requires a secured party in a consumer-goods transaction to provide a debtor with a
notification of how it calculated a deficiency at the time it first undertakes to collect a deficiency.
(ix) Section 9-620 prohibits partial strict foreclosure with respect to consumer goods collateral and, unless the
debtor agrees to waive the requirement in an authenticated record after default, in certain cases requires the
secured party to dispose of consumer goods collateral which has been repossessed.
(x) Section 9-626 ("rebuttable presumption" rule) does not apply to a consumer transaction. Section 9-626 also
provides that its limitation to transactions other than consumer transactions leaves to the courts the proper rules for
consumer transactions and prohibits the courts from drawing inferences from that limitation.
k. Good Faith. Section 9-102 contains a new definition of "good faith" that includes not only "honesty in fact" but
also "the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing." The definition is similar to the ones
adopted in connection with other, recently completed revisions of the UCC.
1. Transition Provisions. Part 7 (Sections 9-701 through 9-707) contains transition provisions. Transition from
former Article 9 to this Article will be particularly challenging in view of its expanded scope, its modification of
choice-of-law rules for perfection and priority, and its expansion of the methods of perfection.
m. Conforming and Related Amendments to Other UCC Articles. Appendix I contains several proposed
revisions to the provisions and Comments of other UCC articles. For the most part the revisions are explained in the
Comments to the proposed revisions. Cross-references in other UCC articles to sections of Article 9 also have been
revised.
Article 1. Revised Section 1-201 contains revisions to the definitions of "buyer in ordinary course of business,"
"purchaser," and "security interest."
Articles 2 and 2A. Sections 2-210, 2-326, 2-502, 2-716, 2A-303, and 2A-307 have been revised to address the
intersection between Articles 2 and 2A and Article 9.
Article 5. New Section 5-118 is patterned on Section 4-210. It provides for a security interest in documents
presented under a letter of credit in favor of the issuer and a nominated person on the letter of credit.
Article 8. Revisions to Section 8-106, which deals with "control" of securities and security entitlements, conform it
to Section 8-302, which deals with "delivery." Revisions to Section 8-110, which deals with a "securities
intermediary's jurisdiction," conform it to the revised treatment of a "commodity intermediary's jurisdiction" in Section
9-305. Sections 8-301 and 8-302 have been revised for clarification. Section 8-510 has been revised to conform it
to the revised priority rules of Section 9-328. Several Comments in Article 8 also have been revised.
§ 9-101. SHORT TITLE
Page 11 of 11
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS > SUBPART 1. SHORT TITLE, DEFINITIONS,
AND GENERAL CONCEPTS
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
(a) [Article 9 definitions.] In this article:
(1) "Accession" means goods that are physically united with other goods in such a manner that the
identity of the original goods is not lost.
(2) "Account", except as used in "account for", means a right to payment of a monetary obligation,
whether or not earned by performance, (i) for property that has been or is to be sold, leased, licensed,
assigned, or otherwise disposed of, (ii) for services rendered or to be rendered, (iii) for a policy of
insurance issued or to be issued, (iv) for a secondary obligation incurred or to be incurred, (v) for
energy provided or to be provided, (vi) for the use or hire of a vessel under a charter or other contract,
(vii) arising out of the use of a credit or charge card or information contained on or for use with the card,
or (viii) as winnings in a lottery or other game of chance operated or sponsored by a State,
governmental unit of a State, or person licensed or authorized to operate the game by a State or
governmental unit of a State. The term includes health-care-insurance receivables. The term does not
include (i) rights to payment evidenced by chattel paper or an instrument, (ii) commercial tort claims, (iii)
deposit accounts, (iv) investment property, (v) letter-of-credit rights or letters of credit, or (vi) rights to
payment for money or funds advanced or sold, other than rights arising out of the use of a credit or
charge card or information contained on or for use with the card.
(3) "Account debtor" means a person obligated on an account, chattel paper, or general intangible. The
term does not include persons obligated to pay a negotiable instrument, even if the instrument
constitutes part of chattel paper.
(4) "Accounting", except as used in "accounting for", means a record:
(A) authenticated by a secured party;
(B) indicating the aggregate unpaid secured obligations as of a date not more than 35 days earlier
or 35 days later than the date of the record; and
(C) identifying the components of the obligations in reasonable detail.
(5) "Agricultural lien" means an interest, other than a security interest, in farm products:
(A) which secures payment or performance of an obligation for:
(i) goods or services furnished in connection with a debtor's farming operation; or
(ii) rent on real property leased by a debtor in connection with its farming operation;
(B) which is created by statute in favor of a person that:
(i) in the ordinary course of its business furnished goods or services to a debtor in connection
with a debtor's farming operation; or
(ii) leased real property to a debtor in connection with the debtor's farming operation; and
(C) whose effectiveness does not depend on the person's possession of the personal property.
(6) "As-extracted collateral" means:
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 23
(A) oil, gas, or other minerals that are subject to a security interest that:
(i) is created by a debtor having an interest in the minerals before extraction; and
(ii) attaches to the minerals as extracted; or
(B) accounts arising out of the sale at the wellhead or minehead of oil, gas, or other minerals in
which the debtor had an interest before extraction.
(7) "Authenticate" means:
(A) to sign; or
(B) with present intent to adopt or accept a record, to attach to or logically associate with the
record an electronic sound, symbol, or process.
(8) "Bank" means an organization that is engaged in the business of banking. The term includes
savings banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, and trust companies.
(9) "Cash proceeds" means proceeds that are money, checks, deposit accounts, or the like.
(10) "Certificate of title" means a certificate of title with respect to which a statute provides for the
security interest in question to be indicated on the certificate as a condition or result of the security
interest's obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor with respect to the collateral. The term
includes another record maintained as an alternative to a certificate of title by the governmental unit
that issues certificates of title if a statute permits the security interest in question to be indicated on the
record as a condition or result of the security interest's obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor
with respect to the collateral.
(11) "Chattel paper" means a record or records that evidence both a monetary obligation and a
security interest in specific goods, a security interest in specific goods and software used in the goods,
a security interest in specific goods and license of software used in the goods, a lease of specific
goods, or a lease of specific goods and license of software used in the goods. In this paragraph,
"monetary obligation" means a monetary obligation secured by the goods or owed under a lease of the
goods and includes a monetary obligation with respect to software used in the goods. The term does
not include (i) charters or other contracts involving the use or hire of a vessel or (ii) records that
evidence a right to payment arising out of the use of a credit or charge card or information contained on
or for use with the card. If a transaction is evidenced by records that include an instrument or series of
instruments, the group of records taken together constitutes chattel paper.
(12) "Collateral" means the property subject to a security interest or agricultural lien. The term includes:
(A) proceeds to which a security interest attaches;
(B) accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, and promissory notes that have been sold; and
(C) goods that are the subject of a consignment.
(13) "Commercial tort claim" means a claim arising in tort with respect to which:
(A) the claimant is an organization; or
(B) the claimant is an individual and the claim:
(i) arose in the course of the claimant's business or profession; and
(ii) does not include damages arising out of personal injury to or the death of an individual.
(14) "Commodity account" means an account maintained by a commodity intermediary in which a
commodity contract is carried for a commodity customer.
(15) "Commodity contract" means a commodity futures contract, an option on a commodity futures
contract, a commodity option, or another contract if the contract or option is:
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 3 of 23
(A) traded on or subject to the rules of a board of trade that has been designated as a contract
market for such a contract pursuant to federal commodities laws; or
(B) traded on a foreign commodity board of trade, exchange, or market, and is carried on the
books of a commodity intermediary for a commodity customer.
(16) "Commodity customer" means a person for which a commodity intermediary carries a commodity
contract on its books.
(17) "Commodity intermediary" means a person that:
(A) is registered as a futures commission merchant under federal commodities law; or
(B) in the ordinary course of its business provides clearance or settlement services for a board of
trade that has been designated as a contract market pursuant to federal commodities law.
(18) "Communicate" means:
(A) to send a written or other tangible record;
(B) to transmit a record by any means agreed upon by the persons sending and receiving the
record; or
(C) in the case of transmission of a record to or by a filing office, to transmit a record by any means
prescribed by filing-office rule.
(19) "Consignee" means a merchant to which goods are delivered in a consignment.
(20) "Consignment" means a transaction, regardless of its form, in which a person delivers goods to a
merchant for the purpose of sale and:
(A) the merchant:
(i) deals in goods of that kind under a name other than the name of the person making
delivery;
(ii) is not an auctioneer; and
(iii) is not generally known by its creditors to be substantially engaged in selling the goods of
others;
(B) with respect to each delivery, the aggregate value of the goods is $ 1,000 or more at the time
of delivery;
(C) the goods are not consumer goods immediately before delivery; and
(D) the transaction does not create a security interest that secures an obligation.
(21) "Consignor" means a person that delivers goods to a consignee in a consignment.
(22) "Consumer debtor" means a debtor in a consumer transaction.
(23) "Consumer goods" means goods that are used or bought for use primarily for personal, family, or
household purposes.
(24) "Consumer-goods transaction" means a consumer transaction in which:
(A) an individual incurs an obligation primarily for personal, family, or household purposes; and
(B) a security interest in consumer goods secures the obligation.
(25) "Consumer obligor" means an obligor who is an individual and who incurred the obligation as part
of a transaction entered into primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.
(26) "Consumer transaction" means a transaction in which (i) an individual incurs an obligation
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, (ii) a security interest secures the obligation, and
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 4 of 23
(iii) the collateral is held or acquired primarily for personal, family, or household purposes. The term
includes consumer-goods transactions.
(27) "Continuation statement" means an amendment of a financing statement which:
(A) identifies, by its file number, the initial financing statement to which it relates; and
(B) indicates that it is a continuation statement for, or that it is filed to continue the effectiveness of,
the identified financing statement.
(28) "Debtor" means:
(A) a person having an interest, other than a security interest or other lien, in the collateral,
whether or not the person is an obligor;
(B) a seller of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes; or
(C) a consignee.
(29) "Deposit account" means a demand, time, savings, passbook, or similar account maintained with
a bank. The term does not include investment property or accounts evidenced by an instrument.
(30) "Document" means a document of title or a receipt of the type described in Section 7-201(b).
(31) "Electronic chattel paper" means chattel paper evidenced by a record or records consisting of
information stored in an electronic medium.
(32) "Encumbrance" means a right, other than an ownership interest, in real property. The term
includes mortgages and other liens on real property.
(33) "Equipment" means goods other than inventory, farm products, or consumer goods.
(34) "Farm products" means goods, other than standing timber, with respect to which the debtor is
engaged in a farming operation and which are:
(A) crops grown, growing, or to be grown, including:
(i) crops produced on trees, vines, and bushes; and
(ii) aquatic goods produced in aquacultural operations;
(B) livestock, born or unborn, including aquatic goods produced in aquacultural operations;
(C) supplies used or produced in a farming operation; or
(D) products of crops or livestock in their unmanufactured states.
(35) "Farming operation" means raising, cultivating, propagating, fattening, grazing, or any other
farming, livestock, or aquacultural operation.
(36) "File number" means the number assigned to an initial financing statement pursuant to Section 9-
519(a).
(37) "Filing office" means an office designated in Section 9-501 as the place to file a financing
statement.
(38) "Filing-office rule" means a rule adopted pursuant to Section 9-526.
(39) "Financing statement" means a record or records composed of an initial financing statement and
any filed record relating to the initial financing statement.
(40) "Fixture filing" means the filing of a financing statement covering goods that are or are to become
fixtures and satisfying Section 9-502(a) and (b). The term includes the filing of a financing statement
covering goods of a transmitting utility which are or are to become fixtures.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 5 of 23
(41) "Fixtures" means goods that have become so related to particular real property that an interest in
them arises under real property law.
(42) "General intangible" means any personal property, including things in action, other than accounts,
chattel paper, commercial tort claims, deposit accounts, documents, goods, instruments, investment
property, letter-of-credit rights, letters of credit, money, and oil, gas, or other minerals before extraction.
The term includes payment intangibles and software.
(43) "Good faith" means honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of
fair dealing.
(44) "Goods" means all things that are movable when a security interest attaches. The term includes (i)
fixtures, (ii) standing timber that is to be cut and removed under a conveyance or contract for sale, (iii)
the unborn young of animals, (iv) crops grown, growing, or to be grown, even if the crops are produced
on trees, vines, or bushes, and (v) manufactured homes. The term also includes a computer program
embedded in goods and any supporting information provided in connection with a transaction relating
to the program if (i) the program is associated with the goods in such a manner that it customarily is
considered part of the goods, or (ii) by becoming the owner of the goods, a person acquires a right to
use the program in connection with the goods. The term does not include a computer program
embedded in goods that consist solely of the medium in which the program is embedded. The term
also does not include accounts, chattel paper, commercial tort claims, deposit accounts, documents,
general intangibles, instruments, investment property, letter-of-credit rights, letters of credit, money, or
oil, gas, or other minerals before extraction.
(45) "Governmental unit" means a subdivision, agency, department, county, parish, municipality, or
other unit of the government of the United States, a State, or a foreign country. The term includes an
organization having a separate corporate existence if the organization is eligible to issue debt on which
interest is exempt from income taxation under the laws of the United States.
(46) "Health-care-insurance receivable" means an interest in or claim under a policy of insurance
which is a right to payment of a monetary obligation for health-care goods or services provided.
(47) "Instrument" means a negotiable instrument or any other writing that evidences a right to the
payment of a monetary obligation, is not itself a security agreement or lease, and is of a type that in
ordinary course of business is transferred by delivery with any necessary indorsement or assignment.
The term does not include (i) investment property, (ii) letters of credit, or (iii) writings that evidence a
right to payment arising out of the use of a credit or charge card or information contained on or for use
with the card.
(48) "Inventory" means goods, other than farm products, which:
(A) are leased by a person as lessor;
(B) are held by a person for sale or lease or to be furnished under a contract of service;
(C) are furnished by a person under a contract of service; or
(D) consist of raw materials, work in process, or materials used or consumed in a business.
(49) "Investment property" means a security, whether certificated or uncertificated, security entitlement,
securities account, commodity contract, or commodity account.
(50) "Jurisdiction of organization", with respect to a registered organization, means the jurisdiction
under whose law the organization is organized.
(51) "Letter-of-credit right" means a right to payment or performance under a letter of credit, whether or
not the beneficiary has demanded or is at the time entitled to demand payment or performance. The
term does not include the right of a beneficiary to demand payment or performance under a letter of
credit.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 6 of 23
(52) "Lien creditor" means:
(A) a creditor that has acquired a lien on the property involved by attachment, levy, or the like;
(B) an assignee for benefit of creditors from the time of assignment;
(C) a trustee in bankruptcy from the date of the filing of the petition; or
(D) a receiver in equity from the time of appointment.
(53) "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected
on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. The term
includes any structure that meets all of the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements
and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the United States
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under Title
42 of the United States Code.
(54) "Manufactured-home transaction" means a secured transaction:
(A) that creates a purchase-money security interest in a manufactured home, other than a
manufactured home held as inventory; or
(B) in which a manufactured home, other than a manufactured home held as inventory, is the
primary collateral.
(55) "Mortgage" means a consensual interest in real property, including fixtures, which secures
payment or performance of an obligation.
(56) "New debtor" means a person that becomes bound as debtor under Section 9-203(d) by a security
agreement previously entered into by another person.
(57) "New value" means (i) money, (ii) money's worth in property, services, or new credit, or (iii)
release by a transferee of an interest in property previously transferred to the transferee. The term does
not include an obligation substituted for another obligation.
(58) "Noncash proceeds" means proceeds other than cash proceeds.
(59) "Obligor" means a person that, with respect to an obligation secured by a security interest in or an
agricultural lien on the collateral, (i) owes payment or other performance of the obligation, (ii) has
provided property other than the collateral to secure payment or other performance of the obligation, or
(iii) is otherwise accountable in whole or in part for payment or other performance of the obligation. The
term does not include issuers or nominated persons under a letter of credit.
(60) "Original debtor", except as used in Section 9-310(c), means a person that, as debtor, entered into
a security agreement to which a new debtor has become bound under Section 9-203(d).
(61) "Payment intangible" means a general intangible under which the account debtor's principal
obligation is a monetary obligation.
(62) "Person related to", with respect to an individual, means:
(A) the spouse of the individual;
(B) a brother, brother-in-law, sister, or sister-in-law of the individual;
(C) an ancestor or lineal descendant of the individual or the individual's spouse; or
(D) any other relative, by blood or marriage, of the individual or the individual's spouse who shares
the same home with the individual.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 7 of 23
(63) "Person related to", with respect to an organization, means:
(A) a person directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the
organization;
(B) an officer or director of, or a person performing similar functions with respect to, the
organization;
(C) an officer or director of, or a person performing similar functions with respect to, a person
described in subparagraph (A);
(D) the spouse of an individual described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C); or
(E) an individual who is related by blood or marriage to an individual described in subparagraph
(A), (B), (C), or (D) and shares the same home with the individual.
(64) "Proceeds", except as used in Section 9-609(b), means the following property:
(A) whatever is acquired upon the sale, lease, license, exchange, or other disposition of collateral;
(B) whatever is collected on, or distributed on account of, collateral;
(C) rights arising out of collateral;
(D) to the extent of the value of collateral, claims arising out of the loss, nonconformity, or
interference with the use of, defects or infringement of rights in, or damage to, the collateral; or
(E) to the extent of the value of collateral and to the extent payable to the debtor or the secured
party, insurance payable by reason of the loss or nonconformity of, defects or infringement of rights
in, or damage to, the collateral.
(65) "Promissory note" means an instrument that evidences a promise to pay a monetary obligation,
does not evidence an order to pay, and does not contain an acknowledgment by a bank that the bank
has received for deposit a sum of money or funds.
(66) "Proposal" means a record authenticated by a secured party which includes the terms on which
the secured party is willing to accept collateral in full or partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures
pursuant to Sections 9-620, 9-621, and 9-622.
(67) "Public-finance transaction" means a secured transaction in connection with which:
(A) debt securities are issued;
(B) all or a portion of the securities issued have an initial stated maturity of at least 20 years; and
(C) the debtor, obligor, secured party, account debtor or other person obligated on collateral,
assignor or assignee of a secured obligation, or assignor or assignee of a security interest is a
State or a governmental unit of a State.
(68) "Public organic record" means a record that is available to the public for inspection and is:
(A) a record consisting of the record initially filed with or issued by a State or the United States to
form or organize an organization and any record filed with or issued by the State or the United
States which amends or restates the initial record;
(B) an organic record of a business trust consisting of the record initially filed with a State and any
record filed with the State which amends or restates the initial record, if a statute of the State
governing business trusts requires that the record be filed with the State; or
(C) a record consisting of legislation enacted by the legislature of a State or the Congress of the
United States which forms or organizes an organization, any record amending the legislation, and
any record filed with or issued by the State or the United States which amends or restates the
name of the organization.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 8 of 23
(69) "Pursuant to commitment", with respect to an advance made or other value given by a secured
party, means pursuant to the secured party's obligation, whether or not a subsequent event of default
or other event not within the secured party's control has relieved or may relieve the secured party from
its obligation.
(70) "Record", except as used in "for record", "of record", "record or legal title", and "record owner",
means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or which is stored in an electronic or other
medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.
(71) "Registered organization" means an organization formed or organized solely under the law of a
single State or the United States by the filing of a public organic record with, the issuance of a public
organic record by, or the enactment of legislation by the State or the United States. The term includes a
business trust that is formed or organized under the law of a single State if a statute of the State
governing business trusts requires that the business trust's organic record be filed with the State.
(72) "Secondary obligor" means an obligor to the extent that:
(A) the obligor's obligation is secondary; or
(B) the obligor has a right of recourse with respect to an obligation secured by collateral against
the debtor, another obligor, or property of either.
(73) "Secured party" means:
(A) a person in whose favor a security interest is created or provided for under a security
agreement, whether or not any obligation to be secured is outstanding;
(B) a person that holds an agricultural lien;
(C) a consignor;
(D) a person to which accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes have
been sold;
(E) a trustee, indenture trustee, agent, collateral agent, or other representative in whose favor a
security interest or agricultural lien is created or provided for; or
(F) a person that holds a security interest arising under Section 2-401, 2-505, 2-711(3), 2A-508(5),
4-210, or 5-118.
(74) "Security agreement" means an agreement that creates or provides for a security interest.
(75) "Send", in connection with a record or notification, means:
(A) to deposit in the mail, deliver for transmission, or transmit by any other usual means of
communication, with postage or cost of transmission provided for, addressed to any address
reasonable under the circumstances; or
(B) to cause the record or notification to be received within the time that it would have been
received if properly sent under subparagraph (A).
(76) "Software" means a computer program and any supporting information provided in connection
with a transaction relating to the program. The term does not include a computer program that is
included in the definition of goods.
(77) "State" means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United
States Virgin Islands, or any territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the United
States.
(78) "Supporting obligation" means a letter-of-credit right or secondary obligation that supports the
payment or performance of an account, chattel paper, a document, a general intangible, an instrument,
or investment property.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 9 of 23
(79) "Tangible chattel paper" means chattel paper evidenced by a record or records consisting of
information that is inscribed on a tangible medium.
(80) "Termination statement" means an amendment of a financing statement which:
(A) identifies, by its file number, the initial financing statement to which it relates; and
(B) indicates either that it is a termination statement or that the identified financing statement is no
longer effective.
(81) "Transmitting utility" means a person primarily engaged in the business of:
(A) operating a railroad, subway, street railway, or trolley bus;
(B) transmitting communications electrically, electromagnetically, or by light;
(C) transmitting goods by pipeline or sewer; or
(D) transmitting or producing and transmitting electricity, steam, gas, or water.
(b) [Definitions in other articles.] "Control" as provided in Section 7-106 and the following definitions in
other articles apply to this article:
"Applicant" Section 5-102.
"Beneficiary" Section 5-102.
"Broker" Section 8-102.
"Certificated security" Section 8-102.
"Check" Section 3-104.
"Clearing corporation" Section 8-102.
"Contract for sale" Section 2-106.
"Customer" Section 4-104.
"Entitlement holder" Section 8-102.
"Financial asset" Section 8-102.
"Holder in due course" Section 3-302.
"Issuer" (with respect to a letter of
credit or letter-of-credit right) Section 5-102.
"Issuer" (with respect to a security) Section 8-201.
"Issuer" (with respect to documents of title) Section 7-102
"Lease" Section 2A-103.
"Lease agreement" Section 2A-103.
"Lease contract" Section 2A-103.
"Leasehold interest" Section 2A-103.
"Lessee" Section 2A-103.
"Lessee in ordinary course of business" Section 2A-103.
"Lessor" Section 2A-103.
"Lessor's residual interest" Section 2A-103.
"Letter of credit" Section 5-102.
"Merchant" Section 2-104.
"Negotiable instrument" Section 3-104.
"Nominated person" Section 5-102.
"Note" Section 3-104.
"Proceeds of a letter of credit" Section 5-114.
"Prove" Section 3-103.
"Sale" Section 2-106.
"Securities account" Section 8-501.
"Securities intermediary" Section 8-102.
"Security" Section 8-102.
"Security certificate" Section 8-102.
"Security entitlement" Section 8-102.
"Uncertificated security" Section 8-102.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 10 of 23
(c) [Article 1 definitions and principles.] Article 1 contains general definitions and principles of
construction and interpretation applicable throughout this article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. All terms that are defined in Article 9 and used in more than one section are consolidated in this
section. Note that the definition of "security interest" is found in Section 1-201, not in this Article, and has been
revised. See Appendix I. Many of the definitions in this section are new; many others derive from those in former
Section 9-105. The following Comments also indicate other sections of former Article 9 that defined (or explained)
terms.
2. Parties to Secured Transactions.
a. "Debtor"; "Obligor"; "Secondary Obligor." Determining whether a person was a "debtor" under former
Section 9-105(1)(d) required a close examination of the context in which the term was used. To reduce the need for
this examination, this Article redefines "debtor" and adds new defined terms, "secondary obligor" and "obligor." In
the context of Part 6 (default and enforcement), these definitions distinguish among three classes of persons: (i)
those persons who may have a stake in the proper enforcement of a security interest by virtue of their non-lien
property interest (typically, an ownership interest) in the collateral, (ii) those persons who may have a stake in the
proper enforcement of the security interest because of their obligation to pay the secured debt, and (iii) those
persons who have an obligation to pay the secured debt but have no stake in the proper enforcement of the security
interest. Persons in the first class are debtors. Persons in the second class are secondary obligors if any portion of
the obligation is secondary or if the obligor has a right of recourse against the debtor or another obligor with respect
to an obligation secured by collateral. One must consult the law of suretyship to determine whether an obligation is
secondary. The Restatement (3d), Suretyship and Guaranty § 1 (1996), contains a useful explanation of the
concept. Obligors in the third class are neither debtors nor secondary obligors. With one exception (Section 9-616,
as it relates to a consumer obligor), the rights and duties provided by Part 6 affect non-debtor obligors only if they
are "secondary obligors."
By including in the definition of "debtor" all persons with a property interest (other than a security interest in or
other lien on collateral), the definition includes transferees of collateral, whether or not the secured party knows of
the transfer or the transferee's identity. Exculpatory provisions in Part 6 protect the secured party in that
circumstance. See Sections 9-605 and 9-628. The definition renders unnecessary former Section 9-112, which
governed situations in which collateral was not owned by the debtor. The definition also includes a "consignee," as
defined in this section, as well as a seller of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes.
Secured parties and other lienholders are excluded from the definition of "debtor" because the interests of those
parties normally derive from and encumber a debtor's interest. However, if in a separate secured transaction a
secured party grants, as debtor, a security interest in its own interest (i.e., its security interest and any obligation
that it secures), the secured party is a debtor in that transaction. This typically occurs when a secured party with a
security interest in specific goods assigns chattel paper.
Consider the following examples:
Example 1: Behnfeldt borrows money and grants a security interest in her Miata to secure the debt. Behnfeldt is
a debtor and an obligor.
Example 2: Behnfeldt borrows money and grants a security interest in her Miata to secure the debt. Bruno cosigns
a negotiable note as maker. As before, Behnfeldt is the debtor and an obligor. As an accommodation party
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 11 of 23
(see Section 3-419), Bruno is a secondary obligor. Bruno has this status even if the note states that her obligation is
a primary obligation and that she waives all suretyship defenses.
Example 3: Behnfeldt borrows money on an unsecured basis. Bruno co-signs the note and grants a security
interest in her Honda to secure her obligation. Inasmuch as Behnfeldt does not have a property interest in the
Honda, Behnfeldt is not a debtor. Having granted the security interest, Bruno is the debtor. Because Behnfeldt is a
principal obligor, she is not a secondary obligor. Whatever the outcome of enforcement of the security interest
against the Honda or Bruno's secondary obligation, Bruno will look to Behnfeldt for her losses. The enforcement will
not affect Behnfeldt's aggregate obligations.
When the principal obligor (borrower) and the secondary obligor (surety) each has granted a security interest in
different collateral, the status of each is determined by the collateral involved.
Example 4: Behnfeldt borrows money and grants a security interest in her Miata to secure the debt. Bruno cosigns
the note and grants a security interest in her Honda to secure her obligation. When the secured party
enforces the security interest in Behnfeldt's Miata, Behnfeldt is the debtor, and Bruno is a secondary obligor. When
the secured party enforces the security interest in the Honda, Bruno is the "debtor." As in Example 3, Behnfeldt is
an obligor, but not a secondary obligor.
b. "Secured Party." The secured party is the person in whose favor the security interest has been created, as
determined by reference to the security agreement. This definition controls, among other things, which person has
the duties and potential liability that Part 6 imposes upon a secured party. The definition of "secured party" also
includes a "consignor," a person to which accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes have
been sold, and the holder of an agricultural lien.
The definition of "secured party" clarifies the status of various types of representatives. Consider, for example, a
multi-bank facility under which Bank A, Bank B, and Bank C are lenders and Bank A serves as the collateral agent.
If the security interest is granted to the banks, then they are the secured parties. If the security interest is granted to
Bank A as collateral agent, then Bank A is the secured party.
c. Other Parties. A "consumer obligor" is defined as the obligor in a consumer transaction. Definitions of "new
debtor" and "original debtor" are used in the special rules found in Sections 9-326 and 9-508.
3. Definitions Relating to Creation of a Security Interest.
a. "Collateral." As under former Section 9-105, "collateral" is the property subject to a security interest and
includes accounts and chattel paper that have been sold. It has been expanded in this Article. The term now
explicitly includes proceeds subject to a security interest. It also reflects the broadened scope of the Article. It
includes property subject to an agricultural lien as well as payment intangibles and promissory notes that have been
sold.
b. "Security Agreement." The definition of "security agreement" is substantially the same as under former
Section 9-105-an agreement that creates or provides for a security interest. However, the term frequently was used
colloquially in former Article 9 to refer to the document or writing that contained a debtor's security agreement. This
Article eliminates that usage, reserving the term for the more precise meaning specified in the definition.
Whether an agreement creates a security interest depends not on whether the parties intend that the law
characterize the transaction as a security interest but rather on whether the transaction falls within the definition of
"security interest" in Section 1-201. Thus, an agreement that the parties characterize as a "lease" of goods may be
a "security agreement," notwithstanding the parties' stated intention that the law treat the transaction as a lease and
not as a secured transaction.
4. Goods-Related Definitions.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 12 of 23
a. "Goods"; "Consumer Goods"; "Equipment"; "Farm Products"; "Farming Operation"; "Inventory." The
definition of "goods" is substantially the same as the definition in former Section 9-105. This Article also retains the
four mutually-exclusive "types" of collateral that consist of goods: "consumer goods," "equipment," "farm products,"
and "inventory." The revisions are primarily for clarification.
The classes of goods are mutually exclusive. For example, the same property cannot simultaneously be both
equipment and inventory. In borderline cases-a physician's car or a farmer's truck that might be either consumer
goods or equipment-the principal use to which the property is put is determinative. Goods can fall into different
classes at different times. For example, a radio may be inventory in the hands of a dealer and consumer goods in
the hands of a consumer. As under former Article 9, goods are "equipment" if they do not fall into another category.
The definition of "consumer goods" follows former Section 9-109. The classification turns on whether the debtor
uses or bought the goods for use "primarily for personal, family, or household purposes."
Goods are inventory if they are leased by a lessor or held by a person for sale or lease. The revised definition of
"inventory" makes clear that the term includes goods leased by the debtor to others as well as goods held for lease.
(The same result should have obtained under the former definition.) Goods to be furnished or furnished under a
service contract, raw materials, and work in process also are inventory. Implicit in the definition is the criterion that
the sales or leases are or will be in the ordinary course of business. For example, machinery used in manufacturing
is equipment, not inventory, even though it is the policy of the debtor to sell machinery when it becomes obsolete or
worn. Inventory also includes goods that are consumed in a business (e.g., fuel used in operations). In general,
goods used in a business are equipment if they are fixed assets or have, as identifiable units, a relatively long
period of use, but are inventory, even though not held for sale or lease, if they are used up or consumed in a short
period of time in producing a product or providing a service.
Goods are "farm products" if the debtor is engaged in farming operations with respect to the goods. Animals in a
herd of livestock are covered whether the debtor acquires them by purchase or as a result of natural increase.
Products of crops or livestock remain farm products as long as they have not been subjected to a manufacturing
process. The terms "crops" and "livestock" are not defined. The new definition of "farming operations" is for
clarification only.
Crops, livestock, and their products cease to be "farm products" when the debtor ceases to be engaged in
farming operations with respect to them. If, for example, they come into the possession of a marketing agency for
sale or distribution or of a manufacturer or processor as raw materials, they become inventory. Products of crops or
livestock, even though they remain in the possession of a person engaged in farming operations, lose their status
as farm products if they are subjected to a manufacturing process. What is and what is not a manufacturing
operation is not specified in this Article. At one end of the spectrum, some processes are so closely connected with
farming--such as pasteurizing milk or boiling sap to produce maple syrup or sugar--that they would not constitute
manufacturing. On the other hand an extensive canning operation would be manufacturing. Once farm products
have been subjected to a manufacturing operation, they normally become inventory.
The revised definition of "farm products" clarifies the distinction between crops and standing timber and makes
clear that aquatic goods produced in aquacultural operations may be either crops or livestock. Although aquatic
goods that are vegetable in nature often would be crops and those that are animal would be livestock, this Article
leaves the courts free to classify the goods on a case-by-case basis. See Section 9-324, Comment 11.
The definitions of "goods" and "software" are also mutually exclusive. Computer programs usually constitute
"software," and, as such, are not "goods" as this Article uses the terms. However, under the circumstances
specified in the definition of "goods," computer programs embedded in goods are part of the "goods" and are not
"software."
b. "Accession"; "Manufactured Home"; "Manufactured-Home Transaction." Other specialized definitions of
goods include "accession" (see the special priority and enforcement rules in Section 9-335), and "manufactured
home" (see Section 9-515, permitting a financing statement in a "manufactured-home transaction" to be effective
for 30 years). The definition of "manufactured home" borrows from the federal Manufactured Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., and is intended to have the same meaning.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 13 of 23
c. "As-Extracted Collateral." Under this Article, oil, gas, and other minerals that have not been extracted from
the ground are treated as real property, to which this Article does not apply. Upon extraction, minerals become
personal property (goods) and eligible to be collateral under this Article. See the definition of "goods," which
excludes "oil, gas, and other minerals before extraction." To take account of financing practices reflecting the shift
from real to personal property, this Article contains special rules for perfecting security interests in minerals which
attach upon extraction and in accounts resulting from the sale of minerals at the wellhead or minehead. See, e.g.,
Sections 9-301(4) (law governing perfection and priority); 9-501 (place of filing), 9-502 (contents of financing
statement), 9-519 (indexing of records). The new term, "as-extracted collateral," refers to the minerals and related
accounts to which the special rules apply. The term "at the wellhead" encompasses arrangements based on a sale
of the produce at the moment that it issues from the ground and is measured, without technical distinctions as to
whether title passes at the "Christmas tree" of a well, the far side of a gathering tank, or at some other point. The
term "at . . . the minehead" is comparable.
The following examples explain the operation of these provisions.
Example 5: Debtor owns an interest in oil that is to be extracted. To secure Debtor's obligations to Lender,
Debtor enters into an authenticated agreement granting Lender an interest in the oil. Although Lender may acquire
an interest in the oil under real-property law, Lender does not acquire a security interest under this Article until the
oil becomes personal property, i.e., until is extracted and becomes "goods" to which this Article applies. Because
Debtor had an interest in the oil before extraction and Lender's security interest attached to the oil as extracted, the
oil is "as-extracted collateral."
Example 6: Debtor owns an interest in oil that is to be extracted and contracts to sell the oil to Buyer at the
wellhead. In an authenticated agreement, Debtor agrees to sell to Lender the right to payment from Buyer. This
right to payment is an account that constitutes "as-extracted collateral." If Lender then resells the account to
Financer, Financer acquires a security interest. However, inasmuch as the debtor-seller in that transaction, Lender,
had no interest in the oil before extraction, Financer's collateral (the account it owns) is not "as-extracted collateral."
Example 7: Under the facts of Example 6, before extraction, Buyer grants a security interest in the oil to Bank.
Although Bank's security interest attaches when the oil is extracted, Bank's security interest is not in "as-extracted
collateral," inasmuch as its debtor, Buyer, did not have an interest in the oil before extraction.
5. Receivables-related Definitions.
a. "Account"; "Health-Care-Insurance Receivable"; "As-Extracted Collateral." The definition of "account"
has been expanded and reformulated. It is no longer limited to rights to payment relating to goods or services. Many
categories of rights to payment that were classified as general intangibles under former Article 9 are accounts under
this Article. Thus, if they are sold, a financing statement must be filed to perfect the buyer's interest in them. As
used in the definition of "account," a right to payment "arising out of the use of a credit or charge card or information
contained on or for use with the card" is the right of a card issuer to payment from its cardholder. A credit-card or
charge-card transaction may give rise to other rights to payments; however, those other rights do not "arise out of
the use" of the card or information contained on or for use with the card. Among the types of property that are
expressly excluded from the definition of account is "a right to payment for money or funds advanced or sold." As
defined in Section 1-201, "money" is limited essentially to currency. As used in the exclusion from the definition of
"account," however, "funds" is a broader concept (although the term is not defined). For example, when a banklender
credits a borrower's deposit account for the amount of a loan, the bank's advance of funds is not a
transaction giving rise to an account.
The definition of "health-care-insurance receivable" is new. It is a subset of the definition of "account." However,
the rules generally applicable to account debtors on accounts do not apply to insurers obligated on health-careinsurance
receivables. See Sections 9-404(e), 9-405(d), 9-406(i).
Note that certain accounts also are "as-extracted collateral." See Comment 4.c., Examples 6 and 7.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 14 of 23
b. "Chattel Paper"; "Electronic Chattel Paper"; "Tangible Chattel Paper." "Chattel paper" consists of a
monetary obligation together with a security interest in or a lease of specific goods if the obligation and security
interest or lease are evidenced by "a record or records." The definition has been expanded from that found in
former Article 9 to include records that evidence a monetary obligation and a security interest in specific goods and
software used in the goods, a security interest in specific goods and license of software used in the goods, or a
lease of specific goods and license of software used in the goods. The expanded definition covers transactions in
which the debtor's or lessee's monetary obligation includes amounts owed with respect to software used in the
goods. The monetary obligation with respect to the software need not be owed under a license from the secured
party or lessor, and the secured party or lessor need not be a party to the license transaction itself. Among the
types of monetary obligations that are included in "chattel paper" are amounts that have been advanced by the
secured party or lessor to enable the debtor or lessee to acquire or obtain financing for a license of the software
used in the goods. The definition also makes clear that rights to payment arising out of credit-card transactions are
not chattel paper.
Charters of vessels are expressly excluded from the definition of chattel paper; they are accounts. The term
"charter" as used in this section includes bareboat charters, time charters, successive voyage charters, contracts of
affreightment, contracts of carriage, and all other arrangements for the use of vessels.
Under former Section 9-105, only if the evidence of an obligation consisted of "a writing or writings" could an
obligation qualify as chattel paper. In this Article, traditional, written chattel paper is included in the definition of
"tangible chattel paper." "Electronic chattel paper" is chattel paper that is stored in an electronic medium instead of
in tangible form. The concept of an electronic medium should be construed liberally to include electrical, digital,
magnetic, optical, electromagnetic, or any other current or similar emerging technologies.
c. "Instrument"; "Promissory Note." The definition of "instrument" includes a negotiable instrument. As under
former Section 9-105, it also includes any other right to payment of a monetary obligation that is evidenced by a
writing of a type that in ordinary course of business is transferred by delivery (and, if necessary, an indorsement or
assignment). Except in the case of chattel paper, the fact that an instrument is secured by a security interest or
encumbrance on property does not change the character of the instrument as such or convert the combination of
the instrument and collateral into a separate classification of personal property. The definition makes clear that
rights to payment arising out of credit-card transactions are not instruments. The definition of "promissory note" is
new, necessitated by the inclusion of sales of promissory notes within the scope of Article 9. It explicitly excludes
obligations arising out of "orders" to pay (e.g., checks) as opposed to "promises" to pay. See Section 3-104.
d. "General Intangible"; "Payment Intangible." "General intangible" is the residual category of personal
property, including things in action, that is not included in the other defined types of collateral. Examples are various
categories of intellectual property and the right to payment of a loan of funds that is not evidenced by chattel paper
or an instrument. As used in the definition of "general intangible," "things in action" includes rights that arise under a
license of intellectual property, including the right to exploit the intellectual property without liability for infringement.
The definition has been revised to exclude commercial tort claims, deposit accounts, and letter-of-credit rights.
Each of the three is a separate type of collateral. One important consequence of this exclusion is that tortfeasors
(commercial tort claims), banks (deposit accounts), and persons obligated on letters of credit (letter-of-credit rights)
are not "account debtors" having the rights and obligations set forth in Sections 9-404, 9-405, and 9-406. In
particular, tortfeasors, banks, and persons obligated on letters of credit are not obligated to pay an assignee
(secured party) upon receipt of the notification described in Section 9-404(a). See Comment 5.h. Another important
consequence relates to the adequacy of the description in the security agreement. See Section 9-108.
"Payment intangible" is a subset of the definition of "general intangible." The sale of a payment intangible is
subject to this Article. See Section 9-109(a)(3). Virtually any intangible right could give rise to a right to payment of
money once one hypothesizes, for example, that the account debtor is in breach of its obligation. The term
"payment intangible," however, embraces only those general intangibles "under which the account debtor's principal
obligation is a monetary obligation." (Emphasis added.) A debtor's right to payment from another person of amounts
received by the other person on the debtor's behalf, including the right of a merchant in a credit-card, debit-card,
prepaid-card, or other payment-card transaction to payment of amounts received by its bank from the card system
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 15 of 23
in settlement of the transaction, is a "payment intangible." (In contrast, the right of a credit-card issuer to payment
arising out of the use of a credit card is an "account.")
In classifying intangible collateral, a court should begin by identifying the particular rights that have been
assigned. The account debtor (promisor) under a particular contract may owe several types of monetary obligations
as well as other, nonmonetary obligations. If the promisee's right to payment of money is assigned separately, the
right is an account or payment intangible, depending on how the account debtor's obligation arose. When all the
promisee's rights are assigned together, an account, a payment intangible, and a general intangible all may be
involved, depending on the nature of the rights.
A right to the payment of money is frequently buttressed by ancillary rights, such as rights arising from covenants
in a purchase agreement, note, or mortgage requiring insurance on the collateral or forbidding removal of the
collateral, rights arising from covenants to preserve the creditworthiness of the promisor, and the lessor's rights with
respect to leased goods that arise upon the lessee's default (see Section 2A-523). This Article does not treat these
ancillary rights separately from the rights to payment to which they relate. For example, attachment and perfection
of an assignment of a right to payment of a monetary obligation, whether it be an account or payment intangible,
also carries these ancillary rights. Thus, an assignment of the lessor's right to payment under a lease also transfers
the lessor's rights with respect to the leased goods under Section 2A-523. If, taken together, the lessor's rights to
payment and with respect to the leased goods are evidenced by chattel paper, then, contrary to In re Commercial
Money Center, Inc., 350 B.R. 465 (Bankr. App. 9th Cir. 2006), an assignment of the lessor's right to payment
constitutes an assignment of the chattel paper. Although an agreement excluding the lessor's rights with respect to
the leased goods from an assignment of the lessor's right to payment may be effective between the parties, the
agreement does not affect the characterization of the collateral to the prejudice of creditors of, and purchasers from,
the assignor.
Every "payment intangible" is also a "general intangible." Likewise, "software" is a "general intangible" for
purposes of this Article. See Comment 25. Accordingly, except as otherwise provided, statutory provisions
applicable to general intangibles apply to payment intangibles and software.
e. "Letter-of-Credit Right." The term "letter-of-credit right" embraces the rights to payment and performance
under a letter of credit (defined in Section 5-102). However, it does not include a beneficiary's right to demand
payment or performance. Transfer of those rights to a transferee beneficiary is governed by Article 5. See Sections
9-107, Comment 4, and 9-329, Comments 3 and 4.
f. "Supporting Obligation." This new term covers the most common types of credit enhancements-suretyship
obligations (including guarantees) and letter-of-credit rights that support one of the types of collateral specified in
the definition. As explained in Comment 2.a., suretyship law determines whether an obligation is "secondary" for
purposes of this definition. Section 9-109 generally excludes from this Article transfers of interests in insurance
policies. However, the regulation of a secondary obligation as an insurance product does not necessarily mean that
it is a "policy of insurance" for purposes of the exclusion in Section 9-109. Thus, this Article may cover a secondary
obligation (as a supporting obligation), even if the obligation is issued by a regulated insurance company and the
obligation is subject to regulation as an "insurance" product.
This Article contains rules explicitly governing attachment, perfection, and priority of security interests in
supporting obligations. See Sections 9-203, 9-308, 9-310, and 9-322. These provisions reflect the principle that a
supporting obligation is an incident of the collateral it supports.
Collections of or other distributions under a supporting obligation are "proceeds" of the supported collateral as
well as "proceeds" of the supporting obligation itself. See Section 9-102 (defining "proceeds") and Comment 13.b.
As such, the collections and distributions are subject to the priority rules applicable to proceeds generally. See
Section 9-322. However, under the special rule governing security interests in a letter-of-credit right, a secured
party's failure to obtain control (Section 9-107) of a letter-of-credit right supporting collateral may leave its security
interest exposed to a priming interest of a party who does take control. See Section 9-329 (security interest in a
letter-of-credit right perfected by control has priority over a conflicting security interest).
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 16 of 23
g. "Commercial Tort Claim." This term is new. A tort claim may serve as original collateral under this Article only
if it is a "commercial tort claim." See Section 9-109(d). Although security interests in commercial tort claims are
within its scope, this Article does not override other applicable law restricting the assignability of a tort claim. See
Section 9-401. A security interest in a tort claim also may exist under this Article if the claim is proceeds of other
collateral.
h. "Account Debtor." An "account debtor" is a person obligated on an account, chattel paper, or general
intangible. The account debtor's obligation often is a monetary obligation; however, this is not always the case. For
example, if a franchisee uses its rights under a franchise agreement (a general intangible) as collateral, then the
franchisor is an "account debtor." As a general matter, Article 3, and not Article 9, governs obligations on negotiable
instruments. Accordingly, the definition of "account debtor" excludes obligors on negotiable instruments constituting
part of chattel paper. The principal effect of this change from the definition in former Article 9 is that the rules in
Sections 9-403, 9-404, 9-405, and 9-406, dealing with the rights of an assignee and duties of an account debtor, do
not apply to an assignment of chattel paper in which the obligation to pay is evidenced by a negotiable instrument.
(Section 9-406(d), however, does apply to promissory notes, including negotiable promissory notes.) Rather, the
assignee's rights are governed by Article 3. Similarly, the duties of an obligor on a nonnegotiable instrument are
governed by non-Article 9 law unless the nonnegotiable instrument is a part of chattel paper, in which case the
obligor is an account debtor.
i. Receivables Under Government Entitlement Programs. This Article does not contain a defined term that
encompasses specifically rights to payment or performance under the many and varied government entitlement
programs. Depending on the nature of a right under a program, it could be an account, a payment intangible, a
general intangible other than a payment intangible, or another type of collateral. The right also might be proceeds of
collateral (e.g., crops).
6. Investment-Property-Related Definitions: "Commodity Account"; "Commodity Contract"; "Commodity
Customer"; "Commodity Intermediary"; "Investment Property." These definitions are substantially the same as
the corresponding definitions in former Section 9-115. "Investment property" includes securities, both certificated
and uncertificated, securities accounts, security entitlements, commodity accounts, and commodity contracts. The
term investment property includes a "securities account" in order to facilitate transactions in which a debtor wishes
to create a security interest in all of the investment positions held through a particular account rather than in
particular positions carried in the account. Former Section 9-115 was added in conjunction with Revised Article 8
and contained a variety of rules applicable to security interests in investment property. These rules have been
relocated to the appropriate sections of Article 9. See, e.g., Sections 9-203 (attachment), 9-314 (perfection by
control), 9-328 (priority).
The terms "security," "security entitlement," and related terms are defined in Section 8-102, and the term
"securities account" is defined in Section 8-501. The terms "commodity account," "commodity contract," "commodity
customer," and "commodity intermediary" are defined in this section. Commodity contracts are not "securities" or
"financial assets" under Article 8. See Section 8-103(f). Thus, the relationship between commodity intermediaries
and commodity customers is not governed by the indirect-holding-system rules of Part 5 of Article 8. For securities,
Article 9 contains rules on security interests, and Article 8 contains rules on the rights of transferees, including
secured parties, on such matters as the rights of a transferee if the transfer was itself wrongful and gives rise to an
adverse claim. For commodity contracts, Article 9 establishes rules on security interests, but questions of the sort
dealt with in Article 8 for securities are left to other law.
The indirect-holding-system rules of Article 8 are sufficiently flexible to be applied to new developments in the
securities and financial markets, where that is appropriate. Accordingly, the definition of "commodity contract" is
narrowly drafted to ensure that it does not operate as an obstacle to the application of the Article 8 indirect-holdingsystem
rules to new products. The term "commodity contract" covers those contracts that are traded on or subject
to the rules of a designated contract market and foreign commodity contracts that are carried on the books of
American commodity intermediaries. The effect of this definition is that the category of commodity contracts that are
excluded from Article 8 but governed by Article 9 is essentially the same as the category of contracts that fall within
the exclusive regulatory jurisdiction of the federal Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 17 of 23
Commodity contracts are different from securities or other financial assets. A person who enters into a commodity
futures contract is not buying an asset having a certain value and holding it in anticipation of increase in value.
Rather the person is entering into a contract to buy or sell a commodity at set price for delivery at a future time. That
contract may become advantageous or disadvantageous as the price of the commodity fluctuates during the term of
the contract. The rules of the commodity exchanges require that the contracts be marked to market on a daily basis;
that is, the customer pays or receives any increment attributable to that day's price change. Because commodity
customers may incur obligations on their contracts, they are required to provide collateral at the outset, known as
"original margin," and may be required to provide additional amounts, known as "variation margin," during the term
of the contract.
The most likely setting in which a person would want to take a security interest in a commodity contract is where a
lender who is advancing funds to finance an inventory of a physical commodity requires the borrower to enter into a
commodity contract as a hedge against the risk of decline in the value of the commodity. The lender will want to
take a security interest in both the commodity itself and the hedging commodity contract. Typically, such
arrangements are structured as security interests in the entire commodity account in which the borrower carries the
hedging contracts, rather than in individual contracts.
One important effect of including commodity contracts and commodity accounts in Article 9 is to provide a clearer
legal structure for the analysis of the rights of commodity clearing organizations against their participants and
futures commission merchants against their customers. The rules and agreements of commodity clearing
organizations generally provide that the clearing organization has the right to liquidate any participant's positions in
order to satisfy obligations of the participant to the clearing corporation. Similarly, agreements between futures
commission merchants and their customers generally provide that the futures commission merchant has the right to
liquidate a customer's positions in order to satisfy obligations of the customer to the futures commission merchant.
The main property that a commodity intermediary holds as collateral for the obligations that the commodity
customer may incur under its commodity contracts is not other commodity contracts carried by the customer but the
other property that the customer has posted as margin. Typically, this property will be securities. The commodity
intermediary's security interest in such securities is governed by the rules of this Article on security interests in
securities, not the rules on security interests in commodity contracts or commodity accounts.
Although there are significant analytic and regulatory differences between commodities and securities, the
development of commodity contracts on financial products in the past few decades has resulted in a system in
which the commodity markets and securities markets are closely linked. The rules on security interests in
commodity contracts and commodity accounts provide a structure that may be essential in times of stress in the
financial markets. Suppose, for example that a firm has a position in a securities market that is hedged by a position
in a commodity market, so that payments that the firm is obligated to make with respect to the securities position
will be covered by the receipt of funds from the commodity position. Depending upon the settlement cycles of the
different markets, it is possible that the firm could find itself in a position where it is obligated to make the payment
with respect to the securities position before it receives the matching funds from the commodity position. If crossmargining
arrangements have not been developed between the two markets, the firm may need to borrow funds
temporarily to make the earlier payment. The rules on security interests in investment property would facilitate the
use of positions in one market as collateral for loans needed to cover obligations in the other market.
7. Consumer-Related Definitions: "Consumer Debtor"; "Consumer Goods"; "Consumer-goods
transaction"; "Consumer Obligor"; "Consumer Transaction." The definition of "consumer goods" (discussed
above) is substantially the same as the definition in former Section 9-109. The definitions of "consumer debtor,"
"consumer obligor," "consumer-goods transaction," and "consumer transaction" have been added in connection
with various new (and old) consumer-related provisions and to designate certain provisions that are inapplicable in
consumer transactions.
"Consumer-goods transaction" is a subset of "consumer transaction." Under each definition, both the obligation
secured and the collateral must have a personal, family, or household purpose. However, "mixed" business and
personal transactions also may be characterized as a consumer-goods transaction or consumer transaction.
Subparagraph (A) of the definition of consumer-goods transactions and clause (i) of the definition of consumer
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 18 of 23
transaction are primary purposes tests. Under these tests, it is necessary to determine the primary purpose of the
obligation or obligations secured. Subparagraph (B) and clause (iii) of these definitions are satisfied if any of the
collateral is consumer goods, in the case of a consumer-goods transaction, or "is held or acquired primarily for
personal, family, or household purposes," in the case of a consumer transaction. The fact that some of the
obligations secured or some of the collateral for the obligation does not satisfy the tests (e.g., some of the collateral
is acquired for a business purpose) does not prevent a transaction from being a "consumer transaction" or
"consumer-goods transaction."
8. Filing-Related Definitions: "Continuation Statement"; "File Number"; "Filing Office"; "Filing-office
Rule"; "Financing Statement"; "Fixture Filing"; "Manufactured-Home Transaction"; "New Debtor"; "Original
Debtor"; "Public-Finance Transaction"; "Termination Statement"; "Transmitting Utility." These definitions
are used exclusively or primarily in the filing-related provisions in Part 5. Most are self-explanatory and are
discussed in the Comments to Part 5. A financing statement filed in a manufactured-home transaction or a publicfinance
transaction may remain effective for 30 years instead of the 5 years applicable to other financing
statements. See Section 9-515(b). The definitions relating to medium neutrality also are significant for the filing
provisions. See Comment 9.
The definition of "transmitting utility" has been revised to embrace the business of transmitting communications
generally to take account of new and future types of communications technology. The term designates a special
class of debtors for whom separate filing rules are provided in Part 5, thereby obviating the many local fixture filings
that would be necessary under the rules of Section 9-501 for a far-flung public-utility debtor. A transmitting utility will
not necessarily be regulated by or operating as such in a jurisdiction where fixtures are located. For example, a
utility might own transmission lines in a jurisdiction, although the utility generates no power and has no customers in
the jurisdiction.
9. Definitions Relating to Medium Neutrality.
a. "Record." In many, but not all, instances, the term "record" replaces the term "writing" and "written." A "record"
includes information that is in intangible form (e.g., electronically stored) as well as tangible form (e.g., written on
paper). Given the rapid development and commercial adoption of modern communication and storage technologies,
requirements that documents or communications be "written," "in writing," or otherwise in tangible form do not
necessarily reflect or aid commercial practices.
A "record" need not be permanent or indestructible, but the term does not include any oral or other
communication that is not stored or preserved by any means. The information must be stored on paper or in some
other medium. Information that has not been retained other than through human memory does not qualify as a
record. Examples of current technologies commercially used to communicate or store information include, but are
not limited to, magnetic media, optical discs, digital voice messaging systems, electronic mail, audio tapes, and
photographic media, as well as paper. "Record" is an inclusive term that includes all of these methods of storing or
communicating information. Any "writing" is a record. A record may be authenticated. See Comment 9.b. A record
may be created without the knowledge or intent of a particular person.
Like the terms "written" or "in writing," the term "record" does not establish the purposes, permitted uses, or legal
effect that a record may have under any particular provision of law. Whatever is filed in the Article 9 filing system,
including financing statements, continuation statements, and termination statements, whether transmitted in
tangible or intangible form, would fall within the definition. However, in some instances, statutes or filing-office rules
may require that a paper record be filed. In such cases, even if this Article permits the filing of an electronic record,
compliance with those statutes or rules is necessary. Similarly, a filer must comply with a statute or rule that
requires a particular type of encoding or formatting for an electronic record.
This Article sometimes uses the terms "for record," "of record," "record or legal title," and "record owner." Some of
these are terms traditionally used in real-property law. The definition of "record" in this Article now explicitly excepts
these usages from the defined term. Also, this Article refers to a record that is filed or recorded in real-property
recording systems to record a mortgage as a "record of a mortgage." This usage recognizes that the defined term
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 19 of 23
"mortgage" means an interest in real property; it does not mean the record that evidences, or is filed or recorded
with respect to, the mortgage.
b. "Authenticate"; "Communicate"; "Send." The terms "authenticate" and "authenticated" generally replace
"sign" and "signed." "Authenticated" replaces and broadens the definition of "signed," in Section 1-201, to
encompass authentication of all records, not just writings. (References to authentication of, e.g., an agreement,
demand, or notification mean, of course, authentication of a record containing an agreement, demand, or
notification.) The terms "communicate" and "send" also contemplate the possibility of communication by nonwritten
media. These definitions include the act of transmitting both tangible and intangible records. The definition of "send"
replaces, for purposes of this Article, the corresponding term in Section 1-201. The reference to "usual means of
communication" in that definition contemplates an inquiry into the appropriateness of the method of transmission
used in the particular circumstances involved.
10. Scope-Related Definitions.
a. Expanded Scope of Article: "Agricultural Lien"; "Consignment"; "Payment Intangible"; "Promissory
Note." These new definitions reflect the expanded scope of Article 9, as provided in Section 9-109(a).
b. Reduced Scope of Exclusions: "Governmental Unit"; "Health-Care-Insurance Receivable";
"Commercial Tort Claims." These new definitions reflect the reduced scope of the exclusions, provided in Section
9-109(c) and (d), of transfers by governmental debtors and assignments of interests in insurance policies and
commercial tort claims.
11. Choice-of-Law-Related Definitions: "Certificate of Title"; "Governmental Unit"; "Jurisdiction of
Organization"; "Public Organic Record"; "Registered Organization"; "State." These new definitions reflect the
changes in the law governing perfection and priority of security interests and agricultural liens provided in Part 3,
Subpart 1.
Statutes often require applicants for a certificate of title to identify all security interests on the application and
require the issuing agency to indicate the identified security interests on the certificate. Some of these statutes
provide that priority over the rights of a lien creditor (i.e., perfection of a security interest) in goods covered by the
certificate occurs upon indication of the security interest on the certificate; that is, they provide for the indication of
the security interest on the certificate as a "condition" of perfection. Other statutes contemplate that perfection is
achieved upon the occurrence of another act, e.g., delivery of the application to the issuing agency, that "results" in
the indication of the security interest on the certificate. A certificate governed by either type of statute can qualify as
a "certificate of title" under this Article. The statute providing for the indication of a security interest need not
expressly state the connection between the indication and perfection. For example, a certificate issued pursuant to
a statute that requires applicants to identify security interests, requires the issuing agency to indicate the identified
security interests on the certificate, but is silent concerning the legal consequences of the indication would be a
"certificate of title" if, under a judicial interpretation of the statute, perfection of a security interest is a legal
consequence of the indication. Likewise, a certificate would be a "certificate of title" if another statute provides,
expressly or as interpreted, the requisite connection between the indication and perfection.
The first sentence of the definition of "certificate of title" includes certificates consisting of tangible records, of
electronic records, and of combinations of tangible and electronic records.
In many States, a certificate of title covering goods that are encumbered by a security interest is delivered to the
secured party by the issuing authority. To eliminate the need for the issuance of a paper certificate under these
circumstances, several States have revised their certificate-of-title statutes to permit or require a State agency to
maintain an electronic record that evidences ownership of the goods and in which a security interest in the goods
may be noted. The second sentence of the definition provides that such a record is a "certificate of title" if it is in
fact maintained as an alternative to the issuance of a paper certificate of title, regardless of whether the certificateof-
title statute provides that the record is a certificate of title and even if the statute does not expressly state that the
record is maintained instead of issuing a paper certificate.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 20 of 23
Not every organization that may provide information about itself in the public records is a "registered
organization." For example, a general partnership is not a "registered organization," even if it files a statement of
partnership authority under Section 303 of the Uniform Partnership Act (1994) or an assumed name ("dba")
certificate. This is because such a partnership is not formed or organized by the filing of a record with, or the
issuance of a record by, a State or the United States. Likewise, a limited liability partnership, which is a form of
general partnership under the Uniform Partnership Act (1997), is not a "registered organization even if it has filed a
record that is a statement of qualification under Section 1001 of the Uniform Partnership Act (1997). The filing of
the record does not form or organize the partnership. The filing only provides the partners in the general
partnership with a limited liability shield and evidences that the general partnership has limited liability partnership
status. See PEB Commentary No. 17. As discussed in PEB Commentary No. 17 the same conclusion would apply
to a limited liability partnership formed under the law of state that has not adopted the Uniform Partnership Act
(1997) but has adopted for limited liability partnerships similar legislation having the material attributes of that Act.
Also as discussed in PEB Commentary No. 17, the same conclusion would apply whether before or after giving
effect to the 2010 amendments to this Article. In contrast, corporations, limited liability companies, and limited
partnerships ordinarily are "registered organizations."
Not every record concerning a registered organization that is filed with, or issued by, a State or the United States
is a "public organic record." For example, a certificate of good standing issued with respect to a corporation or a
published index of domestic corporations would not be a "public organic record" because its issuance or publication
does not form or organize the corporations named.
When collateral is held in a trust, one must look to non-UCC law to determine whether the trust is a "registered
organization." Non-UCC law typically distinguishes between statutory trusts and common-law trusts. A statutory
trust is formed by the filing of a record, commonly referred to as a certificate of trust, in a public office pursuant to a
statute. See, e.g., Uniform Statutory Trust Entity Act § 201 (2009); Delaware Statutory Trust Act, Del. Code Ann. tit.
12, § 3801 et seq. A statutory trust is a juridical entity, separate from its trustee and beneficial owners, that may
sue and be sued, own property, and transact business in its own name. Inasmuch as a statutory trust is a "legal or
commercial entity," it qualifies as a "person other than an individual," and therefore as an "organization," under
Section 1-201. A statutory trust that is formed by the filing of a record in a public office is a "registered
organization," and the filed record is a "public organic record" of the statutory trust, if the filed record is available to
the public for inspection. (The requirement that a record be "available to the public for inspection" is satisfied if a
copy of the relevant record is available for public inspection.)
Unlike a statutory trust, a common-law trust?whether its purpose is donative or commercial?arises from private
action without the filing of a record in a public office. See Uniform Trust Code § 401 (2000); Restatement (Third) of
Trusts § 10 (2003). Moreover, under traditional law, a common-law trust is not itself a juridical entity and therefore
must sue and be sued, own property, and transact business in the name of the trustee acting in the capacity of
trustee. A common-law trust that is a "business trust," i.e., that has a business or commercial purpose, is an
"organization" under Section 1-201. However, such a trust would not be a "registered organization" if, as is typically
the case, the filing of a public record is not needed to form it.
In some states, however, the trustee of a common-law trust that has a commercial or business purpose is
required by statute to file a record in a public office following the trust's formation. See, e.g., Mass. Gen. Laws Ch.
182, § 2; Fla. Stat. Ann. § 609.02. A business trust that is required to file its organic record in a public office is a
"registered organization" under the second sentence of the definition if the filed record is available to the public for
inspection. Any organic record required to be filed, and filed, with respect to a common-law business trust after the
trust is formed is a "public organic record" of the trust. Some statutes require a trust or other organization to file,
after formation or organization, a record other than an organic record. See, e.g., N.Y. Gen Assn's Law § 18
(requiring associations doing business within New York to file a certificate designating the secretary of state as an
agent upon whom process may be served). This requirement does not render the organization a "registered
organization" under the second sentence of the definition, and the record is not a "public organic record."
12. Deposit-Account-Related Definitions: "Deposit Account"; "Bank." The revised definition of "deposit
account" incorporates the definition of "bank," which is new. The definition derives from the definitions of "bank" in
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 21 of 23
Sections 4-105(1) and 4A-105(a)(2), which focus on whether the organization is "engaged in the business of
banking."
Deposit accounts evidenced by Article 9 "instruments" are excluded from the term "deposit account." In contrast,
former Section 9-105 excluded from the former definition "an account evidenced by a certificate of deposit." The
revised definition clarifies the proper treatment of nonnegotiable or uncertificated certificates of deposit. Under the
definition, an uncertificated certificate of deposit would be a deposit account (assuming there is no writing
evidencing the bank's obligation to pay) whereas a nonnegotiable certificate of deposit would be a deposit account
only if it is not an "instrument" as defined in this section (a question that turns on whether the nonnegotiable
certificate of deposit is "of a type that in ordinary course of business is transferred by delivery with any necessary
indorsement or assignment.")
A deposit account evidenced by an instrument is subject to the rules applicable to instruments generally. As a
consequence, a security interest in such an instrument cannot be perfected by "control" (see Section 9-104), and
the special priority rules applicable to deposit accounts (see Sections 9-327 and 9-340) do not apply.
The term "deposit account" does not include "investment property," such as securities and security entitlements.
Thus, the term also does not include shares in a money-market mutual fund, even if the shares are redeemable by
check.
13. Proceeds-Related Definitions: "Cash Proceeds"; "Noncash Proceeds"; "Proceeds." The revised
definition of "proceeds" expands the definition beyond that contained in former Section 9-306 and resolves
ambiguities in the former section.
a. Distributions on Account of Collateral. The phrase "whatever is collected on, or distributed on account of,
collateral," in subparagraph (B), is broad enough to cover cash or stock dividends distributed on account of
securities or other investment property that is original collateral. Compare former Section 9-306 ("Any payments or
distributions made with respect to investment property collateral are proceeds."). This section rejects the holding of
Hastie v. FDIC, 2 F.3d 1042 (10th Cir. 1993) (postpetition cash dividends on stock subject to a prepetition pledge
are not "proceeds" under Bankruptcy Code Section 552(b)), to the extent the holding relies on the Article 9
definition of "proceeds."
b. Distributions on Account of Supporting Obligations. Under subparagraph (B), collections on and
distributions on account of collateral consisting of various credit-support arrangements ("supporting obligations," as
defined in Section 9-102) also are proceeds. Consequently, they are afforded treatment identical to proceeds
collected from or distributed by the obligor on the underlying (supported) right to payment or other collateral.
Proceeds of supporting obligations also are proceeds of the underlying rights to payment or other collateral.
c. Proceeds of Proceeds. The definition of "proceeds" no longer provides that proceeds of proceeds are
themselves proceeds. That idea is expressed in the revised definition of "collateral" in Section 9-102. No change in
meaning is intended.
d. Proceeds Received by Person Who Did Not Create Security Interest. When collateral is sold subject to a
security interest and the buyer then resells the collateral, a question arose under former Article 9 concerning
whether the "debtor" had "received" what the buyer received on resale and, therefore, whether those receipts were
"proceeds" under former Section 9-306(2). This Article contains no requirement that property be "received" by the
debtor for the property to qualify as proceeds. It is necessary only that the property be traceable, directly or
indirectly, to the original collateral.
e. Cash Proceeds and Noncash Proceeds. The definition of "cash proceeds" is substantially the same as the
corresponding definition in former Section 9-306. The phrase "and the like" covers property that is functionally
equivalent to "money, checks, or deposit accounts," such as some money-market accounts that are securities or
part of securities entitlements. Proceeds other than cash proceeds are noncash proceeds.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 22 of 23
14. Consignment-Related Definitions: "Consignee"; "Consignment"; "Consignor." The definition of
"consignment" excludes, in subparagraphs (B) and (C), transactions for which filing would be inappropriate or of
insufficient benefit to justify the costs. A consignment excluded from the application of this Article by one of those
subparagraphs may still be a true consignment; however, it is governed by non-Article 9 law. The definition also
excludes, in subparagraph (D), what have been called "consignments intended for security." These "consignments"
are not bailments but secured transactions. Accordingly, all of Article 9 applies to them. See Sections 1-201(b)(35),
9-109(a)(1). The "consignor" is the person who delivers goods to the "consignee" in a consignment.
The definition of "consignment" requires that the goods be delivered "to a merchant for the purpose of sale." If the
goods are delivered for another purpose as well, such as milling or processing, the transaction is a consignment
nonetheless because a purpose of the delivery is "sale." On the other hand, if a merchant-processor-bailee will not
be selling the goods itself but will be delivering to buyers to which the owner-bailor agreed to sell the goods, the
transaction would not be a consignment.
15. "Accounting." This definition describes the record and information that a debtor is entitled to request under
Section 9-210.
16. "Document." The definition of "document" incorporates both tangible and electronic documents of title. See
Section 1-201(15)[1-201(b)16] and Comment 15 [16].
Legislative Note: Former Article 1 defined document of title in section 1-201(15) and accompanying comment 15.
Revised Article 1 defines document of title in Section 1-201(b)(16) and accompanying comment 16. Cross
references should be adapted depending upon which version of Article 1 is in force in the jurisdiction.
17. "Encumbrance"; "Mortgage." The definitions of "encumbrance" and "mortgage" are unchanged in
substance from the corresponding definitions in former Section 9-105. They are used primarily in the special realproperty-
related priority and other provisions relating to crops, fixtures, and accessions.
18. "Fixtures." This definition is unchanged in substance from the corresponding definition in former Section 9-
313. See Section 9-334 (priority of security interests in fixtures and crops).
19. "Good Faith." This Article expands the definition of "good faith" to include "the observance of reasonable
commercial standards of fair dealing." The definition in this section applies when the term is used in this Article, and
the same concept applies in the context of this Article for purposes of the obligation of good faith imposed by
Section 1-203. See subsection (c).
20. "Lien Creditor" This definition is unchanged in substance from the corresponding definition in former Section
9-301.
21. "New Value." This Article deletes former Section 9-108. Its broad formulation of new value, which embraced
the taking of after-acquired collateral for a pre-existing claim, was unnecessary, counterintuitive, and ineffective for
its original purpose of sheltering after-acquired collateral from attack as a voidable preference in bankruptcy. The
new definition derives from Bankruptcy Code Section 547(a). The term is used with respect to temporary perfection
of security interests in instruments, certificated securities, or negotiable documents under Section 9-312(e) and with
respect to chattel paper priority in Section 9-330.
22. "Person Related To." Section 9-615 provides a special method for calculating a deficiency or surplus when
"the secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor" acquires the collateral at a
foreclosure disposition. Separate definitions of the term are provided with respect to an individual secured party and
with respect to a secured party that is an organization. The definitions are patterned on the corresponding definition
in Section 1.301(32) of the Uniform Consumer Credit Code (1974).
23. "Proposal." This definition describes a record that is sufficient to propose to retain collateral in full or partial
satisfaction of a secured obligation. See Sections 9-620, 9-621, 9-622.
§ 9-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
Page 23 of 23
24. "Pursuant to Commitment." This definition is unchanged in substance from the corresponding definition in
former Section 9-105. It is used in connection with special priority rules applicable to future advances. See Section
9-323.
25. "Software." The definition of "software" is used in connection with the priority rules applicable to purchasemoney
security interests. See Sections 9-103, 9-324. Software, like a payment intangible, is a type of general
intangible for purposes of this Article. See Comment 4.a., above, regarding the distinction between "goods" and
"software."
26. Terminology: "Assignment" and "Transfer." In numerous provisions, this Article refers to the "assignment"
or the "transfer" of property interests. These terms and their derivatives are not defined. This Article generally
follows common usage by using the terms "assignment" and "assign" to refer to transfers of rights to payment,
claims, and liens and other security interests. It generally uses the term "transfer" to refer to other transfers of
interests in property. Except when used in connection with a letter-of-credit transaction (see Section 9-107,
Comment 4), no significance should be placed on the use of one term or the other. Depending on the context, each
term may refer to the assignment or transfer of an outright ownership interest or to the assignment or transfer of a
limited interest, such as a security interest.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS > SUBPART 1. SHORT TITLE, DEFINITIONS,
AND GENERAL CONCEPTS
§ 9-103. PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTEREST; APPLICATION OF
PAYMENTS; BURDEN OF ESTABLISHING
(a) [Definitions.] In this section:
(1) "purchase-money collateral" means goods or software that secures a purchase-money obligation
incurred with respect to that collateral; and
(2) "purchase-money obligation" means an obligation of an obligor incurred as all or part of the price of
the collateral or for value given to enable the debtor to acquire rights in or the use of the collateral if the
value is in fact so used.
(b) [Purchase-money security interest in goods.] A security interest in goods is a purchase-money
security interest:
(1) to the extent that the goods are purchase-money collateral with respect to that security interest;
(2) if the security interest is in inventory that is or was purchase-money collateral, also to the extent
that the security interest secures a purchase-money obligation incurred with respect to other inventory
in which the secured party holds or held a purchase-money security interest; and
(3) also to the extent that the security interest secures a purchase-money obligation incurred with
respect to software in which the secured party holds or held a purchase-money security interest.
(c) [Purchase-money security interest in software.] A security interest in software is a purchase-money
security interest to the extent that the security interest also secures a purchase-money obligation incurred
with respect to goods in which the secured party holds or held a purchase-money security interest if:
(1) the debtor acquired its interest in the software in an integrated transaction in which it acquired an
interest in the goods; and
(2) the debtor acquired its interest in the software for the principal purpose of using the software in the
goods.
(d) [Consignor's inventory purchase-money security interest.] The security interest of a consignor in
goods that are the subject of a consignment is a purchase-money security interest in inventory.
(e) [Application of payment in non-consumer-goods transaction.] In a transaction other than a
consumer-goods transaction, if the extent to which a security interest is a purchase-money security interest
depends on the application of a payment to a particular obligation, the payment must be applied:
(1) in accordance with any reasonable method of application to which the parties agree;
(2) in the absence of the parties' agreement to a reasonable method, in accordance with any intention
of the obligor manifested at or before the time of payment; or
(3) in the absence of an agreement to a reasonable method and a timely manifestation of the obligor's
intention, in the following order:
(A) to obligations that are not secured; and
§ 9-103. PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTEREST; APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS; BURDEN OF
ESTABLISHING
Page 2 of 4
(B) if more than one obligation is secured, to obligations secured by purchase-money security
interests in the order in which those obligations were incurred.
(f) [No loss of status of purchase-money security interest in non-consumer-goods transaction.] In a
transaction other than a consumer-goods transaction, a purchase-money security interest does not lose its
status as such, even if:
(1) the purchase-money collateral also secures an obligation that is not a purchase-money obligation;
(2) collateral that is not purchase-money collateral also secures the purchase-money obligation; or
(3) the purchase-money obligation has been renewed, refinanced, consolidated, or restructured.
(g) [Burden of proof in non-consumer-goods transaction.] In a transaction other than a consumergoods
transaction, a secured party claiming a purchase-money security interest has the burden of
establishing the extent to which the security interest is a purchase-money security interest.
(h) [Non-consumer-goods transactions; no inference.] The limitation of the rules in subsections (e), (f),
and (g) to transactions other than consumer-goods transactions is intended to leave to the court the
determination of the proper rules in consumer-goods transactions. The court may not infer from that
limitation the nature of the proper rule in consumer-goods transactions and may continue to apply
established approaches.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-107.
2. Scope of This Section. Under Section 9-309(1), a purchase-money security interest in consumer goods is
perfected when it attaches. Sections 9-317 and 9-324 provide special priority rules for purchase-money security
interests in a variety of contexts. This section explains when a security interest enjoys purchase-money status.
3. "Purchase-Money Collateral"; "Purchase-Money Obligation"; "Purchase-Money Security Interest."
Subsection (a) defines "purchase-money collateral" and "purchase-money obligation." These terms are essential to
the description of what constitutes a purchase-money security interest under subsection (b). As used in subsection
(a)(2), the definition of "purchase-money obligation," the "price" of collateral or the "value given to enable" includes
obligations for expenses incurred in connection with acquiring rights in the collateral, sales taxes, duties, finance
charges, interest, freight charges, costs of storage in transit, demurrage, administrative charges, expenses of
collection and enforcement, attorney's fees, and other similar obligations.
The concept of "purchase-money security interest" requires a close nexus between the acquisition of collateral
and the secured obligation. Thus, a security interest does not qualify as a purchase-money security interest if a
debtor acquires property on unsecured credit and subsequently creates the security interest to secure the purchase
price.
4. Cross-Collateralization of Purchase-Money Security Interests in Inventory. Subsection (b)(2) deals with
the problem of cross-collateralized purchase-money security interests in inventory. Consider a simple example:
Example: Seller (S) sells an item of inventory (Item-1) to Debtor (D), retaining a security interest in Item-1 to
secure Item-1's price and all other obligations, existing and future, of D to S. S then sells another item of inventory
to D (Item-2), again retaining a security interest in Item-2 to secure Item-2's price as well as all other obligations of
§ 9-103. PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTEREST; APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS; BURDEN OF
ESTABLISHING
Page 3 of 4
D to S. D then pays to S Item-1's price. D then sells Item-2 to a buyer in ordinary course of business, who takes
Item-2 free of S's security interest.
Under subsection (b)(2), S's security interest in Item-1 securing Item-2's unpaid price would be a purchase-money
security interest. This is so because S has a purchase-money security interest in Item-1, Item-1 secures the price of
(a "purchase-money obligation incurred with respect to") Item-2 ("other inventory"), and Item-2 itself was subject to
a purchase-money security interest. Note that, to the extent Item-1 secures the price of Item-2, S's security interest
in Item-1 would not be a purchase-money security interest under subsection (b)(1). The security interest in Item-1 is
a purchase-money security interest under subsection (b)(1) only to the extent that Item-1 is "purchase-money
collateral," i.e., only to the extent that Item-1 "secures a purchase-money obligation incurred with respect to that
collateral" (i.e., Item-1). See subsection (a)(1).
5. Purchase-Money Security Interests in Goods and Software. Subsections (b) and (c) limit purchase-money
security interests to security interests in goods, including fixtures, and software. Otherwise, no change in meaning
from former Section 9-107 is intended. The second sentence of former Section 9-115(5)(f) made the purchasemoney
priority rule (former Section 9-312(4)) inapplicable to investment property. This section's limitation makes
that provision unnecessary.
Subsection (c) describes the limited circumstances under which a security interest in goods may be accompanied
by a purchase-money security interest in software. The software must be acquired by the debtor in a transaction
integrated with the transaction in which the debtor acquired the goods, and the debtor must acquire the software for
the principal purpose of using the software in the goods. "Software" is defined in Section 9-102.
6. Consignments. Under former Section 9-114, the priority of the consignor's interest is similar to that of a
purchase-money security interest. Subsection (d) achieves this result more directly, by defining the interest of a
"consignor," defined in Section 9-102, to be a purchase-money security interest in inventory for purposes of this
Article. This drafting convention obviates any need to set forth special priority rules applicable to the interest of a
consignor. Rather, the priority of the consignor's interest as against the rights of lien creditors of the consignee,
competing secured parties, and purchasers of the goods from the consignee can be determined by reference to the
priority rules generally applicable to inventory, such as Sections 9-317, 9-320, 9-322, and 9-324. For other
purposes, including the rights and duties of the consignor and consignee as between themselves, the consignor
would remain the owner of goods under a bailment arrangement with the consignee. See Section 9-319.
7. Provisions Applicable Only to Non-Consumer-Goods Transactions.
a. "Dual-Status" Rule. For transactions other than consumer-goods transactions, this Article approves what
some cases have called the "dual-status" rule, under which a security interest may be a purchase-money security
interest to some extent and a non-purchase-money security interest to some extent. (Concerning consumer-goods
transactions, see subsection (h) and Comment 8.) Some courts have found this rule to be explicit or implicit in the
words "to the extent," found in former Section 9-107 and continued in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2). The rule is
made explicit in subsection (e). For non-consumer-goods transactions, this Article rejects the "transformation" rule
adopted by some cases, under which any cross-collateralization, refinancing, or the like destroys the purchasemoney
status entirely.
Consider, for example, what happens when a $ 10,000 loan secured by a purchase-money security interest is
refinanced by the original lender, and, as part of the transaction, the debtor borrows an additional $ 2,000 secured
by the collateral. Subsection (f) resolves any doubt that the security interest remains a purchase-money security
interest. Under subsection (b), however, it enjoys purchase-money status only to the extent of $ 10,000.
b. Allocation of Payments. Continuing with the example, if the debtor makes a $ 1,000 payment on the $ 12,000
obligation, then one must determine the extent to which the security interest remains a purchase-money security
interest--$ 9,000 or $ 10,000. Subsection (e)(1) expresses the overriding principle, applicable in cases other than
consumer-goods transactions, for determining the extent to which a security interest is a purchase-money security
interest under these circumstances: freedom of contract, as limited by principle of reasonableness. An
§ 9-103. PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTEREST; APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS; BURDEN OF
ESTABLISHING
Page 4 of 4
unconscionable method of application, for example, is not a reasonable one and so would not be given effect under
subsection (e)(1). In the absence of agreement, subsection (e)(2) permits the obligor to determine how payments
should be allocated. If the obligor fails to manifest its intention, obligations that are not secured will be paid first. (As
used in this Article, the concept of "obligations that are not secured" means obligations for which the debtor has not
created a security interest. This concept is different from and should not be confused with the concept of an
"unsecured claim" as it appears in Bankruptcy Code Section 506(a).) The obligor may prefer this approach,
because unsecured debt is likely to carry a higher interest rate than secured debt. A creditor who would prefer to be
secured rather than unsecured also would prefer this approach.
After the unsecured debt is paid, payments are to be applied first toward the obligations secured by purchasemoney
security interests. In the event that there is more than one such obligation, payments first received are to be
applied to obligations first incurred. See subsection (e)(3). Once these obligations are paid, there are no purchasemoney
security interests and no additional allocation rules are needed.
Subsection (f) buttresses the dual-status rule by making it clear that (in a transaction other than a consumergoods
transaction) cross-collateralization and renewals, refinancings, and restructurings do not cause a purchasemoney
security interest to lose its status as such. The statutory terms "renewed," "refinanced," and "restructured"
are not defined. Whether the terms encompass a particular transaction depends upon whether, under the particular
facts, the purchase-money character of the security interest fairly can be said to survive. Each term contemplates
that an identifiable portion of the purchase-money obligation could be traced to the new obligation resulting from a
renewal, refinancing, or restructuring.
c. Burden of Proof. As is the case when the extent of a security interest is in issue, under subsection (g) the
secured party claiming a purchase-money security interest in a transaction other than a consumer-goods
transaction has the burden of establishing whether the security interest retains its purchase-money status. This is
so whether the determination is to be made following a renewal, refinancing, or restructuring or otherwise.
8. Consumer-Goods Transactions; Characterization Under Other Law. Under subsection (h), the limitation of
subsections (e), (f), and (g) to transactions other than consumer-goods transactions leaves to the court the
determination of the proper rules in consumer-goods transactions. Subsection (h) also instructs the court not to
draw any inference from this limitation as to the proper rules for consumer-goods transactions and leaves the court
free to continue to apply established approaches to those transactions.
This section addresses only whether a security interest is a "purchase-money security interest" under this Article,
primarily for purposes of perfection and priority. See, e.g., Sections 9-317, 9-324. In particular, its adoption of the
dual-status rule, allocation of payments rules, and burden of proof standards for non-consumer-goods transactions
is not intended to affect or influence characterizations under other statutes. Whether a security interest is a
"purchase-money security interest" under other law is determined by that law. For example, decisions under
Bankruptcy Code Section 522(f) have applied both the dual-status and the transformation rules. The Bankruptcy
Code does not expressly adopt the state law definition of "purchase-money security interest." Where federal law
does not defer to this Article, this Article does not, and could not, determine a question of federal law.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS > SUBPART 1. SHORT TITLE, DEFINITIONS,
AND GENERAL CONCEPTS
§ 9-104. CONTROL OF DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
(a) [Requirements for control.] A secured party has control of a deposit account if:
(1) the secured party is the bank with which the deposit account is maintained;
(2) the debtor, secured party, and bank have agreed in an authenticated record that the bank will
comply with instructions originated by the secured party directing disposition of the funds in the deposit
account without further consent by the debtor; or
(3) the secured party becomes the bank's customer with respect to the deposit account.
(b) [Debtor's right to direct disposition.] A secured party that has satisfied subsection (a) has control,
even if the debtor retains the right to direct the disposition of funds from the deposit account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New; derived from Section 8-106.
2. Why "Control" Matters. This section explains the concept of "control" of a deposit account. "Control" under
this section may serve two functions. First, "control . . . pursuant to the debtor's agreement" may substitute for an
authenticated security agreement as an element of attachment. See Section 9-203(b)(3)(D). Second, when a
deposit account is taken as original collateral, the only method of perfection is obtaining control under this section.
See Section 9-312(b)(1).
3. Requirements for "Control." This section derives from Section 8-106 of Revised Article 8, which defines
"control" of securities and certain other investment property. Under subsection (a)(1), the bank with which the
deposit account is maintained has control. The effect of this provision is to afford the bank automatic perfection. No
other form of public notice is necessary; all actual and potential creditors of the debtor are always on notice that the
bank with which the debtor's deposit account is maintained may assert a claim against the deposit account.
Example: D maintains a deposit account with Bank A. To secure a loan from Banks X, Y, and Z, D creates a
security interest in the deposit account in favor of Bank A, as agent for Banks X, Y, and Z. Because Bank A is a
"secured party" as defined in Section 9-102, the security interest is perfected by control under subsection (a)(1).
Under subsection (a)(2), a secured party may obtain control by obtaining the bank's authenticated agreement that
it will comply with the secured party's instructions without further consent by the debtor. The analogous provision in
Section 8-106 does not require that the agreement be authenticated. An agreement to comply with the secured
party's instructions suffices for "control" of a deposit account under this section even if the bank's agreement is
subject to specified conditions, e.g., that the secured party's instructions are accompanied by a certification that the
debtor is in default. (Of course, if the condition is the debtor's further consent, the statute explicitly provides that the
agreement would not confer control.) See revised Section 8-106, Comment 7.
§ 9-104. CONTROL OF DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
Page 2 of 2
Under subsection (a)(3), a secured party may obtain control by becoming the bank's "customer," as defined in
Section 4-104. As the customer, the secured party would enjoy the right (but not necessarily the exclusive right) to
withdraw funds from, or close, the deposit account. See Sections 4-401(a), 4-403(a).
As is the case with possession under Section 9 313, in determining whether a particular person has control under
subsection (a), the principles of agency apply. See Section 1-103 and Restatement (3d), Agency § 8.12, Comment
b.
Although the arrangements giving rise to control may themselves prevent, or may enable the secured party at its
discretion to prevent, the debtor from reaching the funds on deposit, subsection (b) makes clear that the debtor's
ability to reach the funds is not inconsistent with "control."
Perfection by control is not available for bank accounts evidenced by an instrument (e.g., certain certificates of
deposit), which by definition are "instruments" and not "deposit accounts." See Section 9-102 (defining "deposit
account" and "instrument").
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS > SUBPART 1. SHORT TITLE, DEFINITIONS,
AND GENERAL CONCEPTS
§ 9-105. CONTROL OF ELECTRONIC CHATTEL PAPER
(a) [General rule: control of electronic chattel paper.] A secured party has control of electronic chattel
paper if a system employed for evidencing the transfer of interests in the chattel paper reliably establishes
the secured party as the person to which the chattel paper was assigned.
(b) [Specific facts giving control.] A system satisfies subsection (a) if the record or records comprising
the chattel paper are created, stored, and assigned in such a manner that:
(1) a single authoritative copy of the record or records exists which is unique, identifiable and, except
as otherwise provided in paragraphs (4), (5), and (6), unalterable;
(2) the authoritative copy identifies the secured party as the assignee of the record or records;
(3) the authoritative copy is communicated to and maintained by the secured party or its designated
custodian;
(4) copies or amendments that add or change an identified assignee of the authoritative copy can be
made only with the consent of the secured party;
(5) each copy of the authoritative copy and any copy of a copy is readily identifiable as a copy that is
not the authoritative copy; and
(6) any amendment of the authoritative copy is readily identifiable as authorized or unauthorized.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. "Control" of Electronic Chattel Paper. This Article covers security interests in "electronic chattel paper," a
new term defined in Section 9-102. This section governs how "control" of electronic chattel paper may be obtained.
Subsection (a), which derives from Section 16 of the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act, sets forth the general test
for control. Subsection (b) sets forth a safe harbor test that, if satisfied, establishes control under the general test in
subsection (a).
A secured party's control of electronic chattel paper (i) may substitute for an authenticated security agreement for
purposes of attachment under Section 9-203, (ii) is a method of perfection under Section 9-314, and (iii) is a
condition for obtaining special, non-temporal priority under Section 9-330. Because electronic chattel paper cannot
be transferred, assigned, or possessed in the same manner as tangible chattel paper, a special definition of control
is necessary. In descriptive terms, this section provides that control of electronic chattel paper is the functional
equivalent of possession of "tangible chattel paper" (a term also defined in Section 9-102).
§ 9-105. CONTROL OF ELECTRONIC CHATTEL PAPER
Page 2 of 2
3. Development of Control Systems. This Article leaves to the marketplace the development of systems and
procedures, through a combination of suitable technologies and business practices, for dealing with control of
electronic chattel paper in a commercial context. Systems that evolve for control of electronic chattel paper may or
may not involve a third party custodian of the relevant records. As under UETA, a system must be shown to reliably
establish that the secured party is the assignee of the chattel paper. Reliability is a high standard and encompasses
the general principles of uniqueness, identifiability, and unalterability found in subsection (b) without setting forth
specific guidelines as to how these principles must be achieved. However, the standards applied to determine
whether a party is in control of electronic chattel paper should not be more stringent than the standards now applied
to determine whether a party is in possession of tangible chattel paper. For example, just as a secured party does
not lose possession of tangible chattel paper merely by virtue of the possibility that a person acting on its behalf
could wrongfully redeliver the chattel paper to the debtor, so control of electronic chattel paper would not be
defeated by the possibility that the secured party's interest could be subverted by the wrongful conduct of a person
(such as a custodian) acting on its behalf.
This section and the concept of control of electronic chattel paper are not based on the same concepts as are
control of deposit accounts (Section 9-104), security entitlements, a type of investment property (Section 9-106),
and letter-of-credit rights (Section 9-107). The rules for control of those types of collateral are based on existing
market practices and legal and regulatory regimes for institutions such as banks and securities intermediaries.
Analogous practices for electronic chattel paper are developing nonetheless. The flexible approach adopted by this
section, moreover, should not impede the development of these practices and, eventually, legal and regulatory
regimes, which may become analogous to those for, e.g., investment property.
4. "Authoritative Copy" of Electronic Chattel Paper. One requirement for establishing control under subsection
(b) is that a particular copy be an "authoritative copy." Although other copies may exist, they must be distinguished
from the authoritative copy. This may be achieved, for example, through the methods of authentication that are
used or by business practices involving the marking of any additional copies. When tangible chattel paper is
converted to electronic chattel paper, in order to establish that a copy of the electronic chattel paper is the
authoritative copy it may be necessary to show that the tangible chattel paper no longer exists or has been
permanently marked to indicate that it is not the authoritative copy.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS > SUBPART 1. SHORT TITLE, DEFINITIONS,
AND GENERAL CONCEPTS
§ 9-106. CONTROL OF INVESTMENT PROPERTY
(a) [Control under Section 8-106.] A person has control of a certificated security, uncertificated security,
or security entitlement as provided in Section 8-106.
(b) [Control of commodity contract.] A secured party has control of a commodity contract if:
(1) the secured party is the commodity intermediary with which the commodity contract is carried; or
(2) the commodity customer, secured party, and commodity intermediary have agreed that the
commodity intermediary will apply any value distributed on account of the commodity contract as
directed by the secured party without further consent by the commodity customer.
(c) [Effect of control of securities account or commodity account.] A secured party having control of
all security entitlements or commodity contracts carried in a securities account or commodity account has
control over the securities account or commodity account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-115(e).
2. "Control" Under Article 8. For an explanation of "control" of securities and certain other investment property,
see Section 8-106, Comments 4 and 7.
3. "Control" of Commodity Contracts. This section, as did former Section 9-115(1)(e), contains provisions
relating to control of commodity contracts which are analogous to those in Section 8-106 for other types of
investment property.
4. Securities Accounts and Commodity Accounts. For drafting convenience, control with respect to a
securities account or commodity account is defined in terms of obtaining control over the security entitlements or
commodity contracts. Of course, an agreement that provides that (without further consent of the debtor) the
securities intermediary or commodity intermediary will honor instructions from the secured party concerning a
securities account or commodity account described as such is sufficient. Such an agreement necessarily implies
that the intermediary will honor instructions concerning all security entitlements or commodity contracts carried in
the account and thus affords the secured party control of all the security entitlements or commodity contracts.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS > SUBPART 1. SHORT TITLE, DEFINITIONS,
AND GENERAL CONCEPTS
§ 9-107. CONTROL OF LETTER-OF-CREDIT RIGHT
A secured party has control of a letter-of-credit right to the extent of any right to payment or performance by the
issuer or any nominated person if the issuer or nominated person has consented to an assignment of proceeds of
the letter of credit under Section 5-114(c) or otherwise applicable law or practice.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. "Control" of Letter-of-Credit Right. Whether a secured party has control of a letter-of-credit right may
determine the secured party's priority as against competing secured parties. See Section 9-329. This section
provides that a secured party acquires control of a letter-of-credit right by receiving an assignment if the secured
party obtains the consent of the issuer or any nominated person, such as a confirmer or negotiating bank, under
Section 5-114 or other applicable law or practice. Because both issuers and nominated persons may give or be
obligated to give value under a letter of credit, this section contemplates that a secured party obtains control of a
letter-of-credit right with respect to the issuer or a particular nominated person only to the extent that the issuer or
that nominated person consents to the assignment. For example, if a secured party obtains control to the extent of
an issuer's obligation but fails to obtain the consent of a nominated person, the secured party does not have control
to the extent that the nominated person gives value. In many cases the person or persons who will give value under
a letter of credit will be clear from its terms. In other cases, prudence may suggest obtaining consent from more
than one person. The details of the consenting issuer's or nominated person's duties to pay or otherwise render
performance to the secured party are left to the agreement of the parties.
3. "Proceeds of a Letter of Credit." Section 5-114 follows traditional banking terminology by referring to a letter
of credit beneficiary's assignment of its right to receive payment thereunder as an assignment of the "proceeds of a
letter of credit." However, as the seller of goods can assign its right to receive payment (an "account") before it has
been earned by delivering the goods to the buyer, so the beneficiary of a letter of credit can assign its contingent
right to payment before the letter of credit has been honored. See Section 5-114(b). If the assignment creates a
security interest, the security interest can be perfected at the time it is created. An assignment of, including the
creation of a security interest in, a letter-of-credit right is an assignment of a present interest.
4. "Transfer" vs. "Assignment." Letter-of-credit law and practice distinguish the "transfer" of a letter of credit
from an "assignment." Under a transfer, the transferee itself becomes the beneficiary and acquires the right to draw.
Whether a new, substitute credit is issued or the issuer advises the transferee of its status as such, the transfer
constitutes a novation under which the transferee is the new, substituted beneficiary (but only to the extent of the
transfer, in the case of a partial transfer).
§ 9-107. CONTROL OF LETTER-OF-CREDIT RIGHT
Page 2 of 2
Section 5-114(e) provides that the rights of a transferee beneficiary or nominated person are independent of the
beneficiary's assignment of the proceeds of a letter of credit and are superior to the assignee's right to the
proceeds. For this reason, transfer does not appear in this Article as a means of control or perfection. Section 9-
109(c)(4) recognizes the independent and superior rights of a transferee beneficiary under Section 5-114(e); this
Article does not apply to the rights of a transferee beneficiary or nominated person to the extent that those rights
are independent and superior under Section 5-114.
5. Supporting Obligation: Automatic Attachment and Perfection. A letter-of-credit right is a type of
"supporting obligation," as defined in Section 9-102. Under Sections 9-203 and 9-308, a security interest in a letterof-
credit right automatically attaches and is automatically perfected if the security interest in the supported
obligation is a perfected security interest. However, unless the secured party has control of the letter-of-credit right
or itself becomes a transferee beneficiary, it cannot obtain any rights against the issuer or a nominated person
under Article 5. Consequently, as a practical matter, the secured party's rights would be limited to its ability to locate
and identify proceeds distributed by the issuer or nominated person under the letter of credit.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-108
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS > SUBPART 1. SHORT TITLE, DEFINITIONS,
AND GENERAL CONCEPTS
§ 9-108. SUFFICIENCY OF DESCRIPTION
(a) [Sufficiency of description.] Except as otherwise provided in subsections (c), (d), and (e), a
description of personal or real property is sufficient, whether or not it is specific, if it reasonably identifies
what is described.
(b) [Examples of reasonable identification.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), a
description of collateral reasonably identifies the collateral if it identifies the collateral by:
(1) specific listing;
(2) category;
(3) except as otherwise provided in subsection (e), a type of collateral defined in [the Uniform
Commercial Code];
(4) quantity;
(5) computational or allocational formula or procedure; or
(6) except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), any other method, if the identity of the collateral is
objectively determinable.
(c) [Supergeneric description not sufficient.] A description of collateral as "all the debtor's assets" or "all
the debtor's personal property" or using words of similar import does not reasonably identify the collateral.
(d) [Investment property.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e), a description of a security
entitlement, securities account, or commodity account is sufficient if it describes:
(1) the collateral by those terms or as investment property; or
(2) the underlying financial asset or commodity contract.
(e) [When description by type insufficient.] A description only by type of collateral defined in [the
Uniform Commercial Code] is an insufficient description of:
(1) a commercial tort claim; or
(2) in a consumer transaction, consumer goods, a security entitlement, a securities account, or a
commodity account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Sections 9-110, 9-115(3).
§ 9-108. SUFFICIENCY OF DESCRIPTION
Page 2 of 2
2. General Rules. Subsection (a) retains substantially the same formulation as former Section 9-110. Subsection
(b) expands upon subsection (a) by indicating a variety of ways in which a description might reasonably identify
collateral. Whereas a provision similar to subsection (b) was applicable only to investment property under former
Section 9-115(3), subsection (b) applies to all types of collateral, subject to the limitation in subsection (d).
Subsection (b) is subject to subsection (c), which follows prevailing case law and adopts the view that an "all
assets" or "all personal property" description for purposes of a security agreement is not sufficient. Note, however,
that under Section 9-504, a financing statement sufficiently indicates the collateral if it "covers all assets or all
personal property."
The purpose of requiring a description of collateral in a security agreement under Section 9-203 is evidentiary.
The test of sufficiency of a description under this section, as under former Section 9-110, is that the description do
the job assigned to it: make possible the identification of the collateral described. This section rejects any
requirement that a description is insufficient unless it is exact and detailed (the so-called "serial number" test).
3. After-Acquired Collateral. Much litigation has arisen over whether a description in a security agreement is
sufficient to include after-acquired collateral if the agreement does not explicitly so provide. This question is one of
contract interpretation and is not susceptible to a statutory rule (other than a rule to the effect that it is a question of
contract interpretation). Accordingly, this section contains no reference to descriptions of after-acquired collateral.
4. Investment Property. Under subsection (d), the use of the wrong Article 8 terminology does not render a
description invalid (e.g., a security agreement intended to cover a debtor's "security entitlements" is sufficient if it
refers to the debtor's "securities"). Note also that given the broad definition of "securities account" in Section 8-501,
a security interest in a securities account also includes all other rights of the debtor against the securities
intermediary arising out of the securities account. For example, a security interest in a securities account would
include credit balances due to the debtor from the securities intermediary, whether or not they are proceeds of a
security entitlement. Moreover, describing collateral as a securities account is a simple way of describing all of the
security entitlements carried in the account.
5. Consumer Investment Property; Commercial Tort Claims. Subsection (e) requires greater specificity of
description in order to prevent debtors from inadvertently encumbering certain property. Subsection (e) requires that
a description by defined "type" of collateral alone of a commercial tort claim or, in a consumer transaction, of a
security entitlement, securities account, or commodity account, is not sufficient. For example, "all existing and afteracquired
investment property" or "all existing and after-acquired security entitlements," without more, would be
insufficient in a consumer transaction to describe a security entitlement, securities account, or commodity account.
The reference to "only by type" in subsection (e) means that a description is sufficient if it satisfies subsection (a)
and contains a descriptive component beyond the "type" alone. Moreover, if the collateral consists of a securities
account or commodity account, a description of the account is sufficient to cover all existing and future security
entitlements or commodity contracts carried in the account. See Section 9-203(h), (i).
Under Section 9-204, an after-acquired collateral clause in a security agreement will not reach future commercial
tort claims. It follows that when an effective security agreement covering a commercial tort claim is entered into the
claim already will exist. Subsection (e) does not require a description to be specific. For example, a description such
as "all tort claims arising out of the explosion of debtor's factory" would suffice, even if the exact amount of the
claim, the theory on which it may be based, and the identity of the tortfeasor(s) are not described. (Indeed, those
facts may not be known at the time.)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-109
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS > SUBPART 2. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE
§ 9-109. SCOPE
(a) [General scope of article.] Except as otherwise provided in subsections (c) and (d), this article applies
to:
(1) a transaction, regardless of its form, that creates a security interest in personal property or fixtures
by contract;
(2) an agricultural lien;
(3) a sale of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes;
(4) a consignment;
(5) a security interest arising under Section 2-401, 2-505, 2-711(3), or 2A-508(5), as provided in
Section 9-110; and
(6) a security interest arising under Section 4-210 or 5-118.
(b) [Security interest in secured obligation.] The application of this article to a security interest in a
secured obligation is not affected by the fact that the obligation is itself secured by a transaction or interest
to which this article does not apply.
(c) [Extent to which article does not apply.] This article does not apply to the extent that:
(1) a statute, regulation, or treaty of the United States preempts this article;
(2) another statute of this State expressly governs the creation, perfection, priority, or enforcement of a
security interest created by this State or a governmental unit of this State;
(3) a statute of another State, a foreign country, or a governmental unit of another State or a foreign
country, other than a statute generally applicable to security interests, expressly governs creation,
perfection, priority, or enforcement of a security interest created by the State, country, or governmental
unit; or
(4) the rights of a transferee beneficiary or nominated person under a letter of credit are independent
and superior under Section 5-114.
(d) [Inapplicability of article.] This article does not apply to:
(1) a landlord's lien, other than an agricultural lien;
(2) a lien, other than an agricultural lien, given by statute or other rule of law for services or materials,
but Section 9-333 applies with respect to priority of the lien;
(3) an assignment of a claim for wages, salary, or other compensation of an employee;
(4) a sale of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes as part of a sale of the
business out of which they arose;
(5) an assignment of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes which is for the
purpose of collection only;
(6) an assignment of a right to payment under a contract to an assignee that is also obligated to
perform under the contract;
§ 9-109. SCOPE
Page 2 of 7
(7) an assignment of a single account, payment intangible, or promissory note to an assignee in full or
partial satisfaction of a preexisting indebtedness;
(8) a transfer of an interest in or an assignment of a claim under a policy of insurance, other than an
assignment by or to a health-care provider of a health-care-insurance receivable and any subsequent
assignment of the right to payment, but Sections 9-315 and 9-322 apply with respect to proceeds and
priorities in proceeds;
(9) an assignment of a right represented by a judgment, other than a judgment taken on a right to
payment that was collateral;
(10) a right of recoupment or set-off, but:
(A) Section 9-340 applies with respect to the effectiveness of rights of recoupment or set-off
against deposit accounts; and
(B) Section 9-404 applies with respect to defenses or claims of an account debtor;
(11) the creation or transfer of an interest in or lien on real property, including a lease or rents
thereunder, except to the extent that provision is made for:
(A) liens on real property in Sections 9-203 and 9-308;
(B) fixtures in Section 9-334;
(C) fixture filings in Sections 9-501, 9-502, 9-512, 9-516, and 9-519; and
(D) security agreements covering personal and real property in Section 9-604;
(12) an assignment of a claim arising in tort, other than a commercial tort claim, but Sections 9-315
and 9-322 apply with respect to proceeds and priorities in proceeds; or
(13) an assignment of a deposit account in a consumer transaction, but Sections 9-315 and 9-322
apply with respect to proceeds and priorities in proceeds.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Sections 9-102, 9-104.
2. Basic Scope Provision. Subsection (a)(1) derives from former Section 9-102(1) and (2). These subsections
have been combined and shortened. No change in meaning is intended. Under subsection (a)(1), all consensual
security interests in personal property and fixtures are covered by this Article, except for transactions excluded by
subsections (c) and (d). As to which transactions give rise to a "security interest," the definition of that term in
Section 1-201 must be consulted. When a security interest is created, this Article applies regardless of the form of
the transaction or the name that parties have given to it. Likewise, the subjective intention of the parties with respect
to the legal characterization of their transaction is irrelevant to whether this Article applies, as it was to the
application of former Article 9 under the proper interpretation of former Section 9-102.
3. Agricultural Liens. Subsection (a)(2) is new. It expands the scope of this Article to cover agricultural liens, as
defined in Section 9-102.
4. Sales of Accounts, Chattel Paper, Payment Intangibles, Promissory Notes, and Other Receivables.
Under subsection (a)(3), as under former Section 9-102, this Article applies to sales of accounts and chattel paper.
This approach generally has been successful in avoiding difficult problems of distinguishing between transactions in
§ 9-109. SCOPE
Page 3 of 7
which a receivable secures an obligation and those in which the receivable has been sold outright. In many
commercial financing transactions the distinction is blurred.
Subsection (a)(3) expands the scope of this Article by including the sale of a "payment intangible" (defined in
Section 9-102 as "a general intangible under which the account debtor's principal obligation is a monetary
obligation") and a "promissory note" (also defined in Section 9-102). To a considerable extent, this Article affords
these transactions treatment identical to that given sales of accounts and chattel paper. In some respects, however,
sales of payment intangibles and promissory notes are treated differently from sales of other receivables. See, e.g.,
Sections 9-309 (automatic perfection upon attachment), 9-408 (effect of restrictions on assignment). By virtue of the
expanded definition of "account" (defined in Section 9-102), this Article now covers sales of (and other security
interests in) "health-care-insurance receivables" (also defined in Section 9-102). Although this Article occasionally
distinguishes between outright sales of receivables and sales that secure an obligation, neither this Article nor the
definition of "security interest" (Section 1-201(37)) delineates how a particular transaction is to be classified. That
issue is left to the courts.
5. Transfer of Ownership in Sales of Receivables. A "sale" of an account, chattel paper, a promissory note, or
a payment intangible includes a sale of a right in the receivable, such as a sale of a participation interest. The term
also includes the sale of an enforcement right. For example, a "person entitled to enforce" a negotiable promissory
note (Section 3-301) may sell its ownership rights in the instrument. See Section 3-203, Comment 1 ("Ownership
rights in instruments may be determined by principles of the law of property, independent of Article 3, which do not
depend upon whether the instrument was transferred under Section 3-203."). Also, the right under Section 3-309 to
enforce a lost, destroyed, or stolen negotiable promissory note may be sold to a purchaser who could enforce that
right by causing the seller to provide the proof required under that section. This Article rejects decisions reaching a
contrary result, e.g., Dennis Joslin Co. v. Robinson Broadcasting, 977 F. Supp. 491 (D.D.C. 1997).
Nothing in this section or any other provision of Article 9 prevents the transfer of full and complete ownership of
an account, chattel paper, an instrument, or a payment intangible in a transaction of sale. However, as mentioned in
Comment 4, neither this Article nor the definition of "security interest" in Section 1-201 provides rules for
distinguishing sales transactions from those that create a security interest securing an obligation. This Article
applies to both types of transactions. The principal effect of this coverage is to apply this Article's perfection and
priority rules to these sales transactions. Use of terminology such as "security interest," "debtor," and "collateral" is
merely a drafting convention adopted to reach this end, and its use has no relevance to distinguishing sales from
other transactions. See PEB Commentary No. 14.
Following a debtor's outright sale and transfer of ownership of a receivable, the debtor-seller retains no legal or
equitable rights in the receivable that has been sold. See Section 9-318(a). This is so whether or not the buyer's
security interest is perfected. (A security interest arising from the sale of a promissory note or payment intangible is
perfected upon attachment without further action. See Section 9-309.) However, if the buyer's interest in accounts
or chattel paper is unperfected, a subsequent lien creditor, perfected secured party, or qualified buyer can reach the
sold receivable and achieve priority over (or take free of) the buyer's unperfected security interest under Section 9-
317. This is so not because the seller of a receivable retains rights in the property sold; it does not. Nor is this so
because the seller of a receivable is a "debtor" and the buyer of a receivable is a "secured party" under this Article
(they are). It is so for the simple reason that Sections 9-318(b), 9-317, and 9-322 make it so, as did former Sections
9-301 and 9-312. Because the buyer's security interest is unperfected, for purposes of determining the rights of
creditors of and purchasers for value from the debtor-seller, under Section 9-318(b) the debtor-seller is deemed to
have the rights and title it sold. Section 9-317 subjects the buyer's unperfected interest in accounts and chattel
paper to that of the debtor-seller's lien creditor and other persons who qualify under that section.
6. Consignments. Subsection (a)(4) is new. This Article applies to every "consignment." The term, defined in
Section 9-102, includes many but not all "true" consignments (i.e., bailments for the purpose of sale). If a
transaction is a "sale or return," as defined in revised Section 2-326, it is not a "consignment." In a "sale or return"
transaction, the buyer becomes the owner of the goods, and the seller may obtain an enforceable security interest
in the goods only by satisfying the requirements of Section 9-203.
§ 9-109. SCOPE
Page 4 of 7
Under common law, creditors of a bailee were unable to reach the interest of the bailor (in the case of a
consignment, the consignor-owner). Like former Section 2-326 and former Article 9, this Article changes the
common-law result; however, it does so in a different manner. For purposes of determining the rights and interests
of third-party creditors of, and purchasers of the goods from, the consignee, but not for other purposes, such as
remedies of the consignor, the consignee is deemed to acquire under this Article whatever rights and title the
consignor had or had power to transfer. See Section 9-319. The interest of a consignor is defined to be a security
interest under revised Section 1-201(37), more specifically, a purchase-money security interest in the consignee's
inventory. See Section 9-103(d). Thus, the rules pertaining to lien creditors, buyers, and attachment, perfection, and
priority of competing security interests apply to consigned goods. The relationship between the consignor and
consignee is left to other law. Consignors also have no duties under Part 6. See Section 9-601(g).
Sometimes parties characterize transactions that secure an obligation (other than the bailee's obligation to
returned bailed goods) as "consignments." These transactions are not "consignments" as contemplated by Section
9-109(a)(4). See Section 9-102. This Article applies also to these transactions, by virtue of Section 9-109(a)(1).
They create a security interest within the meaning of the first sentence of Section 1-201(37).
This Article does not apply to bailments for sale that fall outside the definition of "consignment" in Section 9-102
and that do not create a security interest that secures an obligation.
7. Security Interest in Obligation Secured by Non-Article 9 Transaction. Subsection (b) is unchanged in
substance from former Section 9-102(3). The following example provides an illustration.
Example 1: O borrows $ 10,000 from M and secures its repayment obligation, evidenced by a promissory note,
by granting to M a mortgage on O's land. This Article does not apply to the creation of the real-property mortgage.
However, if M sells the promissory note to X or gives a security interest in the note to secure M's own obligation to
X, this Article applies to the security interest thereby created in favor of X. The security interest in the promissory
note is covered by this Article even though the note is secured by a real-property mortgage. Also, X's security
interest in the note gives X an attached security interest in the mortgage lien that secures the note and, if the
security interest in the note is perfected, the security interest in the mortgage lien likewise is perfected. See
Sections 9-203, 9-308.
It also follows from subsection (b) that an attempt to obtain or perfect a security interest in a secured obligation by
complying with non-Article 9 law, as by an assignment of record of a real-property mortgage, would be ineffective.
Finally, it is implicit from subsection (b) that one cannot obtain a security interest in a lien, such as a mortgage on
real property, that is not also coupled with an equally effective security interest in the secured obligation. This Article
rejects cases such as In re Maryville Savings & Loan Corp., 743 F.2d 413 (6th Cir. 1984), clarified on
reconsideration, 760 F.2d 119 (1985).
8. Federal Preemption. Former Section 9-104(a) excluded from Article 9 "a security interest subject to any
statute of the United States, to the extent that such statute governs the rights of parties to and third parties affected
by transactions in particular types of property." Some (erroneously) read the former section to suggest that Article 9
sometimes deferred to federal law even when federal law did not preempt Article 9. Subsection (c)(1) recognizes
explicitly that this Article defers to federal law only when and to the extent that it must--i.e., when federal law
preempts it.
9. Governmental Debtors. Former Section 9-104(e) excluded transfers by governmental debtors. It has been
revised and replaced by the exclusions in new paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (c). These paragraphs reflect
the view that Article 9 should apply to security interests created by a State, foreign country, or a "governmental unit"
(defined in Section 9-102) of either except to the extent that another statute governs the issue in question. Under
paragraph (2), this Article defers to all statutes of the forum State. (A forum cannot determine whether it should
consult the choice-of-law rules in the forum's UCC unless it first determines that its UCC applies to the transaction
before it.) Paragraph (3) defers to statutes of another State or a foreign country only to the extent that those
statutes contain rules applicable specifically to security interests created by the governmental unit in question.
§ 9-109. SCOPE
Page 5 of 7
Example 2: A New Jersey state commission creates a security interest in favor of a New York bank. The validity
of the security interest is litigated in New York. The relevant security agreement provides that it is governed by New
York law. To the extent that a New Jersey statute contains rules peculiar to creation of security interests by
governmental units generally, to creation of security interests by state commissions, or to creation of security
interests by this particular state commission, then that law will govern. On the other hand, to the extent that New
Jersey law provides that security interests created by governmental units, state commissions, or this state
commission are governed by the law generally applicable to secured transactions (i.e., New Jersey's Article 9), then
New York's Article 9 will govern.
Example 3: An airline that is an instrumentality of a foreign country creates a security interest in favor of a New
York bank. The analysis used in the previous example would apply here. That is, if the matter is litigated in New
York, New York law would govern except to the extent that the foreign country enacted a statute applicable to
security interests created by governmental units generally or by the airline specifically.
The fact that New York law applies does not necessarily mean that perfection is accomplished by filing in New
York. Rather, it means that the court should apply New York's Article 9, including its choice-of-law provisions. Under
New York's Section 9-301, perfection is governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the debtor is located.
Section 9-307 determines the debtor's location for choice-of-law purposes.
If a transaction does not bear an appropriate relation to the forum State, then that State's Article 9 will not apply,
regardless of whether the transaction would be excluded by paragraph (3).
Example 4: A Belgian governmental unit grants a security interest in its equipment to a Swiss secured party. The
equipment is located in Belgium. A dispute arises and, for some reason, an action is brought in a New Mexico state
court. Inasmuch as the transaction bears no "appropriate relation" to New Mexico, New Mexico's UCC, including its
Article 9, is inapplicable. See Section 1-105(1). New Mexico's Section 9-109(c) on excluded transactions should not
come into play. Even if the parties agreed that New Mexico law would govern, the parties' agreement would not be
effective because the transaction does not bear a "reasonable relation" to New Mexico. See Section 1-105(1).
Conversely, Article 9 will come into play only if the litigation arises in a UCC jurisdiction or if a foreign choice-oflaw
rule leads a foreign court to apply the law of a UCC jurisdiction. For example, if issues concerning a security
interest granted by a foreign airline to a New York bank are litigated overseas, the court may be bound to apply the
law of the debtor's jurisdiction and not New York's Article 9.
10. Certain Statutory and Common-Law Liens; Interests in Real Property. With few exceptions
(nonconsensual agricultural liens being one), this Article applies only to consensual security interests in personal
property. Following former Section 9-104(b) and (j), paragraphs (1) and (11) of subsection (d) exclude landlord's
liens and leases and most other interests in or liens on real property. These exclusions generally reiterate the
limitations on coverage (i.e., "by contract," "in personal property and fixtures") made explicit in subsection (a)(1).
Similarly, most jurisdictions provide special liens to suppliers of many types of services and materials, either by
statute or by common law. With the exception of agricultural liens, it is not necessary for this Article to provide
general codification of this lien structure, which is determined in large part by local conditions and which is far
removed from ordinary commercial financing. As under former Section 9-104(c), subsection (d)(2) excludes these
suppliers' liens (other than agricultural liens) from this Article. However, Section 9-333 provides a rule for
determining priorities between certain possessory suppliers' liens and security interests covered by this Article.
11. Wage and Similar Claims. As under former Section 9-104(d), subsection (d)(3) excludes assignments of
claims for wages and the like from this Article. These assignments present important social issues that other law
addresses. The Federal Trade Commission has ruled that, with some exceptions, the taking of an assignment of
wages or other earnings is an unfair act or practice under the Federal Trade Commission Act. See 16 C.F.R. Part
444. State statutes also may regulate such assignments.
12. Certain Sales and Assignments of Receivables; Judgments. In general this Article covers security
interests in (including sales of) accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, and promissory notes. Paragraphs (4),
(5), (6), and (7) of subsection (d) exclude from the Article certain sales and assignments of receivables that, by their
§ 9-109. SCOPE
Page 6 of 7
nature, do not concern commercial financing transactions. These paragraphs add to the exclusions in former
Section 9-104(f) analogous sales and assignments of payment intangibles and promissory notes. For similar
reasons, subsection (d)(9) retains the exclusion of assignments of judgments under former Section 9-104(h) (other
than judgments taken on a right to payment that itself was collateral under this Article).
13. Insurance. Subsection (d)(8) narrows somewhat the broad exclusion of interests in insurance policies under
former Section 9-104(g). This Article now covers assignments by or to a health-care provider of "health-careinsurance
receivables" (defined in Section 9-102).
14. Set-Off. Subsection (d)(10) adds two exceptions to the general exclusion of set-off rights from Article 9 under
former Section 9-104(i). The first takes account of new Section 9-340, which regulates the effectiveness of a set-off
against a deposit account that stands as collateral. The second recognizes Section 9-404, which affords the obligor
on an account, chattel paper, or general intangible the right to raise claims and defenses against an assignee
(secured party).
15. Tort Claims. Subsection (d)(12) narrows somewhat the broad exclusion of transfers of tort claims under
former Section 9-104(k). This Article now applies to assignments of "commercial tort claims" (defined in Section 9-
102) as well as to security interests in tort claims that constitute proceeds of other collateral (e.g., a right to payment
for negligent destruction of the debtor's inventory). Note that once a claim arising in tort has been settled and
reduced to a contractual obligation to pay, the right to payment becomes a payment intangible and ceases to be a
claim arising in tort.
This Article contains two special rules governing creation of a security interest in tort claims. First, a description of
collateral in a security agreement as "all tort claims" is insufficient to meet the requirement for attachment. See
Section 9-108(e). Second, no security interest attaches under an after-acquired property clause to a tort claim. See
Section 9-204(b). In addition, this Article does not determine whom the tortfeasor must pay to discharge its
obligation. Inasmuch as a tortfeasor is not an "account debtor," the rules governing waiver of defenses and
discharge of an obligation by an obligor (Sections 9-403, 9-404, 9-405, and 9-406) are inapplicable to tort-claim
collateral.
16. Deposit Accounts. Except in consumer transactions, deposit accounts may be taken as original collateral
under this Article. Under former Section 9-104(l), deposit accounts were excluded as original collateral, leaving
security interests in deposit accounts to be governed by the common law. The common law is nonuniform, often
difficult to discover and comprehend, and frequently costly to implement. As a consequence, debtors who wished to
use deposit accounts as collateral sometimes were precluded from doing so as a practical matter. By excluding
deposit accounts from the Article's scope as original collateral in consumer transactions, subsection (d)(13) leaves
those transactions to law other than this Article. However, in both consumer and non-consumer transactions,
sections 9-315 and 9-322 apply to deposit accounts as proceeds and with respect to priorities in proceeds.
This Article contains several safeguards to protect debtors against inadvertently encumbering deposit accounts
and to reduce the likelihood that a secured party will realize a windfall from a debtor's deposit accounts. For
example, because "deposit account" is a separate type of collateral, a security agreement covering general
intangibles will not adequately describe deposit accounts. Rather, a security agreement must reasonably identify
the deposit accounts that are the subject of a security interest, e.g., by using the term "deposit accounts." See
Section 9-108. To perfect a security interest in a deposit account as original collateral, a secured party (other than
the bank with which the deposit account is maintained) must obtain "control" of the account either by obtaining the
bank's authenticated agreement or by becoming the bank's customer with respect to the deposit account. See
Sections 9-312(b)(1), 9-104. Either of these steps requires the debtor's consent.
This Article also contains new rules that determine which State's law governs perfection and priority of a security
interest in a deposit account (Section 9-304), priority of conflicting security interests in and set-off rights against a
deposit account (Sections 9-327, 9-340), the rights of transferees of funds from an encumbered deposit account
(Section 9-332), the obligations of the bank (Section 9-341), enforcement of security interests in a deposit account
(Section 9-607(c)), and the duty of a secured party to terminate control of a deposit account (Section 9-208(b)).
§ 9-109. SCOPE
Page 7 of 7
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-110
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS > SUBPART 2. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE
§ 9-110. SECURITY INTERESTS ARISING UNDER ARTICLE 2 OR 2A
A security interest arising under Section 2-401, 2-505, 2-711(3), or 2A-508(5) is subject to this article.
However, until the debtor obtains possession of the goods:
(1) the security interest is enforceable, even if Section 9-203(b)(3) has not been satisfied;
(2) filing is not required to perfect the security interest;
(3) the rights of the secured party after default by the debtor are governed by Article 2 or 2A; and
(4) the security interest has priority over a conflicting security interest created by the debtor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENTS
1. Source. Former Section 9-113.
2. Background. Former Section 9-113, from which this section derives, referred generally to security interests
"arising solely under the Article on Sales (Article 2) or the Article on Leases (Article 2A)." Views differed as to the
precise scope of that section. In contrast, Section 9-110 specifies the security interests to which it applies.
3. Security Interests Under Articles 2 and 2A. Section 2-505 explains how a seller of goods may reserve a
security interest in them. Section 2-401 indicates that a reservation of title by the seller of goods, despite delivery to
the buyer, is limited to reservation of a security interest. As did former Article 9, this Article governs a security
interest arising solely under one of those sections; however, until the buyer obtains possession of the goods, the
security interest is enforceable even in the absence of a security agreement, filing is not necessary to perfect the
security interest, and the seller-secured party's rights on the buyer's default are governed by Article 2.
Sections 2-711(3) and 2A-508(5) create a security interest in favor of a buyer or lessee in possession of goods
that were rightfully rejected or as to which acceptance was justifiably revoked. As did former Article 9, this Article
governs a security interest arising solely under one of those sections; however, until the seller or lessor obtains
possession of the goods, the security interest is enforceable even in the absence of a security agreement, filing is
not necessary to perfect the security interest, and the secured party's (buyer's or lessee's) rights on the debtor's
(seller's or lessor's) default are governed by Article 2 or 2A, as the case may be.
4. Priority. This section adds to former Section 9-113 a priority rule. Until the debtor obtains possession of the
goods, a security interest arising under one of the specified sections of Article 2 or 2A has priority over conflicting
security interests created by the debtor. Thus, a security interest arising under Section 2-401 or 2-505 has priority
over a conflicting security interest in the buyer's after-acquired goods, even if the goods in question are inventory.
Arguably, the same result would obtain under Section 9-322, but even if it would not, a purchase-money-like priority
is appropriate. Similarly, a security interest under Section 2-711(3) or 2A-508(5) has priority over security interests
claimed by the seller's or lessor's secured lender. This result is appropriate, inasmuch as the payments giving rise
to the debt secured by the Article 2 or 2A security interest are likely to be included among the lender's proceeds.
§ 9-110. SECURITY INTERESTS ARISING UNDER ARTICLE 2 OR 2A
Page 2 of 2
Example: Seller owns equipment subject to a security interest created by Seller in favor of Lender. Buyer pays for
the equipment, accepts the goods, and then justifiably revokes acceptance. As long as Seller does not recover
possession of the equipment, Buyer's security interest under Section 2-711(3) is senior to that of Lender.
In the event that a security interest referred to in this section conflicts with a security interest that is created by a
person other than the debtor, Section 9-325 applies. Thus, if Lender's security interest in the example was created
not by Seller but by the person from whom Seller acquired the goods, Section 9-325 would govern.
5. Relationship to Other Rights and Remedies Under Articles 2 and 2A. This Article does not specifically
address the conflict between (i) a security interest created by a buyer or lessee and (ii) the seller's or lessor's right
to withhold delivery under Section 2-702(1), 2-703(a), or 2A-525, the seller's or lessor's right to stop delivery under
Section 2-705 or 2A-526, or the seller's right to reclaim under Section 2-507(2) or 2-702(2). These conflicts are
governed by the first sentence of Section 2-403(1), under which the buyer's secured party obtains no greater rights
in the goods than the buyer had or had power to convey, or Section 2A-307(1), under which creditors of the lessee
take subject to the lease contract.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-201
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT > SUBPART 1.
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT
§ 9-201. GENERAL EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT
(a) [General effectiveness.] Except as otherwise provided in [the Uniform Commercial Code], a security
agreement is effective according to its terms between the parties, against purchasers of the collateral, and
against creditors.
(b) [Applicable consumer laws and other law.] A transaction subject to this article is subject to any
applicable rule of law which establishes a different rule for consumers and [insert reference to (i) any other
statute or regulation that regulates the rates, charges, agreements, and practices for loans, credit sales, or
other extensions of credit and (ii) any consumer-protection statute or regulation].
(c) [Other applicable law controls.] In case of conflict between this article and a rule of law, statute, or
regulation described in subsection (b), the rule of law, statute, or regulation controls. Failure to comply with
a statute or regulation described in subsection (b) has only the effect the statute or regulation specifies.
(d) [Further deference to other applicable law.] This article does not:
(1) validate any rate, charge, agreement, or practice that violates a rule of law, statute, or regulation
described in subsection (b); or
(2) extend the application of the rule of law, statute, or regulation to a transaction not otherwise subject
to it.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Sections 9-201, 9-203(4).
2. Effectiveness of Security Agreement. Subsection (a) provides that a security agreement is generally
effective. With certain exceptions, a security agreement is effective between the debtor and secured party and is
likewise effective against third parties. Note that "security agreement" is used here (and elsewhere in this Article) as
it is defined in Section 9-102: "an agreement that creates or provides for a security interest." It follows that
subsection (a) does not provide that every term or provision contained in a record that contains a security
agreement or that is so labeled is effective. Property read, former Section 9-201 was to the same effect. Exceptions
to the general rule of subsection (a) arise where there is an overriding provision in this Article or any other Article of
the UCC. For example, Section 9-317 subordinates unperfected security interests to lien creditors and certain
buyers, and several provisions in Part 3 subordinate some security interests to other security interests and interests
of purchasers.
3. Law, Statutes, and Regulations Applicable to Certain Transactions. Subsection (b) makes clear that
certain transactions, although subject to this Article, also are subject to other applicable laws relating to consumers
or specified in that subsection. Subsection (c) provides that the other law is controlling in the event of a conflict, and
§ 9-201. GENERAL EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT
Page 2 of 2
that a violation of other law does not ipso facto constitute a violation of this Article. Subsection (d) provides that this
Article does not validate violations under or extend the application of the other applicable laws.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-202
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT > SUBPART 1.
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT
§ 9-202. TITLE TO COLLATERAL IMMATERIAL
Except as otherwise provided with respect to consignments or sales of accounts, chattel paper, payment
intangibles, or promissory notes, the provisions of this article with regard to rights and obligations apply whether title
to collateral is in the secured party or the debtor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-202.
2. Title Immaterial. The rights and duties of parties to a secured transaction and affected third parties are
provided in this Article without reference to the location of "title" to the collateral. For example, the characteristics of
a security interest that secures the purchase price of goods are the same whether the secured party appears to
have retained title or the debtor appears to have obtained title and then conveyed title or a lien to the secured party.
3. When Title Matters.
a. Under This Article. This section explicitly acknowledges two circumstances in which the effect of certain
Article 9 provisions turns on ownership (title). First, in some respects sales of accounts, chattel paper, payment
intangibles, and promissory notes receive special treatment. See, e.g., Sections 9-207(a), 9-210(b), 9-615(e).
Buyers of receivables under former Article 9 were treated specially, as well. See, e.g., former Section 9-502(2).
Second, the remedies of a consignor under a true consignment and, for the most part, the remedies of a buyer of
accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes are determined by other law and not by Part 6.
See Section 9-601(g).
b. Under Other Law. This Article does not determine which line of interpretation (e.g., title theory or lien theory,
retained title or conveyed title) should be followed in cases in which the applicability of another rule of law depends
upon who has title. If, for example, a revenue law imposes a tax on the "legal" owner of goods or if a corporation
law makes a vote of the stockholders prerequisite to a corporation "giving" a security interest but not if it acquires
property "subject" to a security interest, this Article does not attempt to define whether the secured party is a "legal"
owner or whether the transaction "gives" a security interest for the purpose of such laws. Other rules of law or the
agreement of the parties determines the location and source of title for those purposes.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-203
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT > SUBPART 1.
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT
§ 9-203. ATTACHMENT AND ENFORCEABILITY OF SECURITY INTEREST;
PROCEEDS; SUPPORTING OBLIGATIONS; FORMAL REQUISITES
(a) [Attachment.] A security interest attaches to collateral when it becomes enforceable against the debtor
with respect to the collateral, unless an agreement expressly postpones the time of attachment.
(b) [Enforceability.] Except as otherwise provided in subsections (c) through (i), a security interest is
enforceable against the debtor and third parties with respect to the collateral only if:
(1) value has been given;
(2) the debtor has rights in the collateral or the power to transfer rights in the collateral to a secured
party; and
(3) one of the following conditions is met:
(A) the debtor has authenticated a security agreement that provides a description of the collateral
and, if the security interest covers timber to be cut, a description of the land concerned;
(B) the collateral is not a certificated security and is in the possession of the secured party under
Section 9-313 pursuant to the debtor's security agreement;
(C) the collateral is a certificated security in registered form and the security certificate has been
delivered to the secured party under Section 8-301 pursuant to the debtor's security agreement; or
(D) the collateral is deposit accounts, electronic chattel paper, investment property, or letter-ofcredit
rights, or electronic documents, and the secured party has control under Section 7-106, 9-
104, 9-105, 9-106, or 9-107 pursuant to the debtor's security agreement.
(c) [Other UCC provisions.] Subsection (b) is subject to Section 4-210 on the security interest of a
collecting bank, Section 5-118 on the security interest of a letter-of-credit issuer or nominated person,
Section 9-110 on a security interest arising under Article 2 or 2A, and Section 9-206 on security interests in
investment property.
(d) [When person becomes bound by another person's security agreement.] A person becomes
bound as debtor by a security agreement entered into by another person if, by operation of law other than
this article or by contract:
(1) the security agreement becomes effective to create a security interest in the person's property; or
(2) the person becomes generally obligated for the obligations of the other person, including the
obligation secured under the security agreement, and acquires or succeeds to all or substantially all of
the assets of the other person.
(e) [Effect of new debtor becoming bound.] If a new debtor becomes bound as debtor by a security
agreement entered into by another person:
(1) the agreement satisfies subsection (b)(3) with respect to existing or after-acquired property of the
new debtor to the extent the property is described in the agreement; and
§ 9-203. ATTACHMENT AND ENFORCEABILITY OF SECURITY INTEREST; PROCEEDS; SUPPORTING
OBLIGATIONS; FORMAL REQUISITES
Page 2 of 4
(2) another agreement is not necessary to make a security interest in the property enforceable.
(f) [Proceeds and supporting obligations.] The attachment of a security interest in collateral gives the
secured party the rights to proceeds provided by Section 9-315 and is also attachment of a security interest
in a supporting obligation for the collateral.
(g) [Lien securing right to payment.] The attachment of a security interest in a right to payment or
performance secured by a security interest or other lien on personal or real property is also attachment of a
security interest in the security interest, mortgage, or other lien.
(h) [Security entitlement carried in securities account.] The attachment of a security interest in a
securities account is also attachment of a security interest in the security entitlements carried in the
securities account.
(i) [Commodity contracts carried in commodity account.] The attachment of a security interest in a
commodity account is also attachment of a security interest in the commodity contracts carried in the
commodity account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Sections 9-203, 9-115(2), (6).
2. Creation, Attachment, and Enforceability. Subsection (a) states the general rule that a security interest
attaches to collateral only when it becomes enforceable against the debtor. Subsection (b) specifies the
circumstances under which a security interest becomes enforceable. Subsection (b) states three basic prerequisites
to the existence of a security interest: value (paragraph (1)), rights or power to transfer rights in collateral
(paragraph (2)), and agreement plus satisfaction of an evidentiary requirement (paragraph (3)). When all of these
elements exist, a security interest becomes enforceable between the parties and attaches under subsection (a).
Subsection (c) identifies certain exceptions to the general rule of subsection (b).
3. Security Agreement; Authentication. Under subsection (b)(3), enforceability requires the debtor's security
agreement and compliance with an evidentiary requirement in the nature of a Statute of Frauds. Paragraph (3)(A)
represents the most basic of the evidentiary alternatives, under which the debtor must authenticate a security
agreement that provides a description of the collateral. Under Section 9-102, a "security agreement" is "an
agreement that creates or provides for a security interest." Neither that definition nor the requirement of paragraph
(3)(A) rejects the deeply rooted doctrine that a bill of sale, although absolute in form, may be shown in fact to have
been given as security. Under this Article, as under prior law, a debtor may show by parol evidence that a transfer
purporting to be absolute was in fact for security. Similarly, a self-styled "lease" may serve as a security agreement
if the agreement creates a security interest. See Section 1-203 (distinguishing security interest from lease).
4. Possession, Delivery, or Control Pursuant to Security Agreement. The other alternatives in subsection
(b)(3) dispense with the requirement of an authenticated security agreement and provide alternative evidentiary
tests. Under paragraph (3)(B), the secured party's possession substitutes for the debtor's authentication under
paragraph (3)(A) if the secured party's possession is "pursuant to the debtor's security agreement." That phrase
refers to the debtor's agreement to the secured party's possession for the purpose of creating a security interest.
The phrase should not be confused with the phrase "debtor has authenticated a security agreement," used in
paragraph (3)(A), which contemplates the debtor's authentication of a record. In the unlikely event that possession
is obtained without the debtor's agreement, possession would not suffice as a substitute for an authenticated
security agreement. However, once the security interest has become enforceable and has attached, it is not
§ 9-203. ATTACHMENT AND ENFORCEABILITY OF SECURITY INTEREST; PROCEEDS; SUPPORTING
OBLIGATIONS; FORMAL REQUISITES
Page 3 of 4
impaired by the fact that the secured party's possession is maintained without the agreement of a subsequent
debtor (e.g., a transferee). Possession as contemplated by Section 9-313 is possession for purposes of subsection
(b)(3)(B), even though it may not constitute possession "pursuant to the debtor's agreement" and consequently
might not serve as a substitute for an authenticated security agreement under subsection (b)(3)(A). Subsection
(b)(3)(C) provides that delivery of a certificated security to the secured party under Section 8-301 pursuant to the
debtor's security agreement is sufficient as a substitute for an authenticated security agreement. Similarly, under
subsection (b)(3)(D), control of investment property, a deposit account, electronic chattel paper, or a letter-of-credit
right, or electronic documents satisfies the evidentiary test if control is pursuant to the debtor's security agreement.
5. Collateral Covered by Other Statute or Treaty. One evidentiary purpose of the formal requisites stated in
subsection (b) is to minimize the possibility of future disputes as to the terms of a security agreement (e.g., as to the
property that stands as collateral for the obligation secured). One should distinguish the evidentiary functions of the
formal requisites of attachment and enforceability (such as the requirement that a security agreement contain a
description of the collateral) from the more limited goals of "notice filing" for financing statements under Part 5,
explained in Section 9-502, Comment 2. When perfection is achieved by compliance with the requirements of a
statute or treaty described in Section 9-311(a), such as a federal recording act or a certificate-of-title statute, the
manner of describing the collateral in a registry imposed by the statute or treaty may or may not be adequate for
purposes of this section and Section 9-108. However, the description contained in the security agreement, not the
description in a public registry or on a certificate of title, controls for purposes of this section.
6. Debtor's Rights; Debtor's Power to Transfer Rights. Subsection (b)(2) conditions attachment on the
debtor's having "rights in the collateral or the power to transfer rights in the collateral to a secured party." A debtor's
limited rights in collateral, short of full ownership, are sufficient for a security interest to attach. However, in
accordance with basic personal property conveyancing principles, the baseline rule is that a security interest
attaches only to whatever rights a debtor may have, broad or limited as those rights may be.
Certain exceptions to the baseline rule enable a debtor to transfer, and a security interest to attach to, greater
rights than the debtor has. See Part 3, Subpart 3 (priority rules). The phrase, "or the power to transfer rights in the
collateral to a secured party," accommodates those exceptions. In some cases, a debtor may have power to
transfer another person's rights only to a class of transferees that excludes secured parties. See, e.g., Section 2-
403(2) (giving certain merchants power to transfer an entruster's rights to a buyer in ordinary course of business).
Under those circumstances, the debtor would not have the power to create a security interest in the other person's
rights, and the condition in subsection (b)(2) would not be satisfied.
7. New Debtors. Subsection (e) makes clear that the enforceability requirements of subsection (b)(3) are met
when a new debtor becomes bound under an original debtor's security agreement. If a new debtor becomes bound
as debtor by a security agreement entered into by another person, the security agreement satisfies the requirement
of subsection (b)(3) as to the existing and after-acquired property of the new debtor to the extent the property is
described in the agreement.
Subsection (d) explains when a new debtor becomes bound. Persons who become bound under paragraph (2)
are limited to those who both become primarily liable for the original debtor's obligations and succeed to (or
acquire) its assets. Thus, the paragraph excludes sureties and other secondary obligors as well as persons who
become obligated through veil piercing and other non-successorship doctrines. In many cases, paragraph (2) will
exclude successors to the assets and liabilities of a division of a debtor. See also Section 9-508, Comment 3.
8. Supporting Obligations. Under subsection (f), a security interest in a "supporting obligation" (defined in
Section 9-102) automatically follows from a security interest in the underlying, supported collateral. This result was
implicit under former Article 9. Implicit in subsection (f) is the principle that the secured party's interest in a
supporting obligation extends to the supporting obligation only to the extent that it supports the collateral in which
the secured party has a security interest. Complex issues may arise, however, if a supporting obligation supports
many separate obligations of a particular account debtor and if the supported obligations are separately assigned
as security to several secured parties. The problems may be exacerbated if a supporting obligation is limited to an
§ 9-203. ATTACHMENT AND ENFORCEABILITY OF SECURITY INTEREST; PROCEEDS; SUPPORTING
OBLIGATIONS; FORMAL REQUISITES
Page 4 of 4
aggregate amount that is less than the aggregate amount of the obligations it supports. This Article does not
contain provisions dealing with competing claims to a limited supporting obligation. As under former Article 9, the
law of suretyship and the agreements of the parties will control.
9. Collateral Follows Right to Payment or Performance. Subsection (g) codifies the common-law rule that a
transfer of an obligation secured by a security interest or other lien on personal or real property also transfers the
security interest or lien. See Restatement (3d), Property (Mortgages) § 5.4(a) (1997). See also Section 9-308(e)
(analogous rule for perfection).
10. Investment Property. Subsections (h) and (i) make clear that attachment of a security interest in a securities
account or commodity account is also attachment in security entitlements or commodity contracts carried in the
accounts.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-204
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT > SUBPART 1.
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT
§ 9-204. AFTER-ACQUIRED PROPERTY; FUTURE ADVANCES
(a) [After-acquired collateral.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), a security agreement may
create or provide for a security interest in after-acquired collateral.
(b) [When after-acquired property clause not effective.] A security interest does not attach under a
term constituting an after-acquired property clause to:
(1) consumer goods, other than an accession when given as additional security, unless the debtor
acquires rights in them within 10 days after the secured party gives value; or
(2) a commercial tort claim.
(c) [Future advances and other value.] A security agreement may provide that collateral secures, or that
accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes are sold in connection with, future
advances or other value, whether or not the advances or value are given pursuant to commitment.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-204.
2. After-Acquired Property; Continuing General Lien. Subsection (a) makes clear that a security interest
arising by virtue of an after-acquired property clause is no less valid than a security interest in collateral in which the
debtor has rights at the time value is given. A security interest in after-acquired property is not merely an "equitable"
interest; no further action by the secured party--such as a supplemental agreement covering the new collateral--is
required. This section adopts the principle of a "continuing general lien" or "floating lien." It validates a security
interest in the debtor's existing and (upon acquisition) future assets, even though the debtor has liberty to use or
dispose of collateral without being required to account for proceeds or substitute new collateral. See Section 9-205.
Subsection (a), together with subsection (c), also validates "cross-collateral" clauses under which collateral
acquired at any time secures advances whenever made.
3. After-Acquired Consumer Goods. Subsection (b)(1) makes ineffective an after-acquired property clause
covering consumer goods (defined in Section 9-109), except as accessions (see Section 9-335), acquired more
than 10 days after the secured party gives value. Subsection (b)(1) is unchanged in substance from the
corresponding provision in former Section 9-204(2).
4. Commercial Tort Claims. Subsection (b)(2) provides that an after-acquired property clause in a security
agreement does not reach future commercial tort claims. In order for a security interest in a tort claim to attach, the
claim must be in existence when the security agreement is authenticated. In addition, the security agreement must
describe the tort claim with greater specificity than simply "all tort claims." See Section 9-108(e).
§ 9-204. AFTER-ACQUIRED PROPERTY; FUTURE ADVANCES
Page 2 of 2
5. Future Advances; Obligations Secured. Under subsection (c) collateral may secure future as well as past or
present advances if the security agreement so provides. This is in line with the policy of this Article toward security
interests in after-acquired property under subsection (a). Indeed, the parties are free to agree that a security interest
secures any obligation whatsoever. Determining the obligations secured by collateral is solely a matter of
construing the parties' agreement under applicable law. This Article rejects the holdings of cases decided under
former Article 9 that applied other tests, such as whether a future advance or other subsequently incurred obligation
was of the same or a similar type or class as earlier advances and obligations secured by the collateral.
6. Sales of Receivables. Subsections (a) and (c) expressly validate after-acquired property and future advance
clauses not only when the transaction is for security purposes but also when the transaction is the sale of accounts,
chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes.. This result was implicit under former Article 9.
7. Financing Statements. The effect of after-acquired property and future advance clauses as components of a
security agreement should not be confused with the requirements applicable to financing statements under this
Article's system of perfection by notice filing. The references to after-acquired property clauses and future advance
clauses in this section are limited to security agreements. There is no need to refer to after-acquired property or
future advances or other obligations secured in a financing statement. See Section 9-502, Comment 2.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-205
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT > SUBPART 1.
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT
§ 9-205. USE OR DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL PERMISSIBLE
(a) [When security interest not invalid or fraudulent.] A security interest is not invalid or fraudulent
against creditors solely because:
(1) the debtor has the right or ability to:
(A) use, commingle, or dispose of all or part of the collateral, including returned or repossessed
goods;
(B) collect, compromise, enforce, or otherwise deal with collateral;
(C) accept the return of collateral or make repossessions; or
(D) use, commingle, or dispose of proceeds; or
(2) the secured party fails to require the debtor to account for proceeds or replace collateral.
(b) [Requirements of possession not relaxed.] This section does not relax the requirements of
possession if attachment, perfection, or enforcement of a security interest depends upon possession of the
collateral by the secured party.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-205.
2. Validity of Unrestricted "Floating Lien." This Article expressly validates the "floating lien" on shifting
collateral. See Sections 9-201, 9-204 and Comment 2. This section provides that a security interest is not invalid or
fraudulent by reason of the debtor's liberty to dispose of the collateral without being required to account to the
secured party for proceeds or substitute new collateral. As did former Section 9-205, this section repeals the rule of
Benedict v. Ratner, 268 U.S. 353 (1925), and other cases which held such arrangements void as a matter of law
because the debtor was given unfettered dominion or control over collateral. The Benedict rule did not effectively
discourage or eliminate security transactions in inventory and receivables. Instead, it forced financing arrangements
to be self-liquidating. Although this section repeals Benedict, the filing and other perfection requirements (see Part
3, Subpart 2, and Part 5) provide for public notice that overcomes any potential misleading effects of a debtor's use
and control of collateral. Moreover, nothing in this section prevents the debtor and secured party from agreeing to
procedures by which the secured party policies or monitors collateral or to restrictions on the debtor's dominion.
However, this Article leaves these matters to agreement based on business considerations, not on legal
requirements.
§ 9-205. USE OR DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL PERMISSIBLE
Page 2 of 2
3. Possessory Security Interests. Subsection (b) makes clear that this section does not relax the requirements
for perfection by possession under Section 9-315. If a secured party allows the debtor access to and control over
collateral its security interest may be or become unperfected.
4. Permissible Freedom for Debtor to Enforce Collateral. Former Section 9-205 referred to a debtor's "liberty .
. to collect or compromise accounts or chattel paper." This section recognizes the broader rights of a debtor to
"enforce," as well as to "collect" and "compromise" collateral. This section's reference to collecting, compromising,
and enforcing "collateral" instead of "accounts or chattel paper" contemplates the many other types of collateral that
a debtor may wish to "collect, compromise, or enforce": e.g., deposit accounts, documents, general intangibles,
instruments, investment property, and letter-of-credit rights.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-206
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT > SUBPART 1.
EFFECTIVENESS AND ATTACHMENT
§ 9-206. SECURITY INTEREST ARISING IN PURCHASE OR DELIVERY OF
FINANCIAL ASSET
(a) [Security interest when person buys through securities intermediary.] A security interest in favor
of a securities intermediary attaches to a person's security entitlement if:
(1) the person buys a financial asset through the securities intermediary in a transaction in which the
person is obligated to pay the purchase price to the securities intermediary at the time of the purchase;
and
(2) the securities intermediary credits the financial asset to the buyer's securities account before the
buyer pays the securities intermediary.
(b) [Security interest secures obligation to pay for financial asset.] The security interest described in
subsection (a) secures the person's obligation to pay for the financial asset.
(c) [Security interest in payment against delivery transaction.] A security interest in favor of a person
that delivers a certificated security or other financial asset represented by a writing attaches to the security
or other financial asset if:
(1) the security or other financial asset:
(A) in the ordinary course of business is transferred by delivery with any necessary indorsement or
assignment; and
(B) is delivered under an agreement between persons in the business of dealing with such
securities or financial assets; and
(2) the agreement calls for delivery against payment.
(d) [Security interest secures obligation to pay for delivery.] The security interest described in
subsection (c) secures the obligation to make payment for the delivery.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former 9-116.
2. Codification of "Broker's Lien." Depending upon a securities intermediary's arrangements with its entitlement
holders, the securities intermediary may treat the entitlement holder as entitled to financial assets before the
entitlement holder has actually made payment for them. For example, many brokers permit retail customers to pay
for financial assets by check. The broker may not receive final payment of the check until several days after the
broker has credited the customer's securities account for the financial assets. Thus, the customer will have acquired
§ 9-206. SECURITY INTEREST ARISING IN PURCHASE OR DELIVERY OF FINANCIAL ASSET
Page 2 of 2
a security entitlement prior to payment. Subsection (a) provides that, in such circumstances, the securities
intermediary has a security interest in the entitlement holder's security entitlement. Under subsection (b) the
security interest secures the customer's obligation to pay for the financial asset in question. Subsections (a) and (b)
codify and adapt to the indirect holding system the so-called "broker's lien," which has long been recognized. See
Restatement, Security § 12.
3. Financial Assets Delivered Against Payment. Subsection (c) creates a security interest in favor of persons
who deliver certificated securities or other financial assets in physical form, such as money market instruments, if
the agreed payment is not received. In some arrangements for settlement of transactions in physical financial
assets, the seller's securities custodian will deliver physical certificates to the buyer's securities custodian and
receive a time-stamped delivery receipt. The buyer's securities custodian will examine the certificate to ensure that
it is in good order, and that the delivery matches a trade in which the buyer has instructed the seller to deliver to
that custodian. If all is in order, the receiving custodian will settle with the delivering custodian through whatever
funds settlement system has been agreed upon or is used by custom and usage in that market. The understanding
of the trade, however, is that the delivery is conditioned upon payment, so that if payment is not made for any
reason, the security will be returned to the deliverer. Subsection (c) clarifies the rights of persons making deliveries
in such circumstances. It provides the person making delivery with a security interest in the securities or other
financial assets; under subsection (d), the security interest secures the seller's right to receive payment for the
delivery. Section 8-301 specifies when delivery of a certificated security occurs; that section should be applied as
well to other financial assets as well for purposes of this section.
4. Automatic Attachment and Perfection. Subsections (a) and (c) refer to attachment of a security interest.
Attachment under this section has the same incidents (enforceability, right to proceeds, etc.) as attachment under
Section 9-203. This section overrides the general attachment rules in Section 9-203. See Section 9-203(c). A
securities intermediary's security interest under subsection (a) is perfected by control without further action. See
Section 8-106 (control); 9-314 (perfection). Security interests arising under subsection (c) are automatically
perfected. See Section 9-309(9).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-207
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT > SUBPART 2. RIGHTS
AND DUTIES
§ 9-207. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF SECURED PARTY HAVING POSSESSION
OR CONTROL OF COLLATERAL
(a) [Duty of care when secured party in possession.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), a
secured party shall use reasonable care in the custody and preservation of collateral in the secured party's
possession. In the case of chattel paper or an instrument, reasonable care includes taking necessary steps
to preserve rights against prior parties unless otherwise agreed.
(b) [Expenses, risks, duties, and rights when secured party in possession.] Except as otherwise
provided in subsection (d), if a secured party has possession of collateral:
(1) reasonable expenses, including the cost of insurance and payment of taxes or other charges,
incurred in the custody, preservation, use, or operation of the collateral are chargeable to the debtor
and are secured by the collateral;
(2) the risk of accidental loss or damage is on the debtor to the extent of a deficiency in any effective
insurance coverage;
(3) the secured party shall keep the collateral identifiable, but fungible collateral may be commingled;
and
(4) the secured party may use or operate the collateral:
(A) for the purpose of preserving the collateral or its value;
(B) as permitted by an order of a court having competent jurisdiction; or
(C) except in the case of consumer goods, in the manner and to the extent agreed by the debtor.
(c) [Duties and rights when secured party in possession or control.] Except as otherwise provided in
subsection (d), a secured party having possession of collateral or control of collateral under Section 7-106,
9-104, 9-105, 9-106, or 9-107:
(1) may hold as additional security any proceeds, except money or funds, received from the collateral;
(2) shall apply money or funds received from the collateral to reduce the secured obligation, unless
remitted to the debtor; and
(3) may create a security interest in the collateral.
(d) [Buyer of certain rights to payment.] If the secured party is a buyer of accounts, chattel paper,
payment intangibles, or promissory notes or a consignor:
(1) subsection (a) does not apply unless the secured party is entitled under an agreement:
(A) to charge back uncollected collateral; or
(B) otherwise to full or limited recourse against the debtor or a secondary obligor based on the
nonpayment or other default of an account debtor or other obligor on the collateral; and
(2) subsections (b) and (c) do not apply.
§ 9-207. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF SECURED PARTY HAVING POSSESSION OR CONTROL OF
COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 4
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-207.
2. Duty of Care for Collateral in Secured Party's Possession. Like former section 9-207, subsection (a)
imposes a duty of care, similar to that imposed on a pledgee at common law, on a secured party in possession of
collateral. See Restatement, Security §§ 17, 18. In many cases a secured party in possession of collateral may
satisfy this duty by notifying the debtor of action that should be taken and allowing the debtor to take the action
itself. If the secured party itself takes action, its reasonable expenses may be added to the secured obligation. The
revised definitions of "collateral," "debtor," and "secured party" in Section 9-102 make this section applicable to
collateral subject to an agricultural lien if the collateral is in the lienholder's possession. Under Section 1-302 the
duty to exercise reasonable care may not be disclaimed by agreement, although under that section the parties
remain free to determine by agreement standards that are not manifestly unreasonable as to what constitutes
reasonable care. Unless otherwise agreed, for a secured party in possession of chattel paper or an instrument,
reasonable care includes the preservation of rights against prior parties. The secured party's right to have
instruments or documents indorsed or transferred to it or its order is dealt with in the relevant sections of Articles 3,
7, and 8. See Sections 3-203(c), 7-506, 8-304(d).
3. Specific Rules When Secured Party in Possession or Control of Collateral. Subsections (b) and (c)
provide rules following common-law precedents which apply unless the parties otherwise agree. The rules in
subsection (b) apply to typical issues that may arise while a secured party is in possession of collateral, including
expenses, insurance, and taxes, risk of loss or damage, identifiable and fungible collateral, and use or operation of
collateral. Subsection (c) contains rules that apply in certain circumstances that may arise when a secured party is
in either possession or control of collateral. These circumstances include the secured party's receiving proceeds
from the collateral and the secured party's creation of a security interest in the collateral.
4. Applicability Following Default. This section applies when the secured party has possession of collateral
either before or after default. See Sections 9-601(b), 9-609. Subsection (b)(4)(C) limits agreements concerning the
use or operation of collateral to collateral other than consumer goods. Under Section 9-602(1), a debtor cannot
waive or vary that limitation.
5. "Repledges" and Right of Redemption. Subsection (c)(3) eliminates the qualification in former Section 9-207
to the effect that the terms of a "repledge" may not "impair" a debtor's "right to redeem" collateral. The change is
primarily for clarification. There is no basis on which to draw from subsection (c)(3) any inference concerning the
debtor's right to redeem the collateral. The debtor enjoys that right under Section 9-623; this section need not
address it. For example, if the collateral is a negotiable note that the secured party (SP-1) repledges to SP-2,
nothing in this section suggests that the debtor (D) does not retain the right to redeem the note upon payment to
SP-1 of all obligations secured by the note. But, as explained below, the debtor's unimpaired right to redeem as
against the debtor's original secured party nevertheless may not be enforceable as against the new secured party.
In resolving questions that arise from the creation of a security interest by SP-1, one must take care to distinguish
D's rights against SP-1 from D's rights against SP-2. Once D discharges the secured obligation, D becomes entitled
to the note; SP-1 has no legal basis upon which to withhold it. If, as a practical matter, SP-1 is unable to return the
note because SP-2 holds it as collateral for SP-1's unpaid debt, then SP-1 is liable to D under the law of
conversion.
Whether SP-2 would be liable to D depends on the relative priority of SP-2's security interest and D's interest. By
permitting SP-1 to create a security interest in the collateral (repledge), subsection (c)(3) provides a statutory power
§ 9-207. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF SECURED PARTY HAVING POSSESSION OR CONTROL OF
COLLATERAL
Page 3 of 4
for SP-1 to give SP-2 a security interest (subject, of course, to any agreement by SP-1 not to give a security
interest). In the vast majority of cases where repledge rights are significant, the security interest of the second
secured party, SP-2 in the example, will be senior to the debtor's interest. By virtue of the debtor's consent or
applicable legal rules, SP-2 typically would cut off D's rights in investment property or be immune from D's claims.
See Sections 9-331, 3-306 (holder in due course), 8-303 (protected purchaser), 8-502 (acquisition of a security
entitlement), 8-503(e) (action by entitlement holder). Moreover, the expectations and business practices in some
markets, such as the securities markets, are such that D's consent to SP-2's taking free of D's rights inheres in D's
creation of SP-1's security interest which gives rise to SP-1's power under this section. In these situations, D would
have no right to recover the collateral or recover damages from SP-2. Nevertheless, D would have a damage claim
against SP-1 if SP-1 had given a security interest to SP-2 in breach of its agreement with D. Moreover, if SP-2's
security interest secures an amount that is less than the amount secured by SP-1's security interest (granted by D),
then D's exercise of its right to redeem would provide value sufficient to discharge SP-1's obligations to SP-2.
For the most part this section does not change the law under former Section 9-207, although eliminating the
reference to the debtor's right of redemption may alter the secured party's right to repledge in one respect. Former
Section 9-207 could have been read to limit the secured party's statutory right to repledge collateral to repledge
transactions in which the collateral did not secure a greater obligation than that of the original debtor. Inasmuch as
this is a matter normally dealt with by agreement between the debtor and secured party, any change would appear
to have little practical effect.
6. "Repledges" of Investment Property. The following example will aid the discussion of "repledges" of
investment property.
Example. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of XYZ
Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Alpha does not have an account with Able. Alpha
uses Beta Bank as its securities custodian. Debtor instructs Able to transfer the shares to Beta, for the account of
Alpha, and Able does so. Beta then credits Alpha's account. Alpha has control of the security entitlement for the
1000 shares under Section 8-106(d). (These are the facts of Example 2, Section 8-106, Comment 4.) Although, as
between Debtor and Alpha, Debtor may have become the beneficial owner of the new securities entitlement with
Beta, Beta has agreed to act on Alpha's entitlement orders because, as between Beta and Alpha, Alpha has
become the entitlement holder.
Next, Alpha grants Gamma Bank a security interest in the security entitlement with Beta that includes the 1000
shares of XYZ Co. stock. In order to afford Gamma control of the entitlement, Alpha instructs Beta to transfer the
stock to Gamma's custodian, Delta Bank, which credits Gamma's account for 1000 shares. At this point Gamma
holds its securities entitlement for its benefit as well as that of its debtor, Alpha. Alpha's derivative rights also are for
the benefit of Debtor.
In many, probably most, situations and at any particular point in time, it will be impossible for Debtor or Alpha to
"trace" Alpha's "repledge" to any particular securities entitlement or financial asset of Gamma or anyone else.
Debtor would retain, of course, a right to redeem the collateral from Alpha upon satisfaction of the secured
obligation. However, in the absence of a traceable interest, Debtor would retain only a personal claim against Alpha
in the event Alpha failed to restore the security entitlement to Debtor. Moreover, even in the unlikely event that
Debtor could trace a property interest, in the context of the financial markets, normally the operation of this section,
Debtor's explicit agreement to permit Alpha to create a senior security interest, or legal rules permitting Gamma to
cut off Debtor's rights or become immune from Debtor's claims would effectively subordinate Debtor's interest to the
holder of a security interest created by Alpha. And, under the shelter principle, all subsequent transferees would
obtain interests to which Debtor's interest also would be subordinate.
7. Buyers of Chattel Paper and Other Receivables; Consignors. This section has been revised to reflect the
fact that a seller of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes retains no interest in the
collateral and so is not disadvantaged by the secured party's noncompliance with the requirements of this section.
Accordingly, subsection (d) provides that subsection (a) applies only to security interests that secure an obligation
§ 9-207. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF SECURED PARTY HAVING POSSESSION OR CONTROL OF
COLLATERAL
Page 4 of 4
and to sales of receivables in which the buyer has recourse against the debtor. (Of course, a buyer of accounts or
payment intangibles could not have "possession" of original collateral, but might have possession of proceeds, such
as promissory notes or checks.) The meaning of "recourse" in this respect is limited to recourse arising out of the
account debtor's failure to pay or other default.
Subsection (d) makes subsections (b) and (c) inapplicable to buyers of accounts, chattel paper, payment
intangibles, or promissory notes and consignors. Of course, there is no reason to believe that a buyer of receivables
or a consignor could not, for example, create a security interest or otherwise transfer an interest in the collateral,
regardless of who has possession of the collateral. However, this section leaves the rights of those owners to law
other than Article 9.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-208
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT > SUBPART 2. RIGHTS
AND DUTIES
§ 9-208. ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF SECURED PARTY HAVING CONTROL OF
COLLATERAL
(a) [Applicability of section.] This section applies to cases in which there is no outstanding secured
obligation and the secured party is not committed to make advances, incur obligations, or otherwise give
value.
(b) [Duties of secured party after receiving demand from debtor.] Within 10 days after receiving an
authenticated demand by the debtor:
(1) a secured party having control of a deposit account under Section 9-104(a)(2) shall send to the
bank with which the deposit account is maintained an authenticated statement that releases the bank
from any further obligation to comply with instructions originated by the secured party;
(2) a secured party having control of a deposit account under Section 9-104(a)(3) shall:
(A) pay the debtor the balance on deposit in the deposit account; or
(B) transfer the balance on deposit into a deposit account in the debtor's name;
(3) a secured party, other than a buyer, having control of electronic chattel paper under Section 9-105
shall:
(A) communicate the authoritative copy of the electronic chattel paper to the debtor or its
designated custodian;
(B) if the debtor designates a custodian that is the designated custodian with which the
authoritative copy of the electronic chattel paper is maintained for the secured party, communicate
to the custodian an authenticated record releasing the designated custodian from any further
obligation to comply with instructions originated by the secured party and instructing the custodian
to comply with instructions originated by the debtor; and
(C) take appropriate action to enable the debtor or its designated custodian to make copies of or
revisions to the authoritative copy which add or change an identified assignee of the authoritative
copy without the consent of the secured party;
(4) a secured party having control of investment property under Section 8-106(d)(2) or 9-106(b) shall
send to the securities intermediary or commodity intermediary with which the security entitlement or
commodity contract is maintained an authenticated record that releases the securities intermediary or
commodity intermediary from any further obligation to comply with entitlement orders or directions
originated by the secured party;
(5) a secured party having control of a letter-of-credit right under Section 9-107 shall send to each
person having an unfulfilled obligation to pay or deliver proceeds of the letter of credit to the secured
party an authenticated release from any further obligation to pay or deliver proceeds of the letter of
credit to the secured party; and
(6) a secured party having control of an electronic document shall:
§ 9-208. ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF SECURED PARTY HAVING CONTROL OF COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
(A) give control of the electronic document to the debtor or its designated custodian;
(B) if the debtor designates a custodian that is the designated custodian with which the
authoritative copy of the electronic document is maintained for the secured party, communicate to
the custodian an authenticated record releasing the designated custodian from any further
obligation to comply with instructions originated by the secured party and instructing the custodian
to comply with instructions originated by the debtor; and
(C) take appropriate action to enable the debtor or its designated custodian to make copies of or
revisions to the authoritative copy which add or change an identified assignee of the authoritative
copy without the consent of the secured party.
As amended in 2003.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Scope and Purpose. This section imposes duties on a secured party who has control of a deposit account,
electronic chattel paper, investment property, a letter-of-credit right, or electronic documents of title. The duty to
terminate the secured party's control is analogous to the duty to file a termination statement, imposed by Section 9-
513. Under subsection (a), it applies only when there is no outstanding secured obligation and the secured party is
not committed to give value. The requirements of this section can be varied by agreement under Section 1-102(3).
For example, a debtor could by contract agree that the secured party may comply with subsection (b) by releasing
control more than 10 days after demand. Also, duties under this section should not be read to conflict with the terms
of the collateral itself. For example, if the collateral is a time deposit account, subsection (b)(2) should not require a
secured party with control to make an early withdrawal of the funds (assuming that were possible) in order to pay
them over to the debtor or put them in an account in the debtor's name.
3. Remedy for Failure to Relinquish Control. If a secured party fails to comply with the requirements of
subsection (b), the debtor has the remedy set forth in Section 9-625(e). This remedy is identical to that applicable to
failure to provide or file a termination statement under Section 9-513.
4. Duty to Relinquish Possession. Although Section 9-207 addresses directly the duties of a secured party in
possession of collateral, that section does not require the secured party to relinquish possession when the secured
party ceases to hold a security interest. Under common law, absent agreement to the contrary, the failure to
relinquish possession of collateral upon satisfaction of the secured obligation would constitute a conversion.
Inasmuch as problems apparently have not surfaced in the absence of statutory duties under former Article 9 and
the common-law duty appears to have been sufficient, this Article does not impose a statutory duty to relinquish
possession.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-209
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT > SUBPART 2. RIGHTS
AND DUTIES
§ 9-209. DUTIES OF SECURED PARTY IF ACCOUNT DEBTOR HAS BEEN
NOTIFIED OF ASSIGNMENT
(a) [Applicability of section.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), this section applies if:
(1) there is no outstanding secured obligation; and
(2) the secured party is not committed to make advances, incur obligations, or otherwise give value.
(b) [Duties of secured party after receiving demand from debtor.] Within 10 days after receiving an
authenticated demand by the debtor, a secured party shall send to an account debtor that has received
notification of an assignment to the secured party as assignee under Section 9-406(a) an authenticated
record that releases the account debtor from any further obligation to the secured party.
(c) [Inapplicability to sales.] This section does not apply to an assignment constituting the sale of an
account, chattel paper, or payment intangible.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Scope and Purpose. Like Sections 9-208 and 9-513, which require a secured party to relinquish control of
collateral and to file or provide a termination statement for a financing statement, this section requires a secured
party to free up collateral when there no longer is any outstanding secured obligation or any commitment to give
value in the future. This section addresses the case in which account debtors have been notified to pay a secured
party to whom the receivables have been assigned. It requires the secured party (assignee) to inform the account
debtors that they no longer are obligated to make payment to the secured party. See subsection (b). It does not
apply to account debtors whose obligations on an account, chattel paper, or payment intangible have been sold.
See subsection (c).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-210
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 2. EFFECTIVENESS OF SECURITY AGREEMENT; ATTACHMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST; RIGHTS OF PARTIES TO SECURITY AGREEMENT > SUBPART 2. RIGHTS
AND DUTIES
§ 9-210. REQUEST FOR ACCOUNTING; REQUEST REGARDING LIST OF
COLLATERAL OR STATEMENT OF ACCOUNT
(a) [Definitions.] In this section:
(1) "Request" means a record of a type described in paragraph (2), (3), or (4).
(2) "Request for an accounting" means a record authenticated by a debtor requesting that the recipient
provide an accounting of the unpaid obligations secured by collateral and reasonably identifying the
transaction or relationship that is the subject of the request.
(3) "Request regarding a list of collateral" means a record authenticated by a debtor requesting that the
recipient approve or correct a list of what the debtor believes to be the collateral securing an obligation
and reasonably identifying the transaction or relationship that is the subject of the request.
(4) "Request regarding a statement of account" means a record authenticated by a debtor requesting
that the recipient approve or correct a statement indicating what the debtor believes to be the
aggregate amount of unpaid obligations secured by collateral as of a specified date and reasonably
identifying the transaction or relationship that is the subject of the request.
(b) [Duty to respond to requests.] Subject to subsections (c), (d), (e), and (f), a secured party, other than
a buyer of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes or a consignor, shall comply
with a request within 14 days after receipt:
(1) in the case of a request for an accounting, by authenticating and sending to the debtor an
accounting; and
(2) in the case of a request regarding a list of collateral or a request regarding a statement of account,
by authenticating and sending to the debtor an approval or correction.
(c) [Request regarding list of collateral; statement concerning type of collateral.] A secured party
that claims a security interest in all of a particular type of collateral owned by the debtor may comply with a
request regarding a list of collateral by sending to the debtor an authenticated record including a statement
to that effect within 14 days after receipt.
(d) [Request regarding list of collateral; no interest claimed.] A person that receives a request
regarding a list of collateral, claims no interest in the collateral when it receives the request, and claimed an
interest in the collateral at an earlier time shall comply with the request within 14 days after receipt by
sending to the debtor an authenticated record:
(1) disclaiming any interest in the collateral; and
(2) if known to the recipient, providing the name and mailing address of any assignee of or successor
to the recipient's interest in the collateral.
(e) [Request for accounting or regarding statement of account; no interest in obligation claimed.] A
person that receives a request for an accounting or a request regarding a statement of account, claims no
interest in the obligations when it receives the request, and claimed an interest in the obligations at an
§ 9-210. REQUEST FOR ACCOUNTING; REQUEST REGARDING LIST OF COLLATERAL OR STATEMENT
OF ACCOUNT
Page 2 of 3
earlier time shall comply with the request within 14 days after receipt by sending to the debtor an
authenticated record:
(1) disclaiming any interest in the obligations; and
(2) if known to the recipient, providing the name and mailing address of any assignee of or successor
to the recipient's interest in the obligations.
(f) [Charges for responses.] A debtor is entitled without charge to one response to a request under this
section during any six-month period. The secured party may require payment of a charge not exceeding $
25 for each additional response.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-208.
2. Scope and Purpose. This section provides a procedure whereby a debtor may obtain from a secured party
information about the secured obligation and the collateral in which the secured party may claim a security interest.
It clarifies and resolves some of the issues that arose under former Section 9-208 and makes information
concerning the secured indebtedness readily available to debtors, both before and after default. It applies to
agricultural lien transactions (see the definitions of "debtor," secured party," and "collateral" in Section 9-102), but
generally not to sales of receivables. See subsection (b).
3. Requests by Debtors Only. A financing statement filed under Part 5 may disclose only that a secured party
may have a security interest in specified types of collateral. In most cases the financing statement will contain no
indication of the obligation (if any) secured, whether any security interest actually exists, or the particular property
subject to a security interest. Because creditors of and prospective purchasers from a debtor may have legitimate
needs for more detailed information, it is necessary to provide a procedure under which the secured party will be
required to provide information. On the other hand, the secured party should not be under a duty to disclose any
details of the debtor's financial affairs to any casual inquirer or competitor who may inquire. For this reason, this
section gives the right to request information to the debtor only. The debtor may submit a request in connection with
negotiations with subsequent creditors and purchasers, as well as for the purpose of determining the status of its
credit relationship or demonstrating which of its assets are free of a security interest.
4. Permitted Types of Requests for Information. Subsection (a) contemplates that a debtor may request three
types of information by submitting three types of "requests" to the secured party. First, the debtor may request the
secured party to prepare and send an "accounting" (defined in Section 9-102). Second, the debtor may submit to
the secured party a list of collateral for the secured party's approval or correction. Third, the debtor may submit to
the secured party for its approval or correction a statement of the aggregate amount of unpaid secured obligations.
Inasmuch as a secured party may have numerous transactions and relationships with a debtor, each request must
identify the relevant transactions or relationships. Subsections (b) and (c) require the secured party to respond to a
request within 14 days following receipt of the request.
5. Recipients Claiming No Interest in the Transaction. A debtor may be unaware that a creditor with whom it
has dealt has assigned its security interest or the secured obligation. Subsections (d) and (e) impose upon
recipients of requests under this section the duty to inform the debtor that they claim no interest in the collateral or
secured obligation, respectively, and to inform the debtor of the name and mailing address of any known assignee
or successor. As under subsections (b) and (c), a response to a request under subsection (d) or (e) is due 14 days
following receipt.
§ 9-210. REQUEST FOR ACCOUNTING; REQUEST REGARDING LIST OF COLLATERAL OR STATEMENT
OF ACCOUNT
Page 3 of 3
6. Waiver; Remedy for Failure to Comply. The debtor's rights under this section may not be waived or varied.
See Section 9-602(2). Section 9-625 sets forth the remedies for noncompliance with the requirements of this
section.
7. Limitation on Free Responses to Requests. Under subsection (f), during a six-month period a debtor is
entitled to receive from the secured party one free response to a request. The debtor is not entitled to a free
response to each type of request (i.e., three free responses) during a six-month period.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-301
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 1. LAW GOVERNING
PERFECTION AND PRIORITY
§ 9-301. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY
INTERESTS
Except as otherwise provided in Sections 9-303 through 9-306, the following rules determine the law
governing perfection, the effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a security interest in
collateral:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, while a debtor is located in a jurisdiction, the local law
of that jurisdiction governs perfection, the effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a
security interest in collateral.
(2) While collateral is located in a jurisdiction, the local law of that jurisdiction governs perfection, the
effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a possessory security interest in that collateral.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (4), while tangible negotiable documents, goods,
instruments, money, or tangible chattel paper is located in a jurisdiction, the local law of that jurisdiction
governs:
(A) perfection of a security interest in the goods by filing a fixture filing;
(B) perfection of a security interest in timber to be cut; and
(C) the effect of perfection or nonperfection and the priority of a nonpossessory security interest in
the collateral.
(4) The local law of the jurisdiction in which the wellhead or minehead is located governs perfection,
the effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a security interest in as-extracted collateral.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Sections 9-103(1)(a), (b), 9-103(3)(a), (b), 9-103(5), substantially modified.
2. Scope of This Subpart. Part 3, Subpart 1 (Sections 9-301 through 9-307) contains choice-of-law rules similar
to those of former Section 9-103. Former Section 9-103 generally addresses which State's law governs "perfection
and the effect of perfection or non-perfection of" security interests. See, e.g., former Section 9-103(1)(b). This
Article follows the broader and more precise formulation in former Section 9-103(6)(b), which was revised in
connection with the promulgation of Revised Article 8 in 1994: "perfection, the effect of perfection or non-perfection,
and the priority of" security interests. Priority, in this context, subsumes all of the rules in Part 3, including "cut off" or
"take free" rules such as Sections 9-317(b), (c), and (d), 9-320(a), (b), and (d), and 9-332. This subpart does not
address choice of law for other purposes. For example, the law applicable to issues such as attachment, validity,
characterization (e.g., true lease or security interest), and enforcement is governed by the rules in Section 1-301;
§ 9-301. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS
Page 2 of 4
that governing law typically is specified in the same agreement that contains the security agreement. And, another
jurisdiction's law may govern other third-party matters addressed in this Article. See Section 9-401, Comment 3.
3. Scope of Referral. In designating the jurisdiction whose law governs, this Article directs the court to apply only
the substantive ("local") law of a particular jurisdiction and not its choice-of-law rules.
Example 1: Litigation over the priority of a security interest in accounts arises in State X. State X has adopted the
official text of this Article, which provides that priority is determined by the local law of the jurisdiction in which the
debtor is located. See Section 9-301(1). The debtor is located in State Y. Even if State Y has retained former Article
9 or enacted a nonuniform choice-of-law rule (e.g., one that provides that perfection is governed by the law of State
Z), a State X court should look only to the substantive law of State Y and disregard State Y's choice-of-law rule.
State Y's substantive law (e.g., its Section 9-501) provides that financing statements should be filed in a filing office
in State Y. Note, however, that if the identical perfection issue were to be litigated in State Y, the court would look to
State Y's former Section 9-103 or nonuniform 9-301 and conclude that a filing in State Y is ineffective.
Example 2: In the preceding Example, assume that State X has adopted the official text of this Article, and State
Y has adopted a nonuniform Section 9-301(1) under which perfection is governed by the whole law of State X,
including its choice-of-law rules. If litigation occurs in State X, the court should look to the substantive law of State
Y, which provides that financing statements are to be filed in a filing office in State Y. If litigation occurs in State Y,
the court should look to the law of State X, whose choice-of-law rule requires that the court apply the substantive
law of State Y. Thus, regardless of the jurisdiction in which the litigation arises, the financing statement should be
filed in State Y.
4. Law Governing Perfection: General Rule. Paragraph (1) contains the general rule: the law governing
perfection of security interests in both tangible and intangible collateral, whether perfected by filing or automatically,
is the law of the jurisdiction of the debtor's location, as determined under Section 9-307.
Paragraph (1) substantially simplifies the choice-of-law rules. Former Section 9-103 contained different choice-oflaw
rules for different types of collateral. Under Section 9-301(1), the law of a single jurisdiction governs perfection
with respect to most types of collateral, both tangible and intangible. Paragraph (1) eliminates the need for former
Section 9-103(1)(c), which concerned purchase-money security interests in tangible collateral that is intended to
move from one jurisdiction to the other. It is likely to reduce the frequency of cases in which the governing law
changes after a financing statement is properly filed. (Presumably, debtors change their own location less
frequently than they change the location of their collateral.) The approach taken in paragraph (1) also eliminates
some difficult priority issues and the need to distinguish between "mobile" and "ordinary" goods, and it reduces the
number of filing offices in which secured parties must file or search when collateral is located in several
jurisdictions.
5. Law Governing Perfection: Exceptions. The general rule is subject to several exceptions. It does not apply
to goods covered by a certificate of title (see Section 9-303), deposit accounts (see Section 9-304), investment
property (see Section 9-305), or letter-of-credit rights (see Section 9-306). Nor does it apply to possessory security
interests, i.e., security interests that the secured party has perfected by taking possession of the collateral (see
paragraph (2)), security interests perfected by filing a fixture filing (see subparagraph (3)(A)), security interests in
timber to be cut (subparagraph (3)(B)), or security interests in as-extracted collateral (see paragraph (4)).
a. Possessory Security Interests. Paragraph (2) applies to possessory security interests and provides that
perfection is governed by the local law of the jurisdiction in which the collateral is located. This is the rule of former
Section 9-103(1)(b), except paragraph (2) eliminates the troublesome "last event" test of former law.
The distinction between nonpossessory and possessory security interests creates the potential for the same
jurisdiction to apply two different choice-of-law rules to determine perfection in the same collateral. For example,
were a secured party in possession of an instrument or a tangible document to relinquish possession in reliance on
temporary perfection, the applicable law immediately would change from that of the location of the collateral to that
of the location of the debtor. The applicability of two different choice-of-law rules for perfection is unlikely to lead to
any material practical problems. The perfection rules of one Article 9 jurisdiction are likely to be identical to those of
§ 9-301. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS
Page 3 of 4
another. Moreover, under paragraph (3), the relative priority of competing security interests in tangible collateral is
resolved by reference to the law of the jurisdiction in which the collateral is located, regardless of how the security
interests are perfected.
b. Fixture Filings. Under the general rule in paragraph (1), a security interest in fixtures may be perfected by
filing in the office specified by Section 9-501(a) as enacted in the jurisdiction in which the debtor is located.
However, application of this rule to perfection of a security interest by filing a fixture filing could yield strange results.
For example, perfection of a security interest in fixtures located in Arizona and owned by a Delaware corporation
would be governed by the law of Delaware. Although Delaware law would send one to a filing office in Arizona for
the place to file a financing statement as a fixture filing, see Section 9-501, Delaware law would not take account of
local, nonuniform, real-property filing and recording requirements that Arizona law might impose. For this reason,
paragraph (3)(A) contains a special rule for security interests perfected by a fixture filing; the law of the jurisdiction
in which the fixtures are located governs perfection, including the formal requisites of a fixture filing. Under
paragraph (3)(C), the same law governs priority. Fixtures are "goods" as defined in Section 9-102.
The filing of a financing statement to perfect a security interest in collateral of a transmitting utility constitutes a
fixture filing with respect to goods that are or become fixtures. See Section 9-501(b). Accordingly, to perfect a
security interest in goods of this kind by a fixture filing, a financing statement must be filed in the office specified by
Section 9-501(b) as enacted in the jurisdiction in which the goods are located. If the fixtures collateral is located in
more than one State, filing in all of those States will be necessary to perfect a security interest in all the fixtures
collateral by a fixture filing. Of course, a security interest in nearly all types of collateral (including fixtures) of a
transmitting utility may be perfected by filing in the office specified by Section 9-501(b) as enacted in the jurisdiction
in which the transmitting utility is located. However, such a filing will not be effective as a fixture filing except with
respect to goods that are located in that jurisdiction.
c. Timber to Be Cut. Application of the general rule in paragraph (1) to perfection of a security interest in timber
to be cut would yield undesirable results analogous to those described with respect to fixtures. Paragraph (3)(B)
adopts a similar solution: perfection is governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the timber is located. As with
fixtures, under paragraph (3)(C), the same law governs priority. Timber to be cut also is "goods" as defined in
Section 9-102.
Paragraph (3)(B) applies only to "timber to be cut," not to timber that has been cut. Consequently, once the timber
is cut, the general choice-of-law rule in paragraph (1) becomes applicable. To ensure continued perfection, a
secured party should file in both the jurisdiction in which the timber to be cut is located and in the state where the
debtor is located. The former filing would be with the office in which a real property mortgage would be filed, and the
latter would be a central filing. See Section 9-501.
d. As-Extracted Collateral. Paragraph (4) adopts the rule of former Section 9-103(5) with respect to certain
security interests in minerals and related accounts. Like security interests in fixtures perfected by filing a fixture
filing, security interests in minerals that are as-extracted collateral are perfected by filing in the office designated for
the filing or recording of a mortgage on the real property. For the same reasons, the law governing perfection and
priority is the law of the jurisdiction in which the wellhead or minehead is located.
6. Change in Law Governing Perfection. When the debtor changes its location to another jurisdiction, the
jurisdiction whose law governs perfection under paragraph (1) changes, as well. Similarly, the law governing
perfection of a possessory security interest in collateral under paragraph (2) changes when the collateral is
removed to another jurisdiction. Nevertheless, these changes will not result in an immediate loss of perfection. See
Section 9-316(a), (b).
7. Law Governing Effect of Perfection and Priority: Goods, Documents, Instruments, Money, Negotiable
Documents, and Tangible Chattel Paper. Under former Section 9-103, the law of a single jurisdiction governed
both questions of perfection and those of priority. This Article generally adopts that approach. See paragraph (1).
But the approach may create problems if the debtor and collateral are located in different jurisdictions. For example,
assume a security interest in equipment located in Pennsylvania is perfected by filing in Illinois, where the debtor is
§ 9-301. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS
Page 4 of 4
located. If the law of the jurisdiction in which the debtor is located were to govern priority, then the priority of an
execution lien on goods located in Pennsylvania would be governed by rules enacted by the Illinois legislature.
To address this problem, paragraph (3)(C) divorces questions of perfection from questions of "the effect of
perfection or nonperfection and the priority of a security interest." Under paragraph (3)(C), the rights of competing
claimants to tangible collateral are resolved by reference to the law of the jurisdiction in which the collateral is
located. A similar bifurcation applied to security interests in investment property under former Section 9-103(6). See
Section 9-305.
Paragraph (3)(C) applies the law of the situs to determine priority only with respect to goods (including fixtures),
instruments, money, tangible negotiable documents, and tangible chattel paper. Compare former Section 9-103(1),
which applied the law of the location of the collateral to documents, instruments, and "ordinary" (as opposed to
"mobile") goods. This Article does not distinguish among types of goods. The ordinary/mobile goods distinction
appears to address concerns about where to file and search, rather than concerns about priority. There is no
reason to preserve this distinction under the bifurcated approach.
Particularly serious confusion may arise when the choice-of-law rules of a given jurisdiction result in each of two
competing security interests in the same collateral being governed by a different priority rule. The potential for this
confusion existed under former Section 9-103(4) with respect to chattel paper: Perfection by possession was
governed by the law of the location of the paper, whereas perfection by filing was governed by the law of the
location of the debtor. Consider the mess that would have been created if the language or interpretation of former
Section 9-308 were to differ in the two relevant States, or if one of the relevant jurisdictions (e.g., a foreign country)
had not adopted Article 9. The potential for confusion could have been exacerbated when a secured party perfected
both by taking possession in the State where the collateral is located (State A) and by filing in the State where the
debtor is located (State B)--a common practice for some chattel paper financers. By providing that the law of the
jurisdiction in which the collateral is located governs priority, paragraph (3) substantially diminishes this problem.
8. Non-U.S. Debtors. This Article applies the same choice-of-law rules to all debtors, foreign and domestic. For
example, it adopts the bifurcated approach for determining the law applicable to security interests in goods and
other tangible collateral. See Comment 5.a., above. The Article contains a new rule specifying the location of non-
U.S. debtors for purposes of this Part. The rule appears in Section 9-307 and is explained in the Reporters'
Comments following that section. Former Section 9-103(3)(c), which contained a special choice-of-law rule
governing security interests created by debtors located in a non-U.S. jurisdiction, proved unsatisfactory and was
deleted.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-302
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 1. LAW GOVERNING
PERFECTION AND PRIORITY
§ 9-302. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF
AGRICULTURAL LIENS
While farm products are located in a jurisdiction, the local law of that jurisdiction governs perfection, the effect of
perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of an agricultural lien on the farm products.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Agricultural Liens. This section provides choice-of-law rules for agricultural liens on farm products. Perfection,
the effect of perfection or nonperfection, and priority all are governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the farm
products are located. Other choice-of-law rules, including Section 1-301, determine which jurisdiction's law governs
other matters, such as the secured party's rights on default. See Section 9-301, Comment 2. Inasmuch as no
agricultural lien on proceeds arises under this Article, this section does not expressly apply to proceeds of
agricultural liens. However, if another statute creates an agricultural lien on proceeds, it may be appropriate for
courts to apply the choice-of-law rule in this section to determine priority in the proceeds.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-303
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 1. LAW GOVERNING
PERFECTION AND PRIORITY
§ 9-303. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY
INTERESTS IN GOODS COVERED BY A CERTIFICATE OF TITLE
(a) [Applicability of section.] This section applies to goods covered by a certificate of title, even if there is
no other relationship between the jurisdiction under whose certificate of title the goods are covered and the
goods or the debtor.
(b) [When goods covered by certificate of title.] Goods become covered by a certificate of title when a
valid application for the certificate of title and the applicable fee are delivered to the appropriate authority.
Goods cease to be covered by a certificate of title at the earlier of the time the certificate of title ceases to
be effective under the law of the issuing jurisdiction or the time the goods become covered subsequently by
a certificate of title issued by another jurisdiction.
(c) [Applicable law.] The local law of the jurisdiction under whose certificate of title the goods are covered
governs perfection, the effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a security interest in goods
covered by a certificate of title from the time the goods become covered by the certificate of title until the
goods cease to be covered by the certificate of title.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-103(2)(a), (b), substantially revised.
2. Scope of This Section. This section applies to "goods covered by a certificate of title." The new definition of
"certificate of title" in Section 9-102 makes clear that this section applies not only to certificate-of-title statutes under
which perfection occurs upon notation of the security interest on the certificate but also to those that contemplate
notation but provide that perfection is achieved by another method, e.g., delivery of designated documents to an
official. Subsection (a), which is new, makes clear that this section applies to certificates of a jurisdiction having no
other contacts with the goods or the debtor. This result comports with most of the reported cases on the subject and
with contemporary business practices in the trucking industry.
3. Law Governing Perfection and Priority. Subsection (c) is the basic choice-of-law rule for goods covered by a
certificate of title. Perfection and priority of a security interest are governed by the law of the jurisdiction under
whose certificate of title the goods are covered from the time the goods become covered by the certificate of title
until the goods cease to be covered by the certificate of title.
Normally, under the law of the relevant jurisdiction, the perfection step would consist of compliance with that
jurisdiction's certificate-of-title statute and a resulting notation of the security interest on the certificate of title. See
Section 9-311(b). In the typical case of an automobile or over-the-road truck, a person who wishes to take a
security interest in the vehicle can ascertain whether it is subject to any security interests by looking at the
certificate of title. But certificates of title cover certain types of goods in some States but not in others. A secured
§ 9-303. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN GOODS
COVERED BY A CERTIFICATE OF TITLE
Page 2 of 3
party who does not realize this may extend credit and attempt to perfect by filing in the jurisdiction in which the
debtor is located. If the goods had been titled in another jurisdiction, the lender would be unperfected.
Subsection (b) explains when goods become covered by a certificate of title and when they cease to be covered.
Goods may become covered by a certificate of title, even though no certificate of title has issued. Former Section 9-
103(2)(b) provided that the law of the jurisdiction issuing the certificate ceases to apply upon "surrender" of the
certificate. This Article eliminates the concept of "surrender." However, if the certificate is surrendered in
conjunction with an appropriate application for a certificate to be issued by another jurisdiction, the law of the
original jurisdiction ceases to apply because the goods became covered subsequently by a certificate of title from
another jurisdiction. Alternatively, the law of the original jurisdiction ceases to apply when the certificate "ceases to
be effective" under the law of that jurisdiction. Given the diversity in certificate-of-title statutes, the term "effective" is
not defined.
4. Continued Perfection. The fact that the law of one State ceases to apply under subsection (b) does not mean
that a security interest perfected under that law becomes unperfected automatically. In most cases, the security
interest will remain perfected. See Section 9-316(d), (e). Moreover, a perfected security interest may be subject to
defeat by certain buyers and secured parties. See Section 9-337.
5. Inventory. Compliance with a certificate-of-title statute generally is not the method of perfecting security
interests in inventory. Section 9-311(d) provides that a security interest created in inventory held by a person in the
business of selling goods of that kind is subject to the normal filing rules; compliance with a certificate-of-title statute
is not necessary or effective to perfect the security interest. Most certificate-of-title statutes are in accord.
The following example explains the subtle relationship between this rule and the choice-of-law rules in Section 9-
303 and former Section 9-103(2):
Example: Goods are located in State A and covered by a certificate of title issued under the law of State A. The
State A certificate of title is "clean"; it does not reflect a security interest. Owner takes the goods to State B and sells
(trades in) the goods to Dealer, who is in the business of selling goods of that kind and is located (within the
meaning of Section 9-307) in State B. As is customary, Dealer retains the duly assigned State A certificate of title
pending resale of the goods. Dealer's inventory financer, SP, obtains a security interest in the goods under its afteracquired
property clause.
Under Section 9-311(d) of both State A and State B, Dealer's inventory financer, SP, must perfect by filing instead
of complying with a certificate-of-title statute. If Section 9-303 were read to provide that the law applicable to
perfection of SP's security interest is that of State A, because the goods are covered by a State A certificate, then
SP would be required to file in State A under State A's Section 9-501. That result would be anomalous, to say the
least, since the principle underlying Section 9-311(d) is that the inventory should be treated as ordinary goods.
Section 9-303 (and former Section 9-103(2)) should be read as providing that the law of State B, not State A,
applies. A court looking to the forum's Section 9-303(a) would find that Section 9-303 applies only if two conditions
are met: (i) the goods are covered by the certificate as explained in Section 9-303(b), i.e., application had been
made for a State (here, State A) to issue a certificate of title covering the goods and (ii) the certificate is a
"certificate of title" as defined in Section 9-102, i.e., "a statute provides for the security interest in question to be
indicated on the certificate as a condition or result of the security interest's obtaining priority over the rights of a lien
creditor." Stated otherwise, Section 9-303 applies only when compliance with a certificate-of-title statute, and not
filing, is the appropriate method of perfection. Under the law of State A, for purposes of perfecting SP's security
interest in the dealer's inventory, the proper method of perfection is filing--not compliance with State A's certificateof-
title statute. For that reason, the goods are not covered by a "certificate of title," and the second condition is not
met. Thus, Section 9-303 does not apply to the goods. Instead, Section 9-301 applies, and the applicable law is that
of State B, where the debtor (dealer) is located.
6. External Constraints on This Section. The need to coordinate Article 9 with a variety of nonuniform
certificate-of-title statutes, the need to provide rules to take account of situations in which multiple certificates of title
§ 9-303. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN GOODS
COVERED BY A CERTIFICATE OF TITLE
Page 3 of 3
are outstanding with respect to particular goods, and the need to govern the transition from perfection by filing in
one jurisdiction to perfection by notation in another all create pressure for a detailed and complex set of rules. In an
effort to minimize complexity, this Article does not attempt to coordinate Article 9 with the entire array of certificateof-
title statutes. In particular, Sections 9-303, 9-311, and 9-316(d) and (e) assume that the certificate-of-title statutes
to which they apply do not have relation-back provisions (i.e., provisions under which perfection is deemed to occur
at a time earlier than when the perfection steps actually are taken). A Legislative Note to Section 9-311
recommends the elimination of relation-back provisions in certificate-of-title statutes affecting perfection of security
interests.
Ideally, at any given time, only one certificate of title is outstanding with respect to particular goods. In fact,
however, sometimes more than one jurisdiction issues more than one certificate of title with respect to the same
goods. This situation results from defects in certificate-of-title laws and the interstate coordination of those laws, not
from deficiencies in this Article. As long as the possibility of multiple certificates of title remains, the potential for
innocent parties to suffer losses will continue. At best, this Article can identify clearly which innocent parties will
bear the losses in familiar fact patterns.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-304
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 1. LAW GOVERNING
PERFECTION AND PRIORITY
§ 9-304. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY
INTERESTS IN DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS
(a) [Law of bank's jurisdiction governs.] The local law of a bank's jurisdiction governs perfection, the
effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a security interest in a deposit account maintained
with that bank.
(b) [Bank's jurisdiction.] The following rules determine a bank's jurisdiction for purposes of this part:
(1) If an agreement between the bank and the debtor governing the deposit account expressly
provides that a particular jurisdiction is the bank's jurisdiction for purposes of this part, this article, or
[the Uniform Commercial Code], that jurisdiction is the bank's jurisdiction.
(2) If paragraph (1) does not apply and an agreement between the bank and its customer governing
the deposit account expressly provides that the agreement is governed by the law of a particular
jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the bank's jurisdiction.
(3) If neither paragraph (1) nor paragraph (2) applies and an agreement between the bank and its
customer governing the deposit account expressly provides that the deposit account is maintained at
an office in a particular jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the bank's jurisdiction.
(4) If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the bank's jurisdiction is the jurisdiction in which the
office identified in an account statement as the office serving the customer's account is located.
(5) If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the bank's jurisdiction is the jurisdiction in which the
chief executive office of the bank is located.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New; derived from Section 8-110(e) and former Section 9-103(6).
2. Deposit Accounts. Under this section, the law of the "bank's jurisdiction" governs perfection and priority of a
security interest in deposit accounts. Subsection (b) contains rules for determining the "bank's jurisdiction." The
substance of these rules is substantially similar to that of the rules determining the "security intermediary's
jurisdiction" under former Section 8-110(e), except that subsection (b)(1) provides more flexibility than the
analogous provision in former Section 8-110(e)(1). Subsection (b)(1) permits the parties to choose the law of one
jurisdiction to govern perfection and priority of security interests and a different governing law for other purposes.
The parties' choice is effective, even if the jurisdiction whose law is chosen bears no relationship to the parties or
the transaction. Section 8-110(e)(1) has been conformed to subsection (b)(1) of this section, and Section 9-
305(b)(1), concerning a commodity intermediary's jurisdiction, makes a similar departure from former Section 9-
103(6)(e)(i).
§ 9-304. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN DEPOSIT
ACCOUNTS
Page 2 of 2
3. Change in Law Governing Perfection. When the bank's jurisdiction changes, the jurisdiction whose law
governs perfection under subsection (a) changes, as well. Nevertheless, the change will not result in an immediate
loss of perfection. See Section 9-316(f), (g).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-305
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 1. LAW GOVERNING
PERFECTION AND PRIORITY
§ 9-305. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY
INTERESTS IN INVESTMENT PROPERTY
(a) [Governing law: general rules.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), the following rules
apply:
(1) While a security certificate is located in a jurisdiction, the local law of that jurisdiction governs
perfection, the effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a security interest in the
certificated security represented thereby.
(2) The local law of the issuer's jurisdiction as specified in Section 8-110(d) governs perfection, the
effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a security interest in an uncertificated security.
(3) The local law of the securities intermediary's jurisdiction as specified in Section 8-110(e) governs
perfection, the effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a security interest in a security
entitlement or securities account.
(4) The local law of the commodity intermediary's jurisdiction governs perfection, the effect of
perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a security interest in a commodity contract or commodity
account.
(b) [Commodity intermediary's jurisdiction.] The following rules determine a commodity intermediary's
jurisdiction for purposes of this part:
(1) If an agreement between the commodity intermediary and commodity customer governing the
commodity account expressly provides that a particular jurisdiction is the commodity intermediary's
jurisdiction for purposes of this part, this article, or [the Uniform Commercial Code], that jurisdiction is
the commodity intermediary's jurisdiction.
(2) If paragraph (1) does not apply and an agreement between the commodity intermediary and
commodity customer governing the commodity account expressly provides that the agreement is
governed by the law of a particular jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the commodity intermediary's
jurisdiction.
(3) If neither paragraph (1) nor paragraph (2) applies and an agreement between the commodity
intermediary and commodity customer governing the commodity account expressly provides that the
commodity account is maintained at an office in a particular jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the
commodity intermediary's jurisdiction.
(4) If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the commodity intermediary's jurisdiction is the
jurisdiction in which the office identified in an account statement as the office serving the commodity
customer's account is located.
(5) If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the commodity intermediary's jurisdiction is the
jurisdiction in which the chief executive office of the commodity intermediary is located.
(c) [When perfection governed by law of jurisdiction where debtor located.] The local law of the
jurisdiction in which the debtor is located governs:
(1) perfection of a security interest in investment property by filing;
§ 9-305. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN INVESTMENT
PROPERTY
Page 2 of 3
(2) automatic perfection of a security interest in investment property created by a broker or securities
intermediary; and
(3) automatic perfection of a security interest in a commodity contract or commodity account created
by a commodity intermediary.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-103(6).
2. Investment Property: General Rules. This section specifies choice-of-law rules for perfection and priority of
security interests in investment property. Subsection (a)(1) covers security interests in certificated securities.
Subsection (a)(2) covers security interests in uncertificated securities. Subsection (a)(3) covers security interests in
security entitlements and securities accounts. Subsection (a)(4) covers security interests in commodity contracts
and commodity accounts. The approach of each of these paragraphs is essentially the same. They identify the
jurisdiction's law that governs questions of perfection and priority by using the same principles that Article 8 uses to
determine other questions concerning that form of investment property. Thus, for certificated securities, the law of
the jurisdiction in which the certificate is located governs. Cf. Section 8-110(c). For uncertificated securities, the law
of the issuer's jurisdiction governs. Cf. Section 8-110(a). For security entitlements and securities accounts, the law
of the securities intermediary's jurisdiction governs. Cf. Section 8-110(b). For commodity contracts and commodity
accounts, the law of the commodity intermediary's jurisdiction governs. Because commodity contracts and
commodity accounts are not governed by Article 8, subsection (b) contains rules that specify the commodity
intermediary's jurisdiction. These are analogous to the rules in Section 8-110(e) specifying a securities
intermediary's jurisdiction. Subsection (b)(1) affords the parties greater flexibility than did former Section 9-
103(6)(3). See also Section 9-304(b) (bank's jurisdiction); Revised Section 8-110(e)(1) (securities intermediary's
jurisdiction).
3. Investment Property: Exceptions. Subsection (c) establishes an exception to the general rules set out in
subsection (a). It provides that perfection of a security interest by filing, automatic perfection of a security interest in
investment property created by a debtor who is a broker or securities intermediary (see Section 9-309(10)), and
automatic perfection of a security interest in a commodity contract or commodity account of a debtor who is a
commodity intermediary (see Section 9-309(11) are governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the debtor is
located, as determined under Section 9-307.
4. Examples: The following examples illustrate the rules in this section:
Example 1: A customer residing in New Jersey maintains a securities account with Able & Co. The agreement
between the customer and Able specifies that it is governed by Pennsylvania law but expressly provides that the
law of California is Able's jurisdiction for purposes of the Uniform Commercial Code. Through the account the
customer holds securities of a Massachusetts corporation, which Able holds through a clearing corporation located
in New York. The customer obtains a margin loan from Able. Subsection (a)(3) provides that California law--the law
of the securities intermediary's jurisdiction-governs perfection and priority of the security interest, even if California
has no other relationship to the parties or the transaction.
Example 2: A customer residing in New Jersey maintains a securities account with Able & Co. The agreement
between the customer and Able specifies that it is governed by Pennsylvania law. Through the account the
customer holds securities of a Massachusetts corporation, which Able holds through a clearing corporation located
in New York. The customer obtains a loan from a lender located in Illinois. The lender takes a security interest and
§ 9-305. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN INVESTMENT
PROPERTY
Page 3 of 3
perfects by obtaining an agreement among the debtor, itself, and Able, which satisfies the requirement of Section 8-
106(d)(2) to give the lender control. Subsection (a)(3) provides that Pennsylvania law-the law of the securities
intermediary's jurisdiction-governs perfection and priority of the security interest, even if Pennsylvania has no other
relationship to the parties or the transaction.
Example 3: A customer residing in New Jersey maintains a securities account with Able & Co. The agreement
between the customer and Able specifies that it is governed by Pennsylvania law. Through the account, the
customer holds securities of a Massachusetts corporation, which Able holds through a clearing corporation located
in New York. The customer borrows from SP-1, and SP-1 files a financing statement in New Jersey. Later, the
customer obtains a loan from SP-2. SP-2 takes a security interest and perfects by obtaining an agreement among
the debtor, itself, and Able, which satisfies the requirement of Section 8-106(d)(2) to give the SP-2 control.
Subsection (c) provides that perfection of SP-1's security interest by filing is governed by the location of the debtor,
so the filing in New Jersey was appropriate. Subsection (a)(3), however, provides that Pennsylvania law-the law of
the securities intermediary's jurisdiction-governs all other questions of perfection and priority. Thus, Pennsylvania
law governs perfection of SP-2's security interest, and Pennsylvania law also governs the priority of the security
interests of SP-1 and SP-2.
5. Change in Law Governing Perfection. When the issuer's jurisdiction, the securities intermediary's jurisdiction,
or commodity intermediary's jurisdiction changes, the jurisdiction whose law governs perfection under subsection
(a) changes, as well. Similarly, the law governing perfection of a possessory security interest in a certificated
security changes when the collateral is removed to another jurisdiction, see subsection (a)(1), and the law
governing perfection by filing changes when the debtor changes its location. See subsection (c). Nevertheless,
these changes will not result in an immediate loss of perfection. See Section 9-316(f), (g).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-306
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 1. LAW GOVERNING
PERFECTION AND PRIORITY
§ 9-306. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY
INTERESTS IN LETTER-OF-CREDIT RIGHTS
(a) [Governing law: issuer's or nominated person's jurisdiction.] Subject to subsection (c), the local
law of the issuer's jurisdiction or a nominated person's jurisdiction governs perfection, the effect of
perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of a security interest in a letter-of-credit right if the issuer's
jurisdiction or nominated person's jurisdiction is a State.
(b) [Issuer's or nominated person's jurisdiction.] For purposes of this part, an issuer's jurisdiction or
nominated person's jurisdiction is the jurisdiction whose law governs the liability of the issuer or nominated
person with respect to the letter-of-credit right as provided in Section 5-116.
(c) [When section not applicable.] This section does not apply to a security interest that is perfected only
under Section 9-308(d).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New; derived in part from Section 8-110(e) and former Section 9-103(6).
2. Sui Generis Treatment. This section governs the applicable law for perfection and priority of security interests
in letter-of-credit rights, other than a security interest perfected only under Section 9-308(d) (i.e., as a supporting
obligation). The treatment differs substantially from that provided in Section 9-304 for deposit accounts. The basic
rule is that the law of the issuer's or nominated person's (e.g., confirmer's) jurisdiction, derived from the terms of the
letter of credit itself, controls perfection and priority, but only if the issuer's or nominated person's jurisdiction is a
State, as defined in Section 9-102. If the issuer's or nominated person's jurisdiction is not a State, the baseline rule
of Section 9-301 applies-perfection and priority are governed by the law of the debtor's location, determined under
Section 9-307. Export transactions typically involve a foreign issuer and a domestic nominated person, such as a
confirmer, located in a State. The principal goal of this section is to reduce the likelihood that perfection and priority
would be governed by the law of a foreign jurisdiction in a transaction that is essentially domestic from the
standpoint of the debtor-beneficiary, its creditors, and a domestic nominated person.
3. Issuer's or Nominated Person's Jurisdiction. Subsection (b) defers to the rules established under Section 5-
116 for determination of an issuer's or nominated person's jurisdiction.
Example: An Italian bank issues a letter of credit that is confirmed by a New York bank. The beneficiary is a
Connecticut corporation. The letter of credit provides that the issuer's liability is governed by Italian law, and the
confirmation provides that the confirmer's liability is governed by the law of New York. Under Sections 9-306(b) and
5-116(a), Italy is the issuer's jurisdiction and New York is the confirmer's (nominated person's) jurisdiction. Because
the confirmer's jurisdiction is a State, the law of New York governs perfection and priority of a security interest in the
beneficiary's letter-of-credit right against the confirmer. See Section 9-306(a). However, because the issuer's
§ 9-306. LAW GOVERNING PERFECTION AND PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN LETTER-OFCREDIT
RIGHTS
Page 2 of 2
jurisdiction is not a State, the law of that jurisdiction does not govern. See Section 9-306(a). Rather, the choice-oflaw
rule in Section 9-301(1) applies to perfection and priority of a security interest in the beneficiary's letter-of-credit
right against the issuer. Under that section, perfection and priority are governed by the law of the jurisdiction in
which the debtor (beneficiary) is located. That jurisdiction is Connecticut. See Section 9-307.
4. Scope of this Section. This section specifies only the law governing perfection, the effect of perfection or
nonperfection, and priority of security interests. Section 5-116 specifies the law governing the liability of, and Article
5 (or other applicable law) deals with the rights and duties of, an issuer or nominated person. Perfection,
nonperfection, and priority have no effect on those rights and duties.
5. Change in Law Governing Perfection. When the issuer's jurisdiction, or nominated person's jurisdiction
changes, the jurisdiction whose law governs perfection under subsection (a) changes, as well. Nevertheless, this
change will not result in an immediate loss of perfection. See Section 9-316(f), (g).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-307
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 1. LAW GOVERNING
PERFECTION AND PRIORITY
§ 9-307. LOCATION OF DEBTOR
(a) ["Place of business."] In this section, "place of business" means a place where a debtor conducts its
affairs.
(b) [Debtor's location: general rules.] Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following rules
determine a debtor's location:
(1) A debtor who is an individual is located at the individual's principal residence.
(2) A debtor that is an organization and has only one place of business is located at its place of
business.
(3) A debtor that is an organization and has more than one place of business is located at its chief
executive office.
(c) [Limitation of applicability of subsection (b).] Subsection (b) applies only if a debtor's residence,
place of business, or chief executive office, as applicable, is located in a jurisdiction whose law generally
requires information concerning the existence of a nonpossessory security interest to be made generally
available in a filing, recording, or registration system as a condition or result of the security interest's
obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor with respect to the collateral. If subsection (b) does not
apply, the debtor is located in the District of Columbia.
(d) [Continuation of location: cessation of existence, etc.] A person that ceases to exist, have a
residence, or have a place of business continues to be located in the jurisdiction specified by subsections
(b) and (c).
(e) [Location of registered organization organized under State law.] A registered organization that is
organized under the law of a State is located in that State.
(f) [Location of registered organization organized under federal law; bank branches and agencies.]
Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i), a registered organization that is organized under the law of
the United States and a branch or agency of a bank that is not organized under the law of the United States
or a State are located:
(1) in the State that the law of the United States designates, if the law designates a State of location;
(2) in the State that the registered organization, branch, or agency designates, if the law of the United
States authorizes the registered organization, branch, or agency to designate its State of location,
including by designating its main office, home office, or other comparable office; or
(3) in the District of Columbia, if neither paragraph (1) nor paragraph (2) applies.
(g) [Continuation of location: change in status of registered organization.] A registered organization
continues to be located in the jurisdiction specified by subsection (e) or (f) notwithstanding:
(1) the suspension, revocation, forfeiture, or lapse of the registered organization's status as such in its
jurisdiction of organization; or
(2) the dissolution, winding up, or cancellation of the existence of the registered organization.
(h) [Location of United States.] The United States is located in the District of Columbia.
§ 9-307. LOCATION OF DEBTOR
Page 2 of 4
(i) [Location of foreign bank branch or agency if licensed in only one state.] A branch or agency of a
bank that is not organized under the law of the United States or a State is located in the State in which the
branch or agency is licensed, if all branches and agencies of the bank are licensed in only one State.
(j) [Location of foreign air carrier.] A foreign air carrier under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, as
amended, is located at the designated office of the agent upon which service of process may be made on
behalf of the carrier.
(k) [Section applies only to this part.] This section applies only for purposes of this part.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-103(3)(d), substantially revised.
2. General Rules. As a general matter, the location of the debtor determines the jurisdiction whose law governs
perfection of a security interest. See Sections 9-301(1), 9-305(c). It also governs priority of a security interest in
certain types of intangible collateral, such as accounts, electronic chattel paper, and general intangibles. This
section determines the location of the debtor for choice-of-law purposes, but not for other purposes. See subsection
(k).
Subsection (b) states the general rules: An individual debtor is deemed to be located at the individual's principal
residence with respect to both personal and business assets. Any other debtor is deemed to be located at its place
of business if it has only one, or at its chief executive office if it has more than one place of business.
As used in this section, a "place of business" means a place where the debtor conducts its affairs. See subsection
(a). Thus, every organization, even eleemosynary institutions and other organizations that do not conduct "for profit"
business activities, has a "place of business." Under subsection (d), a person who ceases to exist, have a
residence, or have a place of business continues to be located in the jurisdiction determined by subsection (b).
The term "chief executive office" is not defined in this Section or elsewhere in the Uniform Commercial Code.
"Chief executive office" means the place from which the debtor manages the main part of its business operations or
other affairs. This is the place where persons dealing with the debtor would normally look for credit information, and
is the appropriate place for filing. With respect to most multi-state debtors, it will be simple to determine which of the
debtor's offices is the "chief executive office." Even when a doubt arises, it would be rare that there could be more
than two possibilities. A secured party in such a case may protect itself by perfecting under the law of each possible
jurisdiction.
Similarly, the term "principal residence" is not defined. If the security interest in question is a purchase-money
security interest in consumer goods which is perfected upon attachment, see Section 9-309(1), the choice of law
may make no difference. In other cases, when a doubt arises, prudence may dictate perfecting under the law of
each jurisdiction that might be the debtor's "principal residence."
Questions sometimes arise about the location of the debtor with respect to collateral held in a common-law trust.
A typical common-law trust is not itself a juridical entity capable of owning property and so would not be a "debtor"
as defined in Section 9-102. Rather, the debtor with respect to property held in a common-law trust typically is the
trustee of the trust acting in the capacity of trustee. (The beneficiary would be a "debtor" with respect to its
beneficial interest in the trust, but not with respect to the property held in the trust.) If a common-law trust has
multiple trustees located in different jurisdictions, a secured party who perfects by filing would be well advised to file
a financing statement in each jurisdiction in which a trustee is located, as determined under Section 9-307. Filing in
all relevant jurisdictions would insure perfection and minimize any priority complications that otherwise might arise.
The general rules are subject to several exceptions, each of which is discussed below.
§ 9-307. LOCATION OF DEBTOR
Page 3 of 4
3. Non-U.S. Debtors. Under the general rules of this section, a non-U.S. debtor normally would be located in a
foreign jurisdiction and, as a consequence, foreign law would govern perfection. When foreign law affords no public
notice of security interests, the general rule yields unacceptable results.
Accordingly, subsection (c) provides that the normal rules for determining the location of a debtor (i.e., the rules in
subsection (b)) apply only if they yield a location that is "a jurisdiction whose law generally requires information
concerning the existence of a nonpossessory security interest to be made generally available in a filing, recording,
or registration system as a condition or result of the security interest's obtaining priority over the rights of a lien
creditor with respect to the collateral." The phrase "generally requires" is meant to include legal regimes that
generally require notice in a filing or recording system as a condition of perfecting nonpossessory security interests,
but which permit perfection by another method (e.g., control, automatic perfection, temporary perfection) in limited
circumstances. A jurisdiction that has adopted this Article or an earlier version of this Article is such a jurisdiction. If
the rules in subsection (b) yield a jurisdiction whose law does not generally require notice in a filing or registration
system and none of the special rules in subsections (e), (f), (i), and (j) applies, the debtor is located in the District of
Columbia.
Example 1: Debtor is an English corporation with 7 offices in the United States and its chief executive office in
London, England. Debtor creates a security interest in its accounts. Under subsection (b)(3), Debtor would be
located in England. However, subsection (c) provides that subsection (b) applies only if English law generally
conditions perfection on giving public notice in a filing, recording, or registration system. Otherwise, Debtor is
located in the District of Columbia. Under Section 9-301(1), perfection, the effect of perfection, and priority are
governed by the law of the jurisdiction of the debtor's location-here, England or the District of Columbia (depending
on the content of English law).
Example 2: Debtor is an English corporation with 7 offices in the United States and its chief executive office in
London, England. Debtor creates a security interest in equipment located in London. Under subsection (b)(3)
Debtor would be located in England. However, subsection (c) provides that subsection (b) applies only if English
law generally conditions perfection on giving public notice in a filing, recording, or registration system. Otherwise,
Debtor is located in the District of Columbia. Under Section 9-301(1), perfection is governed by the law of the
jurisdiction of the debtor's location, whereas, under Section 9-301(3), the law of the jurisdiction in which the
collateral is located-here, England-governs priority.
The foregoing discussion assumes that each transaction bears an appropriate relation to the forum State. In the
absence of an appropriate relation, the forum State's entire UCC, including the choice-of-law provisions in Article 9
(Sections 9-301 through 9-307), will not apply. See Section 9-109, Comment 9.
4. Registered Organizations Organized Under Law of a State. Under subsection (e), a "registered
organization" (defined in Section 9-102 so as to ordinarily include corporations, limited partnerships, limited liability
companies, and statutory trusts) organized under the law of a "State" (defined in Section 9-102) is located in its
State of organization. The term "registered organization" includes a business trust described in the second
sentence of the term's definition. See Section 9-102. The trust's public organic record, typically the trust agreement,
usually will indicate the jurisdiction under whose law the trust is organized.
Subsection (g) makes clear that events affecting the status of a registered organization, such as the dissolution of
a corporation or revocation of its charter, do not affect its location for purposes of subsection (e). However, certain
of these events may result in, or be accompanied by, a transfer of collateral from the registered organization to
another debtor. This section does not determine whether a transfer occurs, nor does it determine the legal
consequences of any transfer.
Determining the registered organization-debtor's location by reference to the jurisdiction of organization could
provide some important side benefits for the filing systems. A jurisdiction could structure its filing system so that it
would be impossible to make a mistake in a registered organization-debtor's name on a financing statement. For
example, a filer would be informed if a filed record designated an incorrect corporate name for the debtor. Linking
filing to the jurisdiction of organization also could reduce pressure on the system imposed by transactions in which
registered organizations cease to exist-as a consequence of merger or consolidation, for example. The jurisdiction
§ 9-307. LOCATION OF DEBTOR
Page 4 of 4
of organization might prohibit such transactions unless steps were taken to ensure that existing filings were refiled
against a successor or terminated by the secured party.
5. Registered Organizations Organized Under Law of United States; Branches and Agencies of Banks Not
Organized Under Law of United States. Subsection (f) specifies the location of a debtor that is a registered
organization organized under the law of the United States. It defers to law of the United States, to the extent that
that law determines, or authorizes the debtor to determine, the debtor's location. Thus, if the law of the United
States designates a particular State as the debtor's location, that State is the debtor's location for purposes of this
Article's choice-of-law rules. Similarly, if the law of the United States authorizes the registered organization to
designate its State of location, the State that the registered organization designates is the State in which it is
located for purposes of this Article's choice-of-law rules. In other cases, the debtor is located in the District of
Columbia.
In some cases, the law of the United States authorizes the registered organization to designate a main office,
home office, or other comparable office. See, e.g., 12 U.S.C. Sections 22 and 1464(a); 12 C.F.R. Section 552.3.
Designation of such an office constitutes the designation of the State of location for purposes of Section 9-307
(f)(2).
Subsection (f) also specifies the location of a branch or agency in the United States of a foreign bank that has one
or more branches or agencies in the United States. The law of the United States authorizes a foreign bank (or, on
behalf of the bank, a federal agency) to designate a single home state for all of the foreign bank's branches and
agencies in the United States. See 12 U.S.C. Section 3103(c) and 12 C.F.R. Section 211.22. As authorized, the
designation constitutes the State of location for the branch or agency for purposes of Section 9-307(f), unless all of
a foreign bank's branches or agencies that are in the United States are licensed in only one State, in which case the
branches and agencies are located in that State. See subsection (i).
In cases not governed by subsection (f) or (i), the location of a foreign bank is determined by subsections (b) and
(c).
6. United States. To the extent that Article 9 governs (see Sections 1-301, 9-109(c)), the United States is located
in the District of Columbia for purposes of this Article's choice-of-law rules. See subsection (h).
7. Foreign Air Carriers. Subsection (j) follows former Section 9-103(3)(d). To the extent that it is applicable, the
Convention on the International Recognition of Rights in Aircraft (Geneva Convention) supersedes state legislation
on this subject, as set forth in Section 9-311(b), but some nations are not parties to that Convention.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-308
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 2. PERFECTION
§ 9-308. WHEN SECURITY INTEREST OR AGRICULTURAL LIEN IS
PERFECTED; CONTINUITY OF PERFECTION
(a) [Perfection of security interest.] Except as otherwise provided in this section and Section 9-309, a
security interest is perfected if it has attached and all of the applicable requirements for perfection in
Sections 9-310 through 9-316 have been satisfied. A security interest is perfected when it attaches if the
applicable requirements are satisfied before the security interest attaches.
(b) [Perfection of agricultural lien.] An agricultural lien is perfected if it has become effective and all of
the applicable requirements for perfection in Section 9-310 have been satisfied. An agricultural lien is
perfected when it becomes effective if the applicable requirements are satisfied before the agricultural lien
becomes effective.
(c) [Continuous perfection; perfection by different methods.] A security interest or agricultural lien is
perfected continuously if it is originally perfected by one method under this article and is later perfected by
another method under this article, without an intermediate period when it was unperfected.
(d) [Supporting obligation.] Perfection of a security interest in collateral also perfects a security interest
in a supporting obligation for the collateral.
(e) [Lien securing right to payment.] Perfection of a security interest in a right to payment or
performance also perfects a security interest in a security interest, mortgage, or other lien on personal or
real property securing the right.
(f) [Security entitlement carried in securities account.] Perfection of a security interest in a securities
account also perfects a security interest in the security entitlements carried in the securities account.
(g) [Commodity contract carried in commodity account.] Perfection of a security interest in a
commodity account also perfects a security interest in the commodity contracts carried in the commodity
account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: Any statute conflicting with subsection (e) must be made expressly subject to that subsection.
1. Source. Former Sections 9-303, 9-115(2).
2. General Rule. This Article uses the term "attach" to describe the point at which property becomes subject to a
security interest. The requisites for attachment are stated in Section 9-203. When it attaches, a security interest
may be either perfected or unperfected. "Perfected" means that the security interest has attached and the secured
party has taken all the steps required by this Article as specified in Sections 9-310 through 9-316. A perfected
security interest may still be or become subordinate to other interests. See, e.g., Sections 9-320, 9-322. However,
in general, after perfection the secured party is protected against creditors and transferees of the debtor and, in
§ 9-308. WHEN SECURITY INTEREST OR AGRICULTURAL LIEN IS PERFECTED; CONTINUITY OF
PERFECTION
Page 2 of 3
particular, against any representative of creditors in insolvency proceedings instituted by or against the debtor. See,
e.g., Section 9-317.
Subsection (a) explains that the time of perfection is when the security interest has attached and any necessary
steps for perfection, such as taking possession or filing, have been taken. The "except" clause refers to the
perfection-upon-attachment rules appearing in Section 9-309. It also reflects that other subsections of this section,
e.g., subsection (d), contain automatic-perfection rules. If the steps for perfection have been taken in advance, as
when the secured party files a financing statement before giving value or before the debtor acquires rights in the
collateral, then the security interest is perfected when it attaches.
3. Agricultural Liens. Subsection (b) is new. It describes the elements of perfection of an agricultural lien.
4. Continuous Perfection. The following example illustrates the operation of subsection (c):
Example 1: Debtor, an importer, creates a security interest in goods that it imports and the documents of title that
cover the goods. The secured party, Bank, takes possession of a tangible negotiable bill of lading covering certain
imported goods and thereby perfects its security interest in the bill of lading and the goods. See Sections 9-313(a),
9-312(c)(1). Bank releases the bill of lading to the debtor for the purpose of procuring the goods from the carrier and
selling them. Under Section 9-312(f), Bank continues to have a perfected security interest in the document and
goods for 20 days. Bank files a financing statement covering the collateral before the expiration of the 20-day
period. Its security interest now continues perfected for as long as the filing is good.
If the successive stages of Bank's security interest succeed each other without an intervening gap, the security
interest is "perfected continuously," and the date of perfection is when the security interest first became perfected
(i.e., when Bank received possession of the tangible bill of lading). If, however, there is a gap between stages--for
example, if Bank does not file until after the expiration of the 20-day period specified in Section 9-312(f) and leaves
the collateral in the debtor's possession--then, the chain being broken, the perfection is no longer continuous. The
date of perfection would now be the date of filing (after expiration of the 20-day period). Bank's security interest
would be vulnerable to any interests arising during the gap period which under Section 9-317 take priority over an
unperfected security interest.
5. Supporting Obligations. Subsection (d) is new. It provides for automatic perfection of a security interest in a
supporting obligation for collateral if the security interest in the collateral is perfected. This is unlikely to effect any
change in the law prior to adoption of this Article.
Example 2: Buyer is obligated to pay Debtor for goods sold. Buyer's president guarantees the obligation. Debtor
creates a security interest in the right to payment (account) in favor of Lender. Under Section 9-203(f), the security
interest attaches to Debtor's rights under the guarantee (supporting obligation). Under subsection (d), perfection of
the security interest in the account constitutes perfection of the security interest in Debtor's rights under the
guarantee.
6. Rights to Payment Secured by Lien. Subsection (e) is new. It deals with the situation in which a security
interest is created in a right to payment that is secured by a security interest, mortgage, or other lien.
Example 3: Owner gives to Mortgagee a mortgage on Blackacre to secure a loan. Owner's obligation to pay is
evidenced by a promissory note. In need of working capital, Mortgagee borrows from Financer and creates a
security interest in the note in favor of Financer. Section 9-203(g) adopts the traditional view that the mortgage
follows the note; i.e., the transferee of the note acquires the mortgage, as well. This subsection adopts a similar
principle: perfection of a security interest in the right to payment constitutes perfection of a security interest in the
mortgage securing it.
An important consequence of the rules in Section 9-203(g) and subsection (e) is that, by acquiring a perfected
security interest in a mortgage (or other secured) note, the secured party acquires a security interest in the
mortgage (or other lien) that is senior to the rights of a person who becomes a lien creditor of the mortgagee (Article
§ 9-308. WHEN SECURITY INTEREST OR AGRICULTURAL LIEN IS PERFECTED; CONTINUITY OF
PERFECTION
Page 3 of 3
9 debtor). See Section 9-317(a)(2). This result helps prevent the separation of the mortgage (or other lien) from the
note.
Under this Article, attachment and perfection of a security interest in a secured right to payment do not of
themselves affect the obligation to pay. For example, if the obligation is evidenced by a negotiable note, then Article
3 dictates the person whom the maker must pay to discharge the note and any lien securing it. See Section 3-602.
If the right to payment is a payment intangible, then Section 9-406 determines whom the account debtor must pay.
Similarly, this Article does not determine who has the power to release a mortgage of record. That issue is
determined by real-property law.
7. Investment Property. Subsections (f) and (g) follow former Section 9-115(2).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-309
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 2. PERFECTION
§ 9-309. SECURITY INTEREST PERFECTED UPON ATTACHMENT
The following security interests are perfected when they attach:
(1) a purchase-money security interest in consumer goods, except as otherwise provided in Section 9-
311(b) with respect to consumer goods that are subject to a statute or treaty described in Section 9-
311(a);
(2) an assignment of accounts or payment intangibles which does not by itself or in conjunction with
other assignments to the same assignee transfer a significant part of the assignor's outstanding
accounts or payment intangibles;
(3) a sale of a payment intangible;
(4) a sale of a promissory note;
(5) a security interest created by the assignment of a health-care-insurance receivable to the provider
of the health-care goods or services;
(6) a security interest arising under Section 2-401, 2-505, 2-711(3), or 2A-508(5), until the debtor
obtains possession of the collateral;
(7) a security interest of a collecting bank arising under Section 4-210;
(8) a security interest of an issuer or nominated person arising under Section 5-118;
(9) a security interest arising in the delivery of a financial asset under Section 9-206(c);
(10) a security interest in investment property created by a broker or securities intermediary;
(11) a security interest in a commodity contract or a commodity account created by a commodity
intermediary;
(12) an assignment for the benefit of all creditors of the transferor and subsequent transfers by the
assignee thereunder; and
(13) a security interest created by an assignment of a beneficial interest in a decedent's estate.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Derived from former Sections 9-302(1), 9-115(4)(c), (d), 9-116.
2. Automatic Perfection. This section contains the perfection-upon-attachment rules previously located in former
Sections 9-302(1), 9-115(4)(c), (d), and 9-116. Rather than continue to state the rule by indirection, this section
explicitly provides for perfection upon attachment.
§ 9-309. SECURITY INTEREST PERFECTED UPON ATTACHMENT
Page 2 of 3
3. Purchase-Money Security Interest in Consumer Goods. Former Section 9-302(1)(d) has been revised and
appears here as paragraph (1). No filing or other step is required to perfect a purchase-money security interest in
consumer goods, other than goods, such as automobiles, that are subject to a statute or treaty described in Section
9-311(a). However, filing is required to perfect a non-purchase-money security interest in consumer goods and is
necessary to prevent a buyer of consumer goods from taking free of a security interest under Section 9-320(b). A
fixture filing is required for priority over conflicting interests in fixtures to the extent provided in Section 9-334.
4. Rights to Payment. Paragraph (2) expands upon former Section 9-302(1)(e) by affording automatic perfection
to certain assignments of payment intangibles as well as accounts. The purpose of paragraph (2) is to save from ex
post facto invalidation casual or isolated assignments--assignments which no one would think of filing. Any person
who regularly takes assignments of any debtor's accounts or payment intangibles should file. In this connection
Section 9-109(d)(4) through (7), which excludes certain transfers of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles,
and promissory notes from this Article, should be consulted.
Paragraphs (3) and (4), which are new, afford automatic perfection to sales of payment intangibles and
promissory notes, respectively. They reflect the practice under former Article 9. Under that Article, filing a financing
statement did not affect the rights of a buyer of payment intangibles or promissory notes, inasmuch as the former
Article did not cover those sales. To the extent that the exception in paragraph (2) covers outright sales of payment
intangibles, which automatically are perfected under paragraph (3), the exception is redundant.
5. Health-Care-Insurance Receivables. Paragraph (5) extends automatic perfection to assignments of healthcare-
insurance receivables if the assignment is made to the health-care provider that provided the health-care
goods or services. The primary effect is that, when an individual assigns a right to payment under an insurance
policy to the person who provided health-care goods or services, the provider has no need to file a financing
statement against the individual. The normal filing requirements apply to other assignments of health-careinsurance
receivables covered by this Article, e.g., assignments from the health-care provider to a financer.
6. Investment Property. Paragraph (9) replaces the last clause of former Section 9-116(2), concerning security
interests that arise in the delivery of a financial asset.
Paragraphs (10) and (11) replace former Section 9-115(4)(c) and (d), concerning secured financing of securities
and commodity firms and clearing corporations. The former sections indicated that, with respect to certain security
interests created by a securities intermediary or commodity intermediary, "the filing of a financing statement . . . has
no effect for purposes of perfection or priority with respect to that security interest." No change in meaning is
intended by the deletion of the quoted phrase.
Secured financing arrangements for securities firms are currently implemented in various ways. In some
circumstances, lenders may require that the transactions be structured as "hard pledges," where the securities are
transferred on the books of a clearing corporation from the debtor's account to the lender's account or to a special
pledge account for the lender where they cannot be disposed of without the specific consent of the lender. In other
circumstances, lenders are content with so-called "agreement to pledge" or "agreement to deliver" arrangements,
where the debtor retains the positions in its own account, but reflects on its books that the positions have been
hypothecated and promises that the securities will be transferred to the secured party's account on demand.
The perfection and priority rules of this Article are designed to facilitate current secured financing arrangements
for securities firms as well as to provide sufficient flexibility to accommodate new arrangements that develop in the
future. Hard pledge arrangements are covered by the concept of control. See Sections 9-314, 9-106, 8-106. Noncontrol
secured financing arrangements for securities firms are covered by the automatic perfection rule of
paragraph (10). Before the 1994 revision of Articles 8 and 9, agreement to pledge arrangements could be
implemented under a provision that a security interest in securities given for new value under a written security
agreement was perfected without filing or possession for a period of 21 days. Although the security interests were
temporary in legal theory, the financing arrangements could, in practice, be continued indefinitely by rolling over the
loans at least every 21 days. Accordingly, a knowledgeable creditor of a securities firm realizes that the firm's
securities may be subject to security interests that are not discoverable from any public records. The automatic§
9-309. SECURITY INTEREST PERFECTED UPON ATTACHMENT
Page 3 of 3
perfection rule of paragraph (10) makes it unnecessary to engage in the purely formal practice of rolling over these
arrangements every 21 days.
In some circumstances, a clearing corporation may be the debtor in a secured financing arrangement. For
example, a clearing corporation that settles delivery-versus-payment transactions among its participants on a net,
same-day basis relies on timely payments from all participants with net obligations due to the system. If a
participant that is a net debtor were to default on its payment obligation, the clearing corporation would not receive
some of the funds needed to settle with participants that are net creditors to the system. To complete end-of-day
settlement after a payment default by a participant, a clearing corporation that settles on a net, same-day basis may
need to draw on credit lines and pledge securities of the defaulting participant or other securities pledged by
participants in the clearing corporation to secure such drawings. The clearing corporation may be the top-tier
securities intermediary for the securities pledged, so that it would not be practical for the lender to obtain control.
Even where the clearing corporation holds some types of securities through other intermediaries, however, the
clearing corporation is unlikely to be able to complete the arrangements necessary to convey "control" over the
securities to be pledged in time to complete settlement in a timely manner. However, the term "securities
intermediary" is defined in Section 8-102(a)(14) to include clearing corporations. Thus, the perfection rule of
paragraph (10) applies to security interests in investment property granted by clearing corporations.
7. Beneficial Interests in Trusts. Under former Section 9-302(1)(c), filing was not required to perfect a security
interest created by an assignment of a beneficial interest in a trust. Because beneficial interests in trusts are now
used as collateral with greater frequency in commercial transactions, under this Article filing is required to perfect a
security interest in a beneficial interest.
8. Assignments for Benefit of Creditors. No filing or other action is required to perfect an assignment for the
benefit of creditors. These assignments are not financing transactions, and the debtor ordinarily will not be
engaging in further credit transactions.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-310
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 2. PERFECTION
§ 9-310. WHEN FILING REQUIRED TO PERFECT SECURITY INTEREST OR
AGRICULTURAL LIEN; SECURITY INTERESTS AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS
TO WHICH FILING PROVISIONS DO NOT APPLY
(a) [General rule: perfection by filing.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) and Section 9-
312(b), a financing statement must be filed to perfect all security interests and agricultural liens.
(b) [Exceptions: filing not necessary.] The filing of a financing statement is not necessary to perfect a
security interest:
(1) that is perfected under Section 9-308(d), (e), (f), or (g);
(2) that is perfected under Section 9-309 when it attaches;
(3) in property subject to a statute, regulation, or treaty described in Section 9-311(a);
(4) in goods in possession of a bailee which is perfected under Section 9-312(d)(1) or (2);
(5) in certificated securities, documents, goods, or instruments which is perfected without filing, control,
or possession under Section 9-312(e), (f), or (g);
(6) in collateral in the secured party's possession under Section 9-313;
(7) in a certificated security which is perfected by delivery of the security certificate to the secured party
under Section 9-313;
(8) in deposit accounts, electronic chattel paper, electronic documents, investment property, or letterof-
credit rights which is perfected by control under Section 9-314;
(9) in proceeds which is perfected under Section 9-315; or
(10) that is perfected under Section 9-316.
(c) [Assignment of perfected security interest.] If a secured party assigns a perfected security interest
or agricultural lien, a filing under this article is not required to continue the perfected status of the security
interest against creditors of and transferees from the original debtor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-302(1), (2).
2. General Rule. Subsection (a) establishes a central Article 9 principle: Filing a financing statement is necessary
for perfection of security interests and agricultural liens. However, filing is not necessary to perfect a security
interest that is perfected by another permissible method, see subsection (b), nor does filing ordinarily perfect a
security interest in a deposit account, letter-of-credit right, or money. See Section 9-312(b). Part 5 of the Article
deals with the office in which to file, mechanics of filing, and operations of the filing office.
§ 9-310. WHEN FILING REQUIRED TO PERFECT SECURITY INTEREST OR AGRICULTURAL LIEN;
SECURITY INTERESTS AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS TO WHICH FILING PROVISIONS DO NOT APP....
Page 2 of 2
3. Exemptions from Filing. Subsection (b) lists the security interests for which filing is not required as a condition
of perfection, because they are perfected automatically upon attachment (subsections (b)(2) and (b)(9)) or upon the
occurrence of another event (subsections (b)(1), (b)(5), and (b)(9)), because they are perfected under the law of
another jurisdiction (subsection (b)(10)), or because they are perfected by another method, such as by the secured
party's taking possession or control (subsections (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5), (b)(6), (b)(7), and (b)(8)).
4. Assignments of Perfected Security Interests. Subsection (c) concerns assignment of a perfected security
interest or agricultural lien. It provides that no filing is necessary in connection with an assignment by a secured
party to an assignee in order to maintain perfection as against creditors of and transferees from the original debtor.
Example 1: Buyer buys goods from Seller, who retains a security interest in them. After Seller perfects the
security interest by filing, Seller assigns the perfected security interest to X. The security interest, in X's hands and
without further steps on X's part, continues perfected against Buyer's transferees and creditors.
Example 2: Dealer creates a security interest in specific equipment in favor of Lender. After Lender perfects the
security interest in the equipment by filing, Lender assigns the chattel paper (which includes the perfected security
interest in Dealer's equipment) to X. The security interest in the equipment, in X's hands and without further steps
on X's part, continues perfected against Dealer's transferees and creditors. However, regardless of whether Lender
made the assignment to secure Lender's obligation to X or whether the assignment was an outright sale of the
chattel paper, the assignment creates a security interest in the chattel paper in favor of X. Accordingly, X must take
whatever steps may be required for perfection in order to be protected against Lender's transferees and creditors
with respect to the chattel paper.
Subsection (c) applies not only to an assignment of a security interest perfected by filing but also to an
assignment of a security interest perfected by a method other than by filing, such as by control or by possession.
Although subsection (c) addresses explicitly only the absence of an additional filing requirement, the same result
normally will follow in the case of an assignment of a security interest perfected by a method other than by filing.
For example, as long as possession of collateral is maintained by an assignee or by the assignor or another person
on behalf of the assignee, no further perfection steps need be taken on account of the assignment to continue
perfection as against creditors and transferees of the original debtor. Of course, additional action may be required
for perfection of the assignee's interest as against creditors and transferees of the assignor.
Similarly, subsection (c) applies to the assignment of a security interest perfected by compliance with a statute,
regulation, or treaty under Section 9-311(b), such as a certificate-of-title statute. Unless the statute expressly
provides to the contrary, the security interest will remain perfected against creditors of and transferees from the
original debtor, even if the assignee takes no action to cause the certificate of title to reflect the assignment or to
cause its name to appear on the certificate of title. See PEB Commentary No. 12, which discusses this issue under
former Section 9-302(3). Compliance with the statute is "equivalent to filing" under Section 9-311(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-311
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 2. PERFECTION
§ 9-311. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN PROPERTY SUBJECT
TO CERTAIN STATUTES, REGULATIONS, AND TREATIES
(a) [Security interest subject to other law.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), the filing of a
financing statement is not necessary or effective to perfect a security interest in property subject to:
(1) a statute, regulation, or treaty of the United States whose requirements for a security interest's
obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor with respect to the property preempt Section 9-310(a);
(2) [list any statute covering automobiles, trailers, mobile homes, boats, farm tractors, or the like, which
provides for a security interest to be indicated on a certificate of title as a condition or result of
perfection, and any non-Uniform Commercial Code central filing statute]; or
(3) a statute of another jurisdiction which provides for a security interest to be indicated on a certificate
of title as a condition or result of the security interest's obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor
with respect to the property.
(b) [Compliance with other law.] Compliance with the requirements of a statute, regulation, or treaty
described in subsection (a) for obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor is equivalent to the filing of
a financing statement under this article. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) and Sections 9-313
and 9-316(d) and (e) for goods covered by a certificate of title, a security interest in property subject to a
statute, regulation, or treaty described in subsection (a) may be perfected only by compliance with those
requirements, and a security interest so perfected remains perfected notwithstanding a change in the use
or transfer of possession of the collateral.
(c) [Duration and renewal of perfection.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) and Section 9-
316(d) and (e), duration and renewal of perfection of a security interest perfected by compliance with the
requirements prescribed by a statute, regulation, or treaty described in subsection (a) are governed by the
statute, regulation, or treaty. In other respects, the security interest is subject to this article.
(d) [Inapplicability to certain inventory.] During any period in which collateral subject to a statute
specified in subsection (a)(2) is inventory held for sale or lease by a person or leased by that person as
lessor and that person is in the business of selling goods of that kind, this section does not apply to a
security interest in that collateral created by that person.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: This Article contemplates that perfection of a security interest in goods covered by a certificate
of title occurs upon receipt by appropriate State officials of a properly tendered application for a certificate of title on
which the security interest is to be indicated, without a relation back to an earlier time. States whose certificate-oftitle
statutes provide for perfection at a different time or contain a relation-back provision should amend the statutes
accordingly.
§ 9-311. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN PROPERTY SUBJECT TO CERTAIN STATUTES,
REGULATIONS, AND TREATIES
Page 2 of 4
1. Source. Former Section 9-302(3), (4).
2. Federal Statutes, Regulations, and Treaties. Subsection (a)(1) exempts from the filing provisions of this
Article transactions as to which a system of filing--state or federal--has been established under federal law.
Subsection (b) makes clear that when such a system exists, perfection of a relevant security interest can be
achieved only through compliance with that system (i.e., filing under this Article is not a permissible alternative).
An example of the type of federal statute referred to in subsection (a)(1) is 49 U.S.C. §§ 44107-11, for civil aircraft
of the United States. The Assignment of Claims Act of 1940, as amended, provides for notice to contracting and
disbursing officers and to sureties on bonds but does not establish a national filing system and therefore is not
within the scope of subsection (a)(1). An assignee of a claim against the United States may benefit from compliance
with the Assignment of Claims Act. But regardless of whether the assignee complies with that Act, the assignee
must file under this Article in order to perfect its security interest against creditors and transferees of its assignor.
Subsection (a)(1) provides explicitly that the filing requirement of this Article defers only to federal statutes,
regulations, or treaties whose requirements for a security interest's obtaining priority over the rights of a lien creditor
preempt Section 9-310(a). The provision eschews reference to the term "perfection," inasmuch as Section 9-308
specifies the meaning of that term and a preemptive rule may use other terminology.
3. State Statutes. Subsections (a)(2) and (3) exempt from the filing requirements of this Article transactions
covered by State certificate-of-title statutes covering motor vehicles and the like. The description of certificate-of-title
statutes in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) tracks the language of the definition of "certificate of title" in Section 9-102.
For a discussion of the operation of state certificate-of-title statutes in interstate contexts, see the Comments to
Section 9-303.
Some states have enacted central filing statutes with respect to secured transactions in kinds of property that are
of special importance in the local economy. Subsection (a)(2) defers to these statutes with respect to filing for that
property.
4. Inventory Covered by Certificate of Title. Under subsection (d), perfection of a security interest in the
inventory of a person in the business of selling goods of that kind is governed by the normal perfection rules, even if
the inventory is subject to a certificate-of-title statute. Compliance with a certificate-of-title statute is both
unnecessary and ineffective to perfect a security interest in inventory to which this subsection applies. Thus, a
secured party who finances an automobile dealer that is in the business of selling and leasing its inventory of
automobiles can perfect a security interest in all the automobiles by filing a financing statement but not by
compliance with a certificate-of-title statute.
Subsection (d), and thus the filing and other perfection provisions of this Article, does not apply to inventory that is
subject to a certificate-of-title statute and is of a kind that the debtor is not in the business of selling. For example, if
goods are subject to a certificate-of-title statute and the debtor is in the business of leasing but not of selling, goods
of that kind, the other subsections of this section govern perfection of a security interest in the goods. The fact that
the debtor eventually sells the goods does not, of itself, mean that the debtor "is in the business of selling goods of
that kind."
The filing and other perfection provisions of this Article apply to goods subject to a certificate-of-title statute only
"during any period in which collateral is inventory held for sale or lease or leased." If the debtor takes goods of this
kind out of inventory and uses them, say, as equipment, a filed financing statement would not remain effective to
perfect a security interest.
5. Compliance with Perfection Requirements of Other Statute. Subsection (b) makes clear that compliance
with the perfection requirements (i.e., the requirements for obtaining priority over a lien creditor), but not other
requirements, of a statute, regulation, or treaty described in subsection (a) is sufficient for perfection under this
Article. Perfection of a security interest under such a statute, regulation, or treaty has all the consequences of
perfection under this Article.
§ 9-311. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN PROPERTY SUBJECT TO CERTAIN STATUTES,
REGULATIONS, AND TREATIES
Page 3 of 4
The interplay of this section with certain certificate-of-title statutes may create confusion and uncertainty. For
example, statutes under which perfection does not occur until a certificate of title is issued will create a gap between
the time that the goods are covered by the certificate under Section 9-303 and the time of perfection. If the gap is
long enough, it may result in turning some unobjectionable transactions into avoidable preferences under
Bankruptcy Code Section 547. (The preference risk arises if more than 30 days passes between the time a security
interest attaches (or the debtor receives possession of the collateral, in the case of a purchase-money security
interest) and the time it is perfected.) Accordingly, the Legislative Note to this section instructs the legislature to
amend the applicable certificate-of-title statute to provide that perfection occurs upon receipt by the appropriate
State official of a properly tendered application for a certificate of title on which the security interest is to be
indicated.
Under some certificate-of-title statutes, including the Uniform Motor Vehicle Certificate of Title and Anti-Theft Act,
perfection generally occurs upon delivery of specified documents to a state official but may, under certain
circumstances, relate back to the time of attachment. This relation-back feature can create great difficulties for the
application of the rules in Sections 9-303 and 9-311(b). Accordingly, the Legislative Note also recommends to
legislatures that they remove any relation-back provisions from certificate-of-title statutes affecting security
interests.
6. Compliance with Perfection Requirements of Other Statute as Equivalent to Filing. Under Subsection (b),
compliance with the perfection requirements (i.e., the requirements for obtaining priority over a lien creditor) of a
statute, regulation, or treaty described in subsection (a) "is equivalent to the filing of a financing statement."
The quoted phrase appeared in former Section 9-302(3). Its meaning was unclear, and many questions arose
concerning the extent to which and manner in which Article 9 rules referring to "filing" were applicable to perfection
by compliance with a certificate-of-title statute. This Article takes a variety of approaches for applying Article 9's
filing rules to compliance with other statutes and treaties. First, as discussed above in Comment 5, it leaves the
determination of some rules, such as the rule establishing time of perfection (Section 9-516(a)), to the other statutes
themselves. Second, this Article explicitly applies some Article 9 filing rules to perfection under other statutes or
treaties. See, e.g., Section 9-505. Third, this Article makes other Article 9 rules applicable to security interests
perfected by compliance with another statute through the "equivalent to . . . filing" provision in the first sentence of
Section 9-311(b). The third approach is reflected for the most part in occasional Comments explaining how
particular rules apply when perfection is accomplished under Section 9-311(b). See, e.g., Section 9-310, Comment
4; Section 9-315, Comment 6; Section 9-317, Comment 8. The absence of a Comment indicating that a particular
filing provision applies to perfection pursuant to Section 9-311(b) does not mean the provision is inapplicable.
7. Perfection by Possession of Goods Covered by Certificate-of-Title Statute. A secured party who holds a
security interest perfected under the law of State A in goods that subsequently are covered by a State B certificate
of title may face a predicament. Ordinarily, the secured party will have four months under State B's Section 9-316(c)
and (d) in which to reperfect as against a purchaser of the goods by having its security interest noted on a State B
certificate. This procedure is likely to require the cooperation of the debtor and any competing secured party whose
security interest has been noted on the certificate. Comment 4(e) to former Section 9-103 observed that "that
cooperation is not likely to be forthcoming from an owner who wrongfully procured the issuance of a new certificate
not showing the out-of-state security interest, or from a local secured party finding himself in a priority contest with
the out-of-state secured party." According to that Comment, "the only solution for the out-of-state secured party
under present certificate of title statutes seems to be to reperfect by possession, i.e., by repossessing the goods."
But the "solution" may not have worked: Former Section 9-302(4) provided that a security interest in property
subject to a certificate-of-title statute "can be perfected only by compliance therewith."
Sections 9-316(d) and (e), 9-311(c), and 9-313(b) of this Article resolve the conflict by providing that a security
interest that remains perfected solely by virtue of Section 9-316(e) can be reperfected by the secured party's taking
possession of the collateral. These sections contemplate only that taking possession of goods covered by a
certificate of title will work as a method of perfection. None of these sections creates a right to take possession.
Section 9-609 and the agreement of the parties define the secured party's right to take possession.
§ 9-311. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN PROPERTY SUBJECT TO CERTAIN STATUTES,
REGULATIONS, AND TREATIES
Page 4 of 4
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-312
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 2. PERFECTION
§ 9-312. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN CHATTEL PAPER,
DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS, DOCUMENTS, GOODS COVERED BY DOCUMENTS,
INSTRUMENTS, INVESTMENT PROPERTY, LETTER-OF-CREDIT RIGHTS,
AND MONEY; PERFECTION BY PERMISSIVE FILING; TEMPORARY
PERFECTION WITHOUT FILING OR TRANSFER OF POSSESSION
(a) [Perfection by filing permitted.] A security interest in chattel paper, negotiable documents,
instruments, or investment property may be perfected by filing.
(b) [Control or possession of certain collateral.] Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-315(c) and
(d) for proceeds:
(1) a security interest in a deposit account may be perfected only by control under Section 9-314;
(2) and except as otherwise provided in Section 9-308(d), a security interest in a letter-of-credit right
may be perfected only by control under Section 9-314; and
(3) a security interest in money may be perfected only by the secured party's taking possession under
Section 9-313.
(c) [Goods covered by negotiable document.] While goods are in the possession of a bailee that has
issued a negotiable document covering the goods:
(1) a security interest in the goods may be perfected by perfecting a security interest in the document;
and
(2) a security interest perfected in the document has priority over any security interest that becomes
perfected in the goods by another method during that time.
(d) [Goods covered by nonnegotiable document.] While goods are in the possession of a bailee that
has issued a nonnegotiable document covering the goods, a security interest in the goods may be
perfected by:
(1) issuance of a document in the name of the secured party;
(2) the bailee's receipt of notification of the secured party's interest; or
(3) filing as to the goods.
(e) [Temporary perfection: new value.] A security interest in certificated securities, negotiable
documents, or instruments is perfected without filing or the taking of possession or control for a period of 20
days from the time it attaches to the extent that it arises for new value given under an authenticated
security agreement.
(f) [Temporary perfection: goods or documents made available to debtor.] A perfected security
interest in a negotiable document or goods in possession of a bailee, other than one that has issued a
negotiable document for the goods, remains perfected for 20 days without filing if the secured party makes
available to the debtor the goods or documents representing the goods for the purpose of:
(1) ultimate sale or exchange; or
§ 9-312. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN CHATTEL PAPER, DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS,
DOCUMENTS, GOODS COVERED BY DOCUMENTS, INSTRUMENTS, INVESTME NT PROPERTY,
LETTER-O....
Page 2 of 4
(2) loading, unloading, storing, shipping, transshipping, manufacturing, processing, or otherwise
dealing with them in a manner preliminary to their sale or exchange.
(g) [Temporary perfection: delivery of security certificate or instrument to debtor.] A perfected
security interest in a certificated security or instrument remains perfected for 20 days without filing if the
secured party delivers the security certificate or instrument to the debtor for the purpose of:
(1) ultimate sale or exchange; or
(2) presentation, collection, enforcement, renewal, or registration of transfer.
(h) [Expiration of temporary perfection.] After the 20-day period specified in subsection (e), (f), or (g)
expires, perfection depends upon compliance with this article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-304, with additions and some changes.
2. Instruments. Under subsection (a), a security interest in instruments may be perfected by filing. This rule
represents an important change from former Article 9, under which the secured party's taking possession of an
instrument was the only method of achieving long-term perfection. The rule is likely to be particularly useful in
transactions involving a large number of notes that a debtor uses as collateral but continues to collect from the
makers. A security interest perfected by filing is subject to defeat by certain subsequent purchasers (including
secured parties). Under Section 9-330(d), purchasers for value who take possession of an instrument without
knowledge that the purchase violates the rights of the secured party generally would achieve priority over a security
interest in the instrument perfected by filing. In addition, Section 9-331 provides that filing a financing statement
does not constitute notice that would preclude a subsequent purchaser from becoming a holder in due course and
taking free of all claims under Section 3-306.
3. Chattel Paper; Negotiable Documents. Subsection (a) further provides that filing is available as a method of
perfection for security interests in chattel paper and negotiable documents. Tangible chattel paper is sometimes
delivered to the assignee, and sometimes left in the hands of the assignor for collection. Subsection (a) allows the
assignee to perfect its security interest by filing in the latter case. Alternatively, the assignee may perfect by taking
possession. See Section 9-313(a). An assignee of electronic chattel paper may perfect by taking control. See
Sections 9-314(a), 9-105. The security interest of an assignee who takes possession or control may qualify for
priority over a competing security interest perfected by filing. See Section 9-330.
Negotiable documents may be, and usually are, delivered to the secured party. See Article 1, Section 1-201
(definition of "delivery"). The secured party's taking possession of a tangible document or control of an electronic
document will suffice as a perfection step. See Sections 9-313(a), 9-314 and 7-106. However, as is the case with
chattel paper, a security interest in a negotiable document may be perfected by filing.
4. Investment Property. A security interest in investment property, including certificated securities, uncertificated
securities, security entitlements, and securities accounts, may be perfected by filing. However, security interests
created by brokers, securities intermediaries, or commodity intermediaries are automatically perfected; filing is of no
effect. See Section 9-309(10), (11). A security interest in all kinds of investment property also may be perfected by
control, see Sections 9-314, 9-106, and a security interest in a certificated security also may be perfected by the
secured party's taking delivery under Section 8-301. See Section 9-313(a). A security interest perfected only by
filing is subordinate to a conflicting security interest perfected by control or delivery. See Section 9-328(1), (5).
§ 9-312. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN CHATTEL PAPER, DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS,
DOCUMENTS, GOODS COVERED BY DOCUMENTS, INSTRUMENTS, INVESTME NT PROPERTY,
LETTER-O....
Page 3 of 4
Thus, although filing is a permissible method of perfection, a secured party who perfects by filing takes the risk that
the debtor has granted or will grant a security interest in the same collateral to another party who obtains control.
Also, perfection by filing would not give the secured party protection against other types of adverse claims, since
the Article 8 adverse claim cut-off rules require control. See Section 8-510.
5. Deposit Accounts. Under new subsection (b)(1), the only method of perfecting a security interest in a deposit
account as original collateral is by control. Filing is ineffective, except as provided in Section 9-315 with respect to
proceeds. As explained in Section 9-104, "control" can arise as a result of an agreement among the secured party,
debtor, and bank, whereby the bank agrees to comply with instructions of the secured party with respect to
disposition of the funds on deposit, even though the debtor retains the right to direct disposition of the funds. Thus,
subsection (b)(1) takes an intermediate position between certain non-UCC law, which conditions the effectiveness
of a security interest on the secured party's enjoyment of such dominion and control over the deposit account that
the debtor is unable to dispose of the funds, and the approach this Article takes to securities accounts, under which
a secured party who is unable to reach the collateral without resort to judicial process may perfect by filing. By
conditioning perfection on "control," rather than requiring the secured party to enjoy absolute dominion to the
exclusion of the debtor, subsection (b)(1) permits perfection in a wide variety of transactions, including those in
which the secured party actually relies on the deposit account in extending credit and maintains some meaningful
dominion over it, but does not wish to deprive the debtor of access to the funds altogether.
6. Letter-of-Credit Rights. Letter-of-credit rights commonly are "supporting obligations," as defined in Section 9-
102. Perfection as to the related account, chattel paper, document, general intangible, instrument, or investment
property will perfect as to the letter-of-credit rights. See Section 9-308(d). Subsection (b)(2) provides that, in other
cases, a security interest in a letter-of-credit right may be perfected only by control. "Control," for these purposes, is
explained in Section 9-107.
7. Goods Covered by Document of Title. Subsection (c) applies to goods in the possession of a bailee who has
issued a negotiable document covering the goods. Subsection (d) applies to goods in the possession of a bailee
who has issued a nonnegotiable document of title, including a document of title that is "non-negotiable" under
Section 7-104. Section 9-313 governs perfection of a security interest in goods in the possession of a bailee who
has not issued a document of title.
Subsection (c) clarifies the perfection and priority rules in former Section 9-304(2). Consistently with the
provisions of Article 7, subsection (c) takes the position that, as long as a negotiable document covering goods is
outstanding, title to the goods is, so to say, locked up in the document. Accordingly, a security interest in goods
covered by a negotiable document may be perfected by perfecting a security interest in the document. The security
interest also may be perfected by another method, e.g., by filing. The priority rule in subsection (c) governs only
priority between (i) a security interest in goods which is perfected by perfecting in the document and (ii) a security
interest in the goods which becomes perfected by another method while the goods are covered by the document.
Example 1: While wheat is in a grain elevator and covered by a negotiable warehouse receipt, Debtor creates a
security interest in the wheat in favor of SP-1 and SP-2. SP-1 perfects by filing a financing statement covering
"wheat." Thereafter, SP-2 perfects by filing a financing statement describing the warehouse receipt. Subsection
(c)(1) provides that SP-2's security interest is perfected. Subsection (c)(2) provides that SP-2's security interest is
senior to SP-1's.
Example 2: The facts are as in Example 1, but SP-1's security interest attached and was perfected before the
goods were delivered to the grain elevator. Subsection (c)(2) does not apply, because SP-1's security interest did
not become perfected during the time that the wheat was in the possession of a bailee. Rather, the first-to-file-orperfect
priority rule applies. See Sections 9-322 and 7-503.
A secured party may become "a holder to whom a negotiable document of title has been duly negotiated" under
Section 7-501. If so, the secured party acquires the rights specified by Article 7. Article 9 does not limit those rights,
which may include the right to priority over an earlier-perfected security interest. See Section 9-331(a).
§ 9-312. PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN CHATTEL PAPER, DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS,
DOCUMENTS, GOODS COVERED BY DOCUMENTS, INSTRUMENTS, INVESTME NT PROPERTY,
LETTER-O....
Page 4 of 4
Subsection (d) takes a different approach to the problem of goods covered by a nonnegotiable document. Here,
title to the goods is not looked on as being locked up in the document, and the secured party may perfect its
security interest directly in the goods by filing as to them. The subsection provides two other methods of perfection:
issuance of the document in the secured party's name (as consignee of a straight bill of lading or the person to
whom delivery would be made under a non-negotiable warehouse receipt) and receipt of notification of the secured
party's interest by the bailee. Perfection under subsection (d) occurs when the bailee receives notification of the
secured party's interest in the goods, regardless of who sends the notification. Receipt of notification is effective to
perfect, regardless of whether the bailee responds. Unlike former Section 9-304(3), from which it derives,
subsection (d) does not apply to goods in the possession of a bailee who has not issued a document of title.
Section 9-313(c) covers that case and provides that perfection by possession as to goods not covered by a
document requires the bailee's acknowledgment.
8. Temporary Perfection Without Having First Otherwise Perfected. Subsection (e) follows former Section 9-
304(4) in giving perfected status to security interests in certificated securities, instruments, and negotiable
documents for a short period (reduced from 21 to 20 days, which is the time period generally applicable in this
Article), although there has been no filing and the collateral is in the debtor's possession or control. The 20-day
temporary perfection runs from the date of attachment. There is no limitation on the purpose for which the debtor is
in possession, but the secured party must have given "new value" (defined in Section 9-102) under an
authenticated security agreement.
9. Maintaining Perfection After Surrendering Possession. There are a variety of legitimate reasons-many of
them are described in subsections (f) and (g)-why certain types of collateral must be released temporarily to a
debtor. No useful purpose would be served by cluttering the files with records of such exceedingly short term
transactions.
Subsection (f) affords the possibility of 20-day perfection in negotiable documents and goods in the possession of
a bailee but not covered by a negotiable document. Subsection (g) provides for 20-day perfection in certificated
securities and instruments. These subsections derive from former Section 9-305(5). However, the period of
temporary perfection has been reduced from 21 to 20 days, which is the time period generally applicable in this
Article, and "enforcement" has been added in subsection (g) as one of the special and limited purposes for which a
secured party can release an instrument or certificated security to the debtor and still remain perfected. The period
of temporary perfection runs from the date a secured party who already has a perfected security interest turns over
the collateral to the debtor. There is no new value requirement, but the turnover must be for one or more of the
purposes stated in subsection (f) or (g). The 20-day period may be extended by perfecting as to the collateral by
another method before the period expires. However, if the security interest is not perfected by another method until
after the 20-day period expires, there will be a gap during which the security interest is unperfected.
Temporary perfection extends only to the negotiable document or goods under subsection (f) and only to the
certificated security or instrument under subsection (g). It does not extend to proceeds. If the collateral is sold, the
security interest will continue in the proceeds for the period specified in Section 9-315.
Subsections (f) and (g) deal only with perfection. Other sections of this Article govern the priority of a security
interest in goods after surrender of possession or control of the document covering them. In the case of a purchasemoney
security interest in inventory, priority may be conditioned upon giving notification to a prior inventory
financer. See Section 9-324.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-313
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 2. PERFECTION
§ 9-313. WHEN POSSESSION BY OR DELIVERY TO SECURED PARTY
PERFECTS SECURITY INTEREST WITHOUT FILING
(a) [Perfection by possession or delivery.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), a secured
party may perfect a security interest in tangible negotiable documents, goods, instruments, money, or
tangible chattel paper by taking possession of the collateral. A secured party may perfect a security interest
in certificated securities by taking delivery of the certificated securities under Section 8-301.
(b) [Goods covered by certificate of title.] With respect to goods covered by a certificate of title issued
by this State, a secured party may perfect a security interest in the goods by taking possession of the
goods only in the circumstances described in Section 9-316(d).
(c) [Collateral in possession of person other than debtor.] With respect to collateral other than
certificated securities and goods covered by a document, a secured party takes possession of collateral in
the possession of a person other than the debtor, the secured party, or a lessee of the collateral from the
debtor in the ordinary course of the debtor's business, when:
(1) the person in possession authenticates a record acknowledging that it holds possession of the
collateral for the secured party's benefit; or
(2) the person takes possession of the collateral after having authenticated a record acknowledging
that it will hold possession of collateral for the secured party's benefit.
(d) [Time of perfection by possession; continuation of perfection.] If perfection of a security interest
depends upon possession of the collateral by a secured party, perfection occurs no earlier than the time the
secured party takes possession and continues only while the secured party retains possession.
(e) [Time of perfection by delivery; continuation of perfection.] A security interest in a certificated
security in registered form is perfected by delivery when delivery of the certificated security occurs under
Section 8-301 and remains perfected by delivery until the debtor obtains possession of the security
certificate.
(f) [Acknowledgment not required.] A person in possession of collateral is not required to acknowledge
that it holds possession for a secured party's benefit.
(g) [Effectiveness of acknowledgment; no duties or confirmation.] If a person acknowledges that it
holds possession for the secured party's benefit:
(1) the acknowledgment is effective under subsection (c) or Section 8-301(a), even if the
acknowledgment violates the rights of a debtor; and
(2) unless the person otherwise agrees or law other than this article otherwise provides, the person
does not owe any duty to the secured party and is not required to confirm the acknowledgment to
another person.
(h) [Secured party's delivery to person other than debtor.] A secured party having possession of
collateral does not relinquish possession by delivering the collateral to a person other than the debtor or a
lessee of the collateral from the debtor in the ordinary course of the debtor's business if the person was
instructed before the delivery or is instructed contemporaneously with the delivery:
(1) to hold possession of the collateral for the secured party's benefit; or
§ 9-313. WHEN POSSESSION BY OR DELIVERY TO SECURED PARTY PERFECTS SECURITY INTEREST
WITHOUT FILING
Page 2 of 4
(2) to redeliver the collateral to the secured party.
(i) [Effect of delivery under subsection (h); no duties or confirmation.] A secured party does not
relinquish possession, even if a delivery under subsection (h) violates the rights of a debtor. A person to
which collateral is delivered under subsection (h) does not owe any duty to the secured party and is not
required to confirm the delivery to another person unless the person otherwise agrees or law other than this
article otherwise provides.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Sections 9-305, 9-115(6).
2. Perfection by Possession. As under the common law of pledge, no filing is required by this Article to perfect a
security interest if the secured party takes possession of the collateral. See Section 9-310(b)(6).
This section permits a security interest to be perfected by the taking of possession only when the collateral is
goods, instruments, tangible negotiable documents, money, or tangible chattel paper. Accounts, commercial tort
claims, deposit accounts, investment property, letter-of-credit rights, letters of credit, and oil, gas, or other minerals
before extraction are excluded. (But see Comment 6, below, regarding certificated securities.) A security interest in
accounts and payment intangibles--property not ordinarily represented by any writing whose delivery operates to
transfer the right to payment--may under this Article be perfected only by filing. This rule would not be affected by
the fact that a security agreement or other record described the assignment of such collateral as a "pledge." Section
9-309(2) exempts from filing certain assignments of accounts or payment intangibles which are out of the ordinary
course of financing. These exempted assignments are perfected when they attach. Similarly, under Section 9-
309(3), sales of payment intangibles are automatically perfected.
3. "Possession." This section does not define "possession." It adopts the general concept as it developed under
former Article 9. As under former Article 9, in determining whether a particular person has possession, the
principles of agency apply. For example, if the collateral is in possession of an agent of the secured party for the
purposes of possessing on behalf of the secured party, and if the agent is not also an agent of the debtor, the
secured party has taken actual possession, and subsection (c) does not apply. Sometimes a person holds collateral
both as an agent of the secured party and as an agent of the debtor. The fact of dual agency is not of itself
inconsistent with the secured party's having taken possession (and thereby having rendered subsection (c)
inapplicable). The debtor cannot qualify as an agent for the secured party for purposes of the secured party's taking
possession. And, under appropriate circumstances, a court may determine that a person in possession is so closely
connected to or controlled by the debtor that the debtor has retained effective possession, even though the person
may have agreed to take possession on behalf of the secured party. If so, the person's taking possession would not
constitute the secured party's taking possession and would not be sufficient for perfection. See also Section 9-
205(b). In a typical escrow arrangement, where the escrowee has possession of collateral as agent for both the
secured party and the debtor, the debtor's relationship to the escrowee is not such as to constitute retention of
possession by the debtor.
4. Goods in Possession of Third Party: Perfection. Former Section 9-305 permitted perfection of a security
interest by notification to a bailee in possession of collateral. This Article distinguishes between goods in the
possession of a bailee who has issued a document of title covering the goods and goods in the possession of a
third party who has not issued a document. Section 9-312(c) or (d) applies to the former, depending on whether the
document is negotiable. Section 9-313(c) applies to the latter. It provides a method of perfection by possession
when the collateral is possessed by a third person who is not the secured party's agent.
§ 9-313. WHEN POSSESSION BY OR DELIVERY TO SECURED PARTY PERFECTS SECURITY INTEREST
WITHOUT FILING
Page 3 of 4
Notification of a third person does not suffice to perfect under Section 9-313(c). Rather, perfection does not occur
unless the third person authenticates an acknowledgment that it holds possession of the collateral for the secured
party's benefit. Compare Section 9-312(d), under which receipt of notification of the security party's interest by a
bailee holding goods covered by a nonnegotiable document is sufficient to perfect, even if the bailee does not
acknowledge receipt of the notification. A third person may acknowledge that it will hold for the secured party's
benefit goods to be received in the future. Under these circumstances, perfection by possession occurs when the
third person obtains possession of the goods.
Under subsection (c), acknowledgment of notification by a "lessee . . . in . . . ordinary course of . . . business"
(defined in Section 2A-103) does not suffice for possession. The section thus rejects the reasoning of In re Atlantic
Systems, Inc., 135 B.R. 463 (Bankr. S.D.N.Y. 1992) (holding that notification to debtor-lessor's lessee sufficed to
perfect security interest in leased goods). See Steven O. Weise, Perfection by Possession: The Need for an
Objective Test, 29 Idaho Law Rev. 705 (1992-93) (arguing that lessee's possession in ordinary course of debtorlessor's
business does not provide adequate public notice of possible security interest in leased goods). Inclusion of
a per se rule concerning lessees is not meant to preclude a court, under appropriate circumstances, from
determining that a third person is so closely connected to or controlled by the debtor that the debtor has retained
effective possession. If so, the third person's acknowledgment would not be sufficient for perfection.
In some cases, it may be uncertain whether a person who has possession of collateral is an agent of the secured
party or a non-agent bailee. Under those circumstances, prudence might suggest that the secured party obtain the
person's acknowledgment to avoid litigation and ensure perfection by possession regardless of how the relationship
between the secured party and the person is characterized.
5. No Relation Back. Former Section 9-305 provided that a security interest is perfected by possession from the
time possession is taken "without a relation back." As the Comment to former Section 9-305 observed, the relationback
theory, under which the taking of possession was deemed to relate back to the date of the original security
agreement, has had little vitality since the 1938 revision of the Federal Bankruptcy Act. The theory is inconsistent
with former Article 9 and with this Article. See Section 9-313(d). Accordingly, this Article deletes the quoted phrase
as unnecessary. Where a pledge transaction is contemplated, perfection dates only from the time possession is
taken, although a security interest may attach, unperfected. The only exceptions to this rule are the short, 20-day
periods of perfection provided in Section 9-312(e), (f), and (g), during which a debtor may have possession of
specified collateral in which there is a perfected security interest.
6. Certificated Securities. The second sentence of subsection (a) reflects the traditional rule for perfection of a
security interest in certificated securities. Compare Section 9-115(6) (1994 Official Text); Sections 8-321, 8-
313(1)(a) (1978 Official Text); Section 9-305 (1972 Official Text). It has been modified to refer to "delivery" under
Section 8-301. Corresponding changes appear in Section 9-203(b).
Subsections (e), (f), and (g), which are new, apply to a person in possession of security certificates or holding
security certificates for the secured party's benefit under Section 8-301. For delivery to occur when a person other
than a secured party holds possession for the secured party, the person may not be a securities intermediary.
Under subsection (e), a possessory security interest in a certificated security remains perfected until the debtor
obtains possession of the security certificate. This rule is analogous to that of Section 9-314(c), which deals with
perfection of security interests in investment property by control. See Section 9-314, Comment 3.
7. Goods Covered by Certificate of Title. Subsection (b) is necessary to effect changes to the choice-of-law
rules governing goods covered by a certificate of title. These changes are described in the Comments to Section 9-
311. Subsection (b), like subsection (a), does not create a right to take possession. Rather, it indicates the
circumstances under which the secured party's taking possession of goods covered by a certificate of title is
effective to perfect a security interest in the goods: the goods become covered by a certificate of title issued by this
State at a time when the security interest is perfected by any method under the law of another jurisdiction.
§ 9-313. WHEN POSSESSION BY OR DELIVERY TO SECURED PARTY PERFECTS SECURITY INTEREST
WITHOUT FILING
Page 4 of 4
8. Goods in Possession of Third Party: No Duty to Acknowledge; Consequences of Acknowledgment.
Subsections (f) and (g) are new and address matters as to which former Article 9 was silent. They derive in part
from Section 8-106(g). Subsection (f) provides that a person in possession of collateral is not required to
acknowledge that it holds for a secured party. Subsection (g)(1) provides that an acknowledgment is effective even
if wrongful as to the debtor. Subsection (g)(2) makes clear that an acknowledgment does not give rise to any duties
or responsibilities under this Article. Arrangements involving the possession of goods are hardly standardized. They
include bailments for services to be performed on the goods (such as repair or processing), for use (leases), as
security (pledges), for carriage, and for storage. This Article leaves to the agreement of the parties and to any other
applicable law the imposition of duties and responsibilities upon a person who acknowledges under subsection (c).
For example, by acknowledging, a third party does not become obliged to act on the secured party's direction or to
remain in possession of the collateral unless it agrees to do so or other law so provides.
9. Delivery to Third Party by Secured Party. New subsections (h) and (i) address the practice of mortgage
warehouse lenders. These lenders typically send mortgage notes to prospective purchasers under cover of letters
advising the prospective purchasers that the lenders hold security interests in the notes. These lenders relied on
notification to maintain perfection under former 9-305. Requiring them to obtain authenticated acknowledgments
from each prospective purchaser under subsection (c) could be unduly burdensome and disruptive of established
practices. Under subsection (h), when a secured party in possession itself delivers the collateral to a third party,
instructions to the third party would be sufficient to maintain perfection by possession; an acknowledgment would
not be necessary. Under subsection (i), the secured party does not relinquish possession by making a delivery
under subsection (h), even if the delivery violates the rights of the debtor. That subsection also makes clear that a
person to whom collateral is delivered under subsection (h) does not owe any duty to the secured party and is not
required to confirm the delivery to another person unless the person otherwise agrees or law other than this Article
provides otherwise.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-314
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 2. PERFECTION
§ 9-314. PERFECTION BY CONTROL
(a) [Perfection by control.] A security interest in investment property, deposit accounts, letter-of-credit
rights, electronic chattel paper, or electronic documents may be perfected by control of the collateral under
Section 7-106, 9-104, 9-105, 9-106, or 9-107.
(b) [Specified collateral: time of perfection by control; continuation of perfection.] A security interest
in deposit accounts, electronic chattel paper, letter-of-credit rights, or electronic documents is perfected by
control under Section 7-106, 9-104, 9-105, or 9-107 when the secured party obtains control and remains
perfected by control only while the secured party retains control.
(c) [Investment property: time of perfection by control; continuation of perfection.] A security
interest in investment property is perfected by control under Section 9-106 from the time the secured party
obtains control and remains perfected by control until:
(1) the secured party does not have control; and
(2) one of the following occurs:
(A) if the collateral is a certificated security, the debtor has or acquires possession of the security
certificate;
(B) if the collateral is an uncertificated security, the issuer has registered or registers the debtor as
the registered owner; or
(C) if the collateral is a security entitlement, the debtor is or becomes the entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Substantially new; derived in part from former Section 9-115(4).
2. Control. This section provides for perfection by control with respect to investment property, deposit accounts,
letter-of-credit rights, and electronic chattel paper, and electronic documents. For explanations of how a secured
party takes control of these types of collateral, see Sections 9-104 through 9-107 and Section 7-106. Subsection (b)
explains when a security interest is perfected by control and how long a security interest remains perfected by
control. Like Section 9-313(d) and for the same reasons, subsection (b) makes no reference to the doctrine of
"relation back." See Section 9-313, Comment 5. As to an electronic document that is reissued in a tangible
medium, Section 7-105, a secured party that is perfected by control in the electronic document should file as to the
document before relinquishing control in order to maintain continuous perfection in the document. See Section 9-
308.
3.Investment Property. Subsection (c) provides a special rule for investment property. Once a secured party has
control, its security interest remains perfected by control until the secured party ceases to have control and the
debtor receives possession of collateral that is a certificated security, becomes the registered owner of collateral
§ 9-314. PERFECTION BY CONTROL
Page 2 of 2
that is an uncertificated security, or becomes the entitlement holder of collateral that is a security entitlement. The
result is particularly important in the "repledge" context. See Section 9-207, Comment 5.
In a transaction in which a secured party who has control grants a security interest in investment property or sells
outright the investment property, by virtue of the debtor's consent or applicable legal rules, a purchaser from the
secured party typically will cut off the debtor's rights in the investment property or be immune from the debtor's
claims. See Section 9-207, Comments 5 and 6. If the investment property is a security, the debtor normally would
retain no interest in the security following the purchase from the secured party, and a claim of the debtor against the
secured party for redemption (Section 9-623) or otherwise with respect to the security would be a purely personal
claim. If the investment property transferred by the secured party is a financial asset in which the debtor had a
security entitlement credited to a securities account maintained with the secured party as a securities intermediary,
the debtor's claim against the secured party could arise as a part of its securities account notwithstanding its
personal nature. (This claim would be analogous to a "credit balance" in the securities account, which is a
component of the securities account even though it is a personal claim against the intermediary.) In the case in
which the debtor may retain an interest in investment property notwithstanding a repledge or sale by the secured
party, subsection (c) makes clear that the security interest will remain perfected by control.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-315
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 2. PERFECTION
§ 9-315. SECURED PARTY'S RIGHTS ON DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
AND IN PROCEEDS
(a) [Disposition of collateral: continuation of security interest or agricultural lien; proceeds.] Except
as otherwise provided in this article and in Section 2-403(2):
(1) a security interest or agricultural lien continues in collateral notwithstanding sale, lease, license,
exchange, or other disposition thereof unless the secured party authorized the disposition free of the
security interest or agricultural lien; and
(2) a security interest attaches to any identifiable proceeds of collateral.
(b) [When commingled proceeds identifiable.] Proceeds that are commingled with other property are
identifiable proceeds:
(1) if the proceeds are goods, to the extent provided by Section 9-336; and
(2) if the proceeds are not goods, to the extent that the secured party identifies the proceeds by a
method of tracing, including application of equitable principles, that is permitted under law other than
this article with respect to commingled property of the type involved.
(c) [Perfection of security interest in proceeds.] A security interest in proceeds is a perfected security
interest if the security interest in the original collateral was perfected.
(d) [Continuation of perfection.] A perfected security interest in proceeds becomes unperfected on the
21st day after the security interest attaches to the proceeds unless:
(1) the following conditions are satisfied:
(A) a filed financing statement covers the original collateral;
(B) the proceeds are collateral in which a security interest may be perfected by filing in the office in
which the financing statement has been filed; and
(C) the proceeds are not acquired with cash proceeds;
(2) the proceeds are identifiable cash proceeds; or
(3) the security interest in the proceeds is perfected other than under subsection (c) when the security
interest attaches to the proceeds or within 20 days thereafter.
(e) [When perfected security interest in proceeds becomes unperfected.] If a filed financing statement
covers the original collateral, a security interest in proceeds which remains perfected under subsection
(d)(1) becomes unperfected at the later of:
(1) when the effectiveness of the filed financing statement lapses under Section 9-515 or is terminated
under Section 9-513; or
(2) the 21st day after the security interest attaches to the proceeds.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 9-315. SECURED PARTY'S RIGHTS ON DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL AND IN PROCEEDS
Page 2 of 4
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-306.
2. Continuation of Security Interest or Agricultural Lien Following Disposition of Collateral. Subsection
(a)(1), which derives from former Section 9-306(2), contains the general rule that a security interest survives
disposition of the collateral. In these cases, the secured party may repossess the collateral from the transferee or,
in an appropriate case, maintain an action for conversion. The secured party may claim both any proceeds and the
original collateral but, of course, may have only one satisfaction.
In many cases, a purchaser or other transferee of collateral will take free of a security interest, and the secured
party's only right will be to proceeds. For example, the general rule does not apply, and a security interest does not
continue in collateral, if the secured party authorized the disposition, in the agreement that contains the security
agreement or otherwise. Subsection (a)(1) adopts the view of PEB Commentary No. 3 and makes explicit that the
authorized disposition to which it refers is an authorized disposition "free of" the security interest or agricultural lien.
The secured party's right to proceeds under this section or under the express terms of an agreement does not in
itself constitute an authorization of disposition. The change in language from former Section 9-306(2) is not
intended to address the frequently litigated situation in which the effectiveness of the secured party's consent to a
disposition is conditioned upon the secured party's receipt of the proceeds. In that situation, subsection (a) leaves
the determination of authorization to the courts, as under former Article 9.
This Article contains several provisions under which a transferee takes free of a security interest or agricultural
lien. For example, Section 9-317 states when transferees take free of unperfected security interests; Sections 9-320
and 9-321 on goods, 9-321 on general intangibles, 9-330 on chattel paper and instruments, and 9-331 on
negotiable instruments, negotiable documents, and securities state when purchasers of such collateral take free of
a security interest, even though perfected and even though the disposition was not authorized. Section 9-332
enables most transferees (including non-purchasers) of funds from a deposit account and most transferees of
money to take free of a perfected security interest in the deposit account or money.
Likewise, the general rule that a security interest survives disposition does not apply if the secured party entrusts
goods collateral to a merchant who deals in goods of that kind and the merchant sells the collateral to a buyer in
ordinary course of business. Section 2-403(2) gives the merchant the power to transfer all the secured party's rights
to the buyer, even if the sale is wrongful as against the secured party. Thus, under subsection (a)(1), an entrusting
secured party runs the same risk as any other entruster.
3. Secured Party's Right to Identifiable Proceeds. Under subsection (a)(2), which derives from former Section
9-306(2), a security interest attaches to any identifiable "proceeds," as defined in Section 9-102. See also Section
9-203(f). Subsection (b) is new. It indicates when proceeds commingled with other property are identifiable
proceeds and permits the use of whatever methods of tracing other law permits with respect to the type of property
involved. Among the "equitable principles" whose use other law may permit is the "lowest intermediate balance
rule." See Restatement (2d), Trusts § 202.
4. Automatic Perfection in Proceeds: General Rule. Under subsection (c), a security interest in proceeds is a
perfected security interest if the security interest in the original collateral was perfected. This Article extends the
period of automatic perfection in proceeds from 10 days to 20 days. Generally, a security interest in proceeds
becomes unperfected on the 21st day after the security interest attaches to the proceeds. See subsection (d). The
loss of perfected status under subsection (d) is prospective only. Compare, e.g., Section 9-515(c) (deeming security
interest unperfected retroactively).
5. Automatic Perfection in Proceeds: Proceeds Acquired with Cash Proceeds. Subsection (d)(1) derives
from former Section 9-306(3)(a). It carries forward the basic rule that a security interest in proceeds remains
perfected beyond the period of automatic perfection if a filed financing statement covers the original collateral (e.g.,
inventory) and the proceeds are collateral in which a security interest may be perfected by filing in the office where
§ 9-315. SECURED PARTY'S RIGHTS ON DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL AND IN PROCEEDS
Page 3 of 4
the financing statement has been filed (e.g., equipment). A different rule applies if the proceeds are acquired with
cash proceeds, as is the case if the original collateral (inventory) is sold for cash (cash proceeds) that is used to
purchase equipment (proceeds). Under these circumstances, the security interest in the equipment proceeds
remains perfected only if the description in the filed financing indicates the type of property constituting the
proceeds (e.g., "equipment").
This section reaches the same result but takes a different approach. It recognizes that the treatment of proceeds
acquired with cash proceeds under former Section 9-306(3)(a) essentially was superfluous. In the example, had the
filing covered "equipment" as well as "inventory," the security interest in the proceeds would have been perfected
under the usual rules governing after-acquired equipment (see former Sections 9-302, 9-303); paragraph (3)(a)
added only an exception to the general rule. Subsection (d)(1)(C) of this section takes a more direct approach. It
makes the general rule of continued perfection inapplicable to proceeds acquired with cash proceeds, leaving
perfection of a security interest in those proceeds to the generally applicable perfection rules under subsection
(d)(3).
Example 1: Lender perfects a security interest in Debtor's inventory by filing a financing statement covering
"inventory." Debtor sells the inventory and deposits the buyer's check into a deposit account. Debtor draws a check
on the deposit account and uses it to pay for equipment. Under the "lowest intermediate balance rule," which is a
permitted method of tracing in the relevant jurisdiction, see Comment 3, the funds used to pay for the equipment
were identifiable proceeds of the inventory. Because the proceeds (equipment) were acquired with cash proceeds
(deposit account), subsection (d)(1) does not extend perfection beyond the 20-day automatic period.
Example 2: Lender perfects a security interest in Debtor's inventory by filing a financing statement covering "all
debtor's property." As in Example 1, Debtor sells the inventory, deposits the buyer's check into a deposit account,
draws a check on the deposit account, and uses the check to pay for equipment. Under the "lowest intermediate
balance rule," which is a permitted method of tracing in the relevant jurisdiction, see Comment 3, the funds used to
pay for the equipment were identifiable proceeds of the inventory. Because the proceeds (equipment) were
acquired with cash proceeds (deposit account), subsection (d)(1) does not extend perfection beyond the 20-day
automatic period. However, because the financing statement is sufficient to perfect a security interest in debtor's
equipment, under subsection (d)(3) the security interest in the equipment proceeds remains perfected beyond the
20-day period.
6. Automatic Perfection in Proceeds: Lapse or Termination of Financing Statement During 20-Day Period;
Perfection Under Other Statute or Treaty. Subsection (e) provides that a security interest in proceeds perfected
under subsection (d)(1) ceases to be perfected when the financing statement covering the original collateral lapses
or is terminated. If the lapse or termination occurs before the 21st day after the security interest attaches, however,
the security interest in the proceeds remains perfected until the 21st day. Section 9-311(b) provides that compliance
with the perfection requirements of a statute or treaty described in Section 9-311(a) "is equivalent to the filing of a
financing statement." It follows that collateral subject to a security interest perfected by such compliance under
Section 9-311(b) is covered by a "filed financing statement" within the meaning of Section 9-315(d) and (e).
7. Automatic Perfection in Proceeds: Continuation of Perfection in Cash Proceeds. Former Section 9-
306(3)(b) provided that if a filed financing statement covered original collateral, a security interest in identifiable
cash proceeds of the collateral remained perfected beyond the ten-day period of automatic perfection. Former
Section 9-306(3)(c) contained a similar rule with respect to identifiable cash proceeds of investment property.
Subsection (d)(2) extends the benefits of former Sections 9-306(3)(b) and (3)(c) to identifiable cash proceeds of all
types of original collateral in which a security interest is perfected by any method. Under subsection (d)(2), if the
security interest in the original collateral was perfected, a security interest in identifiable cash proceeds will remain
perfected indefinitely, regardless of whether the security interest in the original collateral remains perfected. In many
cases, however, a purchaser or other transferee of the cash proceeds will take free of the perfected security
interest. See, e.g., Sections 9-330(d) (purchaser of check), 9-331 (holder in due course of check), 9-332 (transferee
of money or funds from a deposit account).
§ 9-315. SECURED PARTY'S RIGHTS ON DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL AND IN PROCEEDS
Page 4 of 4
8. Insolvency Proceedings; Returned and Repossessed Goods. This Article deletes former Section 9-306(4),
which dealt with proceeds in insolvency proceedings. Except as otherwise provided by the Bankruptcy Code, the
debtor's entering into bankruptcy does not affect a secured party's right to proceeds.
This Article also deletes former Section 9-306(5), which dealt with returned and repossessed goods. Section 9-
330, Comments 9 to 11 explain and clarify the application of priority rules to returned and repossessed goods as
proceeds of chattel paper.
9. Proceeds of Collateral Subject to Agricultural Lien. This Article does not determine whether a lien extends
to proceeds of farm products encumbered by an agricultural lien. If, however, the proceeds are themselves farm
products on which an "agricultural lien" (defined in Section 9-102) arises under other law, then the agricultural-lien
provisions of this Article apply to the agricultural lien on the proceeds in the same way in which they would apply
had the farm products not been proceeds.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-316
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 2. PERFECTION
§ 9-316. EFFECT OF CHANGE IN GOVERNING LAW
(a) [General rule: effect on perfection of change in governing law.] A security interest perfected
pursuant to the law of the jurisdiction designated in Section 9-301(1) or 9-305(c) remains perfected until the
earliest of:
(1) the time perfection would have ceased under the law of that jurisdiction;
(2) the expiration of four months after a change of the debtor's location to another jurisdiction; or
(3) the expiration of one year after a transfer of collateral to a person that thereby becomes a debtor
and is located in another jurisdiction.
(b) [Security interest perfected or unperfected under law of new jurisdiction.] If a security interest
described in subsection (a) becomes perfected under the law of the other jurisdiction before the earliest
time or event described in that subsection, it remains perfected thereafter. If the security interest does not
become perfected under the law of the other jurisdiction before the earliest time or event, it becomes
unperfected and is deemed never to have been perfected as against a purchaser of the collateral for value.
(c) [Possessory security interest in collateral moved to new jurisdiction.] A possessory security
interest in collateral, other than goods covered by a certificate of title and as-extracted collateral consisting
of goods, remains continuously perfected if:
(1) the collateral is located in one jurisdiction and subject to a security interest perfected under the law
of that jurisdiction;
(2) thereafter the collateral is brought into another jurisdiction; and
(3) upon entry into the other jurisdiction, the security interest is perfected under the law of the other
jurisdiction.
(d) [Goods covered by certificate of title from this state.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(e), a security interest in goods covered by a certificate of title which is perfected by any method under the
law of another jurisdiction when the goods become covered by a certificate of title from this State remains
perfected until the security interest would have become unperfected under the law of the other jurisdiction
had the goods not become so covered.
(e) [When subsection (d) security interest becomes unperfected against purchasers.] A security
interest described in subsection (d) becomes unperfected as against a purchaser of the goods for value
and is deemed never to have been perfected as against a purchaser of the goods for value if the applicable
requirements for perfection under Section 9-311(b) or 9-313 are not satisfied before the earlier of:
(1) the time the security interest would have become unperfected under the law of the other jurisdiction
had the goods not become covered by a certificate of title from this State; or
(2) the expiration of four months after the goods had become so covered.
(f) [Change in jurisdiction of bank, issuer, nominated person, securities intermediary, or commodity
intermediary.] A security interest in deposit accounts, letter-of-credit rights, or investment property which
is perfected under the law of the bank's jurisdiction, the issuer's jurisdiction, a nominated person's
jurisdiction, the securities intermediary's jurisdiction, or the commodity intermediary's jurisdiction, as
applicable, remains perfected until the earlier of:
§ 9-316. EFFECT OF CHANGE IN GOVERNING LAW
Page 2 of 6
(1) the time the security interest would have become unperfected under the law of that jurisdiction; or
(2) the expiration of four months after a change of the applicable jurisdiction to another jurisdiction.
(g) [Subsection (f) security interest perfected or unperfected under law of new jurisdiction.] If a
security interest described in subsection (f) becomes perfected under the law of the other jurisdiction before
the earlier of the time or the end of the period described in that subsection, it remains perfected thereafter.
If the security interest does not become perfected under the law of the other jurisdiction before the earlier of
that time or the end of that period, it becomes unperfected and is deemed never to have been perfected as
against a purchaser of the collateral for value.
(h) [Effect on filed financing statement of change in governing law.] The following rules apply to
collateral to which a security interest attaches within four months after the debtor changes its location to
another jurisdiction:
(1) A financing statement filed before the change pursuant to the law of the jurisdiction designated in
Section 9-301(1) or 9-305(c) is effective to perfect a security interest in the collateral if the financing
statement would have been effective to perfect a security interest in the collateral had the debtor not
changed its location.
(2) If a security interest perfected by a financing statement that is effective under paragraph (1)
becomes perfected under the law of the other jurisdiction before the earlier of the time the financing
statement would have become ineffective under the law of the jurisdiction designated in Section 9-
301(1) or 9-305(c) or the expiration of the four-month period, it remains perfected thereafter. If the
security interest does not become perfected under the law of the other jurisdiction before the earlier
time or event, it becomes unperfected and is deemed never to have been perfected as against a
purchaser of the collateral for value.
(i) [Effect of change in governing law on financing statement filed against original debtor.] If a
financing statement naming an original debtor is filed pursuant to the law of the jurisdiction designated in
Section 9-301(1) or 9-305(c) and the new debtor is located in another jurisdiction, the following rules apply:
(1) The financing statement is effective to perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the new
debtor before, and within four months after, the new debtor becomes bound under Section 9-203(d), if
the financing statement would have been effective to perfect a security interest in the collateral had the
collateral been acquired by the original debtor.
(2) A security interest perfected by the financing statement and which becomes perfected under the
law of the other jurisdiction before the earlier of the time the financing statement would have become
ineffective under the law of the jurisdiction designated in Section 9-301(1) or 9-305(c) or the expiration
of the four-month period remains perfected thereafter. A security interest that is perfected by the
financing statement but which does not become perfected under the law of the other jurisdiction before
the earlier time or event becomes unperfected and is deemed never to have been perfected as against
a purchaser of the collateral for value.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-103(1)(d), (2)(b), (3)(e), as modified.
2. Continued Perfection. Subsections (a) through (g) deal with continued perfection of security interests that
have been perfected under the law of another jurisdiction. The fact that the law of a particular jurisdiction ceases to
govern perfection under Sections 9-301 through 9-307 does not necessarily mean that a security interest perfected
§ 9-316. EFFECT OF CHANGE IN GOVERNING LAW
Page 3 of 6
under that law automatically becomes unperfected. To the contrary: This section generally provides that a security
interest perfected under the law of one jurisdiction remains perfected for a fixed period of time (four months or one
year, depending on the circumstances), even though the jurisdiction whose law governs perfection changes.
However, cessation of perfection under the law of the original jurisdiction cuts short the fixed period. The four-month
and one-year periods are long enough for a secured party to discover in most cases that the law of a different
jurisdiction governs perfection and to reperfect (typically by filing) under the law of that jurisdiction. If a secured
party properly reperfects a security interest before it becomes unperfected under subsection (a), then the security
interest remains perfected continuously thereafter. See subsection (b).
Example 1: Debtor is a general partnership whose chief executive office is in Pennsylvania. Lender perfects a
security interest in Debtor's equipment by filing in Pennsylvania on May 15, 2002. On April 1, 2005, without
Lender's knowledge, Debtor moves its chief executive office to New Jersey. Lender's security interest remains
perfected for four months after the move. See subsection (a)(2).
Example 2: Debtor is a general partnership whose chief executive office is in Pennsylvania. Lender perfects a
security interest in Debtor's equipment by filing in Pennsylvania on May 15, 2002. On April 1, 2007, without
Lender's knowledge, Debtor moves its chief executive office to New Jersey. Lender's security interest remains
perfected only through May 14, 2007, when the effectiveness of the filed financing statement lapses. See
subsection (a)(1). Although, under these facts, Lender would have only a short period of time to discover that
Debtor had relocated and to reperfect under New Jersey law, Lender could have protected itself by filing a
continuation statement in Pennsylvania before Debtor relocated. By doing so, Lender would have prevented lapse
and allowed itself the full four months to discover Debtor's new location and refile there or, if Debtor is in default, to
perfect by taking possession of the equipment.
Example 3: Under the facts of Example 2, Lender files a financing statement in New Jersey before the
effectiveness of the Pennsylvania financing statement lapses. Under subsection (b), Lender's security interest is
continuously perfected beyond May 14, 2007, for a period determined by New Jersey's Article 9.
Subsection (a)(3) allows a one-year period in which to reperfect. The longer period is necessary, because, even
with the exercise of due diligence, the secured party may be unable to discover that the collateral has been
transferred to a person located in another jurisdiction. In any event, the period is cut short if the financing statement
becomes ineffective under the law of the jurisdiction in which it is filed.
Example 4: Debtor is a Pennsylvania corporation. On January 1, Lender perfects a security interest in Debtor's
equipment by filing in Pennsylvania. Debtor's shareholders decide to "reincorporate" in Delaware. On March 1, they
form a Delaware corporation (Newcorp) into which they merge Debtor. The merger effectuates a transfer of the
collateral from Debtor to Newcorp, which thereby becomes a debtor and is located in another jurisdiction. Under
subsection (a)(3), the security interest remains perfected for one year after the merger. If a financing statement is
filed in Delaware against Newcorp within the year following the merger, then the security interest remains perfected
thereafter for a period determined by Delaware's Article 9.
Note that although Newcorp is a "new debtor" as defined in Section 9-102, the application of subsection (a)(3) is
not limited to transferees who are new debtors. Note also that, under Section 9-507, the financing statement
naming Debtor remains effective even though Newcorp has become the debtor.
Subsection (a) addresses security interests that are perfected (i.e., that have attached and as to which any
required perfection step has been taken) before the debtor changes its location. Subsection (h) applies to security
interests that have not attached before the location changes. See Comment 7.
3. Retroactive Unperfection. Subsection (b) sets forth the consequences of the failure to reperfect before
perfection ceases under subsection (a): the security interest becomes unperfected prospectively and, as against
purchasers for value, including buyers and secured parties, but not as against donees or lien creditors,
retroactively. The rule applies to agricultural liens, as well. See also Section 9-515 (taking the same approach with
respect to lapse). Although this approach creates the potential for circular priorities, the alternative-retroactive
unperfection against lien creditors--would create substantial and unjustifiable preference risks.
§ 9-316. EFFECT OF CHANGE IN GOVERNING LAW
Page 4 of 6
Example 5: Under the facts of Example 4, six months after the merger, Buyer bought from Newcorp some
equipment formerly owned by Debtor. At the time of the purchase, Buyer took subject to Lender's perfected security
interest, of which Buyer was unaware. See Section 9-315(a)(1). However, subsection (b) provides that if Lender
fails to reperfect in Delaware within a year after the merger, its security interest becomes unperfected and is
deemed never to have been perfected against Buyer. Having given value and received delivery of the equipment
without knowledge of the security interest and before it was perfected, Buyer would take free of the security interest.
See Section 9-317(b).
Example 6: Under the facts of Example 4, one month before the merger, Debtor created a security interest in
certain equipment in favor of Financer, who perfected by filing in Pennsylvania. At that time, Financer's security
interest is subordinate to Lender's. See Section 9-322(a)(1). Financer reperfects by filing in Delaware within a year
after the merger, but Lender fails to do so. Under subsection (b), Lender's security interest is deemed never to have
been perfected against Financer, a purchaser for value. Consequently, under Section 9-322(a)(2), Financer's
security interest is now senior.
Of course, the expiration of the time period specified in subsection (a) does not of itself prevent the secured party
from later reperfecting under the law of the new jurisdiction. If the secured party does so, however, there will be a
gap in perfection, and the secured party may lose priority as a result. Thus, in Example 6, if Lender perfects by filing
in Delaware more than one year under the merger, it will have a new date of filing and perfection for purposes of
Section 9-322(a)(1). Financer's security interest, whose perfection dates back to the filing in Pennsylvania under
subsection (b), will remain senior.
4. Possessory Security Interests. Subsection (c) deals with continued perfection of possessory security
interests. It applies not only to security interests perfected solely by the secured party's having taken possession of
the collateral. It also applies to security interests perfected by a method that includes as an element of perfection
the secured party's having taken possession, such as perfection by taking delivery of a certificated security in
registered form, see Section 9-313(a), and perfection by obtaining control over a certificated security. See Section
9-314(a).
5. Goods Covered by Certificate of Title. Subsections (d) and (e) address continued perfection of a security
interest in goods covered by a certificate of title. The following examples explain the operation of those subsections.
Example 7: Debtor's automobile is covered by a certificate of title issued by Illinois. Lender perfects a security
interest in the automobile by complying with Illinois' certificate-of-title statute. Thereafter, Debtor applies for a
certificate of title in Indiana. Six months thereafter, Creditor acquires a judicial lien on the automobile. Under Section
9-303(b), Illinois law ceases to govern perfection; rather, once Debtor delivers the application and applicable fee to
the appropriate Indiana authority, Indiana law governs. Nevertheless, under Indiana's Section 9-316(d), Lender's
security interest remains perfected until it would become unperfected under Illinois law had no certificate of title
been issued by Indiana. (For example, Illinois' certificate-of-title statute may provide that the surrender of an Illinois
certificate of title in connection with the issuance of a certificate of title by another jurisdiction causes a security
interest noted thereon to become unperfected.) If Lender's security interest remains perfected, it is senior to
Creditor's judicial lien.
Example 8: Under the facts in Example 8, five months after Debtor applies for an Indiana certificate of title,
Debtor sells the automobile to Buyer. Under subsection (e)(2), because Lender did not reperfect within the four
months after the goods became covered by the Indiana certificate of title, Lender's security interest is deemed
never to have been perfected against Buyer. Under Section 9-317(b), Buyer is likely to take free of the security
interest. Lender could have protected itself by perfecting its security interest either under Indiana's certificate-of-title
statute, see Section 9-311, or, if it had a right to do so under an agreement or Section 9-609, by taking possession
of the automobile. See Section 9-313(b).
The results in Examples 7 and 8 do not depend on the fact that the original perfection was achieved by notation
on a certificate of title. Subsection (d) applies regardless of the method by which a security interest is perfected
under the law of another jurisdiction when the goods became covered by a certificate of title from this State.
§ 9-316. EFFECT OF CHANGE IN GOVERNING LAW
Page 5 of 6
Section 9-337 affords protection to a limited class of persons buying or acquiring a security interest in the goods
while a security interest is perfected under the law of another jurisdiction but after this State has issued a clean
certificate of title.
6. Deposit Accounts, Letter-of-Credit Rights, and Investment Property. Subsections (f) and (g) address
changes in the jurisdiction of a bank, issuer of an uncertificated security, issuer of or nominated person under a
letter of credit, securities intermediary, and commodity intermediary. The provisions are analogous to those of
subsections (a) and (b).
7. Security Interests that Attach after Debtor Changes Location. In contrast to subsections (a) and (b), which
address security interests that are perfected (i.e., that have attached and as to which any required perfection step
has been taken) before the debtor changes its location, subsection (h) addresses security interests that attach
within four months after the debtor changes its location. Under subsection (h), a filed financing statement that would
have been effective to perfect a security interest in the collateral if the debtor had not changed its location is
effective to perfect a security interest in collateral acquired within four months after the relocation.
Example 9: Debtor, an individual whose principal residence is in Pennsylvania, grants to Lender a security
interest in Debtor's existing and after-acquired inventory. Lender perfects the security interest by filing a proper
financing statement in Pennsylvania on January 2, 2014. On March 31, 2014, Debtor's principal residence is
relocated to New Jersey. Upon the relocation, New Jersey law governs perfection of a security interest in Debtor's
inventory. See Sections 9-301, 9-307. Under New Jersey's Section 9-316(a), Lender's security interest in Debtor's
inventory on hand at the time of the relocation remains perfected for four months thereafter. Had Debtor not
relocated, the financing statement filed in Pennsylvania would have been effective to perfect Lender's security
interest in inventory acquired by Debtor after March 31, 2014. Accordingly, under subsection (h), the financing
statement is effective to perfect Lender's security interest in inventory that Debtor acquires within the four months
after Debtor's location changed.
In Example 9, Lender's security interest in the inventory acquired within the four months after Debtor's relocation
will be perfected when it attaches. It will remain perfected if, before the expiration of the four-month period, the
security interest is perfected under the law of New Jersey. Otherwise, the security interest will become unperfected
at the end of the four-month period and will be deemed never to have been perfected as against a purchaser for
value. See subsection (h)(2).
8. Collateral Acquired by New Debtor. Subsection (i) is similar to subsection (h). Whereas subsection (h)
addresses security interests that attach within four months after a debtor changes its location, subsection (i)
addresses security interests that attach within four months after a new debtor becomes bound as debtor by a
security agreement entered into by another person. Subsection (i) also addresses collateral acquired by the new
debtor before it becomes bound.
Example 10: Debtor, a Pennsylvania corporation, grants to Lender a security interest in Debtor's existing and
after-acquired inventory. Lender perfects the security interest by filing a proper financing statement in Pennsylvania
on January 2, 2014. On March 31, 2014, Debtor merges into Survivor, a Delaware corporation. Because Survivor is
located in Delaware, Delaware law governs perfection of a security interest in Survivor's inventory. See Sections 9-
301, 9-307. Under Delaware's Section 9-316(a), Lender's security interest in the inventory that Survivor acquired
from Debtor remains perfected for one year after the transfer. See Comment 2. By virtue of the merger, Survivor
becomes bound as debtor by Debtor's security agreement. See Section 9-203(d). As a consequence, Lender's
security interest attaches to all of Survivor's inventory under Section 9-203, and Lender's collateral now includes
inventory in which Debtor never had an interest. The financing statement filed in Pennsylvania against Debtor is
effective under Delaware's Section 9-316(i) to perfect Lender's security interest in inventory that Survivor acquired
before, and within the four months after, becoming bound as debtor by Debtor's security agreement. This is
because the financing statement filed in Pennsylvania would have been effective to perfect Lender's security
interest in this collateral had Debtor, rather than Survivor, acquired it.
§ 9-316. EFFECT OF CHANGE IN GOVERNING LAW
Page 6 of 6
If the financing statement is effective, Lender's security interest in the collateral that Survivor acquired before, and
within four months after, Survivor became bound as debtor will be perfected upon attachment. It will remain
perfected if, before the expiration of the four-month period, the security interest is perfected under Delaware law.
Otherwise, the security interest will become unperfected at the end of the four-month period and will be deemed
never to have been perfected as against a purchaser for value.
Section 9-325 contains special rules governing the priority of competing security interests in collateral that is
transferred, by merger or otherwise, to a new debtor or other person who becomes a debtor with respect to the
collateral. Section 9-326 contains special rules governing the priority of competing security interests in collateral
acquired by a new debtor other than by transfer from the original debtor.
9. Agricultural Liens. This section does not apply to agricultural liens.
Example 11: Supplier holds an agricultural lien on corn. The lien arises under an Iowa statute. Supplier perfects
by filing a financing statement in Iowa, where the corn is located. See Section 9-302. Debtor stores the corn in
Missouri. Assume the Iowa agricultural lien survives or an agricultural lien arises under Missouri law (matters that
this Article does not govern). Once the corn is located in Missouri, Missouri becomes the jurisdiction whose law
governs perfection. See Section 9-302. Thus, the agricultural lien will not be perfected unless Supplier files a
financing statement in Missouri.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-317
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-317. INTERESTS THAT TAKE PRIORITY OVER OR TAKE FREE OF
SECURITY INTEREST OR AGRICULTURAL LIEN
(a) [Conflicting security interests and rights of lien creditors.] A security interest or agricultural lien is
subordinate to the rights of:
(1) a person entitled to priority under Section 9-322; and
(2) except as otherwise provided in subsection (e), a person that becomes a lien creditor before the
earlier of the time:
(A) the security interest or agricultural lien is perfected; or
(B) one of the conditions specified in Section 9-203(b)(3) is met and a financing statement
covering the collateral is filed.
(b) [Buyers that receive delivery.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e), a buyer, other than a
secured party, of tangible chattel paper, tangible documents, goods, instruments, or a certificated security
takes free of a security interest or agricultural lien if the buyer gives value and receives delivery of the
collateral without knowledge of the security interest or agricultural lien and before it is perfected.
(c) [Lessees that receive delivery.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e), a lessee of goods
takes free of a security interest or agricultural lien if the lessee gives value and receives delivery of the
collateral without knowledge of the security interest or agricultural lien and before it is perfected.
(d) [Licensees and buyers of certain collateral.] A licensee of a general intangible or a buyer, other than
a secured party, of accounts, electronic chattel paper, electronic documents, general intangibles, or
investment property other than a certificated security takes free of a security interest if the licensee or buyer
gives value without knowledge of the security interest and before it is perfected.
(e) [Purchase-money security interest.] Except as otherwise provided in Sections 9-320 and 9-321, if a
person files a financing statement with respect to a purchase-money security interest before or within 20
days after the debtor receives delivery of the collateral, the security interest takes priority over the rights of
a buyer, lessee, or lien creditor which arise between the time the security interest attaches and the time of
filing.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Sections 9-301, 2A-307(2).
2. Scope of This Section. As did former Section 9-301, this section lists the classes of persons who take priority
over, or take free of, an unperfected security interest. Section 9-308 explains when a security interest or agricultural
lien is "perfected." A security interest that has attached (see Section 9-203) but as to which a required perfection
step has not been taken is "unperfected." Certain provisions have been moved from former Section 9-301. The
§ 9-317. INTERESTS THAT TAKE PRIORITY OVER OR TAKE FREE OF SECURITY INTEREST OR
AGRICULTURAL LIEN
Page 2 of 3
definition of "lien creditor" now appears in Section 9-102, and the rules governing priority in future advances are
found in Section 9-323.
3. Competing Security Interests. Section 9-322 states general rules for determining priority among conflicting
security interests and refers to other sections that state special rules of priority in a variety of situations. The
security interests given priority under Section 9-322 and the other sections to which it refers take priority in general
even over a perfected security interest. A fortiori they take priority over an unperfected security interest.
4. Filed but Unattached Security Interest vs. Lien Creditor. Under former Section 9-301(1)(b), a lien creditor's
rights had priority over an unperfected security interest. Perfection required attachment (former Section 9-303), and
attachment required the giving of value (former Section 9-203). It followed that, if a secured party had filed a
financing statement, but the debtor had not entered into a security agreement and value had not yet been given, an
intervening lien creditor whose lien arose after filing but before attachment of the security interest acquired rights
that are senior to those of the secured party who later gives value. This result comported with the nemo dat
concept: When the security interest attached, the collateral was already subject to the judicial lien.
On the other hand, this approach treated the first secured advance differently from all other advances, even in
circumstances in which a security agreement covering the collateral had been entered into before the judicial lien
attached. The special rule for future advances in former Section 9-301(4) (substantially reproduced in Section 9-
323(b)) afforded priority to a discretionary advance made by a secured party within 45 days after the lien creditor's
rights arose as long as the secured party was "perfected" when the lien creditor's lien arose--i.e., as long as the
advance was not the first one and an earlier advance had been made.
Subsection (a)(2) revises former Section 9-301(1)(b) and, in appropriate cases, treats the first advance the same
as subsequent advances. More specifically, a judicial lien that arises after the security-agreement condition of
Section 9-203(b)(3) is satisfied and a financing statement is filed, but before the security interest attaches and
becomes perfected is subordinate to all advances secured by the security interest, even the first advance, except
as otherwise provided in Section 9-323(b). However, if the security interest becomes unperfected (e.g., because the
effectiveness of the filed financing statement lapses) before the judicial lien arises, the security interest is
subordinate. If a financing statement is filed but a security interest does not attach, then no priority contest arises.
The lien creditor has the only enforceable claim to the property.
5. Security Interest of Consignor or Receivables Buyer vs. Lien Creditor. Section 1-201(b)(35) defines
"security interest" to include the interest of most true consignors of goods and the interest of most buyers of certain
receivables (accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, and promissory notes). A consignee of goods or a seller
of accounts or chattel paper each is deemed to have rights in the collateral which a lien creditor may reach, as long
as the competing security interest of the consignor or buyer is unperfected. This is so even though, as between the
consignor and the debtor-consignee, the latter has only limited rights, and, as between the buyer and debtor-seller,
the latter does not have any rights in the collateral. See Sections 9-318 (seller), 9-319 (consignee). Security
interests arising from sales of payment intangibles and promissory notes are automatically perfected. See Section
9-309. Accordingly, a subsequent judicial lien always would be subordinate to the rights of a buyer of those types of
receivables.
6. Purchasers Other Than Secured Parties. Subsections (b), (c), and (d) afford priority over an unperfected
security interest to certain purchasers (other than secured parties) of collateral. They derive from former Sections 9-
301(1)(c), 2A-307(2), and 9-301(d). Former Section 9-301(1)(c) and (1)(d) provided that unperfected security
interests are "subordinate" to the rights of certain purchasers. But, as former Comment 9 suggested, the practical
effect of subordination in this context is that the purchaser takes free of the security interest. To avoid any possible
misinterpretation, subsections (b) and (d) of this section use the phrase "takes free."
Subsection (b) governs goods, as well as intangibles of the type whose transfer is effected by physical delivery of
the representative piece of paper (tangible chattel paper, tangible documents, instruments, and security
certificates). To obtain priority, a buyer must both give value and receive delivery of the collateral without knowledge
of the existing security interest and before perfection. Even if the buyer gave value without knowledge and before
§ 9-317. INTERESTS THAT TAKE PRIORITY OVER OR TAKE FREE OF SECURITY INTEREST OR
AGRICULTURAL LIEN
Page 3 of 3
perfection, the buyer would take subject to the security interest if perfection occurred before physical delivery of the
collateral to the buyer. Subsection (c) contains a similar rule with respect to lessees of goods. Note that a lessee of
goods in ordinary course of business takes free of all security interests created by the lessor, even if perfected. See
Section 9-321.
Normally, there will be no question when a buyer of tangible chattel paper, tangible documents, instruments, or
security certificates "receives delivery" of the property. See Section 1-201 (defining "delivery"). However,
sometimes a buyer or lessee of goods, such as complex machinery, takes delivery of the goods in stages and
completes assembly at its own location. Under those circumstances, the buyer or lessee "receives delivery" within
the meaning of subsections (b) and (c) when, after an inspection of the portion of the goods remaining with the
seller or lessor, it would be apparent to a potential lender to the seller or lessor that another person might have an
interest in the goods.
The rule of subsection (b) obviously is not appropriate where the collateral consists of intangibles and there is no
representative piece of paper whose physical delivery is the only or the customary method of transfer. Therefore,
with respect to such intangibles (including accounts, electronic chattel paper, electronic documents, general
intangibles, and investment property other than certificated securities), subsection (d) gives priority to any buyer
who gives value without knowledge, and before perfection, of the security interest. A licensee of a general
intangible takes free of an unperfected security interest in the general intangible under the same circumstances.
Note that a licensee of a general intangible in ordinary course of business takes rights under a nonexclusive license
free of security interests created by the licensor, even if perfected. See Section 9-321.
Unless Section 9-109 excludes the transaction from this Article, a buyer of accounts, chattel paper, payment
intangibles, or promissory notes is a "secured party" (defined in Section 9-102), and subsections (b) and (d) do not
determine priority of the security interest created by the sale. Rather, the priority rules generally applicable to
competing security interests apply. See Section 9-322.
7. Agricultural Liens. Subsections (a), (b), and (c) subordinate unperfected agricultural liens in the same manner
in which they subordinate unperfected security interests.
8. Purchase-Money Security Interests. Subsection (e) derives from former Section 9-301(2). It provides that, if
a purchase-money security interest is perfected by filing no later than 20 days after the debtor receives delivery of
the collateral, the security interest takes priority over the rights of buyers, lessees, or lien creditors which arise
between the time the security interest attaches and the time of filing. Subsection (e) differs from former Section 9-
301(2) in two significant respects. First, subsection (e) protects a purchase-money security interest against all
buyers and lessees, not just against transferees in bulk. Second, subsection (e) conditions this protection on filing
within 20, as opposed to ten, days after delivery.
Section 9-311(b) provides that compliance with the perfection requirements of a statute or treaty described in
Section 9-311(a) "is equivalent to the filing of a financing statement." It follows that a person who perfects a security
interest in goods covered by a certificate of title by complying with the perfection requirements of an applicable
certificate-of-title statute "files a financing statement" within the meaning of subsection(e).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-318
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-318. NO INTEREST RETAINED IN RIGHT TO PAYMENT THAT IS SOLD;
RIGHTS AND TITLE OF SELLER OF ACCOUNT OR CHATTEL PAPER WITH
RESPECT TO CREDITORS AND PURCHASERS
(a) [Seller retains no interest.] A debtor that has sold an account, chattel paper, payment intangible, or
promissory note does not retain a legal or equitable interest in the collateral sold.
(b) [Deemed rights of debtor if buyer's security interest unperfected.] For purposes of determining the
rights of creditors of, and purchasers for value of an account or chattel paper from, a debtor that has sold
an account or chattel paper, while the buyer's security interest is unperfected, the debtor is deemed to have
rights and title to the account or chattel paper identical to those the debtor sold.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Sellers of Accounts, Chattel Paper, Payment Intangibles, and Promissory Notes. Section 1-201(b)(35)
defines "security interest" to include the interest of a buyer of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or
promissory notes. See also Section 9-109(a) and Comment 5. Subsection (a) makes explicit what was implicit, but
perfectly obvious, under former Article 9: The fact that a sale of an account or chattel paper gives rise to a "security
interest" does not imply that the seller retains an interest in the property that has been sold. To the contrary, a seller
of an account or chattel paper retains no interest whatsoever in the property to the extent that it has been sold.
Subsection (a) also applies to sales of payment intangibles and promissory notes, transactions that were not
covered by former Article 9. Neither this Article nor the definition of "security interest" in Section 1-201 provides
rules for distinguishing sales transactions from those that create a security interest securing an obligation.
3. Buyers of Accounts and Chattel Paper. Another aspect of sales of accounts and chattel paper also was
implicit, and equally obvious, under former Article 9: If the buyer's security interest is unperfected, then for purposes
of determining the rights of certain third parties, the seller (debtor) is deemed to have all rights and title that the
seller sold. The seller is deemed to have these rights even though, as between the parties, it has sold all its rights to
the buyer. Subsection (b) makes this explicit. As a consequence of subsection (b), if the buyer's security interest is
unperfected, the seller can transfer, and the creditors of the seller can reach, the account or chattel paper as if it
had not been sold.
Example: Debtor sells accounts or chattel paper to Buyer-1 and retains no interest in them. Buyer-1 does not file
a financing statement. Debtor then sells the same receivables to Buyer-2. Buyer-2 files a proper financing
statement. Having sold the receivables to Buyer-1, Debtor would not have any rights in the collateral so as to permit
Buyer-2's security (ownership) interest to attach. Nevertheless, under this section, for purposes of determining the
rights of purchasers for value from Debtor, Debtor is deemed to have the rights that Debtor sold. Accordingly,
§ 9-318. NO INTEREST RETAINED IN RIGHT TO PAYMENT THAT IS SOLD; RIGHTS AND TITLE OF
SELLER OF ACCOUNT OR CHATTEL PAPER WITH RESPECT TO CREDITORS AND PURCHASERS
Page 2 of 2
Buyer-2's security interest attaches, is perfected by the filing, and, under Section 9-322, is senior to Buyer-1's
interest.
4. Effect of Perfection. If the security interest of a buyer of accounts or chattel paper is perfected the usual result
would take effect: transferees from and creditors of the seller could not acquire an interest in the sold accounts or
chattel paper. The same result would occur if payment intangibles or promissory notes were sold, inasmuch as the
buyer's security interest is automatically perfected under Section 9-309.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-319
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-319. RIGHTS AND TITLE OF CONSIGNEE WITH RESPECT TO
CREDITORS AND PURCHASERS
(a) [Consignee has consignor's rights.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), for purposes of
determining the rights of creditors of, and purchasers for value of goods from, a consignee, while the goods
are in the possession of the consignee, the consignee is deemed to have rights and title to the goods
identical to those the consignor had or had power to transfer.
(b) [Applicability of other law.] For purposes of determining the rights of a creditor of a consignee, law
other than this article determines the rights and title of a consignee while goods are in the consignee's
possession if, under this part, a perfected security interest held by the consignor would have priority over
the rights of the creditor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Consignments. This section takes an approach to consignments similar to that taken by Section 9-318 with
respect to buyers of accounts and chattel paper. Revised Section 1-201(b)(35) defines "security interest" to include
the interest of a consignor of goods under many true consignments. Section 9-319(a) provides that, for purposes of
determining the rights of certain third parties, the consignee is deemed to acquire all rights and title that the
consignor had, if the consignor's security interest is unperfected. The consignee acquires these rights even though,
as between the parties, it purchases a limited interest in the goods (as would be the case in a true consignment,
under which the consignee acquires only the interest of a bailee). As a consequence of this section, creditors of the
consignee can acquire judicial liens and security interests in the goods.
Insofar as creditors of the consignee are concerned, this Article to a considerable extent reformulates the former
law, which appeared in former Sections 2-326 and 9-114, without changing the results. However, neither Article 2
nor former Article 9 specifically addresses the rights of non-ordinary course buyers from the consignee. Former
Section 9-114 contained priority rules applicable to security interests in consigned goods. Under this Article, the
priority rules for purchase-money security interests in inventory apply to consignments. See Section 9-103(d).
Accordingly, a special section containing priority rules for consignments no longer is needed. Section 9-317
determines whether the rights of a judicial lien creditor are senior to the interest of the consignor, Sections 9-322
and 9-324 govern competing security interests in consigned goods, and Sections 9-317, 9-315, and 9-320
determine whether a buyer takes free of the consignor's interest.
The following example explains the operation of this section:
Example 1: SP-1 delivers goods to Debtor in a transaction constituting a "consignment" as defined in Section 9-
102. SP-1 does not file a financing statement. Debtor then grants a security interest in the goods to SP-2. SP-2 files
a proper financing statement. Assuming Debtor is a mere bailee, as in a "true" consignment, Debtor would not have
§ 9-319. RIGHTS AND TITLE OF CONSIGNEE WITH RESPECT TO CREDITORS AND PURCHASERS
Page 2 of 2
any rights in the collateral (beyond those of a bailee) so as to permit SP-2's security interest to attach to any greater
rights. Nevertheless, under this section, for purposes of determining the rights of Debtor's creditors, Debtor is
deemed to acquire SP-1's rights. Accordingly, SP-2's security interest attaches, is perfected by the filing, and, under
Section 9-322, is senior to SP-1's interest.
3. Effect of Perfection. Subsection (b) contains a special rule with respect to consignments that are perfected. If
application of this Article would result in the consignor having priority over a competing creditor, then other law
determines the rights and title of the consignee.
Example 2: SP-1 delivers goods to Debtor in a transaction constituting a "consignment" as defined in Section 9-
102. SP-1 files a proper financing statement. Debtor then grants a security interest in the goods to SP-2. Under
Section 9-322, SP-1's security interest is senior to SP-2's. Subsection (b) indicates that, for purposes of determining
SP-2's rights, other law determines the rights and title of the consignee. If, for example, a consignee obtains only
the special property of a bailee, then SP-2's security interest would attach only to that special property.
Example 3: SP-1 obtains a security interest in all Debtor's existing and after-acquired inventory. SP-1 perfects its
security interest with a proper filing. Then SP-2 delivers goods to Debtor in a transaction constituting a
"consignment" as defined in Section 9-102. SP-2 files a proper financing statement but does not send notification to
SP-1 under Section 9-324(b). Accordingly, SP-2's security interest is junior to SP-1's under Section 9-322(a). Under
Section 9-319(a), Debtor is deemed to have the consignor's rights and title, so that SP-1's security interest attaches
to SP-2's ownership interest in the goods. Thereafter, Debtor grants a security interest in the goods to SP-3, and
SP-3 perfects by filing. Because SP-2's perfected security interest is senior to SP-3's under Section 9-322(a),
Section 9-319(b) applies: Other law determines Debtor's rights and title to the goods insofar as SP-3 is concerned,
and SP-3's security interest attaches to those rights.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-320
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-320. BUYER OF GOODS
(a) [Buyer in ordinary course of business.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e), a buyer in
ordinary course of business, other than a person buying farm products from a person engaged in farming
operations, takes free of a security interest created by the buyer's seller, even if the security interest is
perfected and the buyer knows of its existence.
(b) [Buyer of consumer goods.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e), a buyer of goods from a
person who used or bought the goods for use primarily for personal, family, or household purposes takes
free of a security interest, even if perfected, if the buyer buys:
(1) without knowledge of the security interest;
(2) for value;
(3) primarily for the buyer's personal, family, or household purposes; and
(4) before the filing of a financing statement covering the goods.
(c) [Effectiveness of filing for subsection (b).] To the extent that it affects the priority of a security
interest over a buyer of goods under subsection (b), the period of effectiveness of a filing made in the
jurisdiction in which the seller is located is governed by Section 9-316(a) and (b).
(d) [Buyer in ordinary course of business at wellhead or minehead.] A buyer in ordinary course of
business buying oil, gas, or other minerals at the wellhead or minehead or after extraction takes free of an
interest arising out of an encumbrance.
(e) [Possessory security interest not affected.] Subsections (a) and (b) do not affect a security interest
in goods in the possession of the secured party under Section 9-313.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-307.
2. Scope of This Section. This section states when buyers of goods take free of a security interest even though
perfected. Of course, a buyer who takes free of a perfected security interest takes free of an unperfected one.
Section 9-317 should be consulted to determine what purchasers, in addition to the buyers covered in this section,
take free of an unperfected security interest. Article 2 states general rules on purchase of goods from a seller with
defective or voidable title (Section 2-403).
3. Buyers in Ordinary Course. Subsection (a) derives from former Section 9-307(1). The definition of "buyer in
ordinary course of business" in Section 1-201 restricts its application to buyers "from a person, other than a
pawnbroker, in the business of selling goods of that kind." Thus subsection (a) applies primarily to inventory
collateral. The subsection further excludes from its operation buyers of "farm products" (defined in Section 9-102)
§ 9-320. BUYER OF GOODS
Page 2 of 3
from a person engaged in farming operations. The buyer in ordinary course of business is defined as one who buys
goods "in good faith, without knowledge that the sale violates the rights of another person and in the ordinary
course." Subsection (a) provides that such a buyer takes free of a security interest, even though perfected, and
even though the buyer knows the security interest exists. Reading the definition together with the rule of law results
in the buyer's taking free if the buyer merely knows that a security interest covers the goods but taking subject if the
buyer knows, in addition, that the sale violates a term in an agreement with the secured party.
As did former Section 9-307(1), subsection (a) applies only to security interests created by the seller of the goods
to the buyer in ordinary course. However, under certain circumstances a buyer in ordinary course who buys goods
that were encumbered with a security interest created by a person other than the seller may take free of the security
interest, as Example 2 explains. See also Comment 6, below.
Example 1: Manufacturer, who is in the business of manufacturing appliances, owns manufacturing equipment
subject to a perfected security interest in favor of Lender. Manufacturer sells the equipment to Dealer, who is in the
business of buying and selling used equipment. Buyer buys the equipment from Dealer. Even if Buyer qualifies as a
buyer in the ordinary course of business, Buyer does not take free of Lender's security interest under subsection
(a), because Dealer did not create the security interest; Manufacturer did.
Example 2: Manufacturer, who is in the business of manufacturing appliances, owns manufacturing equipment
subject to a perfected security interest in favor of Lender. Manufacturer sells the equipment to Dealer, who is in the
business of buying and selling used equipment. Lender learns of the sale but does nothing to assert its security
interest. Buyer buys the equipment from Dealer. Inasmuch as Lender's acquiescence constitutes an "entrusting" of
the goods to Dealer within the meaning of Section 2-403(3) Buyer takes free of Lender's security interest under
Section 2-403(2) if Buyer qualifies as a buyer in ordinary course of business.
4. Buyers of Farm Products. This section does not enable a buyer of farm products to take free of a security
interest created by the seller, even if the buyer is a buyer in ordinary course of business. However, a buyer of farm
products may take free of a security interest under Section 1324 of the Food Security Act of 1985, 7 U.S.C. § 1631.
5. Buyers of Consumer Goods. Subsection (b), which derives from former Section 9-307(2), deals with buyers
of collateral that the debtor-seller holds as "consumer goods" (defined in Section 9-102). Under Section 9-309(1), a
purchase-money interest in consumer goods, except goods that are subject to a statute or treaty described in
Section 9-311(a) (such as automobiles that are subject to a certificate-of-title statute), is perfected automatically
upon attachment. There is no need to file to perfect. Under subsection (b) a buyer of consumer goods takes free of
a security interest, even though perfected, if the buyer buys (1) without knowledge of the security interest, (2) for
value, (3) primarily for the buyer's own personal, family, or household purposes, and (4) before a financing
statement is filed.
As to purchase money-security interests which are perfected without filing under Section 9-309(1): A secured
party may file a financing statement, although filing is not required for perfection. If the secured party does file, all
buyers take subject to the security interest. If the secured party does not file, a buyer who meets the qualifications
stated in the preceding paragraph takes free of the security interest.
As to security interests for which a perfection step is required: This category includes all non-purchase-money
security interests, and all security interests, whether or not purchase-money, in goods subject to a statute or treaty
described in Section 9-311(a), such as automobiles covered by a certificate-of-title statute. As long as the required
perfection step has not been taken and the security interest remains unperfected, not only the buyers described in
subsection (b) but also the purchasers described in Section 9-317 will take free of the security interest. After a
financing statement has been filed or the perfection requirements of the applicable certificate-of-title statute have
been complied with (compliance is the equivalent of filing a financing statement; see Section 9-311(b)), all
subsequent buyers, under the rule of subsection (b), are subject to the security interest.
The rights of a buyer under subsection (b) turn on whether a financing statement has been filed against consumer
goods. Occasionally, a debtor changes his or her location after a filing is made. Subsection (c), which derives from
§ 9-320. BUYER OF GOODS
Page 3 of 3
former Section 9-103(1)(d)(iii), deals with the continued effectiveness of the filing under those circumstances. It
adopts the rules of Sections 9-316(a) and (b). These rules are explained in the Comments to that section.
6. Authorized Dispositions. The limitations that subsections (a) and (b) impose on the persons who may take
free of a security interest apply of course only to unauthorized sales by the debtor. If the secured party authorized
the sale in an express agreement or otherwise, the buyer takes free under Section 9-315(a) without regard to the
limitations of this section. (That section also states the right of a secured party to the proceeds of a sale, authorized
or unauthorized.) Moreover, the buyer also takes free if the secured party waived or otherwise is precluded from
asserting its security interest against the buyer. See Section 1-103.
7. Oil, Gas, and Other Minerals. Under subsection (d), a buyer in ordinary course of business of minerals at the
wellhead or minehead or after extraction takes free of a security interest created by the seller. Specifically, it
provides that qualified buyers take free not only of Article 9 security interests but also of interests "arising out of an
encumbrance." As defined in Section 9-102, the term "encumbrance" means "a right, other than an ownership
interest, in real property." Thus, to the extent that a mortgage encumbers minerals not only before but also after
extraction, subsection (d) enables a buyer in ordinary course of the minerals to take free of the mortgage. This
subsection does not, however, enable these buyers to take free of interests arising out of ownership interests in the
real property. This issue is significant only in a minority of states. Several of them have adopted special statutes
and nonuniform amendments to Article 9 to provide special protections to mineral owners, whose interests often are
highly fractionalized in the case of oil and gas. See Terry I. Cross, Oil and Gas Product Liens--Statutory Security
Interests for Producers and Royalty Owners Under the Statutes of Kansas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas and
Wyoming, 50 Consumer Fin. L. Q. Rep. 418 (1996). Inasmuch as a complete resolution of the issue would require
the addition of complex provisions to this Article, and there are good reasons to believe that a uniform solution
would not be feasible, this Article leaves its resolution to other legislation.
8. Possessory Security Interests. Subsection (e) is new. It rejects the holding of Tanbro Fabrics Corp. v.
Deering Milliken, Inc., 350 N.E.2d 590 (N.Y. 1976) and, together with Section 9-317(b), prevents a buyer of goods
collateral from taking free of a security interest if the collateral is in the possession of the secured party. "The
secured party" referred in subsection (e) is the holder of the security interest referred to in subsection (a) or (b).
Section 9-313 determines whether a secured party is in possession for purposes of this section. Under some
circumstances, Section 9-313 provides that a secured party is in possession of collateral even if the collateral is in
the physical possession of a third party.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-321
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-321. LICENSEE OF GENERAL INTANGIBLE AND LESSEE OF GOODS IN
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS
(a) ["Licensee in ordinary course of business."] In this section, "licensee in ordinary course of
business" means a person that becomes a licensee of a general intangible in good faith, without knowledge
that the license violates the rights of another person in the general intangible, and in the ordinary course
from a person in the business of licensing general intangibles of that kind. A person becomes a licensee in
the ordinary course if the license to the person comports with the usual or customary practices in the kind of
business in which the licensor is engaged or with the licensor's own usual or customary practices.
(b) [Rights of licensee in ordinary course of business.] A licensee in ordinary course of business takes
its rights under a nonexclusive license free of a security interest in the general intangible created by the
licensor, even if the security interest is perfected and the licensee knows of its existence.
(c) [Rights of lessee in ordinary course of business.] A lessee in ordinary course of business takes its
leasehold interest free of a security interest in the goods created by the lessor, even if the security interest
is perfected and the lessee knows of its existence.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Derived from Sections 2A-103(1)(o), 2A-307(3).
2. Licensee in Ordinary Course. Like the analogous rules in Section 9-320(a) with respect to buyers in ordinary
course and subsection (c) with respect to lessees in ordinary course, the new rule in subsection (b) reflects the
expectations of the parties and the marketplace: a licensee under a nonexclusive license takes subject to a security
interest unless the secured party authorizes the license free of the security interest or other, controlling law such as
that of this section (protecting ordinary-course licensees) dictates a contrary result. See Sections 9-201, 9-315. The
definition of "licensee in ordinary course of business" in subsection (a) is modeled upon that of "buyer in ordinary
course of business."
3. Lessee in Ordinary Course. Subsection (c) contains the rule formerly found in Section 2A-307(3). The rule
works in the same way as that of Section 9-320(a).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-322
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-322. PRIORITIES AMONG CONFLICTING SECURITY INTERESTS IN AND
AGRICULTURAL LIENS ON SAME COLLATERAL
(a) [General priority rules.] Except as otherwise provided in this section, priority among conflicting
security interests and agricultural liens in the same collateral is determined according to the following rules:
(1) Conflicting perfected security interests and agricultural liens rank according to priority in time of
filing or perfection. Priority dates from the earlier of the time a filing covering the collateral is first made
or the security interest or agricultural lien is first perfected, if there is no period thereafter when there is
neither filing nor perfection.
(2) A perfected security interest or agricultural lien has priority over a conflicting unperfected security
interest or agricultural lien.
(3) The first security interest or agricultural lien to attach or become effective has priority if conflicting
security interests and agricultural liens are unperfected.
(b) [Time of perfection: proceeds and supporting obligations.] For the purposes of subsection (a)(1):
(1) the time of filing or perfection as to a security interest in collateral is also the time of filing or
perfection as to a security interest in proceeds; and
(2) the time of filing or perfection as to a security interest in collateral supported by a supporting
obligation is also the time of filing or perfection as to a security interest in the supporting obligation.
(c) [Special priority rules: proceeds and supporting obligations.] Except as otherwise provided in
subsection (f), a security interest in collateral which qualifies for priority over a conflicting security interest
under Section 9-327, 9-328, 9-329, 9-330, or 9-331 also has priority over a conflicting security interest in:
(1) any supporting obligation for the collateral; and
(2) proceeds of the collateral if:
(A) the security interest in proceeds is perfected;
(B) the proceeds are cash proceeds or of the same type as the collateral; and
(C) in the case of proceeds that are proceeds of proceeds, all intervening proceeds are cash
proceeds, proceeds of the same type as the collateral, or an account relating to the collateral.
(d) [First-to-file priority rule for certain collateral.] Subject to subsection (e) and except as otherwise
provided in subsection (f), if a security interest in chattel paper, deposit accounts, negotiable documents,
instruments, investment property, or letter-of-credit rights is perfected by a method other than filing,
conflicting perfected security interests in proceeds of the collateral rank according to priority in time of filing.
(e) [Applicability of subsection (d).] Subsection (d) applies only if the proceeds of the collateral are not
cash proceeds, chattel paper, negotiable documents, instruments, investment property, or letter-of-credit
rights.
(f) [Limitations on subsections (a) through (e).] Subsections (a) through (e) are subject to:
(1) subsection (g) and the other provisions of this part;
§ 9-322. PRIORITIES AMONG CONFLICTING SECURITY INTERESTS IN AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS ON
SAME COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 7
(2) Section 4-210 with respect to a security interest of a collecting bank;
(3) Section 5-118 with respect to a security interest of an issuer or nominated person; and
(4) Section 9-110 with respect to a security interest arising under Article 2 or 2A.
(g) [Priority under agricultural lien statute.] A perfected agricultural lien on collateral has priority over a
conflicting security interest in or agricultural lien on the same collateral if the statute creating the agricultural
lien so provides.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-312(5), (6).
2. Scope of This Section. In a variety of situations, two or more people may claim a security interest in the same
collateral. This section states general rules of priority among conflicting security interests. As subsection (f)
provides, the general rules in subsections (a) through (e) are subject to the rule in subsection (g) governing
perfected agricultural liens and to the other rules in this Part of this Article. Rules that override this section include
those applicable to purchase-money security interests (Section 9-324) and those qualifying for special priority in
particular types of collateral. See, e.g., Section 9-327 (deposit accounts); Section 9-328 (investment property);
Section 9-329 (letter-of-credit rights); Section 9-330 (chattel paper and instruments); Section 9-334 (fixtures). In
addition, the general rules of sections (a) through (e) are subject to priority rules governing security interests arising
under Articles 2, 2A, 4, and 5.
3. General Rules. Subsection (a) contains three general rules. Subsection (a)(1) governs the priority of
competing perfected security interests. Subsection (a)(2) governs the priority of competing security interests if one
is perfected and the other is not. Subsection (a)(3) governs the priority of competing unperfected security interests.
The rules may be regarded as adaptations of the idea, deeply rooted at common law, of a race of diligence among
creditors. The first two rules are based on precedence in the time as of which the competing secured parties either
filed their financing statements or obtained perfected security interests. Under subsection (a)(1), the first secured
party who files or perfects has priority. Under subsection (a)(2), which is new, a perfected security interest has
priority over an unperfected one. Under subsection (a)(3), if both security interests are unperfected, the first to
attach has priority. Note that Section 9-709(b) may affect the application of subsection (a) to a filing that occurred
before the effective date of this Article and which would be ineffective to perfect a security interest under former
Article 9 but effective under this Article.
4. Competing Perfected Security Interests. When there is more than one perfected security interest, the
security interests rank according to priority in time of filing or perfection. "Filing," of course, refers to the filing of an
effective financing statement. "Perfection" refers to the acquisition of a perfected security interest, i.e., one that has
attached and as to which any required perfection step has been taken. See Sections 9-308 and 9-309.
Example 1: On February 1, A files a financing statement covering a certain item of Debtor's equipment. On
March 1, B files a financing statement covering the same equipment. On April 1, B makes a loan to Debtor and
obtains a security interest in the equipment. On May 1, A makes a loan to Debtor and obtains a security interest in
the same collateral. A has priority even though B's loan was made earlier and was perfected when made. It makes
no difference whether A knew of B's security interest when A made its advance.
The problem stated in Example 1 is peculiar to a notice-filing system under which filing may occur before the
security interest attaches (see Section 9-502). The justification for determining priority by order of filing lies in the
§ 9-322. PRIORITIES AMONG CONFLICTING SECURITY INTERESTS IN AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS ON
SAME COLLATERAL
Page 3 of 7
necessity of protecting the filing system--that is, of allowing the first secured party who has filed to make
subsequent advances without each time having to check for subsequent filings as a condition of protection. Note,
however, that this first-to-file protection is not absolute. For example, Section 9-324 affords priority to certain
purchase-money security interests, even if a competing secured party was the first to file or perfect.
Under a notice-filing system, a filed financing statement indicates to third parties that a person may have a
security interest in the collateral indicated. With further inquiry, they may discover the complete state of affairs.
When a financing statement that is ineffective when filed becomes effective thereafter, the policy underlying the
notice-filing system determines the "time of filing" for purposes of subsection (a)(1). For example, the unauthorized
filing of an otherwise sufficient initial financing statement becomes authorized, and the financing statement
becomes effective, upon the debtor's post-filing authorization or ratification of the filing. See Section 9-509,
Comment 3. Because the notice value of the financing statement is independent of the timing of authorization or
ratification, the time of the unauthorized filing is the "time of filing" for purposes of subsection (a)(1). The same
policy applies to the other priority rules in this part.
Example 2: A and B make non-purchase-money advances secured by the same collateral. The collateral is in
Debtor's possession, and neither security interest is perfected when the second advance is made. Whichever
secured party first perfects its security interest (by taking possession of the collateral or by filing) takes priority. It
makes no difference whether that secured party knows of the other security interest at the time it perfects its own.
The rule of subsection (a)(1), affording priority to the first to file or perfect, applies to security interests that are
perfected by any method, including temporarily (Section 9-312) or upon attachment (Section 9-309), even though
there may be no notice to creditors or subsequent purchasers and notwithstanding any common-law rule to the
contrary. The form of the claim to priority, i.e., filing or perfection, may shift from time to time, and the rank will be
based on the first filing or perfection as long as there is no intervening period without filing or perfection. See
Section 9-308(c).
Example 3: On October 1, A acquires a temporarily perfected (20-day) security interest, unfiled, in a tangibler
negotiable document in the debtor's possession under Section 9-312(e). On October 5, B files and thereby perfects
a security interest that previously had attached to the same document. On October 10, A files. A has priority, even
after the 20-day period expires, regardless of whether A knows of B's security interest when A files. A was the first
to perfect and maintained continuous perfection or filing since the start of the 20-day period. However, the
perfection of A's security interest extends only "to the extent it arises for new value given." To the extent A's security
interest secures advances made by A beyond the 20-day period, its security interest would be subordinate to B's,
inasmuch as B was the first to file.
In general, the rule in subsection (a)(1) does not distinguish among various advances made by a secured party.
The priority of every advance dates from the earlier of filing or perfection. However, in rare instances, the priority of
an advance dates from the time the advance is made. See Example 3 and Section 9-323.
5. Priority in After-Acquired Property. The application of the priority rules to after-acquired property must be
considered separately for each item of collateral. Priority does not depend only on time of perfection but may also
be based on priority in filing before perfection.
Example 4: On February 1, A makes advances to Debtor under a security agreement covering "all Debtor's
machinery, both existing and after-acquired." A promptly files a financing statement. On April 1, B takes a security
interest in all Debtor's machinery, existing and after-acquired, to secure an outstanding loan. The following day, B
files a financing statement. On May 1, Debtor acquires a new machine. When Debtor acquires rights in the new
machine, both A and B acquire security interests in the machine simultaneously. Both security interests are
perfected simultaneously. However, A has priority because A filed before B.
When after-acquired collateral is encumbered by more than one security interest, one of the security interests
often is a purchase-money security interest that is entitled to special priority under Section 9-324.
§ 9-322. PRIORITIES AMONG CONFLICTING SECURITY INTERESTS IN AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS ON
SAME COLLATERAL
Page 4 of 7
6. Priority in Proceeds: General Rule. Subsection (b)(1) follows former Section 9-312(6). It provides that the
baseline rules of subsection (a) apply generally to priority conflicts in proceeds except where otherwise provided
(e.g., as in subsections (c) through (e)). Under Section 9-203, attachment cannot occur (and therefore, under
Section 9-308, perfection cannot occur) as to particular collateral until the collateral itself comes into existence and
the debtor has rights in it. Thus, a security interest in proceeds of original collateral does not attach and is not
perfected until the proceeds come into existence and the debtor acquires rights in them.
Example 5: On April 1, Debtor authenticates a security agreement granting to A a security interest in all Debtor's
existing and after-acquired inventory. The same day, A files a financing statement covering inventory. On May 1,
Debtor authenticates a security agreement granting B a security interest in all Debtor's existing and future accounts.
On June 1, Debtor sells inventory to a customer on 30-day unsecured credit. When Debtor acquires the account,
B's security interest attaches to it and is perfected by B's financing statement. At the very same time, A's security
interest attaches to the account as proceeds of the inventory and is automatically perfected. See Section 9-315.
Under subsection (b) of this section, for purposes of determining A's priority in the account, the time of filing as to
the original collateral (April 1, as to inventory) is also the time of filing as to proceeds (account). Accordingly, A's
security interest in the account has priority over B's. Of course, had B filed its financing statement before A filed
(e.g., on March 1), then B would have priority in the accounts.
Section 9-324 governs the extent to which a special purchase-money priority in goods or software carries over
into the proceeds of the original collateral.
7. Priority in Proceeds: Special Rules. Subsections (c), (d), and (e), which are new, provide additional priority
rules for proceeds of collateral in situations where the temporal (first-in-time) rules of subsection (a)(1) are not
appropriate. These new provisions distinguish what these Comments refer to as "non-filing collateral" from what
they call "filing collateral." As used in these Comments, non-filing collateral is collateral of a type for which
perfection may be achieved by a method other than filing (possession or control, mainly) and for which secured
parties who so perfect generally do not expect or need to conduct a filing search. More specifically, non-filing
collateral is chattel paper, deposit accounts, negotiable documents, instruments, investment property, and letter-ofcredit
rights. Other collateral--accounts, commercial tort claims, general intangibles, goods, nonnegotiable
documents, and payment intangibles--is filing collateral.
8. Proceeds of Non-Filing Collateral: Non-Temporal Priority. Subsection (c)(2) provides a baseline priority rule
for proceeds of non-filing collateral which applies if the secured party has taken the steps required for non-temporal
priority over a conflicting security interest in non-filing collateral (e.g., control, in the case of deposit accounts, letterof-
credit rights, investment property, and in some cases, electronic negotiable documents, section 9-331). This rule
determines priority in proceeds of non-filing collateral whether or not there exists an actual conflicting security
interest in the original non-filing collateral. Under subsection (c)(2), the priority in the original collateral continues in
proceeds if the security interest in proceeds is perfected and the proceeds are cash proceeds or non-filing proceeds
"of the same type" as the original collateral. As used in subsection (c)(2), "type" means a type of collateral defined
in the Uniform Commercial Code and should be read broadly. For example, a security is "of the same type" as a
security entitlement (i.e., investment property), and a promissory note is "of the same type" as a draft (i.e., an
instrument).
Example 6: SP-1 perfects its security interest in investment property by filing. SP-2 perfects subsequently by
taking control of a certificated security. Debtor receives cash proceeds of the security (e.g., dividends deposited into
Debtor's deposit account). If the first-to-file-or-perfect rule of subsection (a)(1) were applied, SP-1's security interest
in the cash proceeds would be senior, although SP-2's security interest continues perfected under Section 9-315
beyond the 20-day period of automatic perfection. This was the result under former Article 9. Under subsection (c),
however, SP-2's security interest is senior.
Note that a different result would obtain in Example 6 (i.e., SP-1's security interest would be senior) if SP-1 were
to obtain control of the deposit-account proceeds. This is so because subsection (c) is subject to subsection (f),
which in turn provides that the priority rules under subsections (a) through (e) are subject to "the other provisions of
§ 9-322. PRIORITIES AMONG CONFLICTING SECURITY INTERESTS IN AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS ON
SAME COLLATERAL
Page 5 of 7
this part." One of those "other provisions" is Section 9-327, which affords priority to a security interest perfected by
control. See Section 9-327(1).
Example 7: SP-1 perfects its security interest in investment property by filing. SP-2 perfects subsequently by
taking control of a certificated security. Debtor receives proceeds of the security consisting of a new certificated
security issued as a stock dividend on the original collateral. Although the new security is of the same type as the
original collateral (i.e., investment property), once the 20-day period of automatic perfection expires (see Section 9-
315(d)), SP-2's security interest is unperfected. (SP-2 has not filed or taken delivery or control, and no temporaryperfection
rule applies.) Consequently, once the 20-day period expires, subsection (c) does not confer priority, and,
under subsection (a)(2), SP-1's security interest in the security is senior. This was the result under former Article 9.
Example 8: SP-1 perfects its security interest in investment property by filing. SP-2 perfects subsequently by
taking control of a certificated security and also by filing against investment property. Debtor receives proceeds of
the security consisting of a new certificated security issued as a stock dividend of the collateral. Because the new
security is of the same type as the original collateral (i.e., investment property) and (unlike Example 7) SP-2's
security interest is perfected by filing, SP-2's security interest is senior under subsection (c). If the new security
were redeemed by the issuer upon surrender and yet another security were received by Debtor, SP-2's security
interest would continue to enjoy priority under subsection (c). The new security would be proceeds of proceeds.
Example 9: SP-1 perfects its security interest in investment property by filing. SP-2 subsequently perfects its
security interest in investment property by taking control of a certificated security and also by filing against
investment property. Debtor receives proceeds of the security consisting of a dividend check that it deposits to a
deposit account. Because the check and the deposit account are cash proceeds, SP-1's and SP-2's security
interests in the cash proceeds are perfected under Section 9-315 beyond the 20-day period of automatic perfection.
However, SP-2's security interest is senior under subsection (c).
Example 10: SP-1 perfects its security interest in investment property by filing. SP-2 perfects subsequently by
taking control of a certificated security and also by filing against investment property. Debtor receives an instrument
as proceeds of the security. (Assume that the instrument is not cash proceeds.) Because the instrument is not of
the same type as the original collateral (i.e., investment property), SP-2's security interest, although perfected by
filing, does not achieve priority under subsection (c). Under the first-to-file-or-perfect rule of subsection (a)(1), SP-
1's security interest in the proceeds is senior.
The proceeds of proceeds are themselves proceeds. See Section 9-102 (defining "proceeds" and "collateral").
Sometimes competing security interests arise in proceeds that are several generations removed from the original
collateral. As the following example explains, the applicability of subsection (c) may turn on the nature of the
intervening proceeds.
Example 11: SP-1 perfects its security interest in Debtor's deposit account by obtaining control. Thereafter, SP-2
files against inventory, (presumably) searches, finds no indication of a conflicting security interest, and advances
against Debtor's existing and after-acquired inventory. Debtor uses funds from the deposit account to purchase
inventory, which SP-1 can trace as identifiable proceeds of its security interest in Debtor's deposit account, and
which SP-2 claims as original collateral. The inventory is sold and the proceeds deposited into another deposit
account, as to which SP-1 has not obtained control. Subsection (c) does not govern priority in this other deposit
account. This deposit account is cash proceeds and is also the same type of collateral as SP-1's original collateral,
as required by subsections (c)(2)(A) and (B). However, SP-1's security interest does not satisfy subsection (c)(2)(C)
because the inventory proceeds, which intervened between the original deposit account and the deposit account
constituting the proceeds at issue, are not cash proceeds, proceeds of the same type as the collateral (original
deposit account), or an account relating to the collateral. Stated otherwise, once proceeds other than cash
proceeds, proceeds of the same type as the original collateral, or an account relating to the original collateral
intervene in the chain of proceeds, priority under subsection (c) is thereafter unavailable. The special priority rule in
subsection (d) also is inapplicable to this case. See Comment 9, Example 13, below. Instead, the general first-tofile-
or-perfect rule of subsections (a) and (b) apply. Under that rule, SP-1 has priority unless its security interest in
§ 9-322. PRIORITIES AMONG CONFLICTING SECURITY INTERESTS IN AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS ON
SAME COLLATERAL
Page 6 of 7
the inventory proceeds became unperfected under Section 9-315(d). Had SP-2 filed against inventory before SP-1
obtained control of the original deposit account, then SP-2 would have had priority even if SP-1's security interest in
the inventory proceeds remained perfected.
If two security interests in the same original collateral are entitled to priority in an item of proceeds under
subsection (c)(2), the security interest having priority in the original collateral has priority in the proceeds.
9. Proceeds of Non-Filing Collateral: Special Temporal Priority. Under subsections (d) and (e), if a security
interest in non-filing collateral is perfected by a method other than filing (e.g., control or possession), it does not
retain its priority over a conflicting security interest in proceeds that are filing collateral. Moreover, it is not entitled to
priority in proceeds under the first-to file-or-perfect rule of subsections (a)(1) and (b). Instead, under subsection (d),
priority is determined by a new first-to-file rule.
Example 12: SP-1 perfects its security interest in Debtor's deposit account by obtaining control. Thereafter, SP-2
files against equipment, (presumably) searches, finds no indication of a conflicting security interest, and advances
against Debtor's equipment. SP-1 then files against Debtor's equipment. Debtor uses funds from the deposit
account to purchase equipment, which SP-1 can trace as proceeds of its security interest in Debtor's deposit
account. If the first-to-file-or-perfect rule were applied, SP-1's security interest would be senior under subsections
(a)(1) and (b), because it was the first to perfect in the original collateral and there was no period during which its
security interest was unperfected. Under subsection (d), however, SP-2's security interest would be senior because
it filed first. This corresponds with the likely expectations of the parties.
Note that under subsection (e), the first-to-file rule of subsection (d) applies only if the proceeds in question are
other than non-filing collateral (i.e., if the proceeds are filing collateral). If the proceeds are non-filing collateral,
either the first-to-file-or-perfect rule under subsections (a) and (b) or the non-temporal priority rule in subsection (c)
would apply, depending on the facts.
Example 13: SP-1 perfects its security interest in Debtor's deposit account by obtaining control. Thereafter, SP-2
files against inventory, (presumably) searches, finds no indication of a conflicting security interest, and advances
against Debtor's existing and after-acquired inventory. Debtor uses funds from the deposit account to purchase
inventory, which SP-1 can trace as identifiable proceeds of its security interest in Debtor's deposit account, and
which SP-2 claims as original collateral. The inventory is sold and the proceeds deposited into another deposit
account, as to which SP-1 has not obtained control. As discussed above in Comment 8, Example 11, subsection (c)
does not govern priority in this deposit account. Subsection (d) also does not govern, because the proceeds at
issue (the deposit account) are cash proceeds. See subsection (e). Rather, the general rules of subsections (a) and
(b) govern.
10. Priority in Supporting Obligations. Under subsections (b)(2) and (c)(1), a security interest having priority in
collateral also has priority in a supporting obligation for that collateral. However, the rules in these subsections are
subject to the special rule in Section 9-329 governing the priority of security interests in a letter-of-credit right. See
subsection (f). Under Section 9-329, a secured party's failure to obtain control (Section 9-107) of a letter-of-credit
right that serves as supporting collateral leaves its security interest exposed to a priming interest of a party who
does take control.
11. Unperfected Security Interests. Under subsection (a)(3), if conflicting security interests are unperfected, the
first to attach has priority. This rule may be of merely theoretical interest, inasmuch as it is hard to imagine a
situation where the case would come into litigation without either secured party's having perfected its security
interest. If neither security interest had been perfected at the time of the filing of a petition in bankruptcy, ordinarily
neither would be good against the trustee in bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Code.
12. Agricultural Liens. Statutes other than this Article may purport to grant priority to an agricultural lien as
against a conflicting security interest or agricultural lien. Under subsection (g), if another statute grants priority to an
agricultural lien, the agricultural lien has priority only if the same statute creates the agricultural lien and the
agricultural lien is perfected. Otherwise, subsection (a) applies the same priority rules to an agricultural lien as to a
§ 9-322. PRIORITIES AMONG CONFLICTING SECURITY INTERESTS IN AND AGRICULTURAL LIENS ON
SAME COLLATERAL
Page 7 of 7
security interest, regardless of whether the agricultural lien conflicts with another agricultural lien or with a security
interest.
Inasmuch as no agricultural lien on proceeds arises under this Article, subsections (b) through (e) do not apply to
proceeds of agricultural liens. However, if an agricultural lien has priority under subsection (g) and the statute
creating the agricultural lien gives the secured party a lien on proceeds of the collateral subject to the lien, a court
should apply the principle of subsection (g) and award priority in the proceeds to the holder of the perfected
agricultural lien.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-323
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-323. FUTURE ADVANCES
(a) [When priority based on time of advance.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), for
purposes of determining the priority of a perfected security interest under Section 9-322(a)(1), perfection of
the security interest dates from the time an advance is made to the extent that the security interest secures
an advance that:
(1) is made while the security interest is perfected only:
(A) under Section 9-309 when it attaches; or
(B) temporarily under Section 9-312(e), (f), or (g); and
(2) is not made pursuant to a commitment entered into before or while the security interest is perfected
by a method other than under Section 9-309 or 9-312(e), (f), or (g).
(b) [Lien creditor.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), a security interest is subordinate to the
rights of a person that becomes a lien creditor to the extent that the security interest secures an advance
made more than 45 days after the person becomes a lien creditor unless the advance is made:
(1) without knowledge of the lien; or
(2) pursuant to a commitment entered into without knowledge of the lien.
(c) [Buyer of receivables.] Subsections (a) and (b) do not apply to a security interest held by a secured
party that is a buyer of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes or a consignor.
(d) [Buyer of goods.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e), a buyer of goods other than a buyer
in ordinary course of business takes free of a security interest to the extent that it secures advances made
after the earlier of:
(1) the time the secured party acquires knowledge of the buyer's purchase; or
(2) 45 days after the purchase.
(e) [Advances made pursuant to commitment: priority of buyer of goods.] Subsection (d) does not
apply if the advance is made pursuant to a commitment entered into without knowledge of the buyer's
purchase and before the expiration of the 45-day period.
(f) [Lessee of goods.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (g), a lessee of goods, other than a
lessee in ordinary course of business, takes the leasehold interest free of a security interest to the extent
that it secures advances made after the earlier of:
(1) the time the secured party acquires knowledge of the lease; or
(2) 45 days after the lease contract becomes enforceable.
(g) [Advances made pursuant to commitment: priority of lessee of goods.] Subsection (f) does not
apply if the advance is made pursuant to a commitment entered into without knowledge of the lease and
before the expiration of the 45-day period.
Annotations
§ 9-323. FUTURE ADVANCES
Page 2 of 3
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Sections 9-312(7), 9-301(4), 9-307(3), 2A-307(4).
2. Scope of This Section. A security agreement may provide that collateral secures future advances. See
Section 9-204(c). This section collects all of the special rules dealing with the priority of advances made by a
secured party after a third party acquires an interest in the collateral. Subsection (a) applies when the third party is
a competing secured party. It replaces and clarifies former Section 9-312(7). Subsection (b) deals with lien creditors
and replaces former Section 9-301(4). Subsections (d) and (e) deal with buyers and replace former Section 9-
307(3). Subsections (f) and (g) deal with lessees and replace former Section 2A-307(4).
3. Competing Security Interests. Under a proper reading of the first-to-file-or-perfect rule of Section 9-322(a)(1)
(and former Section 9-312(5)), it is abundantly clear that the time when an advance is made plays no role in
determining priorities among conflicting security interests except when a financing statement was not filed and the
advance is the giving of value as the last step for attachment and perfection. Thus, a secured party takes subject to
all advances secured by a competing security interest having priority under Section 9-322(a)(1). This result
generally obtains regardless of how the competing security interest is perfected and regardless of whether the
advances are made "pursuant to commitment" (Section 9-102). Subsection (a) of this section states the only other
instance when the time of an advance figures in the priority scheme in Section 9-322: when the security interest is
perfected only automatically under Section 9-309 or temporarily under Section 9-312(e), (f), or (g), and the advance
is not made pursuant to a commitment entered into while the security interest was perfected by another method.
Thus, an advance has priority from the date it is made only in the rare case in which it is made without commitment
and while the security interest is perfected only temporarily under Section 9-312.
The new formulation in subsection (a) clarifies the result when the initial advance is paid and a new ("future")
advance is made subsequently. Under former Section 9-312(7), the priority of the new advance turned on whether it
was "made while a security interest is perfected." This section resolves any ambiguity by omitting the quoted
phrase.
Example 1: On February 1, A makes an advance secured by machinery in the debtor's possession and files a
financing statement. On March 1, B makes an advance secured by the same machinery and files a financing
statement. On April 1, A makes a further advance, under the original security agreement, against the same
machinery. A was the first to file and so, under the first-to-file-or-perfect rule of Section 9-322(a)(1), A's security
interest has priority over B's, both as to the February 1 and as to the April 1 advance. It makes no difference
whether A knows of B's intervening advance when A makes the second advance. Note that, as long as A was the
first to file or perfect, A would have priority with respect to both advances if either A or B had perfected by taking
possession of the collateral. Likewise, A would have priority if A's April 1 advance was not made under the original
agreement with the debtor, but was under a new agreement.
Example 2: On October 1, A acquires a temporarily perfected (20-day) security interest, unfiled, in a tangible
negotiable document in the debtor's possession under Section 9-312(e) or (f). The security interest secures an
advance made on that day as well as future advances. On October 5, B files and thereby perfects a security interest
that previously had attached to the same document. On October 8, A makes an additional advance. On October 10,
A files. Under Section 9-322(a)(1), because A was the first to perfect and maintained continuous perfection or filing
since the start of the 20-day period, A has priority, even after the 20-day period expires. See Section 9-322,
Comment 4, Example 3. However, under this section, for purposes of Section 9-322(a)(1), to the extent A's security
interest secures the October 8 advance, the security interest was perfected on October 8. Inasmuch as B perfected
on October 5, B has priority over the October 8 advance.
§ 9-323. FUTURE ADVANCES
Page 3 of 3
The rule in subsection (a) is more liberal toward the priority of future advances than the corresponding rules
applicable to intervening lien creditors (subsection (b)), buyers (subsections (d) and (e)), and lessees (subsections
(f) and (g)).
4. Competing Lien Creditors. Subsection (b) replaces former Section 9-301(4) and addresses the rights of a
"lien creditor," as defined in Section 9-102. Under Section 9-317(a)(2), a security interest is senior to the rights of a
person who becomes a lien creditor, unless the person becomes a lien creditor before the security interest is
perfected and before a financing statement covering the collateral is filed and Section 9-203(b)(3) is satisfied.
Subsection (b) of this section provides that a security interest is subordinate to those rights to the extent that the
specified circumstances occur. Subsection (b) does not elevate the priority of a security interest that is subordinate
to the rights of a lien creditor under Section 9-317(a)(2); it only subordinates.*
As under former Section 9-301(4), a secured party's knowledge does not cut short the 45-day period during which
future advances can achieve priority over an intervening lien creditor's interest. Rather, because of the impact of the
rule in subsection (b) on the question whether the security interest for future advances is "protected" under Section
6323(c)(2) and (d) of the Internal Revenue Code as amended by the Federal Tax Lien Act of 1966, the priority of
the security interest for future advances over a lien creditor is made absolute for 45 days regardless of knowledge
of the secured party concerning the lien. If, however, the advance is made after the 45 days, the advance will not
have priority unless it was made or committed without knowledge of the lien. *Amendments in italics approved by
the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code October 20, 1999 and January 15, 2000.
5. Sales of Receivables; Consignments. Subsections (a) and (b) do not apply to outright sales of accounts,
chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes, nor do they apply to consignments.
6. Competing Buyers and Lessees. Under subsections (d) and (e), a buyer will not take subject to a security
interest to the extent it secures advances made after the secured party has knowledge that the buyer has
purchased the collateral or more than 45 days after the purchase unless the advances were made pursuant to a
commitment entered into before the expiration of the 45-day period and without knowledge of the purchase.
Subsections (f) and (g) provide an analogous rule for lessees. Of course, a buyer in ordinary course who takes free
of the security interest under Section 9-320 and a lessee in ordinary course who takes free under Section 9-321 are
not subject to any future advances. Subsections (d) and (e) replace former Section 9-307(3), and subsections (f)
and (g) replace former Section 2A-307(4). No change in meaning is intended.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-324
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-324. PRIORITY OF PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTERESTS
(a) [General rule: purchase-money priority.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (g), a perfected
purchase-money security interest in goods other than inventory or livestock has priority over a conflicting
security interest in the same goods, and, except as otherwise provided in Section 9-327, a perfected
security interest in its identifiable proceeds also has priority, if the purchase-money security interest is
perfected when the debtor receives possession of the collateral or within 20 days thereafter.
(b) [Inventory purchase-money priority.] Subject to subsection (c) and except as otherwise provided in
subsection (g), a perfected purchase-money security interest in inventory has priority over a conflicting
security interest in the same inventory, has priority over a conflicting security interest in chattel paper or an
instrument constituting proceeds of the inventory and in proceeds of the chattel paper, if so provided in
Section 9-330, and, except as otherwise provided in Section 9-327, also has priority in identifiable cash
proceeds of the inventory to the extent the identifiable cash proceeds are received on or before the delivery
of the inventory to a buyer, if:
(1) the purchase-money security interest is perfected when the debtor receives possession of the
inventory;
(2) the purchase-money secured party sends an authenticated notification to the holder of the
conflicting security interest;
(3) the holder of the conflicting security interest receives the notification within five years before the
debtor receives possession of the inventory; and
(4) the notification states that the person sending the notification has or expects to acquire a purchasemoney
security interest in inventory of the debtor and describes the inventory.
(c) [Holders of conflicting inventory security interests to be notified.] Subsections (b)(2) through (4)
apply only if the holder of the conflicting security interest had filed a financing statement covering the same
types of inventory:
(1) if the purchase-money security interest is perfected by filing, before the date of the filing; or
(2) if the purchase-money security interest is temporarily perfected without filing or possession under
Section 9-312(f), before the beginning of the 20-day period thereunder.
(d) [Livestock purchase-money priority.] Subject to subsection (e) and except as otherwise provided in
subsection (g), a perfected purchase-money security interest in livestock that are farm products has priority
over a conflicting security interest in the same livestock, and, except as otherwise provided in Section 9-
327, a perfected security interest in their identifiable proceeds and identifiable products in their
unmanufactured states also has priority, if:
(1) the purchase-money security interest is perfected when the debtor receives possession of the
livestock;
(2) the purchase-money secured party sends an authenticated notification to the holder of the
conflicting security interest;
(3) the holder of the conflicting security interest receives the notification within six months before the
debtor receives possession of the livestock; and
§ 9-324. PRIORITY OF PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTERESTS
Page 2 of 6
(4) the notification states that the person sending the notification has or expects to acquire a purchasemoney
security interest in livestock of the debtor and describes the livestock.
(e) [Holders of conflicting livestock security interests to be notified.] Subsections (d)(2) through (4)
apply only if the holder of the conflicting security interest had filed a financing statement covering the same
types of livestock:
(1) if the purchase-money security interest is perfected by filing, before the date of the filing; or
(2) if the purchase-money security interest is temporarily perfected without filing or possession under
Section 9-312(f), before the beginning of the 20-day period thereunder.
(f) [Software purchase-money priority.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (g), a perfected
purchase-money security interest in software has priority over a conflicting security interest in the same
collateral, and, except as otherwise provided in Section 9-327, a perfected security interest in its identifiable
proceeds also has priority, to the extent that the purchase-money security interest in the goods in which the
software was acquired for use has priority in the goods and proceeds of the goods under this section.
(g) [Conflicting purchase-money security interests.] If more than one security interest qualifies for
priority in the same collateral under subsection (a), (b), (d), or (f):
(1) a security interest securing an obligation incurred as all or part of the price of the collateral has
priority over a security interest securing an obligation incurred for value given to enable the debtor to
acquire rights in or the use of collateral; and
(2) in all other cases, Section 9-322(a) applies to the qualifying security interests.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-312(3), (4).
2. Priority of Purchase-Money Security Interests. This section contains the priority rules applicable to
purchase-money security interests, as defined in Section 9-103. It affords a special, non-temporal priority to those
purchase-money security interests that satisfy the statutory conditions. In most cases, priority will be over a security
interest asserted under an after-acquired property clause. See Section 9-204 on the extent to which security
interests in after-acquired property are validated.
A purchase-money security interest can be created only in goods and software. See Section 9-103. Section 9-
324(a), which follows former Section 9-312(4), contains the general rule for purchase-money security interests in
goods. It is subject to subsections (b) and (c), which derive from former Section 9-312(3) and apply to purchasemoney
security interests in inventory, and subsections (d) and (e), which apply to purchase-money security
interests in livestock that are farm products. Subsection (f) applies to purchase-money security interests in software.
Subsection (g) deals with the relatively unusual case in which a debtor creates two purchase-money security
interests in the same collateral and both security interests qualify for special priority under one of the other
subsections.
Former Section 9-312(2) contained a rule affording special priority to those who provided secured credit that
enabled a debtor to produce crops. This rule proved unworkable and has been eliminated from this Article. Instead,
model Section 9-324A contains a revised production-money priority rule. That section is a model, not uniform,
provision. The sponsors of the UCC have taken no position as to whether it should be enacted, instead leaving the
matter for state legislatures to consider if they are so inclined.
§ 9-324. PRIORITY OF PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTERESTS
Page 3 of 6
3. Purchase-Money Priority in Goods Other Than Inventory and Livestock. Subsection (a) states a general
rule applicable to all types of goods except inventory and farm-products livestock: the purchase-money interest
takes priority if it is perfected when the debtor receives possession of the collateral or within 20 days thereafter. (As
to the 20-day "grace period," compare Section 9-317(e). Former Sections 9-312(4) and 9-301(2) contained a 10-
day grace period.) The perfection requirement means that the purchase-money secured party either has filed a
financing statement before that time or has a temporarily perfected security interest in goods covered by documents
under Section 9-312(e) and (f) which is continued in a perfected status by filing before the expiration of the 20-day
period specified in that section. A purchase-money security interest qualifies for priority under subsection (a), even
if the purchase-money secured party knows that a conflicting security interest has been created and/or that the
holder of the conflicting interest has filed a financing statement covering the collateral.
Normally, there will be no question when "the debtor receives possession of the collateral" for purposes of
subsection (a). However, sometimes a debtor buys goods and takes possession of them in stages, and then
assembly and testing are completed (by the seller or debtor-buyer) at the debtor's location. Under those
circumstances, the buyer "takes possession" within the meaning of subsection (a) when, after an inspection of the
portion of the goods in the debtor's possession, it would be apparent to a potential lender to the debtor that the
debtor has acquired an interest in the goods taken as a whole.
A similar issue concerning the time when "the debtor receives possession" arises when a person acquires
possession of goods under a transaction that is not governed by this Article and then later agrees to buy the goods
on secured credit. For example, a person may take possession of goods as lessee under a lease contract and then
exercise an option to purchase the goods from the lessor on secured credit. Under Section 2A-307(1), creditors of
the lessee generally take subject to the lease contract; filing a financing statement against the lessee is
unnecessary to protect the lessor's leasehold or residual interest. Once the lease is converted to a security interest,
filing a financing statement is necessary to protect the seller's (former lessor's) security interest. Accordingly, the
20-day period in subsection (a) does not commence until the goods become "collateral" (defined in Section 9-102),
i.e., until they are subject to a security interest.
4. Purchase-Money Security Interests in Inventory. Subsections (b) and (c) afford a means by which a
purchase-money security interest in inventory can achieve priority over an earlier-filed security interest in the same
collateral. To achieve priority, the purchase-money security interest must be perfected when the debtor receives
possession of the inventory. For a discussion of when "the debtor receives possession," see Comment 3, above.
The 20-day grace period of subsection (a) does not apply.
The arrangement between an inventory secured party and its debtor typically requires the secured party to make
periodic advances against incoming inventory or periodic releases of old inventory as new inventory is received. A
fraudulent debtor may apply to the secured party for advances even though it has already given a purchase-money
security interest in the inventory to another secured party. For this reason, subsections (b)(2) through (4) and (c)
impose a second condition for the purchase-money security interest's achieving priority: the purchase-money
secured party must give notification to the holder of a conflicting security interest who filed against the same item or
type of inventory before the purchase-money secured party filed or its security interest became perfected
temporarily under Section 9-312(e) or (f). The notification requirement protects the non-purchase-money inventory
secured party in such a situation: if the inventory secured party has received notification, it presumably will not
make an advance; if it has not received notification (or if the other security interest does not qualify as purchasemoney),
any advance the inventory secured party may make ordinarily will have priority under Section 9-322.
Inasmuch as an arrangement for periodic advances against incoming goods is unusual outside the inventory field,
subsection (a) does not contain a notification requirement.
5. Notification to Conflicting Inventory Secured Party: Timing. Under subsection (b)(3), the perfected
purchase-money security interest achieves priority over a conflicting security interest only if the holder of the
conflicting security interest receives a notification within five years before the debtor receives possession of the
purchase-money collateral. If the debtor never receives possession, the five-year period never begins, and the
purchase-money security interest has priority, even if notification is not given. However, where the purchase-money
inventory financing began by the purchase-money secured party's possession of a negotiable document of title, to
§ 9-324. PRIORITY OF PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTERESTS
Page 4 of 6
retain priority the secured party must give the notification required by subsection (b) at or before the usual time, i.e.,
when the debtor gets possession of the inventory, even though the security interest remains perfected for 20 days
under Section 9-312(e) or (f).
Some people have mistakenly read former Section 9-312(3)(b) to require, as a condition of purchase-money
priority in inventory, that the purchase-money secured party give the notification before it files a financing statement.
Read correctly, the "before" clauses compare (i) the time when the holder of the conflicting security interest filed a
financing statement with (ii) the time when the purchase-money security interest becomes perfected by filing or
automatically perfected temporarily. Only if (i) occurs before (ii) must notification be given to the holder of the
conflicting security interest. Subsection (c) has been rewritten to clarify this point.
6. Notification to Conflicting Inventory Secured Party: Address. Inasmuch as the address provided as that of
the secured party on a filed financing statement is an "address that is reasonable under the circumstances," the
holder of a purchase-money security interest may satisfy the requirement to "send" notification to the holder of a
conflicting security interest in inventory by sending a notification to that address, even if the address is or becomes
incorrect. See Section 9-102 (definition of "send"). Similarly, because the address is "held out by [the holder of the
conflicting security interest] as the place for receipt of such communications [i.e., communications relating to
security interests]," the holder is deemed to have "received" a notification delivered to that address. See Section 1-
202(e).
7. Consignments. Subsections (b) and (c) also determine the priority of a consignor's interest in consigned
goods as against a security interest in the goods created by the consignee. Inasmuch as a consignment subject to
this Article is defined to be a purchase-money security interest, see Section 9-103(d), no inference concerning the
nature of the transaction should be drawn from the fact that a consignor uses the term "security interest" in its
notice under subsection (b)(4). Similarly, a notice stating that the consignor has delivered or expects to deliver
goods, properly described, "on consignment" meets the requirements of subsection (b)(4), even if it does not
contain the term "security interest," and even if the transaction subsequently is determined to be a security interest.
Cf. Section 9-505 (use of "consignor" and "consignee" in financing statement).
8. Priority in Proceeds: General. When the purchase-money secured party has priority over another secured
party, the question arises whether this priority extends to the proceeds of the original collateral. Subsections (a), (d),
and (f) give an affirmative answer, but only as to proceeds in which the security interest is perfected (see Section 9-
315). Although this qualification did not appear in former Section 9-312(4), it was implicit in that provision.
In the case of inventory collateral under subsection (b), where financing frequently is based on the resulting
accounts, chattel paper, or other proceeds, the special priority of the purchase-money secured interest carries over
into only certain types of proceeds. As under former Section 9-312(3), the purchase-money priority in inventory
under subsection (b) carries over into identifiable cash proceeds (defined in Section 9-102) received on or before
the delivery of the inventory to a buyer.
As a general matter, also like former Section 9-312(3), the purchase-money priority in inventory does not carry
over into proceeds consisting of accounts or chattel paper. Many parties financing inventory are quite content to
protect their first-priority security interest in the inventory itself. They realize that when the inventory is sold,
someone else will be financing the resulting receivables (accounts or chattel paper), and the priority for inventory
will not run forward to the receivables constituting the proceeds. Indeed, the cash supplied by the receivables
financer often will be used to pay the inventory financing. In some situations, the party financing the inventory on a
purchase-money basis makes contractual arrangements that the proceeds of receivables financing by another be
devoted to paying off the inventory security interest.
However, the purchase-money priority in inventory does carry over to proceeds consisting of chattel paper and its
proceeds (and also to instruments) to the extent provided in Section 9-330. Under Section 9-330(e), the holder of a
purchase-money security interest in inventory is deemed to give new value for proceeds consisting of chattel paper.
Taken together, Sections 9-324(b) and 9-330(e) enable a purchase-money inventory secured party to obtain priority
in chattel paper constituting proceeds of the inventory, even if the secured party does not actually give new value
§ 9-324. PRIORITY OF PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTERESTS
Page 5 of 6
for the chattel paper, provided the purchase-money secured party satisfies the other conditions for achieving
priority.
When the proceeds of original collateral (goods or software) consist of a deposit account, Section 9-327 governs
priority to the extent it conflicts with the priority rules of this section.
9. Priority in Accounts Constituting Proceeds of Inventory. The application of the priority rules in subsection
(b) is shown by the following examples:
Example 1: Debtor creates a security interest in its existing and after-acquired inventory in favor of SP-1, who
files a financing statement covering inventory. SP-2 subsequently takes a purchase-money security interest in
certain inventory and, under subsection (b), achieves priority in this inventory over SP-1. This inventory is then sold,
producing accounts. Accounts are not cash proceeds, and so the special purchase-money priority in the inventory
does not control the priority in the accounts. Rather, the first-to-file-or-perfect rule of Section 9-322(a)(1) applies.
The time of SP-1's filing as to the inventory is also the time of filing as to the accounts under Section 9-322 (b).
Assuming that each security interest in the accounts proceeds remains perfected under Section 9-315, SP-1 has
priority as to the accounts.
Example 2: In Example 1, if SP-2 had filed directly against accounts, the date of that filing as to accounts would
be compared with the date of SP-1's filing as to the inventory. The first filed would prevail under Section 9-
322(a)(1).
Example 3: If SP-3 had filed against accounts in Example 1 before either SP-1 or SP-2 filed against inventory,
SP-3's filing against accounts would have priority over the filings of SP-1 and SP-2. This result obtains even though
the filings against inventory are effective to continue the perfected status of SP-1's and SP-2's security interest in
the accounts beyond the 20-day period of automatic perfection. See Section 9-315. SP-1's and SP-2's position as
to the inventory does not give them a claim to accounts (as proceeds of the inventory) which is senior to someone
who has filed earlier against accounts. If, on the other hand, either SP-1's or SP-2's filing against the inventory
preceded SP-3's filing against accounts, SP-1 or SP-2 would outrank SP-3 as to the accounts.
10. Purchase-Money Security Interests in Livestock. New subsections (d) and (e) provide a purchase-money
priority rule for farm-products livestock. They are patterned on the purchase-money priority rule for inventory found
in subsections (b) and (c) and include a requirement that the purchase-money secured party notify earlier-filed
parties. Two differences between subsections (b) and (d) are noteworthy. First, unlike the purchase-money
inventory lender, the purchase-money livestock lender enjoys priority in all proceeds of the collateral. Thus, under
subsection (d), the purchase-money secured party takes priority in accounts over an earlier-filed accounts financer.
Second, subsection (d) affords priority in certain products of the collateral as well as proceeds.
11. Purchase-Money Security Interests in Aquatic Farm Products. Aquatic goods produced in aquacultural
operations (e.g., catfish raised on a catfish farm) are farm products. See Section 9-102 (definition of "farm
products"). The definition does not indicate whether aquatic goods are "crops," as to which the model production
money security interest priority in Section 9-324A applies, or "livestock," as to which the purchase-money priority in
subsection (d) of this section applies. This Article leaves courts free to determine the classification of particular
aquatic goods on a case-by-case basis, applying whichever priority rule makes more sense in the overall context of
the debtor's business.
12. Purchase-Money Security Interests in Software. Subsection (f) governs the priority of purchase-money
security interests in software. Under Section 9-103(c), a purchase-money security interest arises in software only if
the debtor acquires its interest in the software for the principal purpose of using the software in goods subject to a
purchase-money security interest. Under subsection (f), a purchase-money security interest in software has the
same priority as the purchase-money security interest in the goods in which the software was acquired for use. This
priority is determined under subsections (b) and (c) (for inventory) or (a) (for other goods).
§ 9-324. PRIORITY OF PURCHASE-MONEY SECURITY INTERESTS
Page 6 of 6
13. Multiple Purchase-Money Security Interests. New subsection (g) governs priority among multiple
purchase-money security interests in the same collateral. It grants priority to purchase-money security interests
securing the price of collateral (i.e., created in favor of the seller) over purchase-money security interests that
secure enabling loans. Section 7.2(c) of the Restatement (3d) of the Law of Property (Mortgages) (1997) adopts
this rule with respect to real property mortgages. As Comment d to that section explains:
the equities favor the vendor. Not only does the vendor part with specific real estate rather than money, but the
vendor would never relinquish it at all except on the understanding that the vendor will be able to use it to satisfy the
obligation to pay the price. This is the case even though the vendor may know that the mortgagor is going to
finance the transaction in part by borrowing from a third party and giving a mortgage to secure that obligation. In the
final analysis, the law is more sympathetic to the vendor's hazard of losing real estate previously owned than to the
third party lender's risk of being unable to collect from an interest in real estate that never previously belonged to it.
The first-to-file-or-perfect rule of Section 9-322 applies to multiple purchase-money security interests securing
enabling loans.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-325
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-325. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN TRANSFERRED
COLLATERAL
(a) [Subordination of security interest in transferred collateral.] Except as otherwise provided in
subsection (b), a security interest created by a debtor is subordinate to a security interest in the same
collateral created by another person if:
(1) the debtor acquired the collateral subject to the security interest created by the other person;
(2) the security interest created by the other person was perfected when the debtor acquired the
collateral; and
(3) there is no period thereafter when the security interest is unperfected.
(b) [Limitation of subsection (a) subordination.] Subsection (a) subordinates a security interest only if
the security interest:
(1) otherwise would have priority solely under Section 9-322(a) or 9-324; or
(2) arose solely under Section 2-711(3) or 2A-508(5).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. "Double Debtor Problem." This section addresses the "double debtor" problem, which arises when a debtor
acquires property that is subject to a security interest created by another debtor.
3. Taking Subject to Perfected Security Interest. Consider the following scenario:
Example 1: A owns an item of equipment subject to a perfected security interest in favor of SP-A. A sells the
equipment to B, not in the ordinary course of business. B acquires its interest subject to SP-A's security interest.
See Sections 9-201, 9-315(a)(1). Under this section, if B creates a security interest in the equipment in favor of SPB,
SP-B's security interest is subordinate to SP-A's security interest, even if SP-B filed against B before SP-A filed
against A, and even if SP-B took a purchase-money security interest. Normally, SP-B could have investigated the
source of the equipment and discovered SP-A's filing before making an advance against the equipment, whereas
SP-A had no reason to search the filings against someone other than its debtor, A.
4. Taking Subject to Unperfected Security Interest. This section applies only if the security interest in the
transferred collateral was perfected when the transferee acquired the collateral. See subsection (a)(2). If this
condition is not met, then the normal priority rules apply.
Example 2: A owns an item of equipment subject to an unperfected security interest in favor of SP-A. A sells the
equipment to B, who gives value and takes delivery of the equipment without knowledge of the security interest. B
§ 9-325. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN TRANSFERRED COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
takes free of the security interest. See Section 9-317(b). If B then creates a security interest in favor of SP-B, no
priority issue arises; SP-B has the only security interest in the equipment.
Example 3: The facts are as in Example 2, except that B knows of SP-A's security interest and therefore takes
the equipment subject to it. If B creates a security interest in the equipment in favor of SP-B, this section does not
determine the relative priority of the security interests. Rather, the normal priority rules govern. If SP-B perfects its
security interest, then, under Section 9-322(a)(2), SP-A's unperfected security interest will be junior to SP-B's
perfected security interest. The award of priority to SP-B is premised on the belief that SP-A's failure to file could
have misled SP-B.
5. Taking Subject to Perfected Security Interest that Becomes Unperfected. This section applies only if the
security interest in the transferred collateral did not become unperfected at any time after the transferee acquired
the collateral. See subsection (a)(3). If this condition is not met, then the normal priority rules apply.
Example 4: As in Example 1, A owns an item of equipment subject to a perfected security interest in favor of SPA.
A sells the equipment to B, not in the ordinary course of business. B acquires its interest subject to SP-A's
security interest. See Sections 9-201, 9-315(a)(1). B creates a security interest in favor of SP-B, and SP-B perfects
its security interest. This section provides that SP-A's security interest is senior to SP-B's. However, if SP-A's
financing statement lapses while SP-B's security interest is perfected, then the normal priority rules would apply,
and SP-B's security interest would become senior to SP-A's security interest. See Sections 9-322(a)(2), 9-515(c).
6. Unusual Situations. The appropriateness of the rule of subsection (a) is most apparent when it works to
subordinate security interests having priority under the basic priority rules of Section 9-322(a) or the purchasemoney
priority rules of Section 9-324. The rule also works properly when applied to the security interest of a buyer
under Section 2-711(3) or a lessee under Section 2A-508(5). However, subsection (a) may provide an inappropriate
resolution of the "double debtor" problem in some of the wide variety of other contexts in which the problem may
arise. Although subsection (b) limits the application of subsection (a) to those cases in which subordination is
known to be appropriate, courts should apply the rule in other settings, if necessary to promote the underlying
purposes and policies of the Uniform Commercial Code. See Section 1-102(1).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-326
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-326. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS CREATED BY NEW DEBTOR
(a) [Subordination of security interest created by new debtor.] Subject to subsection (b), a security
interest that is created by a new debtor in collateral in which the new debtor has or acquires rights and is
perfected sorely by a filed financing statement that is would be ineffective to perfect the security interest but
for the application of Section 9-316(i)(1) or 9-508 is subordinate to a security interest in the same collateral
which is perfected other than by such a filed financing statement.
(b) [Priority under other provisions; multiple original debtors.] The other provisions of this part
determine the priority among conflicting security interests in the same collateral perfected by filed financing
statements described in subsection (a). However, if the security agreements to which a new debtor became
bound as debtor were not entered into by the same original debtor, the conflicting security interests rank
according to priority in time of the new debtor's having become bound.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Subordination of Security Interests Created by New Debtor. This section addresses the priority contests
that may arise when a new debtor becomes bound by the security agreement of an original debtor and each debtor
has a secured creditor.
Subsection (a) subordinates the original debtor's secured party's security interest perfected against the new
debtor by a filed financing statement that would be ineffective to perfect the security interest but for Section 9-508
or, if the original debtor and new debtor are located in different jurisdictions, Section 9-316(i)(1). The security
interest is subordinated to security interests in the same collateral perfected by another method, e.g., by filing
against the new debtor. This section does not subordinate a security interest perfected by a new initial financing
statement providing the name of the new debtor, even if the initial financing statement is filed to maintain the
effectiveness of a financing statement under the circumstances described in Section 9-508(b). Nor does it
subordinate a security interest perfected by a financing statement filed against the original debtor which remains
effective against collateral transferred by the original debtor to the new debtor. See Section 9-508(c). Concerning
priority contests involving transferred collateral, see Sections 9-325 and 9-507.
Example 1: SP-X holds a perfected-by-filing security interest in X Corp's existing and after-acquired inventory,
and SP-Z holds a perfected-by-possession security interest in an item of Z Corp's inventory. Both X Corp and Z
Corp are located in the same jurisdiction under Section 9-307. Z Corp becomes bound as debtor by X Corp's
security agreement (e.g., Z Corp buys X Corp's assets and assumes its security agreement). See Section 9-203(d).
But for Section 9-508, SP-X's financing statement would be ineffective to perfect a security interest in the item of
inventory in which Z Corp has rights. However, subsection (a) provides that SP-X's perfected security interest is
subordinate to SP-Z's, regardless of whether SP-X's financing statement was filed before SP-Z perfected its
security interest.
§ 9-326. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS CREATED BY NEW DEBTOR
Page 2 of 3
Example 2: SP-X holds a perfected-by-filing security interest in X Corp's existing and after-acquired inventory,
and SP-Z holds a perfected-by-filing security interest in Z Corp's existing and after-acquired inventory. Both X Corp
and Z Corp are located in the same jurisdiction under Section 9-307. Z Corp becomes bound as debtor by X Corp's
security agreement. Immediately thereafter, and before the effectiveness of SP-X's financing statement lapses, Z
Corp acquires a new item of inventory. But for Section 9-508, SP-X's financing statement would be ineffective to
perfect a security interest in the new item of inventory in which Z Corp has rights. However, because SP-Z's
security interest was perfected by a filing whose effectiveness does not depend on Section 9-316(i)(1) or 9-508,
subsection (a) subordinates SP-X's perfected security interest to SP-Z's. This would be the case even if SP-Z filed
after Z Corp became bound by X Corp's security agreement, and regardless of which financing statement was filed
first.
The same result would obtain if X Corp and Z Corp were located in different jurisdictions. SP-X's security interest
would be perfected by a financing statement that would be ineffective but for Section 9-316(i)(1), whereas the
effectiveness of SP-Z's filing does not depend on Section 9-316(i)(1) or 9-508.
3. Other Priority Rules. Subsection (b) addresses the priority among security interests created by the original
debtor (X Corp). By invoking the other priority rules of this subpart, as applicable, subsection (b) preserves the
relative priority of security interests created by the original debtor.
Example 3: Under the facts of Example 2, SP-Y also holds a perfected-by-filing security interest in X Corp's
existing and after-acquired inventory. SP-Y filed after SP-X. Inasmuch as both SP-X's and SP-Y's security interests
in inventory acquired by Z Corp after it became bound would be unperfected but for the application of Section 9-
508, the normal priority rules determine their relative priorities. Under the "first-to-file-or-perfect" rule of Section 9-
322(a)(1), SP-X has priority over SP-Y.
Example 4: Under the facts of Example 3, after Z Corp became bound by X Corp's security agreement, SP-Y
promptly filed a new initial financing statement against Z Corp. SP-X's security interest remains perfected only by
virtue of its original filing against X Corp which "would be ineffective to perfect the security interest but for the
application of Section 9-508." Because SP-Y's security interest is perfected by the filing of a financing statement
whose effectiveness does not depend on Section 9-508 or 9-316(i)(1), subsection (a) subordinates SP-X's security
interest to SP-Y's. If both SP-X and SP-Y file a new initial financing statement against Z Corp, then the "first-to-fileor-
perfect" rule of Section 9-322(a)(1) governs their priority inter se as well as their priority against SP-Z.
The second sentence of subsection (b) effectively limits the applicability of the first sentence to situations in which
a new debtor has become bound by more than one security agreement entered into by the same original debtor.
When the new debtor has become bound by security agreements entered into by different original debtors, the
second sentence provides that priority is based on priority in time of the new debtor's becoming bound.
Example 5: Under the facts of Example 2, SP-W holds a perfected-by-filing security interest in W Corp's existing
and after-acquired inventory. After Z Corp became bound by X Corp's security agreement in favor of SP-X, Z Corp
became bound by W Corp's security agreement. Under subsection (b), SP-W's security interest in inventory
acquired by Z Corp is subordinate to that of SP-X, because Z Corp became bound under SP-X's security
agreement before it became bound under SP-W's security agreement. This is the result regardless of which
financing statement (SP-X's or SP-W's) was filed first.
The second sentence of subsection (b) reflects the generally accepted view that priority based on the first-to-file
rule is inappropriate for resolving priority disputes when the filings were made against different debtors. Like
subsection (a) and the first sentence of subsection (b), however, the second sentence of subsection (b) relates only
to priority conflicts among security interests that would be unperfected but for the application of Section 9-316(i)(1)
or 9-508.
Example 6: Under the facts of Example 5, after Z Corp became bound by W Corp's security agreement, SP-W
promptly filed a new initial financing statement against Z Corp. At that time, SP-X's security interest was perfected
only pursuant to its original filing against X Corp which "would be ineffective to perfect the security interest but for
the application of Section 9-508." Because SP-W's security interest is perfected by the filing of a financing
§ 9-326. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS CREATED BY NEW DEBTOR
Page 3 of 3
statement whose effectiveness does not depend on Section 9-316(i)(1) or 9-508, subsection (a) subordinates SPX's
security interest to SP-W's. If both SP-X and SP-W file a new initial financing statement against Z Corp, then the
"first-to-file-or-perfect" rule of Section 9-322(a)(1) governs their priority inter se as well as their priority against SP-Z.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-327
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-327. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
The following rules govern priority among conflicting security interests in the same deposit account:
(1) A security interest held by a secured party having control of the deposit account under Section 9-
104 has priority over a conflicting security interest held by a secured party that does not have control.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), security interests perfected by control
under Section 9-314 rank according to priority in time of obtaining control.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (4), a security interest held by the bank with which the
deposit account is maintained has priority over a conflicting security interest held by another secured
party.
(4) A security interest perfected by control under Section 9-104(a)(3) has priority over a security
interest held by the bank with which the deposit account is maintained.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New; derived from former Section 9-115(5).
2. Scope of This Section. This section contains the rules governing the priority of conflicting security interests in
deposit accounts. It overrides conflicting priority rules. See Sections 9-322(f)(1), 9-324(a), (b), (d), (f). This section
does not apply to accounts evidenced by an instrument (e.g., certain certificates of deposit), which by definition are
not "deposit accounts."
3. Control. Under paragraph (1), security interests perfected by control (Sections 9-314, 9-104) take priority over
those perfected otherwise, e.g., as identifiable cash proceeds under Section 9-315. Secured parties for whom the
deposit account is an integral part of the credit decision will, at a minimum, insist upon the right to immediate
access to the deposit account upon the debtor's default (i.e., control). Those secured parties for whom the deposit
account is less essential will not take control, thereby running the risk that the debtor will dispose of funds on
deposit (either outright or for collateral purposes) after default but before the account can be frozen by court order
or the secured party can obtain control.
Paragraph (2) governs the case (expected to be very rare) in which a bank enters into a Section 9-104(a)(2)
control agreement with more than one secured party. It provides that the security interests rank according to time of
obtaining control. If the bank is solvent and the control agreements are well drafted, the bank will be liable to each
secured party, and the priority rule will have no practical effect.
4. Priority of Bank. Under paragraph (3), the security interest of the bank with which the deposit account is
maintained normally takes priority over all other conflicting security interests in the deposit account, regardless of
whether the deposit account constitutes the competing secured party's original collateral or its proceeds. A rule of
§ 9-327. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
Page 2 of 2
this kind enables banks to extend credit to their depositors without the need to examine either the public record or
their own records to determine whether another party might have a security interest in the deposit account.
A secured party who takes a security interest in the deposit account as original collateral can protect itself against
the results of this rule in one of two ways. It can take control of the deposit account by becoming the bank's
customer. Under paragraph (4), this arrangement operates to subordinate the bank's security interest. Alternatively,
the secured party can obtain a subordination agreement from the bank. See Section 9-339.
A secured party who claims the deposit account as proceeds of other collateral can reduce the risk of becoming
junior by obtaining the debtor's agreement to deposit proceeds into a specific cash-collateral account and obtaining
the agreement of that bank to subordinate all its claims to those of the secured party. But if the debtor violates its
agreement and deposits funds into a deposit account other than the cash-collateral account, the secured party risks
being subordinated.
5. Priority in Proceeds of, and Funds Transferred from, Deposit Account. The priority afforded by this section
does not extend to proceeds of a deposit account. Rather, Section 9-322(c) through (e) and the provisions referred
to in Section 9-322(f) govern priorities in proceeds of a deposit account. Section 9-315(d) addresses continuation of
perfection in proceeds of deposit accounts. As to funds transferred from a deposit account that serves as collateral,
see Section 9-332.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-328
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-328. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN INVESTMENT PROPERTY
The following rules govern priority among conflicting security interests in the same investment property:
(1) A security interest held by a secured party having control of investment property under Section 9-
106 has priority over a security interest held by a secured party that does not have control of the
investment property.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), conflicting security interests held by
secured parties each of which has control under Section 9-106 rank according to priority in time of:
(A) if the collateral is a security, obtaining control;
(B) if the collateral is a security entitlement carried in a securities account and:
(i) if the secured party obtained control under Section 8-106(d)(1), the secured party's
becoming the person for which the securities account is maintained;
(ii) if the secured party obtained control under Section 8-106(d)(2), the securities
intermediary's agreement to comply with the secured party's entitlement orders with respect to
security entitlements carried or to be carried in the securities account; or
(iii) if the secured party obtained control through another person under Section 8-106(d)(3),
the time on which priority would be based under this paragraph if the other person were the
secured party; or
(C) if the collateral is a commodity contract carried with a commodity intermediary, the satisfaction
of the requirement for control specified in Section 9-106(b)(2) with respect to commodity contracts
carried or to be carried with the commodity intermediary.
(3) A security interest held by a securities intermediary in a security entitlement or a securities account
maintained with the securities intermediary has priority over a conflicting security interest held by
another secured party.
(4) A security interest held by a commodity intermediary in a commodity contract or a commodity
account maintained with the commodity intermediary has priority over a conflicting security interest held
by another secured party.
(5) A security interest in a certificated security in registered form which is perfected by taking delivery
under Section 9-313(a) and not by control under Section 9-314 has priority over a conflicting security
interest perfected by a method other than control.
(6) Conflicting security interests created by a broker, securities intermediary, or commodity
intermediary which are perfected without control under Section 9-106 rank equally.
(7) In all other cases, priority among conflicting security interests in investment property is governed by
Sections 9-322 and 9-323.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 9-328. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN INVESTMENT PROPERTY
Page 2 of 6
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-115(5).
2. Scope of This Section. This section contains the rules governing the priority of conflicting security interests in
investment property. Paragraph (1) states the most important general rule--that a secured party who obtains control
has priority over a secured party who does not obtain control. Paragraphs (2) through (4) deal with conflicting
security interests each of which is perfected by control. Paragraph (5) addresses the priority of a security interest in
a certificated security which is perfected by delivery but not control. Paragraph (6) deals with the relatively unusual
circumstance in which a broker, securities intermediary, or commodity intermediary has created conflicting security
interests none of which is perfected by control. Paragraph (7) provides that the general priority rules of Sections 9-
322 and 9-323 apply to cases not covered by the specific rules in this section. The principal application of this
residual rule is that the usual first in time of filing rule applies to conflicting security interests that are perfected only
by filing. Because the control priority rule of paragraph (1) provides for the ordinary cases in which persons
purchase securities on margin credit from their brokers, there is no need for special rules for purchase-money
security interests. See also Section 9-103 (limiting purchase-money collateral to goods and software).
3. General Rule: Priority of Security Interest Perfected by Control. Under paragraph (1), a secured party who
obtains control has priority over a secured party who does not obtain control. The control priority rule does not turn
on either temporal sequence or awareness of conflicting security interests. Rather, it is a structural rule, based on
the principle that a lender should be able to rely on the collateral without question if the lender has taken the
necessary steps to assure itself that it is in a position where it can foreclose on the collateral without further action
by the debtor. The control priority rule is necessary because the perfection rules provide considerable flexibility in
structuring secured financing arrangements. For example, at the "retail" level, a secured lender to an investor who
wants the full measure of protection can obtain control, but the creditor may be willing to accept the greater
measure of risk that follows from perfection by filing. Similarly, at the "wholesale" level, a lender to securities firms
can leave the collateral with the debtor and obtain a perfected security interest under the automatic perfection rule
of Section 9-309(10), but a lender who wants to be entirely sure of its position will want to obtain control. The
control priority rule of paragraph (1) is an essential part of this system of flexibility. It is feasible to provide more than
one method of perfecting security interests only if the rules ensure that those who take the necessary steps to
obtain the full measure of protection do not run the risk of subordination to those who have not taken such steps. A
secured party who is unwilling to run the risk that the debtor has granted or will grant a conflicting control security
interest should not make a loan without obtaining control of the collateral.
As applied to the retail level, the control priority rule means that a secured party who obtains control has priority
over a conflicting security interest perfected by filing without regard to inquiry into whether the control secured party
was aware of the filed security interest. Prior to the 1994 revisions to Articles 8 and 9, Article 9 did not permit
perfection of security interests in securities by filing. Accordingly, parties who deal in securities never developed a
practice of searching the UCC files before conducting securities transactions. Although filing is now a permissible
method of perfection, in order to avoid disruption of existing practices in this business it is necessary to give
perfection by filing a different and more limited effect for securities than for some other forms of collateral. The
priority rules are not based on the assumption that parties who perfect by the usual method of obtaining control will
search the files. Quite the contrary, the control priority rule is intended to ensure that, with respect to investment
property, secured parties who do obtain control are entirely unaffected by filings. To state the point another way,
perfection by filing is intended to affect only general creditors or other secured creditors who rely on filing. The rule
that a security interest perfected by filing can be primed by a control security interest, without regard to awareness,
is a consequence of the system of perfection and priority rules for investment property. These rules are designed to
take account of the circumstances of the securities markets, where filing is not given the same effect as for some
other forms of property. No implication is made about the effect of filing with respect to security interests in other
forms of property, nor about other Article 9 rules, e.g., Section 9-330, which govern the circumstances in which
security interests in other forms of property perfected by filing can be primed by subsequent perfected security
interests.
§ 9-328. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN INVESTMENT PROPERTY
Page 3 of 6
The following examples illustrate the application of the priority rule in paragraph (1):
Example 1: Debtor borrows from Alpha and grants Alpha a security interest in a variety of collateral, including all
of Debtor's investment property. At that time Debtor owns 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock for which Debtor has a
certificate. Alpha perfects by filing. Later, Debtor borrows from Beta and grants Beta a security interest in the 1000
shares of XYZ Co. stock. Debtor delivers the certificate, properly indorsed, to Beta. Alpha and Beta both have
perfected security interests in the XYZ Co. stock. Beta has control, see Section 8-106(b)(1), and hence has priority
over Alpha.
Example 2: Debtor borrows from Alpha and grants Alpha a security interest in a variety of collateral, including all
of Debtor's investment property. At that time Debtor owns 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock, held through a securities
account with Able & Co. Alpha perfects by filing. Later, Debtor borrows from Beta and grants Beta a security
interest in the 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock. Debtor instructs Able to have the 1000 shares transferred through the
clearing corporation to Custodian Bank, to be credited to Beta's account with Custodian Bank. Alpha and Beta both
have perfected security interests in the XYZ Co. stock. Beta has control, see Section 8-106(d)(1), and hence has
priority over Alpha.
Example 3: Debtor borrows from Alpha and grants Alpha a security interest in a variety of collateral, including all
of Debtor's investment property. At that time Debtor owns 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock, which is held through a
securities account with Able & Co. Alpha perfects by filing. Later, Debtor borrows from Beta and grants Beta a
security interest in the 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock. Debtor, Able, and Beta enter into an agreement under which
Debtor will continue to receive dividends and distributions, and will continue to have the right to direct dispositions,
but Beta will also have the right to direct dispositions and receive the proceeds. Alpha and Beta both have perfected
security interests in the XYZ Co. stock (more precisely, in the Debtor's security entitlement to the financial asset
consisting of the XYZ Co. stock). Beta has control, see Section 8-106(d)(2), and hence has priority over Alpha.
Example 4: Debtor borrows from Alpha and grants Alpha a security interest in a variety of collateral, including all
of Debtor's investment property. At that time Debtor owns 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock, held through a securities
account with Able & Co. Alpha perfects by filing. Debtor's agreement with Able & Co. provides that Able has a
security interest in all securities carried in the account as security for any obligations of Debtor to Able. Debtor
incurs obligations to Able and later defaults on the obligations to Alpha and Able. Able has control by virtue of the
rule of Section 8-106(e) that if a customer grants a security interest to its own intermediary, the intermediary has
control. Since Alpha does not have control, Able has priority over Alpha under the general control priority rule of
paragraph (1).
4. Conflicting Security Interests Perfected by Control: Priority of Securities Intermediary or Commodity
Intermediary. Paragraphs (2) through (4) govern the priority of conflicting security interests each of which is
perfected by control. The following example explains the application of the rules in paragraphs (3) and (4):
Example 5: Debtor holds securities through a securities account with Able & Co. Debtor's agreement with Able &
Co. provides that Able has a security interest in all securities carried in the account as security for any obligations of
Debtor to Able. Debtor borrows from Beta and grants Beta a security interest in 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock
carried in the account. Debtor, Able, and Beta enter into an agreement under which Debtor will continue to receive
dividends and distributions and will continue to have the right to direct dispositions, but Beta will also have the right
to direct dispositions and receive the proceeds. Debtor incurs obligations to Able and later defaults on the
obligations to Beta and Able. Both Beta and Able have control, so the general control priority rule of paragraph (1)
does not apply. Compare Example 4. Paragraph (3) provides that a security interest held by a securities
intermediary in positions of its own customer has priority over a conflicting security interest of an external lender, so
Able has priority over Beta. (Paragraph (4) contains a parallel rule for commodity intermediaries.) The agreement
among Able, Beta, and Debtor could, of course, determine the relative priority of the security interests of Able and
Beta, see Section 9-339, but the fact that the intermediary has agreed to act on the instructions of a secured party
such as Beta does not itself imply any agreement by the intermediary to subordinate.
§ 9-328. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN INVESTMENT PROPERTY
Page 4 of 6
5. Conflicting Security Interests Perfected by Control: Temporal Priority. Former Section 9-115 introduced
into Article 9 the concept of conflicting security interests that rank equally. Paragraph (2) of this section governs
priority in those circumstances in which more than one secured party (other than a broker, securities intermediary,
or commodity intermediary) has control. It replaces the equal-priority rule for conflicting security interests in
investment property with a temporal rule. For securities, both certificated and uncertificated, under paragraph (2)(A)
priority is based on the time that control is obtained. For security entitlements carried in securities accounts, the
treatment is more complex. Paragraph (2)(B) bases priority on the timing of the steps taken to achieve control. The
following example illustrates the application of paragraph (2).
Example 6: Debtor borrows from Alpha and grants Alpha a security interest in a variety of collateral, including all
of Debtor's investment property. At that time Debtor owns a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of XYZ
Co. stock that Debtor holds through a securities account with Able & Co. Debtor, Able, and Alpha enter into an
agreement under which Debtor will continue to receive dividends and distributions, and will continue to have the
right to direct dispositions, but Alpha will also have the right to direct dispositions and receive the proceeds. Later,
Debtor borrows from Beta and grants Beta a security interest in all its investment property, existing and afteracquired.
Debtor, Able, and Beta enter into an agreement under which Debtor will continue to receive dividends and
distributions, and will continue to have the right to direct dispositions, but Beta will also have the right to direct
dispositions and receive the proceeds. Alpha and Beta both have perfected-by-control security interests in the
security entitlement to the XYZ Co. stock by virtue of their agreements with Able. See Sections 9-314(a), 9-106(a),
8-106(d)(2). Under paragraph (2)(B)(ii), the priority of each security interest dates from the time of the secured
party's agreement with Able. Because Alpha's agreement was first in time, Alpha has priority. This priority applies
equally to security entitlements to financial assets credited to the account after the agreement was entered into.
The priority rule is analogous to "first-to-file" priority under Section 9-322 with respect to after-acquired collateral.
Paragraphs (2)(B)(i) and (2)(B)(iii) provide similar rules for security entitlements as to which control is obtained by
other methods, and paragraph (2)(C) provides a similar rule for commodity contracts carried in a commodity
account. Section 8-510 also has been revised to provide a temporal priority conforming to paragraph (2)(B).
6. Certificated Securities. A long-standing practice has developed whereby secured parties whose collateral
consists of a security evidenced by a security certificate take possession of the security certificate. If the security
certificate is in bearer form, the secured party's acquisition of possession constitutes "delivery" under Section 8-
301(a)(1), and the delivery constitutes "control" under Section 8-106(a). Comment 5 discusses the priority of
security interests perfected by control of investment property.
If the security certificate is in registered form, the secured party will not achieve control over the security unless
the security certificate contains an appropriate indorsement or is (re)registered in the secured party's name. See
Section 8-106(b). However, the secured party's acquisition of possession constitutes "delivery" of the security
certificate under Section 8-301 and serves to perfect the security interest under Section 9-313(a), even if the
security certificate has not been appropriately indorsed and has not been (re)registered in the secured party's
name. A security interest perfected by this method has priority over a security interest perfected other than by
control (e.g., by filing). See paragraph (5).
The priority rule stated in paragraph (5) may seem anomalous, in that it can afford less favorable treatment to
purchasers who buy collateral outright that to those who take a security interest in it. For example, a buyer of a
security certificate would cut off a security interest perfected by filing only if the buyer achieves the status of a
protected purchaser under Section 8-303. The buyer would not be a protected purchaser, for example, if it does not
obtain "control" under Section 8-106 (e.g., if it fails to obtain a proper indorsement of the certificate) or if it had
notice of an adverse claim under Section 8-105. The apparent anomaly disappears, however, when one
understands the priority rule not as one intended to protect careless or guilty parties, but as one that eliminates the
need to conduct a search of the public records only insofar as necessary to serve the needs of the securities
markets.
7. Secured Financing of Securities Firms. Priority questions concerning security interests granted by brokers
and securities intermediaries are governed by the general control-beats-non-control priority rule of paragraph (1), as
§ 9-328. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN INVESTMENT PROPERTY
Page 5 of 6
supplemented by the special rules set out in paragraphs (2) (temporal priority--first to control), (3) (special priority
for securities intermediary), and (6) (equal priority for non-control). The following examples illustrate the priority
rules as applied to this setting. (In all cases it is assumed that the debtor retains sufficient other securities to satisfy
all customers' claims. This section deals with the relative rights of secured lenders to a securities firm. Disputes
between a secured lender and the firm's own customers are governed by Section 8-511.)
Example 7: Able & Co., a securities dealer, enters into financing arrangements with two lenders, Alpha Bank and
Beta Bank. In each case the agreements provide that the lender will have a security interest in the securities
identified on lists provided to the lender on a daily basis, that the debtor will deliver the securities to the lender on
demand, and that the debtor will not list as collateral any securities which the debtor has pledged to any other
lender. Upon Able's insolvency it is discovered that Able has listed the same securities on the collateral lists
provided to both Alpha and Beta. Alpha and Beta both have perfected security interests under the automaticperfection
rule of Section 9-309(10). Neither Alpha nor Beta has control. Paragraph (6) provides that the security
interests of Alpha and Beta rank equally, because each of them has a non-control security interest granted by a
securities firm. They share pro-rata.
Example 8: Able enters into financing arrangements, with Alpha Bank and Beta Bank as in Example 7. At some
point, however, Beta decides that it is unwilling to continue to provide financing on a non-control basis. Able directs
the clearing corporation where it holds its principal inventory of securities to move specified securities into Beta's
account. Upon Able's insolvency it is discovered that a list of collateral provided to Alpha includes securities that
had been moved to Beta's account. Both Alpha and Beta have perfected security interests; Alpha under the
automatic-perfection rule of Section 9-309(10), and Beta under that rule and also the perfection-by-control rule in
Section 9-314(a). Beta has control but Alpha does not. Beta has priority over Alpha under paragraph (1).
Example 9: Able & Co. carries its principal inventory of securities through Clearing Corporation, which offers a
"shared control" facility whereby a participant securities firm can enter into an arrangement with a lender under
which the securities firm will retain the power to trade and otherwise direct dispositions of securities carried in its
account, but Clearing Corporation agrees that, at any time the lender so directs, Clearing Corporation will transfer
any securities from the firm's account to the lender's account or otherwise dispose of them as directed by the
lender. Able enters into financing arrangements with two lenders, Alpha and Beta, each of which obtains such a
control agreement from Clearing Corporation. The agreement with each lender provides that Able will designate
specific securities as collateral on lists provided to the lender on a daily or other periodic basis, and that it will not
pledge the same securities to different lenders. Upon Able's insolvency, it is discovered that Able has listed the
same securities on the collateral lists provided to both Alpha and Beta. Both Alpha and Beta have control over the
disputed securities. Paragraph (2) awards priority to whichever secured party first entered into the agreement with
Clearing Corporation.
8. Relation to Other Law. Section 1-103 provides that "unless displaced by particular provisions of this Act, the
principles of law and equity . . . shall supplement its provisions." There may be circumstances in which a secured
party's action in acquiring a security interest that has priority under this section constitutes conduct that is wrongful
under other law. Though the possibility of such resort to other law may provide an appropriate "escape valve" for
cases of egregious conduct, care must be taken to ensure that this does not impair the certainty and predictability of
the priority rules. Whether a court may appropriately look to other law to impose liability upon or estop a secured
party from asserting its Article 9 priority depends on an assessment of the secured party's conduct under the
standards established by such other law as well as a determination of whether the particular application of such
other law is displaced by the UCC.
Some circumstances in which other law is clearly displaced by the UCC rules are readily identifiable. Common
law "first in time, first in right" principles, or correlative tort liability rules such as common law conversion principles
under which a purchaser may incur liability to a person with a prior property interest without regard to awareness of
that claim, are necessarily displaced by the priority rules set out in this section since these rules determine the
relative ranking of security interests in investment property. So too, Article 8 provides protections against adverse
claims to certain purchasers of interests in investment property. In circumstances where a secured party not only
§ 9-328. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN INVESTMENT PROPERTY
Page 6 of 6
has priority under Section 9-328, but also qualifies for protection against adverse claims under Section 8-303, 8-
502, or 8-510, resort to other law would be precluded.
In determining whether it is appropriate in a particular case to look to other law, account must also be taken of the
policies that underlie the commercial law rules on securities markets and security interests in securities. A principal
objective of the 1994 revision of Article 8 and the provisions of Article 9 governing investment property was to
ensure that secured financing transactions can be implemented on a simple, timely, and certain basis. One of the
circumstances that led to the revision was the concern that uncertainty in the application of the rules on secured
transactions involving securities and other financial assets could contribute to systemic risk by impairing the ability
of financial institutions to provide liquidity to the markets in times of stress. The control priority rule is designed to
provide a clear and certain rule to ensure that lenders who have taken the necessary steps to establish control do
not face a risk of subordination to other lenders who have not done so.
The control priority rule does not turn on an inquiry into the state of a secured party's awareness of potential
conflicting claims because a rule under which a person's rights depended on that sort of after-the-fact inquiry could
introduce an unacceptable measure of uncertainty. If an inquiry into awareness could provide a complete and
satisfactory resolution of the problem in all cases, the priority rules of this section would have incorporated that test.
The fact that they do not necessarily means that resort to other law based solely on that factor is precluded, though
the question whether a control secured party induced or encouraged its financing arrangement with actual
knowledge that the debtor would be violating the rights of another secured party may, in some circumstances,
appropriately be treated as a factor in determining whether the control party's action is the kind of egregious
conduct for which resort to other law is appropriate.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-329
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-329. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN LETTER-OF-CREDIT RIGHT
The following rules govern priority among conflicting security interests in the same letter-of-credit right:
(1) A security interest held by a secured party having control of the letter-of-credit right under Section
9-107 has priority to the extent of its control over a conflicting security interest held by a secured party
that does not have control.
(2) Security interests perfected by control under Section 9-314 rank according to priority in time of
obtaining control.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New; loosely modeled after former Section 9-115(5).
2. General Rule. Paragraph (1) awards priority to a secured party who perfects a security interest directly in
letter-of-credit rights (i.e., one that takes an assignment of proceeds and obtains consent of the issuer or any
nominated person under Section 5-114(c)) over another conflicting security interest (i.e., one that is perfected
automatically in the letter-of-credit rights as supporting obligations under Section 9-308(d)). This is consistent with
international letter-of-credit practice and provides finality to payments made to recognized assignees of letter-ofcredit
proceeds. If an issuer or nominated person recognizes multiple security interests in a letter-of-credit right,
resulting in multiple parties having control (Section 9-107), under paragraph (2) the security interests rank according
to the time of obtaining control.
3. Drawing Rights; Transferee Beneficiaries. Drawing under a letter of credit is personal to the beneficiary and
requires the beneficiary to perform the conditions for drawing under the letter of credit. Accordingly, a beneficiary's
grant of a security interest in a letter of credit includes the beneficiary's "letter-of-credit right" as defined in Section
9-102 and the right to "proceeds of [the] letter of credit" as defined in Section 5-114(a), but does not include the
right to demand payment under the letter of credit.
Section 5-114(e) provides that the "rights of a transferee beneficiary or nominated person are independent of the
beneficiary's assignment of the proceeds of a letter of credit and are superior to the assignee's right to the
proceeds." To the extent the rights of a transferee beneficiary or nominated person are independent and superior,
this Article does not apply. See Section 9-109(c).
Under Article 5, there is in effect a novation upon the transfer with the issuer becoming bound on a new,
independent obligation to the transferee. The rights of nominated persons and transferee beneficiaries under a
letter of credit include the right to demand payment from the issuer. Under Section 5-114(e), their rights to payment
are independent of their obligations to the beneficiary (or original beneficiary) and superior to the rights of assignees
of letter-of-credit proceeds (Section 5-114(c)) and others claiming a security interest in the beneficiary's (or original
beneficiary's) letter-of-credit rights.
§ 9-329. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN LETTER-OF-CREDIT RIGHT
Page 2 of 2
A transfer of drawing rights under a transferable letter of credit establishes independent Article 5 rights in the
transferee and does not create or perfect an Article 9 security interest in the transferred drawing rights. The
definition of "letter-of-credit right" in Section 9-102 excludes a beneficiary's drawing rights. The exercise of drawing
rights by a transferee beneficiary may breach a contractual obligation of the transferee to the original beneficiary
concerning when and how much the transferee may draw or how it may use the funds received under the letter of
credit. If, for example, drawing rights are transferred to support a sale or loan from the transferee to the original
beneficiary, then the transferee would be obligated to the original beneficiary under the sale or loan agreement to
account for any drawing and for the use of any funds received. The transferee's obligation would be governed by
the applicable law of contracts or restitution.
4. Secured Party-Transferee Beneficiaries. As described in Comment 3, drawing rights under letters of credit
are transferred in many commercial contexts in which the transferee is not a secured party claiming a security
interest in an underlying receivable supported by the letter of credit. Consequently, a transfer of a letter of credit is
not a method of "perfection" of a security interest. The transferee's independent right to draw under the letter of
credit and to receive and retain the value thereunder (in effect, priority) is not based on Article 9 but on letter-ofcredit
law and the terms of the letter of credit. Assume, however, that a secured party does hold a security interest
in a receivable that is owned by a beneficiary-debtor and supported by a transferable letter of credit. Assume further
that the beneficiary-debtor causes the letter of credit to be transferred to the secured party, the secured party draws
under the letter of credit, and, upon the issuer's payment to the secured party-transferee, the underlying account
debtor's obligation to the original beneficiary-debtor is satisfied. In this situation, the payment to the secured partytransferee
is proceeds of the receivable collected by the secured party-transferee. Consequently, the secured partytransferee
would have certain duties to the debtor and third parties under Article 9. For example, it would be obliged
to collect under the letter of credit in a commercially reasonable manner and to remit any surplus pursuant to
Sections 9-607 and 9-608.
This scenario is problematic under letter-of-credit law and practice, inasmuch as a transferee beneficiary collects
in its own right arising from its own performance. Accordingly, under Section 5-114, the independent and superior
rights of a transferee control over any inconsistent duties under Article 9. A transferee beneficiary may take a
transfer of drawing rights to avoid reliance on the original beneficiary's credit and collateral, and it may consider any
Article 9 rights superseded by its Article 5 rights. Moreover, it will not always be clear (i) whether a transferee
beneficiary has a security interest in the underlying collateral, (ii) whether any security interest is senior to the rights
of others, or (iii) whether the transferee beneficiary is aware that it holds a security interest. There will be clear
cases in which the role of a transferee beneficiary as such is merely incidental to a conventional secured financing.
There also will be cases in which the existence of a security interest may have little to do with the position of a
transferee beneficiary as such. In dealing with these cases and less clear cases involving the possible application of
Article 9 to a nominated person or a transferee beneficiary, the right to demand payment under a letter of credit
should be distinguished from letter-of-credit rights. The courts also should give appropriate consideration to the
policies and provisions of Article 5 and letter-of-credit practice as well as Article 9.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-330
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-330. PRIORITY OF PURCHASER OF CHATTEL PAPER OR INSTRUMENT
(a) [Purchaser's priority: security interest claimed merely as proceeds.] A purchaser of chattel paper
has priority over a security interest in the chattel paper which is claimed merely as proceeds of inventory
subject to a security interest if:
(1) in good faith and in the ordinary course of the purchaser's business, the purchaser gives new value
and takes possession of the chattel paper or obtains control of the chattel paper under Section 9-105;
and
(2) the chattel paper does not indicate that it has been assigned to an identified assignee other than
the purchaser.
(b) [Purchaser's priority: other security interests.] A purchaser of chattel paper has priority over a
security interest in the chattel paper which is claimed other than merely as proceeds of inventory subject to
a security interest if the purchaser gives new value and takes possession of the chattel paper or obtains
control of the chattel paper under Section 9-105 in good faith, in the ordinary course of the purchaser's
business, and without knowledge that the purchase violates the rights of the secured party.
(c) [Chattel paper purchaser's priority in proceeds.] Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-327, a
purchaser having priority in chattel paper under subsection (a) or (b) also has priority in proceeds of the
chattel paper to the extent that:
(1) Section 9-322 provides for priority in the proceeds; or
(2) the proceeds consist of the specific goods covered by the chattel paper or cash proceeds of the
specific goods, even if the purchaser's security interest in the proceeds is unperfected.
(d) [Instrument purchaser's priority.] Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-331(a), a purchaser of
an instrument has priority over a security interest in the instrument perfected by a method other than
possession if the purchaser gives value and takes possession of the instrument in good faith and without
knowledge that the purchase violates the rights of the secured party.
(e) [Holder of purchase-money security interest gives new value.] For purposes of subsections (a) and
(b), the holder of a purchase-money security interest in inventory gives new value for chattel paper
constituting proceeds of the inventory.
(f) [Indication of assignment gives knowledge.] For purposes of subsections (b) and (d), if chattel paper
or an instrument indicates that it has been assigned to an identified secured party other than the purchaser,
a purchaser of the chattel paper or instrument has knowledge that the purchase violates the rights of the
secured party.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
§ 9-330. PRIORITY OF PURCHASER OF CHATTEL PAPER OR INSTRUMENT
Page 2 of 6
1. Source. Former Section 9-308.
2. Non-Temporal Priority. This Article permits a security interest in chattel paper or instruments to be perfected
either by filing or by the secured party's taking possession. This section enables secured parties and other
purchasers of chattel paper (both electronic and tangible) and instruments to obtain priority over earlier-perfected
security interests, thereby promoting the negotiability of these types of receivables.
3. Chattel Paper. Subsections (a) and (b) follow former Section 9-308 in distinguishing between earlier-perfected
security interests in chattel paper that is claimed merely as proceeds of inventory subject to a security interest and
chattel paper that is claimed other than merely as proceeds. Like former Section 9-308, this section does not
elaborate upon the phrase "merely as proceeds." For an elaboration, see PEB Commentary No. 8.
This section makes explicit the "good faith" requirement and retains the requirements of "the ordinary course of
the purchaser's business" and the giving of "new value" as conditions for priority. Concerning the last, this Article
deletes former Section 9-108 and adds to Section 9-102 a completely different definition of the term "new value."
Under subsection (e), the holder of a purchase-money security interest in inventory is deemed to give "new value"
for chattel paper constituting the proceeds of the inventory. Accordingly, the purchase-money secured party may
qualify for priority in the chattel paper under subsection (a) or (b), whichever is applicable, even if it does not make
an additional advance against the chattel paper.
If a possessory security interest in tangible chattel paper or a perfected-by-control security interest in electronic
chattel paper does not qualify for priority under this section, it may be subordinate to a perfected-by-filing security
interest under Section 9-322(a)(1).
4. Possession and Control. To qualify for priority under subsection (a) or (b), a purchaser must "take[]
possession of the chattel paper or obtain[] control of the chattel paper under Section 9-105." When chattel paper
comprises one or more tangible records and one or more electronic records, a purchaser may satisfy the
possession-or-control requirement by taking possession of the tangible records under Section 9-313 and having
control of the electronic records under Section 9-105. In determining which of several related records constitutes
chattel paper and thus is relevant to possession or control, the form of the records is irrelevant. Rather, the
touchstone is whether possession or control of the record would afford the public notice contemplated by the
possession and control requirements. For example, because possession or control of an amendment extending the
term of a lease would not afford the contemplated public notice, the amendment would not constitute chattel paper
regardless of whether the amendment is in tangible form and the lease is in electronic form, the amendment is
electronic and the lease is tangible, the amendment and lease are both tangible, or the amendment and lease are
both electronic.
Two common practices have raised particular concerns with respect to the possession requirement. First, in some
cases the parties create more than one copy or counterpart of chattel paper evidencing a single secured obligation
or lease. This practice raises questions as to which counterpart is the "original" and whether it is necessary for a
purchaser to take possession of all counterparts in order to "take possession" of the chattel paper. Second, parties
sometimes enter into a single "master" agreement. The master agreement contemplates that the parties will enter
into separate "schedules" from time to time, each evidencing chattel paper. Must a purchaser of an obligation or
lease evidenced by a single schedule also take possession of the master agreement as well as the schedule in
order to "take possession" of the chattel paper?
The problem raised by the first practice is easily solved. The parties may in the terms of their agreement and by
designation on the chattel paper identify only one counterpart as the original chattel paper for purposes of taking
possession of the chattel paper. Concerns about the second practice also are easily solved by careful drafting.
Each schedule should provide that it incorporates the terms of the master agreement, not the other way around.
This will make it clear that each schedule is a "stand alone" document.
A secured party may wish to convert tangible chattel paper to electronic chattel paper and vice versa. The priority
of a security interest in chattel paper under subsection (a) or (b) may be preserved, even if the form of the chattel
paper changes. The principle implied in the preceding paragraph, i.e., that not every copy of chattel paper is
§ 9-330. PRIORITY OF PURCHASER OF CHATTEL PAPER OR INSTRUMENT
Page 3 of 6
relevant, applies to "control" as well as to "possession." When there are multiple copies of chattel paper, a secured
party may take "possession" or obtain "control" of the chattel paper if it acts with respect to the copy or copies that
are reliably identified as the copy or copies that are relevant for purposes of possession or control. This principle
applies as well to chattel paper that has been converted from one form to another, even if the relevant copies are
not the "original" chattel paper.
5. Chattel Paper Claimed Merely as Proceeds. Subsection (a) revises the rule in former Section 9-308(b) to
eliminate reference to what the purchaser knows. Instead, a purchaser who meets the possession or control,
ordinary course, and new value requirements takes priority over a competing security interest unless the chattel
paper itself indicates that it has been assigned to an identified assignee other than the purchaser. Thus subsection
(a) recognizes the common practice of placing a "legend" on chattel paper to indicate that it has been assigned.
This approach, under which the chattel paper purchaser who gives new value in ordinary course can rely on
possession of unlegended, tangible chattel paper without any concern for other facts that it may know, comports
with the expectations of both inventory and chattel paper financers.
6. Chattel Paper Claimed Other Than Merely as Proceeds. Subsection (b) eliminates the requirement that the
purchaser take without knowledge that the "specific paper" is subject to the security interest and substitutes for it
the requirement that the purchaser take "without knowledge that the purchase violates the rights of the secured
party." This standard derives from the definition of "buyer in ordinary course of business" in Section 1-201(b)(9).
The source of the purchaser's knowledge is irrelevant. Note, however, that "knowledge" means "actual knowledge."
Section 1-202(b).
In contrast to a junior secured party in accounts, who may be required in some special circumstances to
undertake a search under the "good faith" requirement, see Comment 5 to Section 9-331, a purchaser of chattel
paper under this section is not required as a matter of good faith to make a search in order to determine the
existence of prior security interests. There may be circumstances where the purchaser undertakes a search
nevertheless, either on its own volition or because other considerations make it advisable to do so, e.g., where the
purchaser also is purchasing accounts. Without more, a purchaser of chattel paper who has seen a financing
statement covering the chattel paper or who knows that the chattel paper is encumbered with a security interest,
does not have knowledge that its purchase violates the secured party's rights. However, if a purchaser sees a
statement in a financing statement to the effect that a purchase of chattel paper from the debtor would violate the
rights of the filed secured party, the purchaser would have such knowledge. Likewise, under new subsection (f), if
the chattel paper itself indicates that it had been assigned to an identified secured party other than the purchaser,
the purchaser would have wrongful knowledge for purposes of subsection (b), thereby preventing the purchaser
from qualifying for priority under that subsection, even if the purchaser did not have actual knowledge. In the case
of tangible chattel paper, the indication normally would consist of a written legend on the chattel paper. In the case
of electronic chattel paper, this Article leaves to developing market and technological practices the manner in which
the chattel paper would indicate an assignment.
7. Instruments. Subsection (d) contains a special priority rule for instruments. Under this subsection, a purchaser
of an instrument has priority over a security interest perfected by a method other than possession (e.g., by filing,
temporarily under Section 9-312(e) or (g), as proceeds under Section 9-315(d), or automatically upon attachment
under Section 9-309(4) if the security interest arises out of a sale of the instrument) if the purchaser gives value and
takes possession of the instrument in good faith and without knowledge that the purchase violates the rights of the
secured party. Generally, to the extent subsection (d) conflicts with Section 3-306, subsection (d) governs. See
Section 3-102(b). For example, notice of a conflicting security interest precludes a purchaser from becoming a
holder in due course under Section 3-302 and thereby taking free of all claims to the instrument under Section 3-
306. However, a purchaser who takes even with knowledge of the security interest qualifies for priority under
subsection (d) if it takes without knowledge that the purchase violates the rights of the holder of the security
interest. Likewise, a purchaser qualifies for priority under subsection (d) if it takes for "value" as defined in Section
1-201, even if it does not take for "value" as defined in Section 3-303.
Subsection (d) is subject to Section 9-331(a), which provides that Article 9 does not limit the rights of a holder in
due course under Article 3. Thus, in the rare case in which the purchaser of an instrument qualifies for priority under
§ 9-330. PRIORITY OF PURCHASER OF CHATTEL PAPER OR INSTRUMENT
Page 4 of 6
subsection (d), but another person has the rights of a holder in due course of the instrument, the other person takes
free of the purchaser's claim. See Section 3-306.
The rule in subsection (d) is similar to the rules in subsections (a) and (b), which govern priority in chattel paper.
The observations in Comment 6 concerning the requirement of good faith and the phrase "without knowledge that
the purchase violates the rights of the secured party" apply equally to purchasers of instruments. However, unlike a
purchaser of chattel paper, to qualify for priority under this section a purchaser of an instrument need only give
"value" as defined in Section 1-201; it need not give "new value." Also, the purchaser need not purchase the
instrument in the ordinary course of its business.
Subsection (d) applies to checks as well as notes. For example, to collect and retain checks that are proceeds
(collections) of accounts free of a senior secured party's claim to the same checks, a junior secured party must
satisfy the good-faith requirement (honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair
dealing) of this subsection. This is the same good-faith requirement applicable to holders in due course. See
Section 9-331, Comment 5.
8. Priority in Proceeds of Chattel Paper. Subsection (c) sets forth the two circumstances under which the
priority afforded to a purchaser of chattel paper under subsection (a) or (b) extends also to proceeds of the chattel
paper. The first is if the purchaser would have priority under the normal priority rules applicable to proceeds. The
second, which the following Comments discuss in greater detail, is if the proceeds consist of the specific goods
covered by the chattel paper. Former Article 9 generally was silent as to the priority of a security interest in
proceeds when a purchaser qualifies for priority under Section 9-308 (but see former Section 9-306(5)(b),
concerning returned and repossessed goods).
9. Priority in Returned and Repossessed Goods. Returned and repossessed goods may constitute proceeds
of chattel paper. The following Comments explain the treatment of returned and repossessed goods as proceeds of
chattel paper. The analysis is consistent with that of PEB Commentary No. 5, which these Comments replace, and
is based upon the following example:
Example: SP-1 has a security interest in all the inventory of a dealer in goods (Dealer); SP-1's security interest is
perfected by filing. Dealer sells some of its inventory to a buyer in the ordinary course of business (BIOCOB)
pursuant to a conditional sales contract (chattel paper) that does not indicate that it has been assigned to SP-1. SP-
2 purchases the chattel paper from Dealer and takes possession of the paper in good faith, in the ordinary course of
business, and without knowledge that the purchase violates the rights of SP-1. Subsequently, BIOCOB returns the
goods to Dealer because they are defective. Alternatively, Dealer acquires possession of the goods following
BIOCOB's default.
10. Assignment of Non-Lease Chattel Paper.
a. Loan by SP-2 to Dealer Secured by Chattel Paper (or Functional Equivalent Pursuant to Recourse
Arrangement).
(1) Returned Goods. If BIOCOB returns the goods to Dealer for repairs, Dealer is merely a bailee and acquires
thereby no meaningful rights in the goods to which SP-1's security interest could attach. (Although SP-1's security
interest could attach to Dealer's interest as a bailee, that interest is not likely to be of any particular value to SP-1.)
Dealer is the owner of the chattel paper (i.e., the owner of a right to payment secured by a security interest in the
goods); SP-2 has a security interest in the chattel paper, as does SP-1 (as proceeds of the goods under Section 9-
315). Under Section 9-330, SP-2's security interest in the chattel paper is senior to that of SP-1. SP-2 enjoys this
priority regardless of whether, or when, SP-2 filed a financing statement covering the chattel paper. Because chattel
paper and goods represent different types of collateral, Dealer does not have any meaningful interest in goods to
which either SP-1's or SP-2's security interest could attach in order to secure Dealer's obligations to either creditor.
See Section 9-102 (defining "chattel paper" and "goods").
Now assume that BIOCOB returns the goods to Dealer under circumstances whereby Dealer once again
becomes the owner of the goods. This would be the case, for example, if the goods were defective and BIOCOB
§ 9-330. PRIORITY OF PURCHASER OF CHATTEL PAPER OR INSTRUMENT
Page 5 of 6
was entitled to reject or revoke acceptance of the goods. See Sections 2-602 (rejection), 2-608 (revocation of
acceptance). Unless BIOCOB has waived its defenses as against assignees of the chattel paper, SP-1's and SP-2's
rights against BIOCOB would be subject to BIOCOB's claims and defenses. See Sections 9-403, 9-404. SP-1's
security interest would attach again because the returned goods would be proceeds of the chattel paper. Dealer's
acquisition of the goods easily can be characterized as "proceeds" consisting of an "in kind" collection on or
distribution on account of the chattel paper. See Section 9-102 (definition of "proceeds"). Assuming that SP-1's
security interest is perfected by filing against the goods and that the filing is made in the same office where a filing
would be made against the chattel paper, SP-1's security interest in the goods would remain perfected beyond the
20-day period of automatic perfection. See Section 9-315(d).
Because Dealer's newly reacquired interest in the goods is proceeds of the chattel paper, SP-2's security interest
also would attach in the goods as proceeds. If SP-2 had perfected its security interest in the chattel paper by filing
(again, assuming that filing against the chattel paper was made in the same office where a filing would be made
against the goods), SP-2's security interest in the reacquired goods would be perfected beyond 20 days. See
Section 9-315(d). However, if SP-2 had relied only on its possession of the chattel paper for perfection and had not
filed against the chattel paper or the goods, SP-2's security interest would be unperfected after the 20-day period.
See Section 9-315(d). Nevertheless, SP-2's unperfected security interest in the goods would be senior to SP-1's
security interest under Section 9-330(c). The result in this priority contest is not affected by SP-2's acquiescence or
non-acquiescence in the return of the goods to Dealer.
(2) Repossessed Goods. As explained above, Dealer owns the chattel paper covering the goods, subject to
security interests in favor of SP-1 and SP-2. In Article 9 parlance, Dealer has an interest in chattel paper, not goods.
If Dealer, SP-1, or SP-2 repossesses the goods upon BIOCOB's default, whether the repossession is rightful or
wrongful as among Dealer, SP-1, or SP-2, Dealer's interest will not change. The location of goods and the party
who possesses them does not affect the fact that Dealer's interest is in chattel paper, not goods. The goods
continue to be owned by BIOCOB. SP-1's security interest in the goods does not attach until such time as Dealer
reacquires an interest (other than a bare possessory interest) in the goods. For example, Dealer might buy the
goods at a foreclosure sale from SP-2 (whose security interest in the chattel paper is senior to that of SP-1); that
disposition would cut off BIOCOB's rights in the goods. Section 9-617.
In many cases the matter would end upon sale of the goods to Dealer at a foreclosure sale and there would be no
priority contest between SP-1 and SP-2; Dealer would be unlikely to buy the goods under circumstances whereby
SP-2 would retain its security interest. There can be exceptions, however. For example, Dealer may be obliged to
purchase the goods from SP-2 and SP-2 may be obliged to convey the goods to Dealer, but Dealer may fail to pay
SP-2. Or, one could imagine that SP-2, like SP-1, has a general security interest in the inventory of Dealer. In the
latter case, SP-2 should not receive the benefit of any special priority rule, since its interest in no way derives from
priority under Section 9-330. In the former case, SP-2's security interest in the goods reacquired by Dealer is senior
to SP-1's security interest under Section 9-330.
b. Dealer's Outright Sale of Chattel Paper to SP-2. Article 9 also applies to a transaction whereby SP-2 buys
the chattel paper in an outright sale transaction without recourse against Dealer. Sections 1-201(37), 9-109(a).
Although Dealer does not, in such a transaction, retain any residual ownership interest in the chattel paper, the
chattel paper constitutes proceeds of the goods to which SP-1's security interest will attach and continue following
the sale of the goods. Section 9-315(a). Even though Dealer has not retained any interest in the chattel paper, as
discussed above BIOCOB subsequently may return the goods to Dealer under circumstances whereby Dealer
reacquires an interest in the goods. The priority contest between SP-1 and SP-2 will be resolved as discussed
above; Section 9-330 makes no distinction among purchasers of chattel paper on the basis of whether the
purchaser is an outright buyer of chattel paper or one whose security interest secures an obligation of Dealer.
11. Assignment of Lease Chattel Paper. As defined in Section 9-102, "chattel paper" includes not only writings
that evidence security interests in specific goods but also those that evidence true leases of goods.
The analysis with respect to lease chattel paper is similar to that set forth above with respect to non-lease chattel
paper. It is complicated, however, by the fact that, unlike the case of chattel paper arising out of a sale, Dealer
§ 9-330. PRIORITY OF PURCHASER OF CHATTEL PAPER OR INSTRUMENT
Page 6 of 6
retains a residual interest in the goods. See Section 2A-103(1)(q) (defining "lessor's residual interest"); In re
Leasing Consultants, Inc., 486 F.2d 367 (2d Cir. 1973) (lessor's residual interest under true lease is an interest in
goods and is a separate type of collateral from lessor's interest in the lease). If Dealer leases goods to a "lessee in
ordinary course of business" (LIOCOB), then LIOCOB takes its interest under the lease (i.e., its "leasehold interest")
free of the security interest of SP-1. See Sections 2A-307(3), 2A-103(1)(m) (defining "leasehold interest"), (1)(o)
(defining "lessee in ordinary course of business"). SP-1 would, however, retain its security interest in the residual
interest. In addition, SP-1 would acquire an interest in the lease chattel paper as proceeds. If Dealer then assigns
the lease chattel paper to SP-2, Section 9-330 gives SP-2 priority over SP-1 with respect to the chattel paper, but
not with respect to the residual interest in the goods. Consequently, assignees of lease chattel paper typically take
a security interest in and file against the lessor's residual interest in goods, expecting their priority in the goods to be
governed by the first-to-file-or-perfect rule of Section 9-322.
If the goods are returned to Dealer, other than upon expiration of the lease term, then the security interests of
both SP-1 and SP-2 normally would attach to the goods as proceeds of the chattel paper. (If the goods are returned
to Dealer at the expiration of the lease term and the lessee has made all payments due under the lease, however,
then Dealer no longer has any rights under the chattel paper. Dealer's interest in the goods consists solely of its
residual interest, as to which SP-2 has no claim.) This would be the case, for example, when the lessee rescinds
the lease or when the lessor recovers possession in the exercise of its remedies under Article 2A. See, e.g.,
Section 2A-525. If SP-2 enjoyed priority in the chattel paper under Section 9-330, then SP-2 likewise would enjoy
priority in the returned goods as proceeds. This does not mean that SP-2 necessarily is entitled to the entire value
of the returned goods. The value of the goods represents the sum of the present value of (i) the value of their use
for the term of the lease and (ii) the value of the residual interest. SP-2 has priority in the former, but SP-1 ordinarily
would have priority in the latter. Thus, an allocation of a portion of the value of the goods to each component may
be necessary. Where, as here, one secured party has a security interest in the lessor's residual interest and
another has a priority security interest in the chattel paper, it may be advisable for the conflicting secured parties to
establish a method for making such an allocation and otherwise to determine their relative rights in returned goods
by agreement.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-331
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-331. PRIORITY OF RIGHTS OF PURCHASERS OF INSTRUMENTS,
DOCUMENTS, AND SECURITIES UNDER OTHER ARTICLES; PRIORITY OF
INTERESTS IN FINANCIAL ASSETS AND SECURITY ENTITLEMENTS UNDER
ARTICLE 8
(a) [Rights under Articles 3, 7, and 8 not limited.] This article does not limit the rights of a holder in due
course of a negotiable instrument, a holder to which a negotiable document of title has been duly
negotiated, or a protected purchaser of a security. These holders or purchasers take priority over an earlier
security interest, even if perfected, to the extent provided in Articles 3, 7, and 8.
(b) [Protection under Article 8.] This article does not limit the rights of or impose liability on a person to
the extent that the person is protected against the assertion of a claim under Article 8.
(c) [Filing not notice.] Filing under this article does not constitute notice of a claim or defense to the
holders, or purchasers, or persons described in subsections (a) and (b).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-309.
2. "Priority." In some provisions, this Article distinguishes between claimants that take collateral free of a security
interest (in the sense that the security interest no longer encumbers the collateral) and those that take an interest in
the collateral that is senior to a surviving security interest. See, e.g., Section 9-317. Whether a holder or purchaser
referred to in this section takes free or is senior to a security interest depends on whether the purchaser is a buyer
of the collateral or takes a security interest in it. The term "priority" is meant to encompass both scenarios, as it
does in Section 9-330.
3. Rights Acquired by Purchasers. The rights to which this section refers are set forth in Sections 3-305 and 3-
306 (holder in due course), 7-502 (holder to whom a negotiable document of title has been duly negotiated), and 8-
303 (protected purchaser). The holders and purchasers referred to in this section do not always take priority over a
security interest. See, e.g., Section 7-503 (affording paramount rights to certain owners and secured parties as
against holder to whom a negotiable document of title has been duly negotiated). Accordingly, this section adds the
clause, "to the extent provided in Articles 3, 7, and 8" to former Section 9-309.
4. Financial Assets and Security Entitlements. New subsection (b) provides explicit protection for those who
deal with financial assets and security entitlements and who are immunized from liability under Article 8. See, e.g.,
Sections 8-502, 8-503(e), 8-510, 8-511. The new subsection makes explicit in Article 9 what is implicit in former
Article 9 and explicit in several provisions of Article 8. It does not change the law.
5. Collections by Junior Secured Party. Under this section, a secured party with a junior security interest in
receivables (accounts, chattel paper, promissory notes, or payment intangibles) may collect and retain the proceeds
§ 9-331. PRIORITY OF RIGHTS OF PURCHASERS OF INSTRUMENTS, DOCUMENTS, AND SECURITIES
UNDER OTHER ARTICLES; PRIORITY OF INTERESTS IN FINANCI AL ASSETS AND SECURIT....
Page 2 of 2
of those receivables free of the claim of a senior secured party to the same receivables, if the junior secured party is
a holder in due course of the proceeds. In order to qualify as a holder in due course, the junior must satisfy the
requirements of Section 3-302, which include taking in "good faith." This means that the junior not only must act
"honestly" but also must observe "reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing" under the particular
circumstances. See Section 9-102(a). Although "good faith" does not impose a general duty of inquiry, e.g., a
search of the records in filing offices, there may be circumstances in which "reasonable commercial standards of
fair dealing" would require such a search.
Consider, for example, a junior secured party in the business of financing or buying accounts who fails to
undertake a search to determine the existence of prior security interests. Because a search, under the usages of
trade of that business, would enable it to know or learn upon reasonable inquiry that collecting the accounts violated
the rights of a senior secured party, the junior may fail to meet the good-faith standard. See Utility Contractors
Financial Services, Inc. v. Amsouth Bank, NA, 985 F.2d 1554 (11th Cir. 1993). Likewise, a junior secured party who
collects accounts when it knows or should know under the particular circumstances that doing so would violate the
rights of a senior secured party, because the debtor had agreed not to grant a junior security interest in, or sell, the
accounts, may not meet the good-faith test. Thus, if a junior secured party conducted or should have conducted a
search and a financing statement filed on behalf of the senior secured party states such a restriction, the junior's
collection would not meet the good-faith standard. On the other hand, if there was a course of performance
between the senior secured party and the debtor which placed no such restrictions on the debtor and allowed the
debtor to collect and use the proceeds without any restrictions, the junior secured party may then satisfy the
requirements for being a holder in due course. This would be more likely in those circumstances where the junior
secured party was providing additional financing to the debtor on an on-going basis by lending against or buying the
accounts and had no notice of any restrictions against doing so. Generally, the senior secured party would not be
prejudiced because the practical effect of such payment to the junior secured party is little different than if the
debtor itself had made the collections and subsequently paid the secured party from the debtor's general funds.
Absent collusion, the junior secured party would take the funds free of the senior security interests. See Section 9-
332. In contrast, the senior secured party is likely to be prejudiced if the debtor is going out of business and the
junior secured party collects the accounts by notifying the account debtors to make payments directly to the junior.
Those collections may not be consistent with "reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing."
Whether the junior secured party qualifies as a holder in due course is fact-sensitive and should be decided on a
case-by-case basis in the light of those circumstances. Decisions such as Financial Management Services Inc. v.
Familian, 905 P.2d 506 (Ariz. App. Div. 1995) (finding holder in due course status) could be determined differently
under this application of the good-faith requirement.
The concepts addressed in this Comment are also applicable to junior secured parties as purchasers of
instruments under Section 9-330(d). See Section 9-330, Comment 7.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-332
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-332. TRANSFER OF MONEY; TRANSFER OF FUNDS FROM DEPOSIT
ACCOUNT
(a) [Transferee of money.] A transferee of money takes the money free of a security interest unless the
transferee acts in collusion with the debtor in violating the rights of the secured party.
(b) [Transferee of funds from deposit account.] A transferee of funds from a deposit account takes the
funds free of a security interest in the deposit account unless the transferee acts in collusion with the debtor
in violating the rights of the secured party.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Scope of This Section. This section affords broad protection to transferees who take funds from a deposit
account and to those who take money. The term "transferee" is not defined; however, the debtor itself is not a
transferee. Thus this section does not cover the case in which a debtor withdraws money (currency) from its deposit
account or the case in which a bank debits an encumbered account and credits another account it maintains for the
debtor.
A transfer of funds from a deposit account, to which subsection (b) applies, normally will be made by check, by
funds transfer, or by debiting the debtor's deposit account and crediting another depositor's account.
Example 1: Debtor maintains a deposit account with Bank A. The deposit account is subject to a perfected
security interest in favor of Lender. Debtor draws a check on the account, payable to Payee. Inasmuch as the check
is not the proceeds of the deposit account (it is an order to pay funds from the deposit account), Lender's security
interest in the deposit account does not give rise to a security interest in the check. Payee deposits the check into
its own deposit account, and Bank A pays it. Unless Payee acted in collusion with Debtor in violating Lender's
rights, Payee takes the funds (the credits running in favor of Payee) free of Lender's security interest. This is true
regardless of whether Payee is a holder in due course of the check and even if Payee gave no value for the check.
Example 2: Debtor maintains a deposit account with Bank A. The deposit account is subject to a perfected
security interest in favor of Lender. At Bank B's suggestion, Debtor moves the funds from the account at Bank A to
Debtor's deposit account with Bank B. Unless Bank B acted in collusion with Debtor in violating Lender's rights,
Bank B takes the funds (the credits running in favor of Bank B) free from Lender's security interest. See subsection
(b). However, inasmuch as the deposit account maintained with Bank B constitutes the proceeds of the deposit
account at Bank A, Lender's security interest would attach to that account as proceeds. See Section 9-315.
Subsection (b) also would apply if, in the example, Bank A debited Debtor's deposit account in exchange for the
issuance of Bank A's cashier's check. Lender's security interest would attach to the cashier's check as proceeds of
the deposit account, and the rules applicable to instruments would govern any competing claims to the cashier's
check. See, e.g., Sections 3-306, 9-322, 9-330, 9-331.
§ 9-332. TRANSFER OF MONEY; TRANSFER OF FUNDS FROM DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
Page 2 of 2
If Debtor withdraws money (currency) from an encumbered deposit account and transfers the money to a third
party, then subsection (a), to the extent not displaced by federal law relating to money, applies. It contains the same
rule as subsection (b).
Subsection (b) applies to transfers of funds from a deposit account; it does not apply to transfers of the deposit
account itself or of an interest therein. For example, this section does not apply to the creation of a security interest
in a deposit account. Competing claims to the deposit account itself are dealt with by other Article 9 priority rules.
See Sections 9-317(a), 9-327, 9-340, 9-341. Similarly, a corporate merger normally would not result in a transfer of
funds from a deposit account. Rather, it might result in a transfer of the deposit account itself. If so, the normal rules
applicable to transferred collateral would apply; this section would not.
3. Policy. Broad protection for transferees helps to ensure that security interests in deposit accounts do not
impair the free flow of funds. It also minimizes the likelihood that a secured party will enjoy a claim to whatever the
transferee purchases with the funds. Rules concerning recovery of payments traditionally have placed a high value
on finality. The opportunity to upset a completed transaction, or even to place a completed transaction in jeopardy
by bringing suit against the transferee of funds, should be severely limited. Although the giving of value usually is a
prerequisite for receiving the ability to take free from third-party claims, where payments are concerned the law is
even more protective. Thus, Section 3-418(c) provides that, even where the law of restitution otherwise would
permit recovery of funds paid by mistake, no recovery may be had from a person "who in good faith changed
position in reliance on the payment." Rather than adopt this standard, this section eliminates all reliance
requirements whatsoever. Payments made by mistake are relatively rare, but payments of funds from encumbered
deposit accounts (e.g., deposit accounts containing collections from accounts receivable) occur with great
regularity. In most cases, unlike payment by mistake, no one would object to these payments. In the vast proportion
of cases, the transferee probably would be able to show a change of position in reliance on the payment. This
section does not put the transferee to the burden of having to make this proof.
4. "Bad Actors." To deal with the question of the "bad actor," this section borrows "collusion" language from
Article 8. See, e.g., Sections 8-115, 8-503(e). This is the most protective (i.e., least stringent) of the various
standards now found in the UCC. Compare, e.g., Section 1-201(b)(9) ("without knowledge that the sale violates the
rights of another person"); Section 1-201(b)(20) ("honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial
standards of fair dealing"); Section 3-302(a)(2)(v) ("without notice of any claim").
5. Transferee Who Does Not Take Free. This section sets forth the circumstances under which certain
transferees of money or funds take free of security interests. It does not determine the rights of a transferee who
does not take free of a security interest.
Example 3: The facts are as in Example 2, but, in wrongfully moving the funds from the deposit account at Bank
A to Debtor's deposit account with Bank B, Debtor acts in collusion with Bank B. Bank B does not take the funds
free of Lender's security interest under this section. If Debtor grants a security interest to Bank B, Section 9-327
governs the relative priorities of Lender and Bank B. Under Section 9-327(3), Bank B's security interest in the Bank
B deposit account is senior to Lender's security interest in the deposit account as proceeds. However, Bank B's
senior security interest does not protect Bank B against any liability to Lender that might arise from Bank B's
wrongful conduct.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-333
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-333. PRIORITY OF CERTAIN LIENS ARISING BY OPERATION OF LAW
(a) ["Possessory lien."] In this section, "possessory lien" means an interest, other than a security interest
or an agricultural lien:
(1) which secures payment or performance of an obligation for services or materials furnished with
respect to goods by a person in the ordinary course of the person's business;
(2) which is created by statute or rule of law in favor of the person; and
(3) whose effectiveness depends on the person's possession of the goods.
(b) [Priority of possessory lien.] A possessory lien on goods has priority over a security interest in the
goods unless the lien is created by a statute that expressly provides otherwise.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-310.
2. "Possessory Liens." This section governs the relative priority of security interests arising under this Article
and "possessory liens," i.e., common-law and statutory liens whose effectiveness depends on the lienor's
possession of goods with respect to which the lienor provided services or furnished materials in the ordinary course
of its business. As under former Section 9-310, the possessory lien has priority over a security interest unless the
possessory lien is created by a statute that expressly provides otherwise. If the statute creating the possessory lien
is silent as to its priority relative to a security interest, this section provides a rule of interpretation that the
possessory lien takes priority, even if the statute has been construed judicially to make the possessory lien
subordinate.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-334
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-334. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN FIXTURES AND CROPS
(a) [Security interest in fixtures under this article.] A security interest under this article may be created
in goods that are fixtures or may continue in goods that become fixtures. A security interest does not exist
under this article in ordinary building materials incorporated into an improvement on land.
(b) [Security interest in fixtures under real-property law.] This article does not prevent creation of an
encumbrance upon fixtures under real property law.
(c) [General rule: subordination of security interest in fixtures.] In cases not governed by subsections
(d) through (h), a security interest in fixtures is subordinate to a conflicting interest of an encumbrancer or
owner of the related real property other than the debtor.
(d) [Fixtures purchase-money priority.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (h), a perfected
security interest in fixtures has priority over a conflicting interest of an encumbrancer or owner of the real
property if the debtor has an interest of record in or is in possession of the real property and:
(1) the security interest is a purchase-money security interest;
(2) the interest of the encumbrancer or owner arises before the goods become fixtures; and
(3) the security interest is perfected by a fixture filing before the goods become fixtures or within 20
days thereafter.
(e) [Priority of security interest in fixtures over interests in real property.] A perfected security interest
in fixtures has priority over a conflicting interest of an encumbrancer or owner of the real property if:
(1) the debtor has an interest of record in the real property or is in possession of the real property and
the security interest:
(A) is perfected by a fixture filing before the interest of the encumbrancer or owner is of record;
and
(B) has priority over any conflicting interest of a predecessor in title of the encumbrancer or owner;
(2) before the goods become fixtures, the security interest is perfected by any method permitted by this
article and the fixtures are readily removable:
(A) factory or office machines;
(B) equipment that is not primarily used or leased for use in the operation of the real property; or
(C) replacements of domestic appliances that are consumer goods;
(3) the conflicting interest is a lien on the real property obtained by legal or equitable proceedings after
the security interest was perfected by any method permitted by this article; or
(4) the security interest is:
(A) created in a manufactured home in a manufactured-home transaction; and
(B) perfected pursuant to a statute described in Section 9-311(a)(2).
(f) [Priority based on consent, disclaimer, or right to remove.] A security interest in fixtures, whether or
not perfected, has priority over a conflicting interest of an encumbrancer or owner of the real property if:
§ 9-334. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN FIXTURES AND CROPS
Page 2 of 5
(1) the encumbrancer or owner has, in an authenticated record, consented to the security interest or
disclaimed an interest in the goods as fixtures; or
(2) the debtor has a right to remove the goods as against the encumbrancer or owner.
(g) [Continuation of paragraph (f)(2) priority.] The priority of the security interest under paragraph (f)(2)
continues for a reasonable time if the debtor's right to remove the goods as against the encumbrancer or
owner terminates.
(h) [Priority of construction mortgage.] A mortgage is a construction mortgage to the extent that it
secures an obligation incurred for the construction of an improvement on land, including the acquisition cost
of the land, if a recorded record of the mortgage so indicates. Except as otherwise provided in subsections
(e) and (f), a security interest in fixtures is subordinate to a construction mortgage if a record of the
mortgage is recorded before the goods become fixtures and the goods become fixtures before the
completion of the construction. A mortgage has this priority to the same extent as a construction mortgage
to the extent that it is given to refinance a construction mortgage.
(i) [Priority of security interest in crops.] A perfected security interest in crops growing on real property
has priority over a conflicting interest of an encumbrancer or owner of the real property if the debtor has an
interest of record in or is in possession of the real property.
(j) [Subsection (i) prevails.] Subsection (i) prevails over any inconsistent provisions of the following
statutes:
[List here any statutes containing provisions inconsistent with subsection (i).]
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: States that amend statutes to remove provisions inconsistent with subsection (i) need not enact
subsection (j).
1. Source. Former Section 9-313.
2. Scope of This Section. This section contains rules governing the priority of security interests in fixtures and
crops as against persons who claim an interest in real property. Priority contests with other Article 9 security
interests are governed by the other priority rules of this Article. The provisions with respect to fixtures follow those of
former Section 9-313. However, they have been rewritten to conform to Section 2A-309 and to prevailing style
conventions. Subsections (i) and (j), which apply to crops, are new.
3. Security Interests in Fixtures. Certain goods that are the subject of personal-property (chattel) financing
become so affixed or otherwise so related to real property that they become part of the real property. These goods
are called "fixtures." See Section 9-102 (definition of "fixtures"). Some fixtures retain their personal-property nature:
a security interest under this Article may be created in fixtures and may continue in goods that become fixtures. See
subsection (a). However, if the goods are ordinary building materials incorporated into an improvement on land, no
security interest in them exists. Rather, the priority of claims to the building materials are determined by the law
governing claims to real property. (Of course, the fact that no security interest exists in ordinary building materials
incorporated into an improvement on land does not prejudice any rights the secured party may have against the
debtor or any other person who violated the secured party's rights by wrongfully incorporating the goods into real
property.)
Thus, this section recognizes three categories of goods: (1) those that retain their chattel character entirely and
are not part of the real property; (2) ordinary building materials that have become an integral part of the real
§ 9-334. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN FIXTURES AND CROPS
Page 3 of 5
property and cannot retain their chattel character for purposes of finance; and (3) an intermediate class that has
become real property for certain purposes, but as to which chattel financing may be preserved.
To achieve priority under certain provisions of this section, a security interest must be perfected by making a
"fixture filing" (defined in Section 9-102) in the real-property records. Because the question whether goods have
become fixtures often is a difficult one under applicable real-property law, a secured party may make a fixture filing
as a precaution. Courts should not infer from a fixture filing that the secured party concedes that the goods are or
will become fixtures.
4. Priority in Fixtures: General. In considering priority problems under this section, one must first determine
whether real-property claimants per se have an interest in the crops or fixtures as part of real property. If not, it is
immaterial, so far as concerns real property parties as such, whether a security interest arising under this Article is
perfected or unperfected. In no event does a real-property claimant (e.g., owner or mortgagee) acquire an interest
in a "pure" chattel just because a security interest therein is unperfected. If on the other hand real-property law
gives real-property parties an interest in the goods, a conflict arises and this section states the priorities.
5. Priority in Fixtures: Residual Rule. Subsection (c) states the residual priority rule, which applies only if one of
the other rules does not: A security interest in fixtures is subordinate to a conflicting interest of an encumbrancer or
owner of the related real property other than the debtor.
6. Priority in Fixtures: First to File or Record. Subsection (e)(1), which follows former Section 9-313(4)(b),
contains the usual priority rule of conveyancing, that is, the first to file or record prevails. In order to achieve priority
under this rule, however, the security interest must be perfected by a "fixture filing" (defined in Section 9-102), i.e., a
filing for record in the real property records and indexed therein, so that it will be found in a real-property search..
The condition in subsection (e)(1)(B), that the security interest must have had priority over any conflicting interest of
a predecessor in title of the conflicting encumbrancer or owner, appears to limit to the first-in-time principle.
However, this apparent limitation is nothing other than an expression of the usual rule that a person must be entitled
to transfer what he has. Thus, if the fixture security interest is subordinate to a mortgage, it is subordinate to an
interest of an assignee of the mortgage, even though the assignment is a later recorded instrument. Similarly if the
fixture security interest is subordinate to the rights of an owner, it is subordinate to a subsequent grantee of the
owner and likewise subordinate to a subsequent mortgagee of the owner.
7. Priority in Fixtures: Purchase-Money Security Interests. Subsection (d), which follows former Section 9-
313(4)(a), contains the principal exception to the first-to-file-or-record rule of subsection (e)(1). It affords priority to
purchase-money security interests in fixtures as against prior recorded real-property interests, provided that the
purchase-money security interest is filed as a fixture filing in the real-property records before the goods become
fixtures or within 20 days thereafter. This priority corresponds to the purchase-money priority under Section 9-
324(a). (Like other 10-day periods in former Article 9, the 10-day period in this section has been changed to 20
days.)
It should be emphasized that this purchase-money priority with the 20-day grace period for filing is limited to rights
against real-property interests that arise before the goods become fixtures. There is no such priority with the 20-day
grace period as against real-property interests that arise subsequently. The fixture security interest can defeat
subsequent real-property interests only if it is filed first and prevails under the usual conveyancing rule in subsection
(e)(1) or one of the other rules in this section.
8. Priority in Fixtures: Readily Removable Goods. Subsection (e)(2), which derives from Section 2A-309 and
former Section 9-313(4)(d), contains another exception to the usual first-to-file-or-perfect rule. It affords priority to
the holders of security interests in certain types of readily removable goods--factory and office machines, equipment
that is not primarily used or leased for use in the operation of the real property, and (as discussed below) certain
replacements of domestic appliances. This rule is made necessary by the confusion in the law as to whether certain
machinery, equipment, and appliances become fixtures. It protects a secured party who, perhaps in the mistaken
belief that the readily removable goods will not become fixtures, makes a UCC filing (or otherwise perfects under
this Article) rather than making a fixture filing.
§ 9-334. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN FIXTURES AND CROPS
Page 4 of 5
Frequently, under applicable law, goods of the type described in subsection (e)(2) will not be considered to have
become part of the real property. In those cases, the fixture security interest does not conflict with a real-property
interest, and resort to this section is unnecessary. However, if the goods have become part of the real property,
subsection (e)(2) enables a fixture secured party to take priority over a conflicting real-property interest if the fixture
security interest is perfected by a fixture filing or by any other method permitted by this Article. If perfection is by
fixture filing, the fixture security interest would have priority over subsequently recorded real-property interests
under subsection (e)(1) and, if the fixture security interest is a purchase-money security interest (a likely scenario),
it would also have priority over most real property interests under the purchase-money priority of subsection (d).
Note, however, that unlike the purchase-money priority rule in subsection (d), the priority rules in subsection (e)
override the priority given to a construction mortgage under subsection (h).
The rule in subsection (e)(2) is limited to readily removable replacements of domestic appliances. It does not
apply to original installations. Moreover, it is limited to appliances that are "consumer goods" (defined in Section 9-
102) in the hands of the debtor. The principal effect of the rule is to make clear that a secured party financing
occasional replacements of domestic appliances in noncommercial, owner-occupied contexts need not concern
itself with real-property descriptions or records; indeed, for a purchase-money replacement of consumer goods,
perfection without any filing will be possible. See Section 9-309(1).
9. Priority in Fixtures: Judicial Liens. Subsection (e)(3), which follows former Section 9-313(4)(d), adopts a
first-in-time rule applicable to conflicts between a fixture security interest and a lien on the real property obtained by
legal or equitable proceedings. Such a lien is subordinate to an earlier-perfected security interest, regardless of the
method by which the security interest was perfected. Judgment creditors generally are not reliance creditors who
search real-property records. Accordingly, a perfected fixture security interest takes priority over a subsequent
judgment lien or other lien obtained by legal or equitable proceedings, even if no evidence of the security interest
appears in the relevant real-property records. Subsection (e)(3) thus protects a perfected fixture security interest
from avoidance by a trustee in bankruptcy under Bankruptcy Code Section 544(a), regardless of the method of
perfection.
10. Priority in Fixtures: Manufactured Homes. A manufactured home may become a fixture. New subsection
(e)(4) contains a special rule granting priority to certain security interests created in a "manufactured home" as part
of a "manufactured-home transaction" (both defined in Section 9-102). Under this rule, a security interest in a
manufactured home that becomes a fixture has priority over a conflicting interest of an encumbrancer or owner of
the real property if the security interest is perfected under a certificate-of-title statute (see Section 9-311).
Subsection (e)(4) is only one of the priority rules applicable to security interests in a manufactured home that
becomes a fixture. Thus, a security interest in a manufactured home which does not qualify for priority under this
subsection may qualify under another.
11. Priority in Fixtures: Construction Mortgages. The purchase-money priority presents a difficult problem in
relation to construction mortgages. The latter ordinarily will have been recorded even before the commencement of
delivery of materials to the job, and therefore would take priority over fixture security interests were it not for the
purchase-money priority. However, having recorded first, the holder of a construction mortgage reasonably expects
to have first priority in the improvement built using the mortgagee's advances. Subsection (g) expressly gives
priority to the construction mortgage recorded before the filing of the purchase-money security interest in fixtures. A
refinancing of a construction mortgage has the same priority as the construction mortgage itself. The phrase "an
obligation incurred for the construction of an improvement" covers both optional advances and advances pursuant
to commitment. Both types of advances have the same priority under subsection (g).
The priority under this subsection applies only to goods that become fixtures during the construction period
leading to the completion of the improvement. The construction priority will not apply to additions to the building
made long after completion of the improvement, even if the additions are financed by the real-property mortgagee
under an open-end clause of the construction mortgage. In such case, subsections (d), (e), and (f) govern.
Although this subsection affords a construction mortgage priority over a purchase-money security interest that
otherwise would have priority under subsection (d), the subsection is subject to the priority rules in subsections (e)
§ 9-334. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN FIXTURES AND CROPS
Page 5 of 5
and (f). Thus, a construction mortgage may be junior to a fixture security interest perfected by a fixture filing before
the construction mortgage was recorded. See subsection (e)(1).
12. Crops. Growing crops are "goods" in which a security interest may be created and perfected under this
Article. In some jurisdictions, a mortgage of real property may cover crops, as well. In the event that crops are
encumbered by both a mortgage and an Article 9 security interest, subsection (i) provides that the security interest
has priority. States whose real-property law provides otherwise should either amend that law directly or override it
by enacting subsection (j).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-335
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-335. ACCESSIONS
(a) [Creation of security interest in accession.] A security interest may be created in an accession and
continues in collateral that becomes an accession.
(b) [Perfection of security interest.] If a security interest is perfected when the collateral becomes an
accession, the security interest remains perfected in the collateral.
(c) [Priority of security interest.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), the other provisions of
this part determine the priority of a security interest in an accession.
(d) [Compliance with certificate-of-title statute.] A security interest in an accession is subordinate to a
security interest in the whole which is perfected by compliance with the requirements of a certificate-of-title
statute under Section 9-311(b).
(e) [Removal of accession after default.] After default, subject to Part 6, a secured party may remove an
accession from other goods if the security interest in the accession has priority over the claims of every
person having an interest in the whole.
(f) [Reimbursement following removal.] A secured party that removes an accession from other goods
under subsection (e) shall promptly reimburse any holder of a security interest or other lien on, or owner of,
the whole or of the other goods, other than the debtor, for the cost of repair of any physical injury to the
whole or the other goods. The secured party need not reimburse the holder or owner for any diminution in
value of the whole or the other goods caused by the absence of the accession removed or by any necessity
for replacing it. A person entitled to reimbursement may refuse permission to remove until the secured party
gives adequate assurance for the performance of the obligation to reimburse.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-314.
2. "Accession." This section applies to an "accession," as defined in Section 9-102, regardless of the cost or
difficulty of removing the accession from the other goods, and regardless of whether the original goods have come
to form an integral part of the other goods. This section does not apply to goods whose identity has been lost.
Goods of that kind are "commingled goods" governed by Section 9-336. Neither this section nor the following one
addresses the case of collateral that changes form without the addition of other goods.
3. "Accession" vs. "Other Goods." This section distinguishes among the "accession," the "other goods," and
the "whole." The last term refers to the combination of the "accession" and the "other goods." If one person's
collateral becomes physically united with another person's collateral, each is an "accession."
Example 1: SP-1 holds a security interest in the debtor's tractors (which are not subject to a certificate-of-title
statute), and SP-2 holds a security interest in a particular tractor engine. The engine is installed in a tractor. From
§ 9-335. ACCESSIONS
Page 2 of 2
the perspective of SP-1, the tractor becomes an "accession" and the engine is the "other goods." From the
perspective of SP-2, the engine is the "accession" and the tractor is the "other goods." The completed tractor-tractor
cum engine-constitutes the "whole."
4. Scope. This section governs only a few issues concerning accessions. Subsection (a) contains rules governing
continuation of a security interest in an accession. Subsection (b) contains a rule governing continued perfection of
a security interest in goods that become an accession. Subsection (d) contains a special priority rule governing
accessions that become part of a whole covered by a certificate of title. Subsections (e) and (f) govern enforcement
of a security interest in an accession.
5. Matters Left to Other Provisions of This Article: Attachment and Perfection. Other provisions of this
Article often govern accession-related issues. For example, this section does not address whether a secured party
acquires a security interest in the whole if its collateral becomes an accession. Normally this will turn on the
description of the collateral in the security agreement.
Example 2: Debtor owns a computer subject to a perfected security interest in favor of SP-1. Debtor acquires
memory and installs it in the computer. Whether SP-1's security interest attaches to the memory depends on
whether the security agreement covers it.
Similarly, this section does not determine whether perfection against collateral that becomes an accession is
effective to perfect a security interest in the whole. Other provisions of this Article, including the requirements for
indicating the collateral covered by a financing statement, resolve that question.
6. Matters Left to Other Provisions of This Article: Priority. With one exception, concerning goods covered by
a certificate of title (see subsection (d)), the other provisions of this Part, including the rules governing purchasemoney
security interests, determine the priority of most security interests in an accession, including the relative
priority of a security interest in an accession and a security interest in the whole. See subsection (c).
Example 3: Debtor owns an office computer subject to a security interest in favor of SP-1. Debtor acquires
memory and grants a perfected security interest in the memory to SP-2. Debtor installs the memory in the
computer, at which time (one assumes) SP-1's security interest attaches to the memory. The first-to-file-or-perfect
rule of Section 9-322 governs priority in the memory. If, however, SP-2's security interest is a purchase-money
security interest, Section 9-324(a) would afford priority in the memory to SP-2, regardless of which security interest
was perfected first.
7. Goods Covered by Certificate of Title. This section does govern the priority of a security interest in an
accession that is or becomes part of a whole that is subject to a security interest perfected by compliance with a
certificate-of-title statute. Subsection (d) provides that a security interest in the whole, perfected by compliance with
a certificate-of-title statute, takes priority over a security interest in the accession. It enables a secured party to rely
upon a certificate of title without having to check the UCC files to determine whether any components of the
collateral may be encumbered. The subsection imposes a corresponding risk upon those who finance goods that
may become part of goods covered by a certificate of title. In doing so, it reverses the priority that appeared
reasonable to most pre-UCC courts.
Example 4: Debtor owns an automobile subject to a security interest in favor of SP-1. The security interest is
perfected by notation on the certificate of title. Debtor buys tires subject to a perfected-by-filing purchase-money
security interest in favor of SP-2 and mounts the tires on the automobile's wheels. If the security interest in the
automobile attaches to the tires, then SP-1 acquires priority over SP-2. The same result would obtain if SP-1's
security interest attached to the automobile and was perfected after the tires had been mounted on the wheels.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-336
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-336. COMMINGLED GOODS
(a) ["Commingled goods."] In this section, "commingled goods" means goods that are physically united
with other goods in such a manner that their identity is lost in a product or mass.
(b) [No security interest in commingled goods as such.] A security interest does not exist in
commingled goods as such. However, a security interest may attach to a product or mass that results when
goods become commingled goods.
(c) [Attachment of security interest to product or mass.] If collateral becomes commingled goods, a
security interest attaches to the product or mass.
(d) [Perfection of security interest.] If a security interest in collateral is perfected before the collateral
becomes commingled goods, the security interest that attaches to the product or mass under subsection (c)
is perfected.
(e) [Priority of security interest.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (f), the other provisions of
this part determine the priority of a security interest that attaches to the product or mass under subsection
(c).
(f) [Conflicting security interests in product or mass] If more than one security interest attaches to the
product or mass under subsection (c), the following rules determine priority:
(1) A security interest that is perfected under subsection (d) has priority over a security interest that is
unperfected at the time the collateral becomes commingled goods.
(2) If more than one security interest is perfected under subsection (d), the security interests rank
equally in proportion to the value of the collateral at the time it became commingled goods.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-315.
2. "Commingled Goods." Subsection (a) defines "commingled goods." It is meant to include not only goods
whose identity is lost through manufacturing or production (e.g., flour that has become part of baked goods) but
also goods whose identity is lost by commingling with other goods from which they cannot be distinguished (e.g.,
ball bearings).
3. Consequences of Becoming "Commingled Goods." By definition, the identity of the original collateral
cannot be determined once the original collateral becomes commingled goods. Consequently, the security interest
in the specific original collateral alone is lost once the collateral becomes commingled goods, and no security
interest in the original collateral can be created thereafter except as a part of the resulting product or mass. See
subsection (b).
§ 9-336. COMMINGLED GOODS
Page 2 of 3
Once collateral becomes commingled goods, the secured party's security interest is transferred from the original
collateral to the product or mass. See subsection (c). If the security interest in the original collateral was perfected,
the security interest in the product or mass is a perfected security interest. See subsection (d). This perfection
continues until lapse.
4. Priority of Perfected Security Interests That Attach Under This Section. This section governs the priority of
competing security interests in a product or mass only when both security interests arise under this section. In that
case, if both security interests are perfected by operation of this section (see subsections (c) and (d)), then the
security interests rank equally, in proportion to the value of the collateral at the time it became commingled goods.
See subsection (f)(2).
Example 1: SP-1 has a perfected security interest in Debtor's eggs, which have a value of $ 300 and secure a
debt of $ 400, and SP-2 has a perfected security interest in Debtor's flour, which has a value of $ 500 and secures
a debt of $ 600. Debtor uses the flour and eggs to make cakes, which have a value of $ 1000. The two security
interests rank equally and share in the ratio of 3:5. Applying this ratio to the entire value of the product, SP-1 would
be entitled to $ 375 (i.e., 3/8 x $ 1000), and SP-2 would be entitled to $ 625 (i.e., 5/8 x $ 1000).
Example 2: Assume the facts of Example 1, except that SP-1's collateral, worth $ 300, secures a debt of $ 200.
Recall that, if the cake is worth $ 1000, then applying the ratio of 3:5 would entitle SP-1 to $ 375 and SP-2 to $ 625.
However, SP-1 is not entitled to collect from the product more than it is owed. Accordingly, SP-1's share would be
only $ 200, SP-2 would receive the remaining value, up to the amount it is owed ($ 600).
Example 3: Assume that the cakes in the previous examples have a value of only $ 600. Again, the parties share
in the ratio of 3:5. If, as in Example 1, SP-1 is owed $ 400, then SP-1 is entitled to $ 225 (i.e., 3/8 x $ 600), and SP-
2 is entitled to $ 375 (i.e., 5/8 x $ 600). Debtor receives nothing. If, however, as in Example 2, SP-1 is owed only $
200, then SP-2 receives $ 400.
The results in the foregoing examples remain the same, regardless of whether SP-1 or SP-2 (or each) has a
purchase-money security interest.
5. Perfection: Unperfected Security Interests. The rule explained in the preceding Comment applies only when
both security interests in original collateral are perfected when the goods become commingled goods. If a security
interest in original collateral is unperfected at the time the collateral becomes commingled goods, subsection (f)(1)
applies.
Example 4: SP-1 has a perfected security interest in the debtor's eggs, and SP-2 has an unperfected security
interest in the debtor's flour. Debtor uses the flour and eggs to make cakes. Under subsection (c), both security
interests attach to the cakes. But since SP-1's security interest was perfected at the time of commingling and SP-2's
was not, only SP-1's security interest in the cakes is perfected. See subsection (d). Under subsection (f)(1) and
Section 9-322(a)(2), SP-1's perfected security interest has priority over SP-2's unperfected security interest.
If both security interests are unperfected, the rule of Section 9-322(a)(3) would apply.
6. Multiple Security Interests. On occasion, a single input may be encumbered by more than one security
interest. In those cases, the multiple secured parties should be treated like a single secured party for purposes of
determining their collective share under subsection (f)(2). The normal priority rules would determine how that share
would be allocated between them. Consider the following example, which is a variation on Example 1 above:
Example 5: SP-1A has a perfected, first-priority security interest in Debtor's eggs. SP-1B has a perfected,
second-priority security interest in the same collateral. The eggs have a value of $ 300. Debtor owes $ 200 to SP-
1A and $ 200 to SP-1B. SP-2 has a perfected security interest in Debtor's flour, which has a value of $ 500 and
secures a debt of $ 600. Debtor uses the flour and eggs to make cakes, which have a value of $ 1000.
For purposes of subsection (f)(2), SP-1A and SP-1B should be treated like a single secured party. The collective
security interest would rank equally with that of SP-2. Thus, the secured parties would share in the ratio of 3 (for
SP-1A and SP-1B combined) to 5 (for SP-2). Applying this ratio to the entire value of the product, SP-1A and SP-1B
§ 9-336. COMMINGLED GOODS
Page 3 of 3
in the aggregate would be entitled to $ 375 (i.e., 3/8 x $ 1000), and SP-2 would be entitled to $ 625 (i.e., 5/8 x $
1000). SP-1A and SP-1B would share the $ 375 in accordance with their priority, as established under other rules.
Inasmuch as SP-1A has first priority, it would receive $ 200, and SP-1B would receive $ 175.
7. Priority of Security Interests That Attach Other Than by Operation of This Section. Under subsection (e),
the normal priority rules determine the priority of a security interest that attaches to the product or mass other than
by operation of this section. For example, assume that SP-1 has a perfected security interest in Debtor's existing
and after-acquired baked goods, and SP-2 has a perfected security interest in Debtor's flour. When the flour is
processed into cakes, subsections (c) and (d) provide that SP-2 acquires a perfected security interest in the cakes.
If SP-1 filed against the baked goods before SP-2 filed against the flour, then SP-1 will enjoy priority in the cakes.
See Section 9-322 (first-to-file-or-perfect). But if SP-2 filed against the flour before SP-1 filed against the baked
goods, then SP-2 will enjoy priority in the cakes to the extent of its security interest.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-337
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-337. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS IN GOODS COVERED BY
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE
If, while a security interest in goods is perfected by any method under the law of another jurisdiction, this
State issues a certificate of title that does not show that the goods are subject to the security interest or
contain a statement that they may be subject to security interests not shown on the certificate:
(1) a buyer of the goods, other than a person in the business of selling goods of that kind, takes free of
the security interest if the buyer gives value and receives delivery of the goods after issuance of the
certificate and without knowledge of the security interest; and
(2) the security interest is subordinate to a conflicting security interest in the goods that attaches, and
is perfected under Section 9-311(b), after issuance of the certificate and without the conflicting secured
party's knowledge of the security interest.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Derived from former Section 9-103(2)(d).
2. Protection for Buyers and Secured Parties. This section affords protection to certain good-faith purchasers
for value who are likely to have relied on a "clean" certificate of title, i.e., one that neither shows that the goods are
subject to a particular security interest nor contains a statement that they may be subject to security interests not
shown on the certificate. Under this section, a buyer can take free of, and the holder of a conflicting security interest
can acquire priority over, a security interest that is perfected by any method under the law of another jurisdiction.
The fact that the security interest has been reperfected by possession under Section 9-313 does not of itself
disqualify the holder of a conflicting security interest from protection under paragraph (2).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-338
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-338. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTEREST OR AGRICULTURAL LIEN
PERFECTED BY FILED FINANCING STATEMENT PROVIDING CERTAIN
INCORRECT INFORMATION
If a security interest or agricultural lien is perfected by a filed financing statement providing information
described in Section 9-516(b)(5) which is incorrect at the time the financing statement is filed:
(1) the security interest or agricultural lien is subordinate to a conflicting perfected security interest in
the collateral to the extent that the holder of the conflicting security interest gives value in reasonable
reliance upon the incorrect information; and
(2) a purchaser, other than a secured party, of the collateral takes free of the security interest or
agricultural lien to the extent that, in reasonable reliance upon the incorrect information, the purchaser
gives value and, in the case of tangible chattel paper, tangible documents, goods, instruments, or a
security certificate, receives delivery of the collateral.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Effect of Incorrect Information in Financing Statement. Section 9-520(a) requires the filing office to reject
financing statements that do not contain information concerning the debtor as specified in Section 9-516(b)(5). An
error in this information does not render the financing statement ineffective. On rare occasions, a subsequent
purchaser of the collateral (i.e., a buyer or secured party) may rely on the misinformation to its detriment. This
section subordinates a security interest or agricultural lien perfected by an effective, but flawed, financing statement
to the rights of a buyer or holder of a perfected security interest to the extent that, in reasonable reliance on the
incorrect information, the purchaser gives value and, in the case of tangible collateral, receives delivery of the
collateral. A purchaser who has not made itself aware of the information in the filing office with respect to the debtor
cannot act in "reasonable reliance" upon incorrect information.
3. Relationship to Section 9-507. This section applies to financing statements that contain information that is
incorrect at the time of filing and imposes a small risk of subordination on the filer. In contrast, Section 9-507 deals
with financing statements containing information that is correct at the time of filing but which becomes incorrect
later. Except as provided in Section 9-507 with respect to changes in the name that is sufficient as the name of the
debtor under Section 9-503(a), an otherwise effective financing statement does not become ineffective if the
information contained in it becomes inaccurate.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 9-338. PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTEREST OR AGRICULTURAL LIEN PERFECTED BY FILED
FINANCING STATEMENT PROVIDING CERTAIN INCORRECT INFORMATION
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-339
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 3. PRIORITY
§ 9-339. PRIORITY SUBJECT TO SUBORDINATION
This article does not preclude subordination by agreement by a person entitled to priority.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-316.
2. Subordination by Agreement. The preceding sections deal elaborately with questions of priority. This section
makes it entirely clear that a person entitled to priority may effectively agree to subordinate its claim. Only the
person entitled to priority may make such an agreement: a person's rights cannot be adversely affected by an
agreement to which the person is not a party.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-340
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 4. RIGHTS OF BANK
§ 9-340. EFFECTIVENESS OF RIGHT OF RECOUPMENT OR SET-OFF
AGAINST DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
(a) [Exercise of recoupment or set-off.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), a bank with
which a deposit account is maintained may exercise any right of recoupment or set-off against a secured
party that holds a security interest in the deposit account.
(b) [Recoupment or set-off not affected by security interest.] Except as otherwise provided in
subsection (c), the application of this article to a security interest in a deposit account does not affect a right
of recoupment or set-off of the secured party as to a deposit account maintained with the secured party.
(c) [When set-off ineffective.] The exercise by a bank of a set-off against a deposit account is ineffective
against a secured party that holds a security interest in the deposit account which is perfected by control
under Section 9-104(a)(3), if the set-off is based on a claim against the debtor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New; subsection (b) is based on a nonuniform Illinois amendment.
2. Set-off vs. Security Interest. This section resolves the conflict between a security interest in a deposit account
and the bank's rights of recoupment and set-off.
Subsection (a) states the general rule and provides that the bank may effectively exercise rights of recoupment
and set-off against the secured party. Subsection (c) contains an exception: if the secured party has control under
Section 9-104(a)(3) (i.e., if it has become the bank's customer), then any set-off exercised by the bank against a
debt owed by the debtor (as opposed to a debt owed to the bank by the secured party) is ineffective. The bank may,
however, exercise its recoupment rights effectively. This result is consistent with the priority rule in Section 9-
327(4), under which the security interest of a bank in a deposit account is subordinate to that of a secured party
who has control under Section 9-104(a)(3).
This section deals with rights of set-off and recoupment that a bank may have under other law. It does not create
a right of set-off or recoupment, nor is it intended to override any limitations or restrictions that other law imposes on
the exercise of those rights.
3. Preservation of Set-Off Right. Subsection (b) makes clear that a bank may hold both a right of set-off against,
and an Article 9 security interest in, the same deposit account. By holding a security interest in a deposit account, a
bank does not impair any right of set-off it would otherwise enjoy. This subsection does not pertain to accounts
evidenced by an instrument (e.g., certain certificates of deposit), which are excluded from the definition of "deposit
accounts."
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 9-340. EFFECTIVENESS OF RIGHT OF RECOUPMENT OR SET-OFF AGAINST DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-341
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 4. RIGHTS OF BANK
§ 9-341. BANK'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES WITH RESPECT TO DEPOSIT
ACCOUNT
Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-340(c), and unless the bank otherwise agrees in an
authenticated record, a bank's rights and duties with respect to a deposit account maintained with the bank
are not terminated, suspended, or modified by:
(1) the creation, attachment, or perfection of a security interest in the deposit account;
(2) the bank's knowledge of the security interest; or
(3) the bank's receipt of instructions from the secured party.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Free Flow of Funds. This section is designed to prevent security interests in deposit accounts from impeding
the free flow of funds through the payment system. Subject to two exceptions, it leaves the bank's rights and duties
with respect to the deposit account and the funds on deposit unaffected by the creation or perfection of a security
interest or by the bank's knowledge of the security interest. In addition, the section permits the bank to ignore the
instructions of the secured party unless it had agreed to honor them or unless other law provides to the contrary. A
secured party who wishes to deprive the debtor of access to funds on deposit or to appropriate those funds for itself
needs to obtain the agreement of the bank, utilize the judicial process, or comply with procedures set forth in other
law. Section 4-303(a), concerning the effect of notice on a bank's right and duty to pay items, is not to the contrary.
That section addresses only whether an otherwise effective notice comes too late; it does not determine whether a
timely notice is otherwise effective.
3. Operation of Rule. The general rule of this section is subject to Section 9-340(c), under which a bank's right of
set-off may not be exercised against a deposit account in the secured party's name if the right is based on a claim
against the debtor. This result reflects current law in many jurisdictions and does not appear to have unduly
disrupted banking practices or the payments system. The more important function of this section, which is not
impaired by Section 9-340, is the bank's right to follow the debtor's (customer's) instructions (e.g., by honoring
checks, permitting withdrawals, etc.) until such time as the depository institution is served with judicial process or
receives instructions with respect to the funds on deposit from a secured party who has control over the deposit
account.
4. Liability of Bank. This Article does not determine whether a bank that pays out funds from an encumbered
deposit is liable to the holder of a security interest. Although the fact that a secured party has control over the
deposit account and the manner by which control was achieved may be relevant to the imposition of liability,
whatever rule applies generally when a bank pays out funds in which a third party has an interest would determine
liability to a secured party. Often, this rule is found in a non-UCC adverse claim statute.
§ 9-341. BANK'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES WITH RESPECT TO DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
Page 2 of 2
5. Certificates of Deposit. This section does not address the obligations of banks that issue instruments
evidencing deposits (e.g., certain certificates of deposit).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-342
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 3. PERFECTION AND PRIORITY > SUBPART 4. RIGHTS OF BANK
§ 9-342. BANK'S RIGHT TO REFUSE TO ENTER INTO OR DISCLOSE
EXISTENCE OF CONTROL AGREEMENT
This article does not require a bank to enter into an agreement of the kind described in Section 9-104(a)(2), even if
its customer so requests or directs. A bank that has entered into such an agreement is not required to confirm the
existence of the agreement to another person unless requested to do so by its customer.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New; derived from Section 8-106(g).
2. Protection for Bank. This section protects banks from the need to enter into agreements against their will and
from the need to respond to inquiries from persons other than their customers.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-401
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES
§ 9-401. ALIENABILITY OF DEBTOR'S RIGHTS
(a) [Other law governs alienability; exceptions.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) and
Sections 9-406, 9-407, 9-408, and 9-409, whether a debtor's rights in collateral may be voluntarily or
involuntarily transferred is governed by law other than this article.
(b) [Agreement does not prevent transfer.] An agreement between the debtor and secured party which
prohibits a transfer of the debtor's rights in collateral or makes the transfer a default does not prevent the
transfer from taking effect.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-311.
2. Scope of This Part. This Part deals with several issues affecting third parties (i.e., parties other than the
debtor and the secured party). These issues are not addressed in Part 3, Subpart 3, which deals with priorities. This
Part primarily addresses the rights and duties of account debtors and other persons obligated on collateral who are
not, themselves, parties to a secured transaction.
3. Governing Law. There was some uncertainty under former Article 9 as to which jurisdiction's law (usually,
which jurisdiction's version of Article 9) applied to the matters that this Part addresses. Part 3, Subpart 1, does not
determine the law governing these matters because they do not relate to perfection, the effect of perfection or
nonperfection, or priority. However, it might be inappropriate for a designation of applicable law by a debtor and
secured party under Section 1-301 to control the law applicable to an independent transaction or relationship
between the debtor and an account debtor.
Consider an example under Section 9-408.
Example 1: State X has adopted this Article; former Article 9 is the law of State Y. A general intangible (e.g., a
franchise agreement) between a debtor-franchisee, D, and an account debtor-franchisor, AD, is governed by the
law of State Y. D grants to SP a security interest in its rights under the franchise agreement. The franchise
agreement contains a term prohibiting D's assignment of its rights under the agreement. D and SP agree that their
secured transaction is governed by the law of State X. Under State X's Section 9-408, the restriction on D's
assignment is ineffective to prevent the creation, attachment, or perfection of SP's security interest. State Y's former
Section 9-318(4), however, does not address restrictions on the creation of security interests in general intangibles
other than general intangibles for money due or to become due. Accordingly, it does not address restrictions on the
assignment to SP of D's rights under the franchise agreement. The non-Article-9 law of State Y, which does
address restrictions, provides that the prohibition on assignment is effective.
This Article does not provide a specific answer to the question of which State's law applies to the restriction on
assignment in the example. However, assuming that under non-UCC choice-of-law principles the effectiveness of
the restriction would be governed by the law of State Y, which governs the franchise agreement, the fact that State
§ 9-401. ALIENABILITY OF DEBTOR'S RIGHTS
Page 2 of 2
X's Article 9 governs the secured transaction between SP and D would not override the otherwise applicable law
governing the agreement. Of course, to the extent that jurisdictions eventually adopt identical versions of this Article
and courts interpret it consistently, the inability to identify the applicable law in circumstances such as those in the
example may be inconsequential.
4. Inalienability Under Other Law. Subsection (a) addresses the question whether property necessarily is
transferable by virtue of its inclusion (i.e., its eligibility as collateral) within the scope of Article 9. It gives a negative
answer, subject to the identified exceptions. The substance of subsection (a) was implicit under former Article 9.
5. Negative Pledge Covenant. Subsection (b) is an exception to the general rule in subsection (a). It makes clear
that in secured transactions under this Article the debtor has rights in collateral (whether legal title or equitable)
which it can transfer and which its creditors can reach. It is best explained with an example.
Example 2: A debtor, D, grants to SP a security interest to secure a debt in excess of the value of the collateral.
D agrees with SP that it will not create a subsequent security interest in the collateral and that any security interest
purportedly granted in violation of the agreement will be void. Subsequently, in violation of its agreement with SP, D
purports to grant a security interest in the same collateral to another secured party.
Subsection (b) validates D's creation of the subsequent (prohibited) security interest, which might even achieve
priority over the earlier security interest. See Comment 7. However, unlike some other provisions of this Part, such
as Section 9-406, subsection (b) does not provide that the agreement restricting assignment itself is "ineffective."
Consequently, the debtor's breach may create a default.
6. Rights of Lien Creditors. Difficult problems may arise with respect to attachment, levy, and other judicial
procedures under which a debtor's creditors may reach collateral subject to a security interest. For example, an
obligation may be secured by collateral worth many times the amount of the obligation. If a lien creditor has caused
all or a portion of the collateral to be seized under judicial process, it may be difficult to determine the amount of the
debtor's "equity" in the collateral that has been seized. The section leaves resolution of this problem to the courts.
The doctrine of marshaling may be appropriate.
7. Sale of Receivables. If a debtor sells an account, chattel paper, payment intangible, or promissory note
outright, as against the buyer the debtor has no remaining rights to transfer. If, however, the buyer fails to perfect its
interest, then solely insofar as the rights of certain third parties are concerned, the debtor is deemed to retain its
rights and title. See Section 9-318. The debtor has the power to convey these rights to a subsequent purchaser. If
the subsequent purchaser (buyer or secured lender) perfects its interest, it will achieve priority over the earlier,
unperfected purchaser. See Section 9-322(a)(1).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-402
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES
§ 9-402. SECURED PARTY NOT OBLIGATED ON CONTRACT OF DEBTOR
OR IN TORT
The existence of a security interest, agricultural lien, or authority given to a debtor to dispose of or use collateral,
without more, does not subject a secured party to liability in contract or tort for the debtor's acts or omissions.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-317.
2. Nonliability of Secured Party. This section, like former Section 9-317, rejects theories on which a secured
party might be held liable on a debtor's contracts or in tort merely because a security interest exists or because the
debtor is entitled to dispose of or use collateral. This section expands former Section 9-317 to cover agricultural
liens.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-403
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES
§ 9-403. AGREEMENT NOT TO ASSERT DEFENSES AGAINST ASSIGNEE
(a) ["Value."] In this section, "value" has the meaning provided in Section 3-303(a).
(b) [Agreement not to assert claim or defense.] Except as otherwise provided in this section, an
agreement between an account debtor and an assignor not to assert against an assignee any claim or
defense that the account debtor may have against the assignor is enforceable by an assignee that takes an
assignment:
(1) for value;
(2) in good faith;
(3) without notice of a claim of a property or possessory right to the property assigned; and
(4) without notice of a defense or claim in recoupment of the type that may be asserted against a
person entitled to enforce a negotiable instrument under Section 3-305(a).
(c) [When subsection (b) not applicable.] Subsection (b) does not apply to defenses of a type that may
be asserted against a holder in due course of a negotiable instrument under Section 3-305(b).
(d) [Omission of required statement in consumer transaction.] In a consumer transaction, if a record
evidences the account debtor's obligation, law other than this article requires that the record include a
statement to the effect that the rights of an assignee are subject to claims or defenses that the account
debtor could assert against the original obligee, and the record does not include such a statement:
(1) the record has the same effect as if the record included such a statement; and
(2) the account debtor may assert against an assignee those claims and defenses that would have
been available if the record included such a statement.
(e) [Rule for individual under other law.] This section is subject to law other than this article which
establishes a different rule for an account debtor who is an individual and who incurred the obligation
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.
(f) [Other law not displaced.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), this section does not
displace law other than this article which gives effect to an agreement by an account debtor not to assert a
claim or defense against an assignee.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-206.
2. Scope and Purpose. Subsection (b), like former Section 9-206, generally validates an agreement between an
account debtor and an assignor that the account debtor will not assert against an assignee claims and defenses
that it may have against the assignor. These agreements are typical in installment sale agreements and leases.
§ 9-403. AGREEMENT NOT TO ASSERT DEFENSES AGAINST ASSIGNEE
Page 2 of 3
However, this section expands former Section 9-206 to apply to all account debtors; it is not limited to account
debtors that have bought or leased goods. This section applies only to the obligations of an "account debtor," as
defined in Section 9-102. Thus, it does not determine the circumstances under which and the extent to which a
person who is obligated on a negotiable instrument is disabled from asserting claims and defenses. Rather, Article
3 must be consulted. See, e.g., Sections 3-305, 3-306. Article 3 governs even when the negotiable instrument
constitutes part of chattel paper. See Section 9-102 (an obligor on a negotiable instrument constituting part of
chattel paper is not an "account debtor").
3. Conditions of Validation; Relationship to Article 3. Subsection (b) validates an account debtor's agreement
only if the assignee takes an assignment for value, in good faith, and without notice of conflicting claims to the
property assigned or of certain claims or defenses of the account debtor. Like former Section 9-206, this section is
designed to put the assignee in a position that is no better and no worse than that of a holder in due course of a
negotiable instrument under Article 3. However, former Section 9-206 left open certain issues, e.g., whether the
section incorporated the special Article 3 definition of "value" in Section 3-303 or the generally applicable definition
in Section 1-201(44). Subsection (a) addresses this question; it provides that "value" has the meaning specified in
Section 3-303(a). Similarly, subsection (c) provides that subsection (b) does not validate an agreement with respect
to defenses that could be asserted against a holder in due course under Section 3-305(b) (the so-called "real"
defenses). In 1990, the definition of "holder in due course" (Section 3-302) and the articulation of the rights of a
holder in due course (Sections 3-305 and 3-306) were revised substantially. This section tracks more closely the
rules of Sections 3-302, 3-305, and 3-306.
4. Relationship to Terms of Assigned Property. Former Section 9-206(2), concerning warranties
accompanying the sale of goods, has been deleted as unnecessary. This Article does not regulate the terms of the
account, chattel paper, or general intangible that is assigned, except insofar as the account, chattel paper, or
general intangible itself creates a security interest (as often is the case with chattel paper). Thus, Article 2, and not
this Article, determines whether a seller of goods makes or effectively disclaims warranties, even if the sale is
secured. Similarly, other law, and not this Article, determines the effectiveness of an account debtor's undertaking
to pay notwithstanding, and not to assert, any defenses or claims against an assignor--e.g., a "hell-or-high-water"
provision in the underlying agreement that is assigned. If other law gives effect to this undertaking, then, under
principles of nemo dat, the undertaking would be enforceable by the assignee (secured party). If other law prevents
the assignor from enforcing the undertaking, this section nevertheless might permit the assignee to do so. The right
of the assignee to enforce would depend upon whether, under the particular facts, the account debtor's undertaking
fairly could be construed as an agreement that falls within the scope of this section and whether the assignee meets
the requirements of this section.
5. Relationship to Federal Trade Commission Rule. Subsection (d) is new. It applies to rights evidenced by a
record that is required to contain, but does not contain, the notice set forth in Federal Trade Commission Rule 433,
16 C.F.R. Part 433 (the "Holder-in-Due-Course Regulations"). Under this subsection, an assignee of such a record
takes subject to the consumer account debtor's claims and defenses to the same extent as it would have if the
writing had contained the required notice. Thus, subsection (d) effectively renders waiver-of-defense clauses
ineffective in the transactions with consumers to which it applies.
6. Relationship to Other Law. Like former Section 9-206(1), this section takes no position on the enforceability
of waivers of claims and defenses by consumer account debtors, leaving that question to other law. However, the
reference to "law other than this article" in subsection (e) encompasses administrative rules and regulations; the
reference in former Section 9-206(1) that it replaces ("statute or decision") arguably did not.
This section does not displace other law that gives effect to a non-consumer account debtor's agreement not to
assert defenses against an assignee, even if the agreement would not qualify under subsection (b). See subsection
(f). It validates, but does not invalidate, agreements made by a non-consumer account debtor. This section also
does not displace other law to the extent that the other law permits an assignee, who takes an assignment with
notice of a claim of a property or possessory right, a defense, or a claim in recoupment, to enforce an account
debtor's agreement not to assert claims and defenses against the assignor (e.g., a "hell-or-high-water" agreement).
See Comment 4. It also does not displace an assignee's right to assert that an account debtor is estopped from
§ 9-403. AGREEMENT NOT TO ASSERT DEFENSES AGAINST ASSIGNEE
Page 3 of 3
asserting a claim or defense. Nor does this section displace other law with respect to waivers of potential future
claims and defenses that are the subject of an agreement between the account debtor and the assignee. Finally, it
does not displace Section 1-107, concerning waiver of a breach that allegedly already has occurred.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-404
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES
§ 9-404. RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY ASSIGNEE; CLAIMS AND DEFENSES
AGAINST ASSIGNEE
(a) [Assignee's rights subject to terms, claims, and defenses; exceptions.] Unless an account debtor
has made an enforceable agreement not to assert defenses or claims, and subject to subsections (b)
through (e), the rights of an assignee are subject to:
(1) all terms of the agreement between the account debtor and assignor and any defense or claim in
recoupment arising from the transaction that gave rise to the contract; and
(2) any other defense or claim of the account debtor against the assignor which accrues before the
account debtor receives a notification of the assignment authenticated by the assignor or the assignee.
(b) [Account debtor's claim reduces amount owed to assignee.] Subject to subsection (c) and except
as otherwise provided in subsection (d), the claim of an account debtor against an assignor may be
asserted against an assignee under subsection (a) only to reduce the amount the account debtor owes.
(c) [Rule for individual under other law.] This section is subject to law other than this article which
establishes a different rule for an account debtor who is an individual and who incurred the obligation
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.
(d) [Omission of required statement in consumer transaction.] In a consumer transaction, if a record
evidences the account debtor's obligation, law other than this article requires that the record include a
statement to the effect that the account debtor's recovery against an assignee with respect to claims and
defenses against the assignor may not exceed amounts paid by the account debtor under the record, and
the record does not include such a statement, the extent to which a claim of an account debtor against the
assignor may be asserted against an assignee is determined as if the record included such a statement.
(e) [Inapplicability to health-care-insurance receivable.] This section does not apply to an assignment
of a health-care-insurance receivable.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-318(1).
2. Purpose; Rights of Assignee in General. Subsection (a), like former Section 9-318(1), provides that an
assignee generally takes an assignment subject to defenses and claims of an account debtor. Under subsection
(a)(1), if the account debtor's defenses on an assigned claim arise from the transaction that gave rise to the
contract with the assignor, it makes no difference whether the defense or claim accrues before or after the account
debtor is notified of the assignment. Under subsection (a)(2), the assignee takes subject to other defenses or claims
only if they accrue before the account debtor has been notified of the assignment. Of course, an account debtor
may waive its right to assert defenses or claims against an assignee under Section 9-403 or other applicable law.
Subsection (a) tracks Section 3-305(a)(3) more closely than its predecessor.
§ 9-404. RIGHTS ACQUIRED BY ASSIGNEE; CLAIMS AND DEFENSES AGAINST ASSIGNEE
Page 2 of 2
3. Limitation on Affirmative Claims. Subsection (b) is new. It limits the claim that the account debtor may assert
against an assignee. Borrowing from Section 3-305(a)(3) and cases construing former Section 9-318, subsection
(b) generally does not afford the account debtor the right to an affirmative recovery from an assignee.
4. Consumer Account Debtors; Relationship to Federal Trade Commission Rule. Subsections (c) and (d)
also are new. Subsection (c) makes clear that the rules of this section are subject to other law establishing special
rules for consumer account debtors. An "account debtor who is an individual" as used in subsection (c) includes
individuals who are jointly or jointly and severally obligated. Subsection (d) applies to rights evidenced by a record
that is required to contain, but does not contain, the notice set forth in Federal Trade Commission Rule 433, 16
C.F.R. Part 433 (the "Holder-in-Due-Course Regulations"). Under subsection (d), a consumer account debtor has
the same right to an affirmative recovery from an assignee of such a record as the consumer would have had
against the assignee had the record contained the required notice.
5. Scope; Application to "Account Debtor." This section deals only with the rights and duties of "account
debtors"--and for the most part only with account debtors on accounts, chattel paper, and payment intangibles.
Subsection (e) provides that the obligation of an insurer with respect to a health-care-insurance receivable is
governed by other law. References in this section to an "account debtor" include account debtors on collateral that
is proceeds. Neither this section nor any other provision of this Article, including Sections 9-408 and 9-409, provides
analogous regulation of the rights and duties of other obligors on collateral, such as the maker of a negotiable
instrument (governed by Article 3), the issuer of or nominated person under a letter of credit (governed by Article 5),
or the issuer of a security (governed by Article 8). Article 9 leaves those rights and duties untouched; however,
Section 9-409 deals with the special case of letters of credit. When chattel paper is composed in part of a
negotiable instrument, the obligor on the instrument is not an "account debtor," and Article 3 governs the rights of
the assignee of the chattel paper with respect to the issues that this section addresses. See, e.g., Section 3-601
(dealing with discharge of an obligation to pay a negotiable instrument).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-405
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES
§ 9-405. MODIFICATION OF ASSIGNED CONTRACT
(a) [Effect of modification on assignee.] A modification of or substitution for an assigned contract is
effective against an assignee if made in good faith. The assignee acquires corresponding rights under the
modified or substituted contract. The assignment may provide that the modification or substitution is a
breach of contract by the assignor. This subsection is subject to subsections (b) through (d).
(b) [Applicability of subsection (a).] Subsection (a) applies to the extent that:
(1) the right to payment or a part thereof under an assigned contract has not been fully earned by
performance; or
(2) the right to payment or a part thereof has been fully earned by performance and the account debtor
has not received notification of the assignment under Section 9-406(a).
(c) [Rule for individual under other law.] This section is subject to law other than this article which
establishes a different rule for an account debtor who is an individual and who incurred the obligation
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.
(d) [Inapplicability to health-care-insurance receivable.] This section does not apply to an assignment
of a health-care-insurance receivable.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-318(2).
2. Modification of Assigned Contract. The ability of account debtors and assignors to modify assigned
contracts can be important, especially in the case of government contracts and complex contractual arrangements
(e.g., construction contracts) with respect to which modifications are customary. Subsections (a) and (b) provide
that good-faith modifications of assigned contracts are binding against an assignee to the extent that (i) the right to
payment has not been fully earned or (ii) the right to payment has been earned and notification of the assignment
has not been given to the account debtor. Former Section 9-318(2) did not validate modifications of fully-performed
contracts under any circumstances, whether or not notification of the assignment had been given to the account
debtor. Subsection (a) protects the interests of assignees by (i) limiting the effectiveness of modifications to those
made in good faith, (ii) affording the assignee with corresponding rights under the contract as modified, and (iii)
recognizing that the modification may be a breach of the assignor's agreement with the assignee.
3. Consumer Account Debtors. Subsection (c) is new. It makes clear that the rules of this section are subject to
other law establishing special rules for consumer account debtors.
4. Account Debtors on Health-Care-Insurance Receivables. Subsection (d) also is new. It provides that this
section does not apply to an assignment of a health-care-insurance receivable. The obligation of an insurer with
respect to a health-care-insurance receivable is governed by other law.
§ 9-405. MODIFICATION OF ASSIGNED CONTRACT
Page 2 of 2
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-406
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES
§ 9-406. DISCHARGE OF ACCOUNT DEBTOR; NOTIFICATION OF
ASSIGNMENT; IDENTIFICATION AND PROOF OF ASSIGNMENT;
RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF ACCOUNTS, CHATTEL PAPER,
PAYMENT INTANGIBLES, AND PROMISSORY NOTES INEFFECTIVE.
(a) [Discharge of account debtor; effect of notification.] Subject to subsections (b) through (i), an
account debtor on an account, chattel paper, or a payment intangible may discharge its obligation by
paying the assignor until, but not after, the account debtor receives a notification, authenticated by the
assignor or the assignee, that the amount due or to become due has been assigned and that payment is to
be made to the assignee. After receipt of the notification, the account debtor may discharge its obligation by
paying the assignee and may not discharge the obligation by paying the assignor.
(b) [When notification ineffective.] Subject to subsection (h), notification is ineffective under subsection
(a):
(1) if it does not reasonably identify the rights assigned;
(2) to the extent that an agreement between an account debtor and a seller of a payment intangible
limits the account debtor's duty to pay a person other than the seller and the limitation is effective under
law other than this article; or
(3) at the option of an account debtor, if the notification notifies the account debtor to make less than
the full amount of any installment or other periodic payment to the assignee, even if:
(A) only a portion of the account, chattel paper, or payment intangible has been assigned to that
assignee;
(B) a portion has been assigned to another assignee; or
(C) the account debtor knows that the assignment to that assignee is limited.
(c) [Proof of assignment.] Subject to subsection (h), if requested by the account debtor, an assignee
shall seasonably furnish reasonable proof that the assignment has been made. Unless the assignee
complies, the account debtor may discharge its obligation by paying the assignor, even if the account
debtor has received a notification under subsection (a).
(d) [Term restricting assignment generally ineffective.] Except as otherwise provided in subsections (e)
and (k) and Sections 2A-303 and 9-407, and subject to subsection (h), a term in an agreement between an
account debtor and an assignor or in a promissory note is ineffective to the extent that it:
(1) prohibits, restricts, or requires the consent of the account debtor or person obligated on the
promissory note to the assignment or transfer of, or the creation, attachment, perfection, or
enforcement of a security interest in, the account, chattel paper, payment intangible, or promissory
note; or
(2) provides that the assignment or transfer or the creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of
the security interest may give rise to a default, breach, right of recoupment, claim, defense, termination,
right of termination, or remedy under the account, chattel paper, payment intangible, or promissory
note.
§ 9-406. DISCHARGE OF ACCOUNT DEBTOR; NOTIFICATION OF ASSIGNMENT; IDENTIFICATION AND
PROOF OF ASSIGNMENT; RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF AC COUNTS, CHATTEL PAPER....
Page 2 of 5
(e) [Inapplicability of subsection (d) to certain sales.] Subsection (d) does not apply to the sale of a
payment intangible or promissory note, other than a sale pursuant to a disposition under Section 9-610 or
an acceptance of collateral under Section 9-620.
(f) [Legal restrictions on assignment generally ineffective.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(k) and Sections 2A-303 and 9-407 and subject to subsections (h) and (i), a rule of law, statute, or
regulation that prohibits, restricts, or requires the consent of a government, governmental body or official, or
account debtor to the assignment or transfer of, or creation of a security interest in, an account or chattel
paper is ineffective to the extent that the rule of law, statute, or regulation:
(1) prohibits, restricts, or requires the consent of the government, governmental body or official, or
account debtor to the assignment or transfer of, or the creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement
of a security interest in the account or chattel paper; or
(2) provides that the assignment or transfer or the creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of
the security interest may give rise to a default, breach, right of recoupment, claim, defense, termination,
right of termination, or remedy under the account or chattel paper.
(g) [Subsection (b)(3) not waivable.] Subject to subsection (h), an account debtor may not waive or vary
its option under subsection (b)(3).
(h) [Rule for individual under other law.] This section is subject to law other than this article which
establishes a different rule for an account debtor who is an individual and who incurred the obligation
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.
(i) [Inapplicability to health-care-insurance receivable.] This section does not apply to an assignment of
a health-care-insurance receivable.
(j) [Section prevails over specified inconsistent law.] This section prevails over any inconsistent
provisions of the following statutes, rules, and regulations:
[List here any statutes, rules, and regulations containing provisions inconsistent with this section.]
(k) [Inapplicability to interests in certain entities.] Subsections (d), (f), and (j) do not apply to a security
interest in an ownership interest in a general partnership, limited partnership, or limited liability company.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: States that amend statutes, rules, and regulations to remove provisions inconsistent with this
section need not enact subsection (j)
1. Source. Former Section 9-318(3), (4).
2. Account Debtor's Right to Pay Assignor Until Notification. Subsection (a) provides the general rule
concerning an account debtor's right to pay the assignor until the account debtor receives appropriate notification.
The revision makes clear that once the account debtor receives the notification, the account debtor cannot
discharge its obligation by paying the assignor. It also makes explicit that payment to the assignor before
notification, or payment to the assignee after notification, discharges the obligation. No change in meaning from
former Section 9-318 is intended. Nothing in this section conditions the effectiveness of a notification on the identity
of the person who gives it. An account debtor that doubts whether the right to payment has been assigned may
avail itself of the procedures in subsection (c). See Comment 4.
§ 9-406. DISCHARGE OF ACCOUNT DEBTOR; NOTIFICATION OF ASSIGNMENT; IDENTIFICATION AND
PROOF OF ASSIGNMENT; RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF AC COUNTS, CHATTEL PAPER....
Page 3 of 5
An effective notification under subsection (a) must be authenticated. This requirement normally could be satisfied
by sending notification on the notifying person's letterhead or on a form on which the notifying person's name
appears. In each case the printed name would be a symbol adopted by the notifying person for the purpose of
identifying the person and adopting the notification. See Section 9-102 (defining "authenticate").
Subsection (a) applies only to account debtors on accounts, chattel paper, and payment intangibles. (Section 9-
102 defines the term "account debtor" more broadly, to include those obligated on all general intangibles.) Although
subsection (a) is more precise than its predecessor, it probably does not change the rule that applied under former
Article 9. Former Section 9-318(3) referred to the account debtor's obligation to "pay," indicating that the subsection
was limited to account debtors on accounts, chattel paper, and other payment obligations.
3. Limitations on Effectiveness of Notification. Subsection (b) contains some special rules concerning the
effectiveness of a notification under subsection (a).
Subsection (b)(1) tracks former Section 9-318(3) by making ineffective a notification that does not reasonably
identify the rights assigned. A reasonable identification need not identify the right to payment with specificity, but
what is reasonable also is not left to the arbitrary decision of the account debtor. If an account debtor has doubt as
to the adequacy of a notification, it may not be safe in disregarding the notification unless it notifies the assignee
with reasonable promptness as to the respects in which the account debtor considers the notification defective.
Subsection (b)(2), which is new, applies only to sales of payment intangibles. It makes a notification ineffective to
the extent that other law gives effect to an agreement between an account debtor and a seller of a payment
intangible that limits the account debtor's duty to pay a person other than the seller. Payment intangibles are
substantially less fungible than accounts and chattel paper. In some (e.g., commercial bank loans), account debtors
customarily and legitimately expect that they will not be required to pay any person other than the financial
institution that has advanced funds.
It has become common in financing transactions to assign interests in a single obligation to more than one
assignee. Requiring an account debtor that owes a single obligation to make multiple payments to multiple
assignees would be unnecessarily burdensome. Thus, under subsection (b)(3), an account debtor that is notified to
pay an assignee less than the full amount of any installment or other periodic payment has the option to treat the
notification as ineffective, ignore the notice, and discharge the assigned obligation by paying the assignor. Some
account debtors may not realize that the law affords them the right to ignore certain notices of assignment with
impunity. By making the notification ineffective at the account debtor's option, subsection (b)(3) permits an account
debtor to pay the assignee in accordance with the notice and thereby to satisfy its obligation pro tanto. Under
subsection (g), the rights and duties created by subsection (b)(3) cannot be waived or varied.
4. Proof of Assignment. Subsection (c) links payment with discharge, as in subsection (a). It follows former
Section 9-318(3) in referring to the right of the account debtor to pay the assignor if the requested proof of
assignment is not seasonably forthcoming. Even if the proof is not forthcoming, the notification of assignment would
remain effective, so that, in the absence of reasonable proof of the assignment, the account debtor could discharge
the obligation by paying either the assignee or the assignor. Of course, if the assignee did not in fact receive an
assignment, the account debtor cannot discharge its obligation by paying a putative assignee who is a stranger.
The observations in Comment 3 concerning the reasonableness of an identification of a right to payment also apply
here. An account debtor that questions the adequacy of proof submitted by an assignor would be well advised to
promptly inform the assignor of the defects.
An account debtor may face another problem if its obligation becomes due while the account debtor is awaiting
reasonable proof of the assignment that it has requested from the assignee. This section does not excuse the
account debtor from timely compliance with its obligations. Consequently, an account debtor that has received a
notification of assignment and who has requested reasonable proof of the assignment may discharge its obligation
by paying the assignor at the time (or even earlier if reasonably necessary to avoid risk of default) when a payment
is due, even if the account debtor has not yet received a response to its request for proof. On the other hand, after
requesting reasonable proof of the assignment, an account debtor may not discharge its obligation by paying the
§ 9-406. DISCHARGE OF ACCOUNT DEBTOR; NOTIFICATION OF ASSIGNMENT; IDENTIFICATION AND
PROOF OF ASSIGNMENT; RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF AC COUNTS, CHATTEL PAPER....
Page 4 of 5
assignor substantially in advance of the time that the payment is due unless the assignee has failed to provide the
proof seasonably.
5. Contractual Restrictions on Assignment. Former Section 9-318(4) rendered ineffective an agreement
between an account debtor and an assignor which prohibited assignment of an account (whether outright or to
secure an obligation) or prohibited a security assignment of a general intangible for the payment of money due or to
become due. Subsection (d) essentially follows former Section 9-318(4), but expands the rule of free assignability to
chattel paper (subject to Sections 2A-303 and 9-407) and promissory notes and explicitly overrides both restrictions
and prohibitions of assignment. The policies underlying the ineffectiveness of contractual restrictions under this
section build on common-law developments that essentially have eliminated legal restrictions on assignments of
rights to payment as security and other assignments of rights to payment such as accounts and chattel paper. Any
that might linger for accounts and chattel paper are addressed by new subsection (f). See Comment 6.
Former Section 9-318(4) did not apply to a sale of a payment intangible (as described in the former provision, "a
general intangible for money due or to become due") but did apply to an assignment of a payment intangible for
security. Subsection (e) continues this approach and also makes subsection (d) inapplicable to sales of promissory
notes. Section 9-408 addresses anti-assignment clauses with respect to sales of payment intangibles and
promissory notes.
Like former Section 9-318(4), subsection (d) provides that anti-assignment clauses are "ineffective." The quoted
term means that the clause is of no effect whatsoever; the clause does not prevent the assignment from taking
effect between the parties and the prohibited assignment does not constitute a default under the agreement
between the account debtor and assignor. However, subsection (d) does not override terms that do not directly
prohibit, restrict, or require consent to an assignment but which might, nonetheless, present a practical impairment
of the assignment. Properly read, however, subsection (d) reaches only covenants that prohibit, restrict, or require
consents to assignments; it does not override all terms that might "impair" an assignment in fact.
Example: Buyer enters into an agreement with Seller to buy equipment that Seller is to manufacture according to
Buyer's specifications. Buyer agrees to make a series of prepayments during the construction process. In return,
Seller agrees to set aside the prepaid funds in a special account and to use the funds solely for the manufacture of
the designated equipment. Seller also agrees that it will not assign any of its rights under the sale agreement with
Buyer. Nevertheless, Seller grants to Secured Party a security interest in its accounts. Seller's anti-assignment
agreement is ineffective under subsection (d); its agreement concerning the use of prepaid funds, which is not a
restriction or prohibition on assignment, is not. However, if Secured Party notifies Buyer to make all future payments
directly to Secured Party, Buyer will be obliged to do so under subsection (a) if it wishes the payments to discharge
its obligation. Unless Secured Party releases the funds to Seller so that Seller can comply with its use-of-funds
covenant, Seller will be in breach of that covenant.
In the example, there appears to be a plausible business purpose for the use-of-funds covenant. However, a court
may conclude that a covenant with no business purpose other than imposing an impediment to an assignment
actually is a direct restriction that is rendered ineffective by subsection (d).
6. Legal Restrictions on Assignment. Former Section 9-318(4), like subsection (d) of this section, addressed
only contractual restrictions on assignment. The former section was grounded on the reality that legal, as opposed
to contractual, restrictions on assignments of rights to payment had largely disappeared. New subsection (f) codifies
this principle of free assignability for accounts and chattel paper. For the most part the discussion of contractual
restrictions in Comment 5 applies as well to legal restrictions rendered ineffective under subsection (f).
7. Multiple Assignments. This section, like former Section 9-318, is not a complete codification of the law of
assignments of rights to payment. In particular, it is silent concerning many of the ramifications for an account
debtor in cases of multiple assignments of the same right. For example, an assignor might assign the same
receivable to multiple assignees (which assignments could be either inadvertent or wrongful). Or, the assignor could
assign the receivable to assignee-1, which then might re-assign it to assignee-2, and so forth. The rights and duties
of an account debtor in the face of multiple assignments and in other circumstances not resolved in the statutory
§ 9-406. DISCHARGE OF ACCOUNT DEBTOR; NOTIFICATION OF ASSIGNMENT; IDENTIFICATION AND
PROOF OF ASSIGNMENT; RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF AC COUNTS, CHATTEL PAPER....
Page 5 of 5
text are left to the common-law rules. See, e.g., Restatement (2d), Contracts §§ 338(3), 339. The failure of former
Article 9 to codify these rules does not appear to have caused problems.
8. Consumer Account Debtors. Subsection (h) is new. It makes clear that the rules of this section are subject to
other law establishing special rules for consumer account debtors.
9. Account Debtors on Health-Care-Insurance Receivables. Subsection (i) also is new. The obligation of an
insurer with respect to a health-care-insurance receivable is governed by other law. Section 9-408 addresses
contractual and legal restrictions on the assignment of a health-care-insurance receivable.
10. Inapplicability to Certain Ownership Interests. This section does not apply to an ownership interest in a
limited liability company, limited partnership, or general partnership, regardless of the name of the interest and
whether the interest: (i) pertains to economic rights, governance rights, or both; (ii) arises under: (a) an operating
agreement, the applicable limited liability company act, or both; or (b) a partnership agreement, the applicable
partnership act, or both; or (iii) is owned by: (a) a member of a company or transferee or assignee of a member; or
(b) a partner or a transferee or assignee of a partner; or (iv) comprises contractual, property, other rights, or some
combination thereof.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-407
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES
§ 9-407. RESTRICTIONS ON CREATION OR ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY
INTEREST IN LEASEHOLD INTEREST OR IN LESSOR'S RESIDUAL
INTEREST
(a) [Term restricting assignment generally ineffective.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b),
a term in a lease agreement is ineffective to the extent that it:
(1) prohibits, restricts, or requires the consent of a party to the lease to the assignment or transfer of,
or the creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of a security interest in, an interest of a party
under the lease contract or in the lessor's residual interest in the goods; or
(2) provides that the assignment or transfer or the creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of
the security interest may give rise to a default, breach, right of recoupment, claim, defense, termination,
right of termination, or remedy under the lease.
(b) [Effectiveness of certain terms.] Except as otherwise provided in Section 2A-303(7), a term
described in subsection (a)(2) is effective to the extent that there is:
(1) a transfer by the lessee of the lessee's right of possession or use of the goods in violation of the
term; or
(2) a delegation of a material performance of either party to the lease contract in violation of the term.
(c) [Security interest not material impairment.] The creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of
a security interest in the lessor's interest under the lease contract or the lessor's residual interest in the
goods is not a transfer that materially impairs the lessee's prospect of obtaining return performance or
materially changes the duty of or materially increases the burden or risk imposed on the lessee within the
purview of Section 2A-303(4) unless, and then only to the extent that, enforcement actually results in a
delegation of material performance of the lessor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Section 2A-303.
2. Restrictions on Assignment Generally Ineffective. Under subsection (a), as under former Section 2A-
303(3), a term in a lease agreement which prohibits or restricts the creation of a security interest generally is
ineffective. This reflects the general policy of Section 9-406(d) and former Section 9-318(4). This section has been
conformed in several respects to analogous provisions in Sections 9-406, 9-408, and 9-409, including the
substitution of "ineffective" for "not enforceable" and the substitution of "assignment or transfer of, or the* creation,
attachment, perfection, or enforcement of a security interest" for "creation or enforcement of a security interest."
*Amendments in italics approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code October 20,
1999.
§ 9-407. RESTRICTIONS ON CREATION OR ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST IN LEASEHOLD
INTEREST OR IN LESSOR'S RESIDUAL INTEREST
Page 2 of 2
3. Exceptions for Certain Transfers and Delegations. Subsection (b) provides exceptions to the general
ineffectiveness of restrictions under subsection (a). A term that otherwise is ineffective under subsection (a)(2) is
effective to the extent that a lessee transfers its right to possession and use of goods or if either party delegates
material performance of the lease contract in violation of the term. However, under subsection (c), as under former
Section 2A-303(3), a lessor's creation of a security interest in its interest in a lease contract or its residual interest in
the leased goods is not a material impairment under Section 2A-303(4) (former Section 2A-303(5)), absent an
actual delegation of the lessor's material performance. The terms of the lease contract determine whether the
lessor, in fact, has any remaining obligations to perform. If it does, it is then necessary to determine whether there
has been an actual delegation of "material performance." See Section 2A-303, Comments 3 and 4.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-408
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES
§ 9-408. RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF PROMISSORY NOTES,
HEALTH-CARE-INSURANCE RECEIVABLES, AND CERTAIN GENERAL
INTANGIBLES INEFFECTIVE
(a) [Term restricting assignment generally ineffective.] Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b)
and (f), a term in a promissory note or in an agreement between an account debtor and a debtor which
relates to a health-care-insurance receivable or a general intangible, including a contract, permit, license, or
franchise, and which term prohibits, restricts, or requires the consent of the person obligated on the
promissory note or the account debtor to, the assignment or transfer of, or creation, attachment, or
perfection of a security interest in, the promissory note, health-care-insurance receivable, or general
intangible, is ineffective to the extent that the term:
(1) would impair the creation, attachment, or perfection of a security interest; or
(2) provides that the assignment or transfer or the creation, attachment, or perfection of the security
interest may give rise to a default, breach, right of recoupment, claim, defense, termination, right of
termination, or remedy under the promissory note, health-care-insurance receivable, or general
intangible.
(b) [Applicability of subsection (a) to sales of certain rights to payment.] Subsection (a) applies to a
security interest in a payment intangible or promissory note only if the security interest arises out of a sale
of the payment intangible or promissory note, other than a sale pursuant to a disposition under Section 9-
610 or an acceptance of collateral under Section 9-620.
(c) [Legal restrictions on assignment generally ineffective.] Except as otherwise provided in
subsection (f), a rule of law, statute, or regulation that prohibits, restricts, or requires the consent of a
government, governmental body or official, person obligated on a promissory note, or account debtor to the
assignment or transfer of, or creation of a security interest in, a promissory note, health-care-insurance
receivable, or general intangible, including a contract, permit, license, or franchise between an account
debtor and a debtor, is ineffective to the extent that the rule of law, statute, or regulation:
(1) would impair the creation, attachment, or perfection of a security interest; or
(2) provides that the assignment or transfer or the creation, attachment, or perfection of the security
interest may give rise to a default, breach, right of recoupment, claim, defense, termination, right of
termination, or remedy under the promissory note, health-care-insurance receivable, or general
intangible.
(d) [Limitation on ineffectiveness under subsections (a) and (c).] To the extent that a term in a
promissory note or in an agreement between an account debtor and a debtor which relates to a healthcare-
insurance receivable or general intangible or a rule of law, statute, or regulation described in
subsection (c) would be effective under law other than this article but is ineffective under subsection (a) or
(c), the creation, attachment, or perfection of a security interest in the promissory note, health-careinsurance
receivable, or general intangible:
(1) is not enforceable against the person obligated on the promissory note or the account debtor;
(2) does not impose a duty or obligation on the person obligated on the promissory note or the account
debtor;
§ 9-408. RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF PROMISSORY NOTES, HEALTH-CARE-INSURANCE
RECEIVABLES, AND CERTAIN GENERAL INTANGIBLES INEFFECTIVE
Page 2 of 5
(3) does not require the person obligated on the promissory note or the account debtor to recognize
the security interest, pay or render performance to the secured party, or accept payment or
performance from the secured party;
(4) does not entitle the secured party to use or assign the debtor's rights under the promissory note,
health-care-insurance receivable, or general intangible, including any related information or materials
furnished to the debtor in the transaction giving rise to the promissory note, health-care-insurance
receivable, or general intangible;
(5) does not entitle the secured party to use, assign, possess, or have access to any trade secrets or
confidential information of the person obligated on the promissory note or the account debtor; and
(6) does not entitle the secured party to enforce the security interest in the promissory note, healthcare-
insurance receivable, or general intangible.
(e) [Section prevails over specified inconsistent law.] This section prevails over any inconsistent
provisions of the following statutes, rules, and regulations:
[List here any statutes, rules, and regulations containing provisions inconsistent with this section.]
(f) [Inapplicability to interests in certain entities.] This section does not apply to a security interest in an
ownership interest in a general partnership, limited partnership, or limited liability company.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: States that amend statutes, rules, and regulations to remove provisions inconsistent with this
section need not enact subsection (e).
1. Source. New.
2. Free Assignability. This section makes ineffective any attempt to restrict the assignment of a general
intangible, health-care-insurance receivable, or promissory note, whether the restriction appears in the terms of a
promissory note or the agreement between an account debtor and a debtor (subsection (a)) or in a rule of law,
including a statute or governmental rule or regulation (subsection (c)). This result allows the creation, attachment,
and perfection of a security interest in a general intangible, such as an agreement for the nonexclusive license of
software, as well as sales of certain receivables, such as a health-care-insurance receivable (which is an
"account"), payment intangible, or promissory note, without giving rise to a default or breach by the assignor or from
triggering a remedy of the account debtor or person obligated on a promissory note. This enhances the ability of
certain debtors to obtain credit. On the other hand, subsection (d) protects the other party--the "account debtor" on
a general intangible or the person obligated on a promissory note--from adverse effects arising from the security
interest. It leaves the account debtor's or obligated person's rights and obligations unaffected in all material
respects if a restriction rendered ineffective by subsection (a) or (c) would be effective under law other than Article
9.
Example 1: A term of an agreement for the nonexclusive license of computer software prohibits the licensee from
assigning any of its rights as licensee with respect to the software. The agreement also provides that an attempt to
assign rights in violation of the restriction is a default entitling the licensor to terminate the license agreement. The
licensee, as debtor, grants to a secured party a security interest in its rights under the license and in the computers
in which it is installed. Under this section, the term prohibiting assignment and providing for a default upon an
attempted assignment is ineffective to prevent the creation, attachment, or perfection of the security interest or
§ 9-408. RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF PROMISSORY NOTES, HEALTH-CARE-INSURANCE
RECEIVABLES, AND CERTAIN GENERAL INTANGIBLES INEFFECTIVE
Page 3 of 5
entitle the licensor to terminate the license agreement. However, under subsection (d), the secured party (absent
the licensor's agreement) is not entitled to enforce the license or to use, assign, or otherwise enjoy the benefits of
the licensed software, and the licensor need not recognize (or pay any attention to) the secured party. Even if the
secured party takes possession of the computers on the debtor's default, the debtor would remain free to remove
the software from the computer, load it on another computer, and continue to use it, if the license so permits. If the
debtor does not remove the software, other law may require the secured party to remove it before disposing of the
computer. Disposition of the software with the computer could violate an effective prohibition on enforcement of the
security interest. See subsection (d).
3. Nature of Debtor's Interest. Neither this section nor any other provision of this Article determines whether a
debtor has a property interest. The definition of the term "security interest" provides that it is an "interest in personal
property." See Section 1-201(b)(35). Ordinarily, a debtor can create a security interest in collateral only if it has
"rights in the collateral." See Section 9-203(b). Other law determines whether a debtor has a property interest
("rights in the collateral") and the nature of that interest. For example, the nonexclusive license addressed in
Example 1 may not create any property interest whatsoever in the intellectual property (e.g., copyright) that
underlies the license and that effectively enables the licensor to grant the license. The debtor's property interest
may be confined solely to its interest in the promises made by the licensor in the license agreement (e.g., a promise
not to sue the debtor for its use of the software).
4. Scope: Sales of Payment Intangibles and Other General Intangibles; Assignments Unaffected by this
Section. Subsections (a) and (c) render ineffective restrictions on assignments only "to the extent" that the
assignments restrict the "creation, attachment, or perfection of a security interest," including sales of payment
intangibles and promissory notes. This section does not render ineffective a restriction on an assignment that does
not create a security interest. For example, if the debtor in Comment 2, Example 1 purported to assign the license
to another entity that would use the computer software itself, other law would govern the effectiveness of the antiassignment
provisions.
Subsection (a) applies to a security interest in payment intangibles only if the security interest arises out of sale of
the payment intangibles. Contractual restrictions directed to security interests in payment intangibles which secure
an obligation are subject to Section 9-406(d). Subsection (a) also deals with sales of promissory notes which also
create security interests. See Section 9-109(a). Subsection (c) deals with all security interests in payment
intangibles or promissory notes, whether or not arising out of a sale.
Subsection (a) does not render ineffective any term, and subsection (c) does not render ineffective any law,
statute or regulation, that restricts outright sales of general intangibles other than payment intangibles. They deal
only with restrictions on security interests. The only sales of general intangibles that create security interests are
sales of payment intangibles.
5. Terminology: "Account Debtor"; "Person Obligated on a Promissory Note." This section uses the term
"account debtor" as it is defined in Section 9-102. The term refers to the party, other than the debtor, to a general
intangible, including a permit, license, franchise, or the like, and the person obligated on a health-care-insurance
receivable, which is a type of account. The definition of "account debtor" does not limit the term to persons who are
obligated to pay under a general intangible. Rather, the term includes all persons who are obligated on a general
intangible, including those who are obligated to render performance in exchange for payment. In some cases, e.g.,
the creation of a security interest in a franchisee's rights under a franchise agreement, the principal payment
obligation may be owed by the debtor (franchisee) to the account debtor (franchisor). This section also refers to a
"person obligated on a promissory note," inasmuch as those persons do not fall within the definition of "account
debtor."
Example 2: A licensor and licensee enter into an agreement for the nonexclusive license of computer software.
The licensee's interest in the license agreement is a general intangible. If the licensee grants to a secured party a
security interest in its rights under the license agreement, the licensee is the debtor and the licensor is the account
debtor. On the other hand, if the licensor grants to a secured party a security interest in its right to payment (an
§ 9-408. RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF PROMISSORY NOTES, HEALTH-CARE-INSURANCE
RECEIVABLES, AND CERTAIN GENERAL INTANGIBLES INEFFECTIVE
Page 4 of 5
account) under the license agreement, the licensor is the debtor and the licensee is the account debtor. (This
section applies to the security interest in the general intangible but not to the security interest in the account, which
is not a health-care-insurance receivable.)
6. Effects on Account Debtors and Persons Obligated on Promissory Notes. Subsections (a) and (c) affect
two classes of persons. These subsections affect account debtors on general intangibles and health-care-insurance
receivables and persons obligated on promissory notes. Subsection (c) also affects governmental entities that enact
or determine rules of law. However, subsection (d) ensures that these affected persons are not affected adversely.
That provision removes any burdens or adverse effects on these persons for which any rational basis could exist to
restrict the effectiveness of an assignment or to exercise any remedies. For this reason, the effects of subsections
(a) and (c) are immaterial insofar as those persons are concerned.
Subsection (a) does not override terms that do not directly prohibit, restrict, or require consent to an assignment
but which might, nonetheless, present a practical impairment of the assignment. Properly read, however, this
section, like Section 9-406(d), reaches only covenants that prohibit, restrict, or require consents to assignments; it
does not override all terms that might "impair" an assignment in fact.
Example 3: A licensor and licensee enter into an agreement for the nonexclusive license of valuable business
software. The license agreement includes terms (i) prohibiting the licensee from assigning its rights under the
license, (ii) prohibiting the licensee from disclosing to anyone certain information relating to the software and the
licensor, and (iii) deeming prohibited assignments and prohibited disclosures to be defaults. The licensee wishes to
obtain financing and, in exchange, is willing to grant a security interest in its rights under the license agreement.
The secured party, reasonably, refuses to extend credit unless the licensee discloses the information that it is
prohibited from disclosing under the license agreement. The secured party cannot determine the value of the
proposed collateral in the absence of this information. Under this section, the terms of the license prohibiting the
assignment (grant of the security interest) and making the assignment a default are ineffective. However, the
nondisclosure covenant is not a term that prohibits the assignment or creation of a security interest in the license.
Consequently, the nondisclosure term is enforceable even though the practical effect is to restrict the licensee's
ability to use its rights under the license agreement as collateral.
The nondisclosure term also would be effective in the factual setting of Comment 2, Example 1. If the secured
party's possession of the computers loaded with software would put it in a position to discover confidential
information that the debtor was prohibited from disclosing, the licensor should be entitled to enforce its rights
against the secured party. Moreover, the licensor could have required the debtor to obtain the secured party's
agreement that (i) it would immediately return all copies of software loaded on the computers and that (ii) it would
not examine or otherwise acquire any information contained in the software. This section does not prevent an
account debtor from protecting by agreement its independent interests that are unrelated to the "creation,
attachment, or perfection" of a security interest. In Example 1, moreover, the secured party is not in possession of
copies of software by virtue of its security interest or in connection with enforcing its security interest in the debtor's
license of the software. Its possession is incidental to its possession of the computers, in which it has a security
interest. Enforcing against the secured party a restriction relating to the software in no way interferes with its
security interest in the computers.
7. Effect in Assignor's Bankruptcy. This section could have a substantial effect if the assignor enters
bankruptcy. Roughly speaking, Bankruptcy Code Section 552 invalidates security interests in property acquired
after a bankruptcy petition is filed, except to the extent that the postpetition property constitutes proceeds of
prepetition collateral.
Example 4: A debtor is the owner of a cable television franchise that, under applicable law, cannot be assigned
without the consent of the municipal franchisor. A lender wishes to extend credit to the debtor, provided that the
credit is secured by the debtor's "going business" value. To secure the loan, the debtor grants a security interest in
all its existing and after-acquired property. The franchise represents the principal value of the business. The
municipality refuses to consent to any assignment for collateral purposes. If other law were given effect, the security
§ 9-408. RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF PROMISSORY NOTES, HEALTH-CARE-INSURANCE
RECEIVABLES, AND CERTAIN GENERAL INTANGIBLES INEFFECTIVE
Page 5 of 5
interest in the franchise would not attach; and if the debtor were to enter bankruptcy and sell the business, the
secured party would receive but a fraction of the business's value. Under this section, however, the security interest
would attach to the franchise. As a result, the security interest would attach to the proceeds of any sale of the
franchise while a bankruptcy is pending. However, this section would protect the interests of the municipality by
preventing the secured party from enforcing its security interest to the detriment of the municipality.
8. Effect Outside of Bankruptcy. The principal effects of this section will take place outside of bankruptcy.
Compared to the relatively few debtors that enter bankruptcy, there are many more that do not. By making available
previously unavailable property as collateral, this section should enable debtors to obtain additional credit. For
purposes of determining whether to extend credit, under some circumstances a secured party may ascribe value to
the collateral to which its security interest has attached, even if this section precludes the secured party from
enforcing the security interest without the agreement of the account debtor or person obligated on the promissory
note. This may be the case where the secured party sees a likelihood of obtaining that agreement in the future. This
may also be the case where the secured party anticipates that the collateral will give rise to a type of proceeds as to
which this section would not apply.
Example 5: Under the facts of Example 4, the debtor does not enter bankruptcy. Perhaps in exchange for a fee,
the municipality agrees that the debtor may transfer the franchise to a buyer. As consideration for the transfer, the
debtor receives from the buyer its check for part of the purchase price and its promissory note for the balance. The
security interest attaches to the check and promissory note as proceeds. See Section 9-315(a)(2). This section
does not apply to the security interest in the check, which is not a promissory note, health-care-insurance
receivable, or general intangible. Nor does it apply to the security interest in the promissory note, inasmuch as it
was not sold to the secured party.
9. Contrary Federal Law. This section does not override federal law to the contrary. However, it does reflect an
important policy judgment that should provide a template for future federal law reforms.
10. Inapplicability to Certain Ownership Interests. This section does not apply to an ownership interest in a limited
liability company, limited partnership, or general partnership, regardless of the name of the interest and whether the
interest: (i) pertains to economic rights, governance rights, or both; (ii) arises under: (a) an operating agreement, the
applicable limited liability company act, or both; or (b) a partnership agreement, the applicable partnership act, or
both; or (iii) is owned by: (a) a member of a company or transferee or assignee of a member; or (b) a partner or a
transferee or assignee of a partner; or (iv) comprises contractual, property, other rights, or some combination
thereof.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-409
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 4. RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES
§ 9-409. RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF LETTER-OF-CREDIT RIGHTS
INEFFECTIVE
(a) [Term or law restricting assignment generally ineffective.] A term in a letter of credit or a rule of
law, statute, regulation, custom, or practice applicable to the letter of credit which prohibits, restricts, or
requires the consent of an applicant, issuer, or nominated person to a beneficiary's assignment of or
creation of a security interest in a letter-of-credit right is ineffective to the extent that the term or rule of law,
statute, regulation, custom, or practice:
(1) would impair the creation, attachment, or perfection of a security interest in the letter-of-credit right;
or
(2) provides that the assignment or the creation, attachment, or perfection of the security interest may
give rise to a default, breach, right of recoupment, claim, defense, termination, right of termination, or
remedy under the letter-of-credit right.
(b) [Limitation on ineffectiveness under subsection (a).] To the extent that a term in a letter of credit is
ineffective under subsection (a) but would be effective under law other than this article or a custom or
practice applicable to the letter of credit, to the transfer of a right to draw or otherwise demand performance
under the letter of credit, or to the assignment of a right to proceeds of the letter of credit, the creation,
attachment, or perfection of a security interest in the letter-of-credit right:
(1) is not enforceable against the applicant, issuer, nominated person, or transferee beneficiary;
(2) imposes no duties or obligations on the applicant, issuer, nominated person, or transferee
beneficiary; and
(3) does not require the applicant, issuer, nominated person, or transferee beneficiary to recognize the
security interest, pay or render performance to the secured party, or accept payment or other
performance from the secured party.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Purpose and Relevance. This section, patterned on Section 9-408, limits the effectiveness of attempts to
restrict the creation, attachment, or perfection of a security interest in letter-of-credit rights, whether the restriction
appears in the letter of credit or a rule of law, custom, or practice applicable to the letter of credit. It protects the
creation, attachment, and perfection of a security interest while preventing these events from giving rise to a default
or breach by the assignor or from triggering a remedy or defense of the issuer or other person obligated on a letter
of credit. Letter-of-credit rights are a type of supporting obligation. See Section 9-102. Under Sections 9-203 and 9-
308, a security interest in a supporting obligation attaches and is perfected automatically if the security interest in
the supported obligation attaches and is perfected. See Section 9-107, Comment 5. The automatic attachment and
§ 9-409. RESTRICTIONS ON ASSIGNMENT OF LETTER-OF-CREDIT RIGHTS INEFFECTIVE
Page 2 of 2
perfection under Article 9 would be anomalous or misleading if, under other law (e.g., Article 5), a restriction on
transfer or assignment were effective to block attachment and perfection.
3. Relationship to Letter-of-Credit Law. Although restrictions on an assignment of a letter of credit are
ineffective to prevent creation, attachment, and perfection of a security interest, subsection (b) protects the issuer
and other parties from any adverse effects of the security interest by preserving letter-of-credit law and practice that
limits the right of a beneficiary to transfer its right to draw or otherwise demand performance (Section 5-112) and
limits the obligation of an issuer or nominated person to recognize a beneficiary's assignment of letter-of-credit
proceeds (Section 5-114). Thus, this section's treatment of letter-of-credit rights differs from this Article's treatment
of instruments and investment property. Moreover, under Section 9-109(c)(4), this Article does not apply to the
extent that the rights of a transferee beneficiary or nominated person are independent and superior under Section
5-114, thereby preserving the "independence principle" of letter-of-credit law.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-501
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-501. FILING OFFICE
(a) [Filing offices.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), if the local law of this State governs
perfection of a security interest or agricultural lien, the office in which to file a financing statement to perfect
the security interest or agricultural lien is:
(1) the office designated for the filing or recording of a record of a mortgage on the related real
property, if:
(A) the collateral is as-extracted collateral or timber to be cut; or
(B) the financing statement is filed as a fixture filing and the collateral is goods that are or are to
become fixtures; or
(2) the office of [] [or any office duly authorized by []], in all other cases, including a case in which the
collateral is goods that are or are to become fixtures and the financing statement is not filed as a fixture
filing.
(b) [Filing office for transmitting utilities.] The office in which to file a financing statement to perfect a
security interest in collateral, including fixtures, of a transmitting utility is the office of []. The financing
statement also constitutes a fixture filing as to the collateral indicated in the financing statement which is or
is to become fixtures.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: The State should designate the filing office where the brackets appear. The filing office may be
that of a governmental official (e.g., the Secretary of State) or a private party that maintains the State's filing
system.
1. Source. Derived from former Section 9-401.
2. Where to File. Subsection (a) indicates where in a given State a financing statement is to be filed. Former
Article 9 afforded each State three alternative approaches, depending on the extent to which the State desires
central filing (usually with the Secretary of State), local filing (usually with a county office), or both. As Comment 1 to
former Section 9-401 observed, "The principal advantage of state-wide filing is ease of access to the credit
information which the files exist to provide. Consider for example the national distributor who wishes to have current
information about the credit standing of the thousands of persons he sells to on credit. The more completely the
files are centralized on a state-wide basis, the easier and cheaper it becomes to procure credit information; the
more the files are scattered in local filing units, the more burdensome and costly." Local filing increases the net
costs of secured transactions also by increasing uncertainty and the number of required filings. Any benefit that
local filing may have had in the 1950's is now insubstantial. Accordingly, this Article dictates central filing for most
§ 9-501. FILING OFFICE
Page 2 of 2
situations, while retaining local filing for real-estate-related collateral and special filing provisions for transmitting
utilities.
3. Minerals and Timber. Under subsection (a)(1), a filing in the office where a record of a mortgage on the
related real property would be filed will perfect a security interest in as-extracted collateral. Inasmuch as the security
interest does not attach until extraction, the filing continues to be effective after extraction. A different result occurs
with respect to timber to be cut, however. Unlike as-extracted collateral, standing timber may be goods before it is
cut. See Section 9-102 (defining "goods"). Once cut, however, it is no longer timber to be cut, and the filing in the
real-property-mortgage office ceases to be effective. The timber then becomes ordinary goods, and filing in the
office specified in subsection (a)(2) is necessary for perfection. Note also that after the timber is cut the law of the
debtor's location, not the location of the timber, governs perfection under Section 9-301.
4. Fixtures. There are two ways in which a secured party may file a financing statement to perfect a security
interest in goods that are or are to become fixtures. It may file in the Article 9 records, as with most other goods.
See subsection (a)(2). Or it may file the financing statement as a "fixture filing," defined in Section 9-102, in the
office in which a record of a mortgage on the related real property would be filed. See subsection(a)(1)(B).
5. Transmitting Utilities. The usual filing rules do not apply well for a transmitting utility (defined in Section 9-
102). Many pre-UCC statutes provided special filing rules for railroads and in some cases for other public utilities, to
avoid the requirements for filing with legal descriptions in every county in which such debtors had property. Former
Section 9-401(5) recreated and broadened these provisions, and subsection (b) follows this approach. The nature
of the debtor will inform persons searching the record as to where to make a search.
A given State's subsection (b) applies only if the local law of that State governs perfection. As to most collateral,
perfection by filing is governed by the law of the jurisdiction in which the debtor is located. See Section 9-301(1).
However, the law of the jurisdiction in which goods that are or become fixtures are located governs perfection by
filing a fixture filing. See Section 9-301(3)(A). As a consequence, filing in the filing office of more than one State
may be necessary to perfect a security interest in fixtures collateral of a transmitting utility by filing a fixture filing.
See Section 9-301, Comment 5.b.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-502
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-502. CONTENTS OF FINANCING STATEMENT; RECORD OF MORTGAGE
AS FINANCING STATEMENT; TIME OF FILING FINANCING STATEMENT
(a) [Sufficiency of financing statement.] Subject to subsection (b), a financing statement is sufficient
only if it:
(1) provides the name of the debtor;
(2) provides the name of the secured party or a representative of the secured party; and
(3) indicates the collateral covered by the financing statement.
(b) [Real-property-related financing statements.] Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-501(b), to
be sufficient, a financing statement that covers as-extracted collateral or timber to be cut, or which is filed
as a fixture filing and covers goods that are or are to become fixtures, must satisfy subsection (a) and also:
(1) indicate that it covers this type of collateral;
(2) indicate that it is to be filed [for record] in the real property records;
(3) provide a description of the real property to which the collateral is related [sufficient to give
constructive notice of a mortgage under the law of this State if the description were contained in a
record of the mortgage of the real property]; and
(4) if the debtor does not have an interest of record in the real property, provide the name of a record
owner.
(c) [Record of mortgage as financing statement.] A record of a mortgage is effective, from the date of
recording, as a financing statement filed as a fixture filing or as a financing statement covering as-extracted
collateral or timber to be cut only if:
(1) the record indicates the goods or accounts that it covers;
(2) the goods are or are to become fixtures related to the real property described in the record or the
collateral is related to the real property described in the record and is as-extracted collateral or timber to
be cut;
(3) the record satisfies the requirements for a financing statement in this section, but:
(A) the record need not indicate that it is to be filed in the real property records; and
(B) the record sufficiently provides the name of a debtor who is an individual if it provides the
individual name of the debtor or the surname and first personal name of the debtor, even if the
debtor is an individual to whom Section 9-503(a)(4) applies; and
(4) the record is [duly] recorded.
(d) [Filing before security agreement or attachment.] A financing statement may be filed before a
security agreement is made or a security interest otherwise attaches.
Annotations
§ 9-502. CONTENTS OF FINANCING STATEMENT; RECORD OF MORTGAGE AS FINANCING
STATEMENT; TIME OF FILING FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 2 of 4
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: Language in brackets is optional. Where the State has any special recording system for real
property other than the usual grantor-grantee index (as, for instance, a tract system or a title registration or Torrens
system) local adaptations of subsection (b) and Section 9-519(d) and (e) may be necessary. See, e.g., Mass. Gen.
Laws Chapter 106, Section 9-410.
A State should enact the 2010 amendments to Section 9-502 only if the State enacts Alternative A of the 2010
amendments to Section 9-503.
1. Source. Former Section 9-402(1), (5), (6).
2. "Notice Filing." This section adopts the system of "notice filing." What is required to be filed is not, as under
pre-UCC chattel mortgage and conditional sales acts, the security agreement itself, but only a simple record
providing a limited amount of information (financing statement). The financing statement may be filed before the
security interest attaches or thereafter. See subsection (d). See also Section 9-308(a) (contemplating situations in
which a financing statement is filed before a security interest attaches).
The notice itself indicates merely that a person may have a security interest in the collateral indicated. Further
inquiry from the parties concerned will be necessary to disclose the complete state of affairs. Section 9-210
provides a statutory procedure under which the secured party, at the debtor's request, may be required to make
disclosure. However, in many cases, information may be forthcoming without the need to resort to the formalities of
that section.
Notice filing has proved to be of great use in financing transactions involving inventory, accounts, and chattel
paper, because it obviates the necessity of refiling on each of a series of transactions in a continuing arrangement
under which the collateral changes from day to day. However, even in the case of filings that do not necessarily
involve a series of transactions (e.g., a loan secured by a single item of equipment), a financing statement is
effective to encompass transactions under a security agreement not in existence and not contemplated at the time
the notice was filed, if the indication of collateral in the financing statement is sufficient to cover the collateral
concerned. Similarly, a financing statement is effective to cover after-acquired property of the type indicated and to
perfect with respect to future advances under security agreements, regardless of whether after-acquired property or
future advances are mentioned in the financing statement and even if not in the contemplation of the parties at the
time the financing statement was authorized to be filed.
3. Debtor's Signature; Required Authorization. Subsection (a) sets forth the simple formal requirements for an
effective financing statement. These requirements are: (1) the debtor's name; (2) the name of a secured party or
representative of the secured party; and (3) an indication of the collateral.
Whereas former Section 9-402(1) required the debtor's signature to appear on a financing statement, this Article
contains no signature requirement. The elimination of the signature requirement facilitates paperless filing.
(However, as PEB Commentary No. 15 indicates, a paperless financing statement was sufficient under former
Article 9.) Elimination of the signature requirement also makes the exceptions provided by former Section 9-402(2)
unnecessary.
The fact that this Article does not require that an authenticating symbol be contained in the public record does not
mean that all filings are authorized. Rather, Section 9-509(a) entitles a person to file an initial financing statement,
an amendment that adds collateral, or an amendment that adds a debtor only if the debtor authorizes the filing, and
Section 9-509(d) entitles a person other than the debtor to file a termination statement only if the secured party of
record authorizes the filing. Of course, a filing has legal effect only to the extent it is authorized. See Section 9-510.
§ 9-502. CONTENTS OF FINANCING STATEMENT; RECORD OF MORTGAGE AS FINANCING
STATEMENT; TIME OF FILING FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 3 of 4
Law other than this Article, including the law with respect to ratification of past acts, generally determines whether
a person has the requisite authority to file a record under this Article. See Section 1-103. However, under Section 9-
509(b), the debtor's authentication of (or becoming bound by) a security agreement ipso facto constitutes the
debtor's authorization of the filing of a financing statement covering the collateral described in the security
agreement. The secured party need not obtain a separate authorization.
Section 9-625 provides a remedy for unauthorized filings. Making an unauthorized filing also may give rise to civil
or criminal liability under other law. In addition, this Article contains provisions that assist in the discovery of
unauthorized filings and the amelioration of their practical effect. For example, Section 9-518 provides a procedure
whereby a person may add to the public record a statement to the effect that a financing statement indexed under
the person's name was wrongfully filed, and Section 9-509(d) entitles any person to file a termination statement if
the secured party of record fails to comply with its obligation to file or send one to the debtor, the debtor authorizes
the filing, and the termination statement so indicates. However, the filing office is neither obligated nor permitted to
inquire into issues of authorization. See Section 9-520(a).
4. Certain Other Requirements. Subsection (a) deletes other provisions of former Section 9-402(1) because
they seems unwise (real-property description for financing statements covering crops), unnecessary (adequacy of
copies of financing statements), or both (copy of security agreement as financing statement). In addition, the filing
office must reject a financing statement lacking certain other information formerly required as a condition of
perfection (e.g., an address for the debtor or secured party). See Sections 9-516(b), 9-520(a). However, if the filing
office accepts the record, it is effective nevertheless. See Section 9-520(c).
5. Real-Property-Related Filings. Subsection (b) contains the requirements for financing statements filed as
fixture filings and financing statements covering timber to be cut or minerals and minerals-related accounts
constituting as-extracted collateral. A description of the related real property must be sufficient to reasonably
identify it. See Section 9-108. This formulation rejects the view that the real property description must be by metes
and bounds, or otherwise conforming to traditional real-property practice in conveyancing, but, of course, the
incorporation of such a description by reference to the recording data of a deed, mortgage or other instrument
containing the description should suffice under the most stringent standards. The proper test is that a description of
real property must be sufficient so that the financing statement will fit into the real-property search system and be
found by a real-property searcher. Under the optional language in subsection (b)(3), the test of adequacy of the
description is whether it would be adequate in a record of a mortgage of the real property. As suggested in the
Legislative Note, more detail may be required if there is a tract indexing system or a land registration system.
If the debtor does not have an interest of record in the real property, a real-property-related financing statement
must show the name of a record owner, and Section 9-519(d) requires the financing statement to be indexed in the
name of that owner. This requirement also enables financing statements covering as-extracted collateral or timber
to be cut and financing statements filed as fixture filings to fit into the real-property search system.
6. Record of Mortgage Effective as Financing Statement. Subsection (c) explains when a record of a
mortgage is effective as a financing statement filed as a fixture filing or to cover timber to be cut or as-extracted
collateral. Use of the term "record of a mortgage" recognizes that in some systems the record actually filed is not
the record pursuant to which a mortgage is created. Moreover, "mortgage" is defined in Section 9-102 as an
"interest in real property," not as the record that creates or evidences the mortgage or the record that is filed in the
public recording systems. A record creating a mortgage may also create a security interest with respect to fixtures
(or other goods) in conformity with this Article. A single agreement creating a mortgage on real property and a
security interest in chattels is common and useful for certain purposes. Under subsection (c), the recording of the
record evidencing a mortgage (if it satisfies the requirements for a financing statement) constitutes the filing of a
financing statement as to the fixtures (but not, of course, as to other goods). Section 9-515(g) makes the usual fiveyear
maximum life for financing statements inapplicable to mortgages that operate as fixture filings under Section 9-
502(c). Such mortgages are effective for the duration of the real-property recording.
§ 9-502. CONTENTS OF FINANCING STATEMENT; RECORD OF MORTGAGE AS FINANCING
STATEMENT; TIME OF FILING FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 4 of 4
Of course, if a combined mortgage covers chattels that are not fixtures, a regular financing statement filing is
necessary with respect to the chattels, and subsection (c) is inapplicable. Likewise, a financing statement filed as a
"fixture filing" is not effective to perfect a security interest in personal property other than fixtures.
In some cases it may be difficult to determine whether goods are or will become fixtures. Nothing in this Part
prohibits the filing of a "precautionary" fixture filing, which would provide protection in the event goods are
determined to be fixtures. The fact of filing should not be a factor in the determining whether goods are fixtures. Cf.
Section 9-505(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-503
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
(a) [Sufficiency of debtor's name.] A financing statement sufficiently provides the name of the debtor:
(1) except as otherwise provided in paragraph (3), if the debtor is a registered organization or the
collateral is held in a trust that is a registered organization, only if the financing statement provides the
name that is stated to be the registered organization's name on the public organic record most recently
filed with or issued or enacted by the registered organization's jurisdiction of organization which
purports to state, amend, or restate the registered organization's name;
(2) subject to subsection (f), if the collateral is being administered by the personal representative of a
decedent, only if the financing statement provides, as the name of the debtor, the name of the
decedent and, in a separate part of the financing statement, indicates that the collateral is being
administered by a personal representative;
(3) if the collateral is held in a trust that is not a registered organization, only if the financing statement:
(A) provides, as the name of the debtor:
(i) if the organic record of the trust specifies a name for the trust, the name specified; or
(ii) if the organic record of the trust does not specify a name for the trust, the name of the
settlor or testator; and
(B) in a separate part of the financing statement:
(i) if the name is provided in accordance with subparagraph (A)(i), indicates that the collateral
is held in a trust; or
(ii) if the name is provided in accordance with subparagraph (A)(ii), provides additional
information sufficient to distinguish the trust from other trusts having one or more of the same
settlors or the same testator and indicates that the collateral is held in a trust, unless the
additional information so indicates;
[Alternative A]
(4) subject to subsection (g), if the debtor is an individual to whom this State has issued a [driver's
license] that has not expired, only if the financing statement provides the name of the individual which
is indicated on the [driver's license];
(5) if the debtor is an individual to whom paragraph (4) does not apply, only if the financing statement
provides the individual name of the debtor or the surname and first personal name of the debtor; and
(6) in other cases:
(A) if the debtor has a name, only if the financing statement provides the individual or
organizational name of the debtor; and
(B) if the debtor does not have a name, only if it provides the names of the partners, members,
associates, or other persons comprising the debtor, in a manner that each name provided would be
sufficient if the person named were the debtor.
§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 2 of 7
(b) [Additional debtor-related information.] A financing statement that provides the name of the debtor
in accordance with subsection (a) is not rendered ineffective by the absence of:
(1) a trade name or other name of the debtor; or
(2) unless required under subsection (a)(6)(B), names of partners, members, associates, or other
persons comprising the debtor.
[Alternative B]
(4) if the debtor is an individual, only if the financing statement:
(A) provides the individual name of the debtor;
(B) provides the surname and first personal name of the debtor; or
(C) subject to subsection (g), provides the name of the individual which is indicated on a [driver's
license] that this State has issued to the individual and which has not expired; and
(5) in other cases:
(A) if the debtor has a name, only if the financing statement provides the organizational name of
the debtor; and
(B) if the debtor does not have a name, only if the financing statement provides the names of the
partners, members, associates, or other persons comprising the debtor, in a manner that each
name provided would be sufficient if the person named were the debtor.
(b) [Additional debtor-related information.] A financing statement that provides the name of the debtor
in accordance with subsection (a) is not rendered ineffective by the absence of:
(1) a trade name or other name of the debtor; or
(2) unless required under subsection (a)(5)(B), names of partners, members, associates, or other
persons comprising the debtor.
[End of Alternatives]
(c) [Debtor's trade name insufficient.] A financing statement that provides only the debtor's trade name
does not sufficiently provide the name of the debtor.
(d) [Representative capacity.] Failure to indicate the representative capacity of a secured party or
representative of a secured party does not affect the sufficiency of a financing statement.
(e) [Multiple debtors and secured parties.] A financing statement may provide the name of more than
one debtor and the name of more than one secured party.
(f) [Name of decedent.] The name of the decedent indicated on the order appointing the personal
representative of the decedent issued by the court having jurisdiction over the collateral is sufficient as the
"name of the decedent" under subsection (a)(2).
[Alternative A]
(g) [Multiple driver's licenses.] If this State has issued to an individual more than one [driver's license] of
a kind described in subsection (a)(4), the one that was issued most recently is the one to which subsection
(a)(4) refers.
[Alternative B]
(g) [Multiple driver's licenses.] If this State has issued to an individual more than one [driver's license] of
a kind described in subsection (a)(4)(C), the one that was issued most recently is the one to which
subsection (a)(4)(C) refers.
[End of Alternatives]
§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 3 of 7
(h) [Definition.] In this section, the "name of the settlor or testator" means:
(1) if the settlor is a registered organization, the name that is stated to be the settlor's name on the
public organic record most recently filed with or issued or enacted by the settlor's jurisdiction of
organization which purports to state, amend, or restate the settlor's name; or
(2) in other cases, the name of the settlor or testator indicated in the trust's organic record.
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note:
1. This Act contains two alternative sets of amendments relating to the names of individual debtors. A State
should enact the same Alternative, A or B, for both subsections (a) and (i) of Section 9-503. A State that enacts
Alternative A of the amendments to this section should also enact the amendments to Section 9-502.
2. Both Alternatives refer, in part, to the name as shown on a debtor's driver's license. The Legislature should be
aware that, in some States, certain characters that may be used by the State's department of motor vehicles (or
similar agency) in the name on a driver's license may not be accepted by the State's central or local UCC filing
offices under current regulations or internal protocols. This may occur because of technological limitations of the
filing offices or merely as a result of inconsistent procedures. Similar issues may exist for field sizes as well. In
these situations, perfection of a security interest granted by a debtor with such a driver's license may be impossible
under Alternative A of the amendments and the utility of Alternative B, under which the name on the driver's license
is one of the names that is sufficient, may be reduced. Accordingly, the State may wish to determine if one or more
of these issues exist and, if so, to make certain that such issues have been resolved. A successful resolution might
be accomplished by statute, agency regulation, or technological change effectuated before or as part of the
enactment of this Act.
3. Regardless of which Alternative is enacted, in States in which a single agency issues driver's licenses and non
driver identification cards as an alternative to a driver's license, such that at any given time an individual may hold
either a driver's license or an identification card but not both, the State should replace each use of the term "driver's
license" with a phrase meaning "driver's license or identification card" but containing the analogous terms used in
the enacting State. In other States, the State should replace the term "driver's license" with the analogous term
used in the enacting State.
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Subsections (a)(4)(A), (b), and (c) derive from former Section 9-402(7); otherwise, new.
2. Debtor's Name. The requirement that a financing statement provide the debtor's name is particularly
important. Financing statements are indexed under the name of the debtor, and those who wish to find financing
statements search for them under the debtor's name. Subsection (a) explains what the debtor's name is for
purposes of a financing statement.
a. Registered Organizations. As a general matter, if if the debtor is a "registered organization" (defined in
Section 9-102 so as to ordinarily include corporations, limited partnerships, limited liability companies, and statutory
trusts), then the debtor's name is the name shown on the "public organic record" of the debtor's "jurisdiction of
organization" (both also defined in Section 9-102).
b. Collateral Held in a Trust. When a financing statement covers collateral that is held in a trust that is a
registered organization, subsection (a)(1) governs the name of the debtor. If, however, the collateral is held in a
trust that is not a registered organization, subsection (a)(3) applies. (As used in this Article, collateral "held in a
§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 4 of 7
trust" includes collateral as to which the trust is the debtor as well as collateral as to which the trustee is the debtor.)
This subsection adopts a convention that generally results in the name of the trust or the name of the trust's settlor
being provided as the name of the debtor on the financing statement, even if, as typically is the case with commonlaw
trusts, the "debtor" (defined in Section 9-102) is a trustee acting with respect to the collateral. This convention
provides more accurate information and eases the burden for searchers, who otherwise would have difficulty with
respect to debtor trustees that are large financial institutions.
More specifically, if a trust's organic record specifies a name for the trust, subsection (a)(3) requires the financing
statement to provide, as the name of the debtor, the name for the trust specified in the organic record. In addition,
the financing statement must indicate, in a separate part of the financing statement, that the collateral is held in a
trust.
If the organic record of the trust does not specify a name for the trust, the name required for the financing
statement is the name of the settlor or, in the case of a testamentary trust, the testator, in each case as determined
under subsection (h). In addition, the financing statement must provide sufficient additional information to
distinguish the trust from other trusts having one or more of the same settlors or the same testator. In many cases
an indication of the date on which the trust was settled will satisfy this requirement. If neither the name nor the
additional information indicates that the collateral is held in a trust, the financing statement must indicate that fact,
but not as part of the debtor's name.
Neither the indication that the collateral is held in a trust nor the additional information that distinguishes the trust
from other trusts having one or more of the same settlors or the same testator is part of the debtor's name.
Nevertheless, a financing statement that fails to provide, in a separate part of the financing statement, any required
indication or additional information does not sufficiently provide the name of the debtor under Sections 9-502(a) and
9-503(a)(3), does not "substantially satisfy[] the requirements" of Part 5 within the meaning of Section 9-506(a), and
so is ineffective.
c. Collateral Administered by a Personal Representative. Subsection (a)(2) deals with collateral that is being
administered by an executor, administrator, or other personal representative of a decedent. Even if, as often is the
case, the representative is the "debtor" (defined in Section 9-102), the financing statement must provide the name
of the decedent as the name of the debtor. Subsection (f) provides a safe harbor, under which the name of the
decedent indicated on the order appointing the personal representative issued by the court having jurisdiction over
the collateral is sufficient as the name of the decedent. If the order indicates more than one name for the decedent,
the first name in the list qualifies under subsection (f); however, other names in the list also may qualify as the
"name of the decedent" within the meaning of subsection (a)(2). In addition to providing the name of the decedent,
the financing statement must indicate, in a separate part of the financing statement, that the collateral is being
administered by a personal representative. Although the indication is not part of the debtor's name, a financing
statement that fails to provide the indication does not sufficiently provide the name of the debtor under Sections 9-
502(a) and 9-503(a)(2), does not "substantially satisfy[] the requirements" of Part 5 within the meaning of Section 9-
506(a), and so is ineffective.
d. Individuals. This Article provides alternative approaches towards the requirement for providing the name of a
debtor who is an individual.
Alternative A. Alternative A distinguishes between two groups of individual debtors. For debtors holding an
unexpired driver's license issued by the State where the financing statement is filed (ordinarily the State where the
debtor maintains the debtor's principal residence), Alternative A requires that a financing statement provide the
name indicated on the license. When a debtor does not hold an unexpired driver's license issued by the relevant
State, the requirement can be satisfied in either of two ways. A financing statement is sufficient if it provides the
"individual name" of the debtor. Alternatively, a financing statement is sufficient if it provides the debtor's surname
(i.e., family name) and first personal name (i.e., first name other than the surname).
Alternative B. Alternative B provides three ways in which a financing statement may sufficiently provide the name
of an individual who is a debtor. The "individual name" of the debtor is sufficient, as is the debtor's surname and first
personal name. If the individual holds an unexpired driver's license issued by the State where the financing
§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 5 of 7
statement is filed (ordinarily the State of the debtor's principal residence), the name indicated on the driver's license
also is sufficient.
Name indicated on the driver's license. A financing statement does not "provide the name of the individual which
is indicated" on the debtor's driver's license unless the name it provides is the same as the name indicated on the
license. This is the case even if the name indicated on the debtor's driver's license contains an error.
Example 1: Debtor, an individual whose principal residence is in Illinois, grants a security interest to SP in certain
business equipment. SP files a financing statement with the Illinois filing office. The financing statement provides
the name appearing on Debtor's Illinois driver's license, "Joseph Allan Jones." Regardless of which Alternative is in
effect in Illinois, this filing would be sufficient under Illinois' Section 9-503(a), even if Debtor's correct middle name is
Alan, not Allan.
A filing against "Joseph A. Jones" or "Joseph Jones" would not "provide the name of the individual which is
indicated" on the debtor's driver's license. However, these filings might be sufficient if Alternative A is in effect in
Illinois and Jones has no current (i.e., unexpired) Illinois driver's license, or if Illinois has enacted Alternative B.
Determining the name that should be provided on the financing statement must not be done mechanically. The
order in which the components of an individual's name appear on a driver's license differs among the States. Had
the debtor in Example 1 obtained a driver's license from a different State, the license might have indicated the
name as "Jones Joseph Allan." Regardless of the order on the driver's license, the debtor's surname must be
provided in the part of the financing statement designated for the surname.
Alternatives A and B both refer to a license issued by "this State." Perfection of a security interest by filing
ordinarily is determined by the law of the jurisdiction in which the debtor is located. See Section 9-301(1).
(Exceptions to the general rule are found in Section 9-301(3) and (4), concerning fixture filings, timber to be cut, and
as-extracted collateral.) A debtor who is an individual ordinarily is located at the individual's principal residence. See
Section 9-307(b). (An exception appears in Section 9-307(c).) Thus, a given State's Section 9-503 ordinarily will
apply during any period when the debtor's principal residence is located in that State, even if during that time the
debtor holds or acquires a driver's license from another State.
When a debtor's principal residence changes, the location of the debtor under Section 9-307 also changes and
perfection by filing ordinarily will be governed by the law of the debtor's new location. As a consequence of the
application of that jurisdiction's Section 9-316, a security interest that is perfected by filing under the law of the
debtor's former location will remain perfected for four months after the relocation, and thereafter if the secured party
perfects under the law of the debtor's new location. Likewise, a financing statement filed in the former location may
be effective to perfect a security interest that attaches after the debtor relocates. See Section 9-316(h).
Individual name of the debtor. Article 9 does not determine the "individual name" of a debtor. Nor does it
determine which element or elements in a debtor's name constitute the surname. In some cases, determining the
"individual name" of a debtor may be difficult, as may determining the debtor's surname. This is because in the
case of individuals, unlike registered organizations, there is no public organic record to which reference can be
made and from which the name and its components can be definitively determined.
Names can take many forms in the United States. For example, whereas a surname is often colloquially referred
to as a "last name," the sequence in which the elements of a name are presented is not determinative. In some
cultures, the surname appears first, while in others it may appear in a location that is neither first nor last. In
addition, some surnames are composed of multiple elements that, taken together, constitute a single surname.
These elements may or may not be separated by a space or connected by a hyphen, "i," or "y." In other instances,
some or all of the same elements may not be part of the surname. In some cases, a debtor's entire name might be
composed of only a single element, which should be provided in the part of the financing statement designated for
the surname.
In disputes as to whether a financing statement sufficiently provides the "individual name" of a debtor, a court
should refer to any non-UCC law concerning names. However, case law about names may have developed in
contexts that implicate policies different from those of Article 9. A court considering an individual's name for
§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 6 of 7
purposes of determining the sufficiency of a financing statement is not necessarily bound by cases that were
decided in other contexts and for other purposes.
Individuals are asked to provide their names on official documents such as tax returns and bankruptcy petitions.
An individual may provide a particular name on an official document in response to instructions relating to the
document rather than because the name is actually the individual's name. Accordingly, a court should not assume
that the name an individual provides on an official document necessarily constitutes the "individual name" for
purposes of the sufficiency of the debtor's name on a financing statement. Likewise, a court should not assume that
the name as presented on an individual's birth certificate is necessarily the individual's current name.
In applying non-UCC law for purposes of determining the sufficiency of a debtor's name on a financing statement,
a court should give effect to the instruction in Section 1-103(a)(1) that the UCC "must be liberally construed and
applied to promote its underlying purposes and policies," which include simplifying and clarifying the law governing
commercial transactions. Thus, determination of a debtor's name in the context of the Article 9 filing system must
take into account the needs of both filers and searchers. Filers need a simple and predictable system in which they
can have a reasonable degree of confidence that, without undue burden, they can determine a name that will be
sufficient so as to permit their financing statements to be effective. Likewise, searchers need a simple and
predictable system in which they can have a reasonable degree of confidence that, without undue burden, they will
discover all financing statements pertaining to the debtor in question. The court also should take into account the
purpose of the UCC to make the law uniform among the various jurisdictions. See Section 1-103(a)(3).
Of course, once an individual debtor's name has been determined to be sufficient for purposes of Section 9-503,
a financing statement that provides a variation of that name, such as a "nickname" that does not constitute the
debtor's name, does not sufficiently provide the name of the debtor under this section. Cf. Section 9-503(c) (a
financing statement providing only a debtor's trade name is not sufficient).
If there is any doubt about an individual debtor's name, a secured party may choose to file one or more financing
statements that provide a number of possible names for the debtor and a searcher may similarly choose to search
under a number of possible names.
Note that, even if the name provided in an initial financing statement is correct, the filing office nevertheless must
reject the financing statement if it does not identify an individual debtor's surname (e.g., if it is not clear whether the
debtor's surname is Perry or Mason). See Section 9-516(b)(3)(C).
3. Secured Party's Name. New subsection (d) makes clear that when the secured party is a representative, a
financing statement is sufficient if it names the secured party, whether or not it indicates any representative
capacity. Similarly, a financing statement that names a representative of the secured party is sufficient, even if it
does not indicate the representative capacity.
Example 2: Debtor creates a security interest in favor of Bank X, Bank Y, and Bank Z, but not to their
representative, the collateral agent (Bank A). The collateral agent is not itself a secured party. See Section 9-102.
Under Sections 9-502(a) and 9-503(d), however, a financing statement is effective if it names as secured party
Bank A and not the actual secured parties, even if it omits Bank A's representative capacity.
Each person whose name is provided in an initial financing statement as the name of the secured party or
representative of the secured party is a secured party of record. See Section 9-511.
4. Multiple Names. Subsection (e) makes explicit what is implicit under former Article 9: a financing statement
may provide the name of more than one debtor and secured party. See Section 1-106 (words in the singular include
the plural). With respect to records relating to more than one debtor, see Section 9-520(d). With respect to financing
statements providing the name of more than one secured party, see Sections 9-509(e) and 9-510(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 9-503. NAME OF DEBTOR AND SECURED PARTY
Page 7 of 7
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-504
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-504. INDICATION OF COLLATERAL
A financing statement sufficiently indicates the collateral that it covers if the financing statement provides:
(1) a description of the collateral pursuant to Section 9-108; or
(2) an indication that the financing statement covers all assets or all personal property.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-402(1).
2. Indication of Collateral. To comply with Section 9-502(a), a financing statement must "indicate" the collateral
it covers. A financing statement sufficiently indicates collateral claimed to be covered by the financing statement if it
satisfies the purpose of conditioning perfection on the filing of a financing statement, i.e., if it provides notice that a
person may have a security interest in the collateral claimed. See Section 9-502, Comment 2. In particular, an
indication of collateral that would have satisfied the requirements of former Section 9-402(1) (i.e., "a statement
indicating the types, or describing the items, of collateral") suffices under Section 9-502(a). An indication may
satisfy the requirements of Section 9-502(a), even if it would not have satisfied the requirements of former Section
9-402(1).
This section provides two safe harbors. Under paragraph (1), a "description" of the collateral (as the term is
explained in Section 9-108) suffices as an indication for purposes of the sufficiency of a financing statement.
Debtors sometimes create a security interest in all, or substantially all, of their assets. To accommodate this
practice, paragraph (2) expands the class of sufficient collateral references to embrace "an indication that the
financing statement covers all assets or all personal property." If the property in question belongs to the debtor and
is personal property, any searcher will know that the property is covered by the financing statement. Of course,
regardless of its breadth, a financing statement has no effect with respect to property indicated but to which a
security interest has not attached. Note that a broad statement of this kind (e.g., "all debtor's personal property")
would not be a sufficient "description" for purposes of a security agreement. See Sections 9-203(b)(3)(A), 9-108. It
follows that a somewhat narrower description than "all assets," e.g., "all assets other than automobiles," is sufficient
for purposes of this section, even if it does not suffice for purposes of a security agreement.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-505
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-505. FILING AND COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER STATUTES AND TREATIES
FOR CONSIGNMENTS, LEASES, OTHER BAILMENTS, AND OTHER
TRANSACTIONS
(a) [Use of terms other than "debtor" and "secured party."] A consignor, lessor, or other bailor of
goods, a licensor, or a buyer of a payment intangible or promissory note may file a financing statement, or
may comply with a statute or treaty described in Section 9-311(a), using the terms "consignor",
"consignee", "lessor", "lessee", "bailor", "bailee", "licensor", "licensee", "owner", "registered owner", "buyer",
"seller", or words of similar import, instead of the terms "secured party" and "debtor".
(b) [Effect of financing statement under subsection (a).] This part applies to the filing of a financing
statement under subsection (a) and, as appropriate, to compliance that is equivalent to filing a financing
statement under Section 9-311(b), but the filing or compliance is not of itself a factor in determining whether
the collateral secures an obligation. If it is determined for another reason that the collateral secures an
obligation, a security interest held by the consignor, lessor, bailor, licensor, owner, or buyer which attaches
to the collateral is perfected by the filing or compliance.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-408.
2. Precautionary Filing. Occasionally, doubts arise concerning whether a transaction creates a relationship to
which this Article or its filing provisions apply. For example, questions may arise over whether a "lease" of
equipment in fact creates a security interest or whether the "sale" of payment intangibles in fact secures an
obligation, thereby requiring action to perfect the security interest. This section, which derives from former Section
9-408, affords the option of filing of a financing statement with appropriate changes of terminology but without
affecting the substantive question of classification of the transaction.
3. Changes from Former Section 9-408. This section expands the rule of Section 9-408 to embrace more
generally other bailments and transactions, as well as sales transactions, primarily sales of payment intangibles and
promissory notes. It provides the same benefits for compliance with a statute or treaty described in Section 9-311(a)
that former Section 9-408 provided for filing, in connection with the use of terms such as "lessor," consignor," etc.
The references to "owner" and "registered owner" are intended to address, for example, the situation where a
putative lessor is the registered owner of an automobile covered by a certificate of title and the transaction is
determined to create a security interest. Although this section provides that the security interest is perfected, the
relevant certificate-of-title statute may expressly provide to the contrary or may be ambiguous. If so, it may be
necessary or advisable to amend the certificate-of-title statute to ensure that perfection of the security interest will
be achieved.
§ 9-505. FILING AND COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER STATUTES AND TREATIES FOR CONSIGNMENTS,
LEASES, OTHER BAILMENTS, AND OTHER TRANSACTIONS
Page 2 of 2
As did former Section 1-201, former Article 9 referred to transactions, including leases and consignments,
"intended as security." This misleading phrase created the erroneous impression that the parties to a transaction
can dictate how the law will classify it (e.g., as a bailment or as a security interest) and thus affect the rights of third
parties. This Article deletes the phrase wherever it appears. Subsection (b) expresses the principle more precisely
by referring to a security interest that "secures an obligation."
4. Consignments. Although a "true" consignment is a bailment, the filing and priority provisions of former Article
9 applied to "true" consignments. See former Sections 2-326(3), 9-114. A consignment "intended as security"
created a security interest that was in all respects subject to former Article 9. This Article subsumes most true
consignments under the rubric of "security interest." See Sections 9-102 (definition of "consignment"), 9-109(a)(4),
1-201(b)(35) (definition of "security interest"). Nevertheless, it maintains the distinction between a (true)
"consignment," as to which only certain aspects of Article 9 apply, and a so-called consignment that actually
"secures an obligation," to which Article 9 applies in full. The revisions to this section reflect the change in
terminology.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-506
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-506. EFFECT OF ERRORS OR OMISSIONS
(a) [Minor errors and omissions.] A financing statement substantially satisfying the requirements of this
part is effective, even if it has minor errors or omissions, unless the errors or omissions make the financing
statement seriously misleading.
(b) [Financing statement seriously misleading.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), a
financing statement that fails sufficiently to provide the name of the debtor in accordance with Section 9-
503(a) is seriously misleading.
(c) [Financing statement not seriously misleading.] If a search of the records of the filing office under
the debtor's correct name, using the filing office's standard search logic, if any, would disclose a financing
statement that fails sufficiently to provide the name of the debtor in accordance with Section 9-503(a), the
name provided does not make the financing statement seriously misleading.
(d) ["Debtor's correct name."] For purposes of Section 9-508(b), the "debtor's correct name" in
subsection (c) means the correct name of the new debtor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-402(8).
2. Errors and Omissions. Like former Section 9-402(8), subsection (a) is in line with the policy of this Article to
simplify formal requisites and filing requirements. It is designed to discourage the fanatical and impossibly refined
reading of statutory requirements in which courts occasionally have indulged themselves. Subsection (a) provides
the standard applicable to indications of collateral. Subsections (b) and (c), which are new, concern the
effectiveness of financing statements in which the debtor's name is incorrect. Subsection (b) contains the general
rule: a financing statement that fails sufficiently to provide the debtor's name in accordance with Section 9-503(a) is
seriously misleading as a matter of law. Subsection (c) provides an exception: If the financing statement
nevertheless would be discovered in a search under the debtor's correct name, using the filing office's standard
search logic, if any, then as a matter of law the incorrect name does not make the financing statement seriously
misleading. A financing statement that is seriously misleading under this section is ineffective even if it is disclosed
by (i) using a search logic other than that of the filing office to search the official records, or (ii) using the filing
office's standard search logic to search a data base other than that of the filing office. For purposes of subsection
(c), any name that satisfies Section 9-503(a) at the time of the search is a "correct name."
This section and Section 9 503 balance the interests of filers and searchers. Searchers are not expected to
ascertain nicknames, trade names, and the like by which the debtor may be known and then search under each of
them. Rather, it is the secured party's responsibility to provide the name of the debtor sufficiently in a filed financing
statement. Subsection (c) sets forth the only situation in which a financing statement that fails sufficiently to provide
the name of the debtor is not seriously misleading. As stated in subsection (b), if the name of the debtor provided
§ 9-506. EFFECT OF ERRORS OR OMISSIONS
Page 2 of 2
on a financing statement is insufficient and subsection (c) is not satisfied, the financing statement is seriously
misleading. Such a financing statement is ineffective even if the debtor is known in some contexts by the name
provided on the financing statement and even if searchers know or have reason to know that the name provided on
the financing statement refers to the debtor. Any suggestion to the contrary in a judicial opinion is incorrect.
In addition to requiring the debtor's name and an indication of the collateral, Section 9-502(a) requires a financing
statement to provide the name of the secured party or a representative of the secured party. Inasmuch as searches
are not conducted under the secured party's name, and no filing is needed to continue the perfected status of
security interest after it is assigned, an error in the name of the secured party or its representative will not be
seriously misleading. However, in an appropriate case, an error of this kind may give rise to an estoppel in favor of
a particular holder of a conflicting claim to the collateral. See Section 1-103.
3. New Debtors. Subsection (d) provides that, in determining the extent to which a financing statement naming
an original debtor is effective against a new debtor, the sufficiency of the financing statement should be tested
against the name of the new debtor.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-507
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-507. EFFECT OF CERTAIN EVENTS ON EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING
STATEMENT
(a) [Disposition.] A filed financing statement remains effective with respect to collateral that is sold,
exchanged, leased, licensed, or otherwise disposed of and in which a security interest or agricultural lien
continues, even if the secured party knows of or consents to the disposition.
(b) [Information becoming seriously misleading.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) and
Section 9-508, a financing statement is not rendered ineffective if, after the financing statement is filed, the
information provided in the financing statement becomes seriously misleading under Section 9-506.
(c) [Change in debtor's name.] If the name that a filed financing statement provides for a debtor becomes
insufficient as the name of the debtor under Section 9-503(a) so that the financing statement becomes
seriously misleading under Section 9-506:
(1) the financing statement is effective to perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the debtor
before, or within four months after, the filed financing statement becomes seriously misleading; and
(2) the financing statement is not effective to perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the
debtor more than four months after the filed financing statement becomes seriously misleading, unless
an amendment to the financing statement which renders the financing statement not seriously
misleading is filed within four months after the the financing statement became seriously misleading.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-402(7).
2. Scope of Section. This section deals with situations in which the information in a proper financing statement
becomes inaccurate after the financing statement is filed. Compare Section 9-338, which deals with situations in
which a financing statement contains a particular kind of information concerning the debtor (i.e., the information
described in Section 9-516(b)(5)) that is incorrect at the time it is filed.
3. Post-Filing Disposition of Collateral. Under subsection (a), a financing statement remains effective even if
the collateral is sold or otherwise disposed of. This subsection clarifies the third sentence of former Section 9-
402(7) by providing that a financing statement remains effective following the disposition of collateral only when the
security interest or agricultural lien continues in that collateral. This result is consistent with the conclusion of PEB
Commentary No. 3. Normally, a security interest does continue after disposition of the collateral. See Section 9-
315(a). Law other than this Article determines whether an agricultural lien survives disposition of the collateral.
As a consequence of the disposition, the collateral may be owned by a person other than the debtor against
whom the financing statement was filed. Under subsection (a), the secured party remains perfected even if it does
§ 9-507. EFFECT OF CERTAIN EVENTS ON EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 2 of 3
not correct the public record. For this reason, any person seeking to determine whether a debtor owns collateral
free of security interests must inquire as to the debtor's source of title and, if circumstances seem to require it,
search in the name of a former owner. Subsection (a) addresses only the sufficiency of the information contained in
the financing statement. A disposition of collateral may result in loss of perfection for other reasons. See Section 9-
316.
Example: Dee Corp. is an Illinois corporation. It creates a security interest in its equipment in favor of Secured
Party. Secured Party files a proper financing statement in Illinois. Dee Corp. sells an item of equipment to Bee
Corp., a Pennsylvania corporation, subject to the security interest. The security interest continues, see Section 9-
315(a), and remains perfected, see Section 9-507(a), notwithstanding that the financing statement is filed under "D"
(for Dee Corp.) and not under "B." However, because Bee Corp. is located in Pennsylvania and not Illinois, see
Section 9-307, unless Secured Party perfects under Pennsylvania law within one year after the transfer, its security
interest will become unperfected and will be deemed to have been unperfected against purchasers of the collateral.
See Section 9-316.
4. Other Post-Filing Changes. Subsection (b) provides that, as a general matter, post-filing changes that render
a financing statement seriously misleading have no effect on a financing statement. The financing statement
remains effective. It is subject to two exceptions: Section 9-508 and Section 9-507(c). Section 9-508 addresses the
effectiveness of a financing statement filed against an original debtor when a new debtor becomes bound by the
original debtor's security agreement. It is discussed in the Comments to that section. Section 9-507(c) addresses
cases in which a filed financing statement provides a name that, at the time of filing, satisfies the requirements of
Section 9-503(a) with respect to the named debtor but, at a later time, no longer does so.
Example 1: Debtor, an individual whose principal residence is in California, grants a security interest to SP in
certain business equipment. SP files a financing statement with the California filing office. Alternative A is in effect in
California. The financing statement provides the name appearing on Debtor's California driver's license, "James
McGinty." Debtor obtains a court order changing his name to "Roger McGuinn" but does not change his driver's
license. Even after the court order issues, the name provided for the debtor in the financing statement is sufficient
under Section 9-503(a). Accordingly, Section 9-507(c) does not apply.
The same result would follow if Alternative B is in effect in California.
Under Section 9-503(a)(4) (Alternative A), if the debtor holds a current (i.e., unexpired) driver's license issued by
the State where the financing statement is filed, the name required for the financing statement is the name indicated
on the license that was issued most recently by that State. If the debtor does not have a current driver's license
issued by that State, then the debtor's name is determined under subsection (a)(5). It follows that a debtor's name
may change, and a financing statement providing the name on the debtor's then current driver's license may
become seriously misleading, if the license expires and the debtor's name under subsection (a)(5) is different. The
same consequences may follow if a debtor's driver's license is renewed and the names on the licenses differ.
Example 2: The facts are as in Example 1. Debtor's driver's license expires one year after the entry of the court
order changing Debtor's name. Debtor does not renew the license. Upon expiration of the license, the name
required for sufficiency by Section 9-503(a) is the individual name of the debtor or the debtor's surname and first
personal name. The name "James McGinty" has become insufficient.
Example 3: The facts are as in Example 1. Before the license expires, Debtor renews the license. The name
indicated on the new license is "Roger McGuinn." Upon issuance of the new license, "James McGinty" becomes
insufficient as the debtor's name under Section 9-503(a).
The same results would follow if Alternative B is in effect in California (assuming that, following the issuance of
the court order, "James McGinty" is neither the individual name of the debtor nor the debtor's surname and first
personal name).
Even if the name provided as the name of the debtor becomes insufficient under Section 9-503(a), the filed
financing statement does not become seriously misleading, and Section 9-507(c) does not apply, if the financing
§ 9-507. EFFECT OF CERTAIN EVENTS ON EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 3 of 3
statement can be found by searching under the debtor's "correct" name, using the filing office's standard search
logic. See Section 9-506. Any name that satisfies Section 9-503(a) at the time of the search is a "correct name" for
these purposes. Thus, assuming that a search of the records of the California filing office under "Roger McGuinn,"
using the filing office's standard search logic, would not disclose a financing statement naming "James McGinty,"
the financing statement in Examples 2 and 3 has become seriously misleading and Section 9-507(c) applies.
If a financing statement becomes seriously misleading because the name it provides for a debtor becomes
insufficient, the financing statement, unless amended to provide a sufficient name for the debtor, is effective only to
perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the debtor before, or within four months after, the change. If an
amendment that provides a sufficient name is filed within four months after the change, the financing statement as
amended would be effective also with respect to collateral acquired more than four months after the change. If an
amendment that provides a sufficient name is filed more than four months after the change, the financing statement
as amended would be effective also with respect to collateral acquired more than four months after the change, but
only from the time of the filing of the amendment.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-508
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-508. EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT IF NEW DEBTOR
BECOMES BOUND BY SECURITY AGREEMENT
(a) [Financing statement naming original debtor.] Except as otherwise provided in this section, a filed
financing statement naming an original debtor is effective to perfect a security interest in collateral in which
a new debtor has or acquires rights to the extent that the financing statement would have been effective
had the original debtor acquired rights in the collateral.
(b) [Financing statement becoming seriously misleading.] If the difference between the name of the
original debtor and that of the new debtor causes a filed financing statement that is effective under
subsection (a) to be seriously misleading under Section 9-506:
(1) the financing statement is effective to perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the new
debtor before, and within four months after, the new debtor becomes bound under Section 9-203(d);
and
(2) the financing statement is not effective to perfect a security interest in collateral acquired by the
new debtor more than four months after the new debtor becomes bound under Section 9-203(d) unless
an initial financing statement providing the name of the new debtor is filed before the expiration of that
time.
(c) [When section not applicable.] This section does not apply to collateral as to which a filed financing
statement remains effective against the new debtor under Section 9-507(a).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. The Problem. Section 9-203(d) and (e) and this section deal with situations where one party (the "new debtor")
becomes bound as debtor by a security agreement entered into by another person (the "original debtor"). These
situations often arise as a consequence of changes in business structure. For example, the original debtor may be
an individual debtor who operates a business as a sole proprietorship and then incorporates it. Or, the original
debtor may be a corporation that is merged into another corporation. Under both former Article 9 and this Article,
collateral that is transferred in the course of the incorporation or merger normally would remain subject to a
perfected security interest. See Sections 9-315(a), 9-507(a). Former Article 9 was less clear with respect to whether
an after-acquired property clause in a security agreement signed by the original debtor would be effective to create
a security interest in property acquired by the new corporation or the merger survivor and, if so, whether a financing
statement filed against the original debtor would be effective to perfect the security interest. This section and
Sections 9-203(d) and (e) are a clarification.
§ 9-508. EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT IF NEW DEBTOR BECOMES BOUND BY
SECURITY AGREEMENT
Page 2 of 3
3. How New Debtor Becomes Bound. Normally, a security interest is unenforceable unless the debtor has
authenticated a security agreement describing the collateral. See Section 9-203(b). New Section 9-203(e) creates
an exception, under which a security agreement entered into by one person is effective with respect to the property
of another. This exception comes into play if a "new debtor" becomes bound as debtor by a security agreement
entered into by another person (the "original debtor"). (The quoted terms are defined in Section 9-102.) If a new
debtor does become bound, then the security agreement entered into by the original debtor satisfies the securityagreement
requirement of Section 9-203(b)(3) as to existing or after-acquired property of the new debtor to the
extent the property is described in the security agreement. In that case, no other agreement is necessary to make a
security interest enforceable in that property. See Section 9-203(e).
Section 9-203(d) explains when a new debtor becomes bound by an original debtor's security agreement. Under
Section 9-203(d)(1), a new debtor becomes bound as debtor if, by contract or operation of other law, the security
agreement becomes effective to create a security interest in the new debtor's property. For example, if the
applicable corporate law of mergers provides that when A Corp merges into B Corp, B Corp becomes a debtor
under A Corp's security agreement, then B Corp would become bound as debtor following such a merger. Similarly,
B Corp would become bound as debtor if B Corp contractually assumes A's obligations under the security
agreement.
Under certain circumstances, a new debtor becomes bound for purposes of this Article even though it would not
be bound under other law. Under Section 9-203(d)(2), a new debtor becomes bound when, by contract or operation
of other law, it (i) becomes obligated not only for the secured obligation but also generally for the obligations of the
original debtor and (ii) acquires or succeeds to substantially all the assets of the original debtor. For example, some
corporate laws provide that, when two corporations merge, the surviving corporation succeeds to the assets of its
merger partner and "has all liabilities" of both corporations. In the case where, for example, A Corp merges into B
Corp (and A Corp ceases to exist), some people have questioned whether A Corp's grant of a security interest in its
existing and after-acquired property becomes a "liability" of B Corp, such that B Corp's existing and after-acquired
property becomes subject to a security interest in favor of A Corp's lender. Even if corporate law were to give a
negative answer, under Section 9-203(d)(2), B Corp would become bound for purposes of Section 9-203(e) and this
section. The "substantially all of the assets" requirement of Section 9-203(d)(2) excludes sureties and other
secondary obligors as well as persons who become obligated through veil piercing and other non-successorship
doctrines. In most cases, it will exclude successors to the assets and liabilities of a division of a debtor.
4. When Financing Statement Effective Against New Debtor. Subsection (a) provides that a filing against the
original debtor generally is effective to perfect a security interest in collateral that a new debtor has at the time it
becomes bound by the original debtor's security agreement and collateral that it acquires after the new debtor
becomes bound. Under subsection (b), however, if the filing against the original debtor is seriously misleading as to
the new debtor's name, the filing is effective as to collateral acquired by the new debtor more than four months after
the new debtor becomes bound only if a person files during the four-month period an initial financing statement
providing the name of the new debtor. Compare Section 9-507(c) (four-month period of effectiveness with respect
to collateral acquired by a debtor after the name provided for the debtor becomes insufficient as the name of the
debtor). As to the meaning of "initial financing statement" in this context, see Section 9-512, Comment 5.
5. Transferred Collateral. This section does not apply to collateral transferred by the original debtor to a new
debtor. See subsection (c). Under those circumstances, the filing against the original debtor continues to be
effective until it lapses or perfection is lost for another reason. See Sections 9-316, 9-507(a).
6. Priority. Section 9-326 governs the priority contest between a secured creditor of the original debtor and a
secured creditor of the new debtor.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 9-508. EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT IF NEW DEBTOR BECOMES BOUND BY
SECURITY AGREEMENT
Page 3 of 3
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-509
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-509. PERSONS ENTITLED TO FILE A RECORD
(a) [Person entitled to file record.] A person may file an initial financing statement, amendment that adds
collateral covered by a financing statement, or amendment that adds a debtor to a financing statement only
if:
(1) the debtor authorizes the filing in an authenticated record or pursuant to subsection (b) or (c); or
(2) the person holds an agricultural lien that has become effective at the time of filing and the financing
statement covers only collateral in which the person holds an agricultural lien.
(b) [Security agreement as authorization.] By authenticating or becoming bound as debtor by a security
agreement, a debtor or new debtor authorizes the filing of an initial financing statement, and an
amendment, covering:
(1) the collateral described in the security agreement; and
(2) property that becomes collateral under Section 9-315(a)(2), whether or not the security agreement
expressly covers proceeds.
(c) [Acquisition of collateral as authorization.] By acquiring collateral in which a security interest or
agricultural lien continues under Section 9-315(a)(1), a debtor authorizes the filing of an initial financing
statement, and an amendment, covering the collateral and property that becomes collateral under Section
9-315(a)(2).
(d) [Person entitled to file certain amendments.] A person may file an amendment other than an
amendment that adds collateral covered by a financing statement or an amendment that adds a debtor to a
financing statement only if:
(1) the secured party of record authorizes the filing; or
(2) the amendment is a termination statement for a financing statement as to which the secured party
of record has failed to file or send a termination statement as required by Section 9-513(a) or (c), the
debtor authorizes the filing, and the termination statement indicates that the debtor authorized it to be
filed.
(e) [Multiple secured parties of record.] If there is more than one secured party of record for a financing
statement, each secured party of record may authorize the filing of an amendment under subsection (d).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
§ 9-509. PERSONS ENTITLED TO FILE A RECORD
Page 2 of 3
2. Scope and Approach of This Section. This section collects in one place most of the rules determining
whether a record may be filed. Section 9-510 explains the extent to which a filed record is effective. Under these
sections, the identity of the person who effects a filing is immaterial. The filing scheme contemplated by this Part
does not contemplate that the identity of a "filer" will be a part of the searchable records. This is consistent with, and
a necessary aspect of, eliminating signatures or other evidence of authorization from the system. (Note that the
1972 amendments to this Article eliminated the requirement that a financing statement contain the signature of the
secured party.) As long as the appropriate person authorizes the filing, or, in the case of a termination statement,
the debtor is entitled to the termination, it is insignificant whether the secured party or another person files any given
record. The question of authorization is one for the court, not the filing office. However, a filing office may choose to
employ authentication procedures in connection with electronic communications, e.g., to verify the identity of a filer
who seeks to charge the filing fee.
3. Unauthorized Filings. Records filed in the filing office do not require signatures for their effectiveness.
Subsection (a)(1) substitutes for the debtor's signature on a financing statement the requirement that the debtor
authorize in an authenticated record the filing of an initial financing statement or an amendment that adds collateral.
Also, under subsection (a)(1), if an amendment adds a debtor, the debtor who is added must authorize the
amendment. A person who files an unauthorized record in violation of subsection (a)(1) is liable under Section 9-
625(b) and (e) for actual and statutory damages. Of course, a filed financing statement is ineffective to perfect a
security interest if the filing is not authorized. See Section 9-510(a). Law other than this Article, including the law
with respect to ratification of past acts, generally determines whether a person has the requisite authority to file a
record under this section. See Sections 1-103, 9-502, Comment 3. This Article applies to other issues, such as the
priority of a security interest perfected by the filing of a financing statement. See Section 9-322, Comment 4.
4. Ipso Facto Authorization. Under subsection (b), the authentication of a security agreement ipso facto
constitutes the debtor's authorization of the filing of a financing statement covering the collateral described in the
security agreement. The secured party need not obtain a separate authorization. Similarly, a new debtor's
becoming bound by a security agreement ipso facto constitutes the new debtor's authorization of the filing of a
financing statement covering the collateral described in the security agreement by which the new debtor has
become bound. And, under subsection (c), the acquisition of collateral in which a security interest continues after
disposition under Section 9-315(a)(1) ipso facto constitutes an authorization to file an initial financing statement
against the person who acquired the collateral. The authorization to file an initial financing statement also
constitutes an authorization to file a record covering actual proceeds of the original collateral, even if the security
agreement is silent as to proceeds.
Example 1: Debtor authenticates a security agreement creating a security interest in Debtor's inventory in favor
of Secured Party. Secured Party files a financing statement covering inventory and accounts. The financing
statement is authorized insofar as it covers inventory and unauthorized insofar as it covers accounts. (Note,
however, that the financing statement will be effective to perfect a security interest in accounts constituting
proceeds of the inventory to the same extent as a financing statement covering only inventory.)
Example 2: Debtor authenticates a security agreement creating a security interest in Debtor's inventory in favor
of Secured Party. Secured Party files a financing statement covering inventory. Debtor sells some inventory,
deposits the buyer's payment into a deposit account, and withdraws the funds to purchase equipment. As long as
the equipment can be traced to the inventory, the security interest continues in the equipment. See Section 9-
315(a)(2). However, because the equipment was acquired with cash proceeds, the financing statement becomes
ineffective to perfect the security interest in the equipment on the 21st day after the security interest attaches to the
equipment unless Secured Party continues perfection beyond the 20-day period by filing a financing statement
against the equipment or amending the filed financing statement to cover equipment. See Section 9-315(d).
Debtor's authentication of the security agreement authorizes the filing of an initial financing statement or
amendment covering the equipment, which is "property that becomes collateral under Section 9-315(a)(2)." See
Section 9-509(b)(2).
§ 9-509. PERSONS ENTITLED TO FILE A RECORD
Page 3 of 3
5. Agricultural Liens. Under subsection (a)(2), the holder of an agricultural lien may file a financing statement
covering collateral subject to the lien without obtaining the debtor's authorization. Because the lien arises as matter
of law, the debtor's consent is not required. A person who files an unauthorized record in violation of this subsection
is liable under Section 9-625(e) for a statutory penalty and damages.
6. Amendments; Termination Statements Authorized by Debtor. Most amendments may not be filed unless
the secured party of record, as determined under Section 9-511, authorizes the filing. See subsection (d)(1).
However, under subsection (d)(2), the authorization of the secured party of record is not required for the filing of a
termination statement if the secured party of record failed to send or file a termination statement as required by
Section 9-513, the debtor authorizes it to be filed, and the termination statement so indicates. An authorization to
file a record under subsection (d) is effective even if the authorization is not in an authenticated record. Compare
subsection (a)(1). However, both the person filing the record and the person giving the authorization may wish to
obtain and retain a record indicating that the filing was authorized.
7. Multiple Secured Parties of Record. Subsection (e) deals with multiple secured parties of record. It permits
each secured party of record to authorize the filing of amendments. However, Section 9-510(b) protects the rights
and powers of one secured party of record from the effects of filings made by another secured party of record. See
Section 9-510, Comment 3.
8. Successor to Secured Party of Record. A person may succeed to the powers of the secured party of record
by operation of other law, e.g., the law of corporate mergers. In that case, the successor has the power to authorize
filings within the meaning of this section.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-510
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-510. EFFECTIVENESS OF FILED RECORD
(a) [Filed record effective if authorized.] A filed record is effective only to the extent that it was filed by a
person that may file it under Section 9-509.
(b) [Authorization by one secured party of record.] A record authorized by one secured party of record
does not affect the financing statement with respect to another secured party of record.
(c) [Continuation statement not timely filed.] A continuation statement that is not filed within the sixmonth
period prescribed by Section 9-515(d) is ineffective.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Ineffectiveness of Unauthorized or Overbroad Filings. Subsection (a) provides that a filed financing
statement is effective only to the extent it was filed by a person entitled to file it.
Example 1: Debtor authorizes the filing of a financing statement covering inventory. Under Section 9-509, the
secured party may file a financing statement covering only inventory; it may not file a financing statement covering
other collateral. The secured party files a financing statement covering inventory and equipment. This section
provides that the financing statement is effective only to the extent the secured party may file it. Thus, the financing
statement is effective to perfect a security interest in inventory but ineffective to perfect a security interest in
equipment.
3. Multiple Secured Parties of Record. Section 9-509(e) permits any secured party of record to authorize the
filing of most amendments. Subsection (b) of this section prevents a filing authorized by one secured party of record
from affecting the rights and powers of another secured party of record without the latter's consent.
Example 2: Debtor creates a security interest in favor of A and B. The filed financing statement names A and B
as the secured parties. An amendment deleting some collateral covered by the financing statement is filed pursuant
to B's authorization. Although B's security interest in the deleted collateral becomes unperfected, A's security
interest remains perfected in all the collateral.
Example 3: Debtor creates a security interest in favor of A and B. The financing statement names A and B as the
secured parties. A termination statement is filed pursuant to B's authorization. Although the effectiveness of the
financing statement terminates with respect to B's security interest, A's rights are unaffected. That is, the financing
statement continues to be effective to perfect A's security interest.
4. Continuation Statements. A continuation statement may be filed only within the six months immediately
before lapse. See Section 9-515(d). The filing office is obligated to reject a continuation statement that is filed
§ 9-510. EFFECTIVENESS OF FILED RECORD
Page 2 of 2
outside the six-month period. See Sections 9-520(a), 9-516(b)(7). Subsection (c) provides that if the filing office fails
to reject a continuation statement that is not filed in a timely manner, the continuation statement is ineffective
nevertheless.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-511
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-511. SECURED PARTY OF RECORD
(a) [Secured party of record.] A secured party of record with respect to a financing statement is a person
whose name is provided as the name of the secured party or a representative of the secured party in an
initial financing statement that has been filed. If an initial financing statement is filed under Section 9-514(a),
the assignee named in the initial financing statement is the secured party of record with respect to the
financing statement.
(b) [Amendment naming secured party of record.] If an amendment of a financing statement which
provides the name of a person as a secured party or a representative of a secured party is filed, the person
named in the amendment is a secured party of record. If an amendment is filed under Section 9-514(b), the
assignee named in the amendment is a secured party of record.
(c) [Amendment deleting secured party of record.] A person remains a secured party of record until the
filing of an amendment of the financing statement which deletes the person.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Secured Party of Record. This new section explains how the secured party of record is to be determined. If
SP-1 is named as the secured party in an initial financing statement, it is the secured party of record. Similarly, if an
initial financing statement reflects a total assignment from SP-0 to SP-1, then SP-1 is the secured party of record.
See subsection (a). If, subsequently, an amendment is filed assigning SP-1's status to SP-2, then SP-2 becomes
the secured party of record in place of SP-1. The same result obtains if a subsequent amendment deletes the
reference to SP-1 and substitutes therefor a reference to SP-2. If, however, a subsequent amendment adds SP-2
as a secured party but does not purport to remove SP-1 as a secured party, then SP-2 and SP-1 each is a secured
party of record. See subsection (b). An amendment purporting to remove the only secured party of record without
providing a successor is ineffective. See Section 9-512(e). At any point in time, all effective records that comprise a
financing statement must be examined to determine the person or persons that have the status of secured party of
record.
3. Successor to Secured Party of Record. Application of other law may result in a person succeeding to the
powers of a secured party of record. For example, if the secured party of record (A) merges into another corporation
(B) and the other corporation (B) survives, other law may provide that B has all of A's powers. In that case, B is
authorized to take all actions under this Part that A would have been authorized to take. Similarly, acts taken by a
person who is authorized under generally applicable principles of agency to act on behalf of the secured party of
record are effective under this Part.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 9-511. SECURED PARTY OF RECORD
Page 2 of 2
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-512
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-512. AMENDMENT OF FINANCING STATEMENT
[Alternative A]
(a) [Amendment of information in financing statement.] Subject to Section 9-509, a person may
add or delete collateral covered by, continue or terminate the effectiveness of, or, subject to subsection
(e), otherwise amend the information provided in, a financing statement by filing an amendment that:
(1) identifies, by its file number, the initial financing statement to which the amendment relates; and
(2) if the amendment relates to an initial financing statement filed [or recorded] in a filing office
described in Section 9-501(a)(1), provides the information specified in Section 9-502(b).
[Alternative B]
(a) [Amendment of information in financing statement.] Subject to Section 9-509, a person may
add or delete collateral covered by, continue or terminate the effectiveness of, or, subject to subsection
(e), otherwise amend the information provided in, a financing statement by filing an amendment that:
(1) identifies, by its file number, the initial financing statement to which the amendment relates; and
(2) if the amendment relates to an initial financing statement filed [or recorded] in a filing office
described in Section 9-501(a)(1), provides the date [and time] that the initial financing statement
was filed [or recorded] and the information specified in Section 9-502(b).
[End of Alternatives]
(b) [Period of effectiveness not affected.] Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-515, the filing
of an amendment does not extend the period of effectiveness of the financing statement.
(c) [Effectiveness of amendment adding collateral.] A financing statement that is amended by an
amendment that adds collateral is effective as to the added collateral only from the date of the filing of
the amendment.
(d) [Effectiveness of amendment adding debtor.] A financing statement that is amended by an
amendment that adds a debtor is effective as to the added debtor only from the date of the filing of the
amendment.
(e) [Certain amendments ineffective.] An amendment is ineffective to the extent it:
(1) purports to delete all debtors and fails to provide the name of a debtor to be covered by the
financing statement; or
(2) purports to delete all secured parties of record and fails to provide the name of a new secured
party of record.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 9-512. AMENDMENT OF FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 2 of 3
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: States whose real-estate filing offices require additional information in amendments and cannot
search their records by both the name of the debtor and the file number should enact Alternative B to Sections 9-
512(a), 9-518(b), 9-518(d), 9-519(f) and 9-522(a).
1. Source. Former 9-402(4).
2. Changes to Financing Statements. This section addresses changes to financing statements, including
addition and deletion of collateral. Although termination statements, assignments, and continuation statements are
types of amendment, this Article follows former Article 9 and contains separate sections containing additional
provisions applicable to particular types of amendments. See Section 9-513 (termination statements); 9-514
(assignments); 9-515 (continuation statements). One should not infer from this separate treatment that this Article
requires a separate amendment to accomplish each change. Rather, a single amendment would be legally
sufficient to, e.g., add collateral and continue the effectiveness of the financing statement.
3. Amendments. An amendment under this Article may identify only the information contained in a financing
statement that is to be changed; alternatively, it may take the form of an amended and restated financing statement.
The latter would state, for example, that the financing statement "is amended and restated to read as follows: . . ."
References in this Part to an "amended financing statement" are to a financing statement as amended by an
amendment using either technique.
This section revises former Section 9-402(4) to permit secured parties of record to make changes in the public
record without the need to obtain the debtor's signature. However, the filing of an amendment that adds collateral or
adds a debtor must be authorized by the debtor or it will not be effective. See Sections 9-509(a), 9-510(a).
4. Amendment Adding Debtor. An amendment that adds a debtor is effective, provided that the added debtor
authorizes the filing. See Section 9-509(a). However, filing an amendment adding a debtor to a previously filed
financing statement affords no advantage over filing an initial financing statement against that debtor and may be
disadvantageous. With respect to the added debtor, for purposes of determining the priority of the security interest,
the time of filing is the time of the filing of the amendment, not the time of the filing of the initial financing statement.
See subsection (d). However, the effectiveness of the financing statement lapses with respect to added debtor at
the time it lapses with respect to the original debtor. See subsection (b).
5. Amendment Adding Debtor Name. Many states have enacted statutes governing the "conversion" of one
organization organized under the law of that state, e.g., a corporation, into another such organization, e.g., a limited
liability company. This Article defers to those statutes to determine whether the resulting organization is the same
legal person as the initial, converting organization (albeit with a different name) or whether the resulting
organization is a different legal person. When the governing statute does not clearly resolve the question, a secured
party whose debtor is the converting organization may wish to proceed as if the statute provides for both results. In
these circumstances, an amendment adding to the initial financing statement the name of the resulting organization
may be preferable to an amendment substituting that name for the name of the debtor provided on the initial
financing statement. In the event the governing statute is construed as providing that the resulting organization is
the same legal person as the converting organization, but with a different name, the timely filing of such an
amendment would satisfy the requirement of Section 9-507(c)(2). If, however, the governing statute is construed as
providing that the resulting organization is a different legal person, the financing statement (which continues to
provide the name of the original debtor) would be effective as to collateral acquired by the resulting organization
("new debtor") before, and within four months after, the conversion. See Section 9 508(b)(1). Inasmuch as it is the
first financing statement filed against the resulting organization by the secured party, the record adding the name of
the resulting organization as a debtor would constitute "an initial financing statement providing the name of the new
debtor " under Section 9 508(b)(2). The secured party also may wish to file another financing statement naming the
resulting organization as debtor. See Comment 4.
§ 9-512. AMENDMENT OF FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 3 of 3
6. Deletion of All Debtors or Secured Parties of Record. Subsection (e) assures that there will be a debtor and
secured party of record for every financing statement.
Example: A filed financing statement names A and B as secured parties of record and covers inventory and
equipment. An amendment deletes equipment and purports to delete A and B as secured parties of record without
adding a substitute secured party. The amendment is ineffective to the extent it purports to delete the secured
parties of record but effective with respect to the deletion of collateral. As a consequence, the financing statement,
as amended, covers only inventory, but A and B remain as secured parties of record.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-513
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-513. TERMINATION STATEMENT
(a) [Consumer goods.] A secured party shall cause the secured party of record for a financing statement
to file a termination statement for the financing statement if the financing statement covers consumer goods
and:
(1) there is no obligation secured by the collateral covered by the financing statement and no
commitment to make an advance, incur an obligation, or otherwise give value; or
(2) the debtor did not authorize the filing of the initial financing statement.
(b) [Time for compliance with subsection (a).] To comply with subsection (a), a secured party shall
cause the secured party of record to file the termination statement:
(1) within one month after there is no obligation secured by the collateral covered by the financing
statement and no commitment to make an advance, incur an obligation, or otherwise give value; or
(2) if earlier, within 20 days after the secured party receives an authenticated demand from a debtor.
(c) [Other collateral.] In cases not governed by subsection (a), within 20 days after a secured party
receives an authenticated demand from a debtor, the secured party shall cause the secured party of record
for a financing statement to send to the debtor a termination statement for the financing statement or file the
termination statement in the filing office if:
(1) except in the case of a financing statement covering accounts or chattel paper that has been sold
or goods that are the subject of a consignment, there is no obligation secured by the collateral covered
by the financing statement and no commitment to make an advance, incur an obligation, or otherwise
give value;
(2) the financing statement covers accounts or chattel paper that has been sold but as to which the
account debtor or other person obligated has discharged its obligation;
(3) the financing statement covers goods that were the subject of a consignment to the debtor but are
not in the debtor's possession; or
(4) the debtor did not authorize the filing of the initial financing statement.
(d) [Effect of filing termination statement.] Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-510, upon the
filing of a termination statement with the filing office, the financing statement to which the termination
statement relates ceases to be effective. Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-510, for purposes of
Sections 9-519(g), 9-522(a), and 9-523(c), the filing with the filing office of a termination statement relating
to a financing statement that indicates that the debtor is a transmitting utility also causes the effectiveness
of the financing statement to lapse.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 9-513. TERMINATION STATEMENT
Page 2 of 3
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-404.
2. Duty to File or Send. This section specifies when a secured party must cause the secured party of record to
file or send to the debtor a termination statement for a financing statement. Because most financing statements
expire in five years unless a continuation statement is filed (Section 9-515), no compulsion is placed on the secured
party to file a termination statement unless demanded by the debtor, except in the case of consumer goods.
Because many consumers will not realize the importance to them of clearing the public record, an affirmative duty is
put on the secured party in that case. But many purchase-money security interests in consumer goods will not be
filed, except for motor vehicles. See Section 9-309(1). Under Section 9-311(b), compliance with a certificate-of-title
statute is "equivalent to the filing of a financing statement under this article." Thus, this section applies to a
certificate of title unless the section is superseded by a certificate-of-title statute that contains a specific rule
addressing a secured party's duty to cause a notation of a security interest to be removed from a certificate of title.
In the context of a certificate of title, however, the secured party could comply with this section by causing the
removal itself or providing the debtor with documentation sufficient to enable the debtor to effect the removal.
Subsections (a) and (b) apply to a financing statement covering consumer goods. Subsection (c) applies to other
financing statements. Subsection (a) and (c) each makes explicit what was implicit under former Article 9: If the
debtor did not authorize the filing of a financing statement in the first place, the secured party of record should file or
send a termination statement. The liability imposed upon a secured party that fails to comply with subsection (a) or
(c) is identical to that imposed for the filing of an unauthorized financing statement or amendment. See Section 9-
625(e).
3. "Bogus" Filings. A secured party's duty to send a termination statement arises when the secured party
"receives" an authenticated demand from the debtor. In the case of an unauthorized financing statement, the
person named as debtor in the financing statement may have no relationship with the named secured party and no
reason to know the secured party's address. Inasmuch as the address in the financing statement is "held out by [the
person named as secured party in the financing statement] as the place for receipt of such communications [i.e.,
communications relating to security interests]," the putative secured party is deemed to have "received" a
notification delivered to that address. See Section 1-202(e). If a termination statement is not forthcoming, the
person named as debtor itself may authorize the filing of a termination statement, which will be effective if it
indicates that the person authorized it to be filed. See Sections 9-509(d)(2), 9-510(c).
4. Buyers of Receivables. Applied literally, former Section 9-404(1) would have required many buyers of
receivables to file a termination statement immediately upon filing a financing statement because "there is no
outstanding secured obligation and no commitment to make advances, incur obligations, or otherwise give value."
Subsections (c)(1) and (2) remedy this problem. While the security interest of a buyer of accounts or chattel paper
(B-1) is perfected, the debtor is not deemed to retain an interest in the sold receivables and thus could transfer no
interest in them to another buyer (B-2) or to a lien creditor (LC). However, for purposes of determining the rights of
the debtor's creditors and certain purchasers of accounts or chattel paper from the debtor, while B-1's security
interest is unperfected, the debtor-seller is deemed to have rights in the sold receivables, and a competing security
interest or judicial lien may attach to those rights. See Sections 9-318, 9-109, Comment 5. Suppose that B-1's
security interest in certain accounts and chattel paper is perfected by filing, but the effectiveness of the financing
statement lapses. Both before and after lapse, B-1 collects some of the receivables. After lapse, LC acquires a lien
on the accounts and chattel paper. B-1's unperfected security interest in the accounts and chattel paper is
subordinate to LC's rights. See Section 9-317(a)(2). But collections on accounts and chattel paper are not
"accounts" or "chattel paper." Even if B-1's security interest in the accounts and chattel paper is or becomes
unperfected, neither the debtor nor LC acquires rights to the collections that B-1 collects (and owns) before LC
acquires a lien.
5. Effect of Filing. Subsection (d) states the effect of filing a termination statement: the related financing
statement ceases to be effective. If one of several secured parties of record files a termination statement,
subsection (d) applies only with respect to the rights of the person who authorized the filing of the termination
§ 9-513. TERMINATION STATEMENT
Page 3 of 3
statement. See Section 9-510(b). The financing statement remains effective with respect to the rights of the others.
However, even if a financing statement is terminated (and thus no longer is effective) with respect to all secured
parties of record, the financing statement, including the termination statement, will remain of record until at least
one year after it lapses with respect to all secured parties of record. See Section 9-519(g).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-514
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-514. ASSIGNMENT OF POWERS OF SECURED PARTY OF RECORD
(a) [Assignment reflected on initial financing statement.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection
(c), an initial financing statement may reflect an assignment of all of the secured party's power to authorize
an amendment to the financing statement by providing the name and mailing address of the assignee as
the name and address of the secured party.
(b) [Assignment of filed financing statement.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), a
secured party of record may assign of record all or part of its power to authorize an amendment to a
financing statement by filing in the filing office an amendment of the financing statement which:
(1) identifies, by its file number, the initial financing statement to which it relates;
(2) provides the name of the assignor; and
(3) provides the name and mailing address of the assignee.
(c) [Assignment of record of mortgage.] An assignment of record of a security interest in a fixture
covered by a record of a mortgage which is effective as a financing statement filed as a fixture filing under
Section 9-502(c) may be made only by an assignment of record of the mortgage in the manner provided by
law of this State other than [the Uniform Commercial Code].
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-405.
2. Assignments. This section provides a permissive device whereby a secured party of record may effectuate an
assignment of its power to affect a financing statement. It may also be useful for a secured party who has assigned
all or part of its security interest or agricultural lien and wishes to have the fact noted of record, so that inquiries
concerning the transaction would be addressed to the assignee. See Section 9-502, Comment 2. Upon the filing of
an assignment, the assignee becomes the "secured party of record" and may authorize the filing of a continuation
statement, termination statement, or other amendment. Note that under Section 9-310(c) no filing of an assignment
is required as a condition of continuing the perfected status of the security interest against creditors and transferees
of the original debtor. However, if an assignment is not filed, the assignor remains the secured party of record, with
the power (even if not the right) to authorize the filing of effective amendments. See Sections 9-511(c), 9-509(d).
Where a record of a mortgage is effective as a financing statement filed as a fixture filing (Section 9-502(c)), then
an assignment of record of the security interest may be made only in the manner in which an assignment of record
of the mortgage may be made under local real-property law.
3. Comparison to Prior Law. Most of the changes reflected in this section are for clarification or to embrace
medium-neutral drafting. As a general matter, this section preserves the opportunity given by former Section 9-405
§ 9-514. ASSIGNMENT OF POWERS OF SECURED PARTY OF RECORD
Page 2 of 2
to assign a security interest of record in one of two different ways. Under subsection (a), a secured party may
assign all of its power to affect a financing statement by naming an assignee in the initial financing statement. The
secured party of record may accomplish the same result under subsection (b) by making a subsequent filing.
Subsection (b) also may be used for an assignment of only some of the secured party of record's power to affect a
financing statement, e.g., the power to affect the financing statement as it relates to particular items of collateral or
as it relates to an undivided interest in a security interest in all the collateral. An initial financing statement may not
be used to change the secured party of record under these circumstances. However, an amendment adding the
assignee as a secured party of record may be used.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-515
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-515. DURATION AND EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT;
EFFECT OF LAPSED FINANCING STATEMENT
(a) [Five-year effectiveness.] Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b), (e), (f), and (g), a filed
financing statement is effective for a period of five years after the date of filing.
(b) [Public-finance or manufactured-home transaction.] Except as otherwise provided in subsections
(e), (f), and (g), an initial financing statement filed in connection with a public-finance transaction or
manufactured-home transaction is effective for a period of 30 years after the date of filing if it indicates that
it is filed in connection with a public-finance transaction or manufactured-home transaction.
(c) [Lapse and continuation of financing statement.] The effectiveness of a filed financing statement
lapses on the expiration of the period of its effectiveness unless before the lapse a continuation statement
is filed pursuant to subsection (d). Upon lapse, a financing statement ceases to be effective and any
security interest or agricultural lien that was perfected by the financing statement becomes unperfected,
unless the security interest is perfected otherwise. If the security interest or agricultural lien becomes
unperfected upon lapse, it is deemed never to have been perfected as against a purchaser of the collateral
for value.
(d) [When continuation statement may be filed.] A continuation statement may be filed only within six
months before the expiration of the five-year period specified in subsection (a) or the 30-year period
specified in subsection (b), whichever is applicable.
(e) [Effect of filing continuation statement.] Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-510, upon timely
filing of a continuation statement, the effectiveness of the initial financing statement continues for a period
of five years commencing on the day on which the financing statement would have become ineffective in
the absence of the filing. Upon the expiration of the five-year period, the financing statement lapses in the
same manner as provided in subsection (c), unless, before the lapse, another continuation statement is
filed pursuant to subsection (d). Succeeding continuation statements may be filed in the same manner to
continue the effectiveness of the initial financing statement.
(f) [Transmitting utility financing statement.] If a debtor is a transmitting utility and a filed initial financing
statement so indicates, the financing statement is effective until a termination statement is filed.
(g) [Record of mortgage as financing statement.] A record of a mortgage that is effective as a financing
statement filed as a fixture filing under Section 9-502(c) remains effective as a financing statement filed as
a fixture filing until the mortgage is released or satisfied of record or its effectiveness otherwise terminates
as to the real property.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
§ 9-515. DURATION AND EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT; EFFECT OF LAPSED
FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 2 of 2
1. Source. Former Section 9-403(2), (3), (6).
2. Period of Financing Statement's Effectiveness. Subsection (a) states the general rule: a financing statement
is effective for a five-year period unless its effectiveness is continued under this section or terminated under Section
9-513. Subsection (b) provides that if the financing statement relates to a public-finance transaction or a
manufactured-home transaction and so indicates, the financing statement is effective for 30 years. These financings
typically extend well beyond the standard, five-year period. Under subsection (f), a financing statement filed against
a transmitting utility remains effective indefinitely, until a termination statement is filed. Likewise, under subsection
(g), a mortgage effective as a fixture filing remains effective until its effectiveness terminates under real-property
law.
3. Lapse. When the period of effectiveness under subsection (a) or (b) expires, the effectiveness of the financing
statement lapses. The last sentence of subsection (c) addresses the effect of lapse. The deemed retroactive
unperfection applies only with respect to purchasers for value; unlike former Section 9-403(2), it does not apply with
respect to lien creditors.
Example 1: SP-1 and SP-2 both hold security interests in the same collateral. Both security interests are
perfected by filing. SP-1 filed first and has priority under Section 9-322(a)(1). The effectiveness of SP-1's filing
lapses. As long as SP-2's security interest remains perfected thereafter, SP-2 is entitled to priority over SP-1's
security interest, which is deemed never to have been perfected as against a purchaser for value (SP-2). See
Section 9-322(a)(2).
Example 2: SP holds a security interest perfected by filing. On July 1, LC acquires a judicial lien on the collateral.
Two weeks later, the effectiveness of the financing statement lapses. Although the security interest becomes
unperfected upon lapse, it was perfected when LC acquired its lien. Accordingly, notwithstanding the lapse, the
perfected security interest has priority over the rights of LC, who is not a purchaser. See Section 9-317(a)(2).
4. Effect of Debtor's Bankruptcy. Under former Section 9-403(2), lapse was tolled if the debtor entered
bankruptcy or another insolvency proceeding. Nevertheless, being unaware that insolvency proceedings had been
commenced, filing offices routinely removed records from the files as if lapse had not been tolled. Subsection (c)
deletes the former tolling provision and thereby imposes a new burden on the secured party: to be sure that a
financing statement does not lapse during the debtor's bankruptcy. The secured party can prevent lapse by filing a
continuation statement, even without first obtaining relief from the automatic stay. See Bankruptcy Code Section
362(b)(3). Of course, if the debtor enters bankruptcy before lapse, the provisions of this Article with respect to lapse
would be of no effect to the extent that federal bankruptcy law dictates a contrary result (e.g., to the extent that the
Bankruptcy Code determines rights as of the date of the filing of the bankruptcy petition).
5. Continuation Statements. Subsection (d) explains when a continuation statement may be filed. A continuation
statement filed at a time other than that prescribed by subsection (d) is ineffective, see Section 9-510(c), and the
filing office may not accept it. See Sections 9-520(a), 9-516(b). Subsection (e) specifies the effect of a continuation
statement and provides for successive continuation statements.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-516
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-516. WHAT CONSTITUTES FILING; EFFECTIVENESS OF FILING
(a) [What constitutes filing.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), communication of a record
to a filing office and tender of the filing fee or acceptance of the record by the filing office constitutes filing.
(b) [Refusal to accept record; filing does not occur.] Filing does not occur with respect to a record that
a filing office refuses to accept because:
(1) the record is not communicated by a method or medium of communication authorized by the filing
office;
(2) an amount equal to or greater than the applicable filing fee is not tendered;
(3) the filing office is unable to index the record because:
(A) in the case of an initial financing statement, the record does not provide a name for the debtor;
(B) in the case of an amendment or information statement, the record:
(i) does not identify the initial financing statement as required by Section 9-512 or 9-518, as
applicable; or
(ii) identifies an initial financing statement whose effectiveness has lapsed under Section 9-
515;
(C) in the case of an initial financing statement that provides the name of a debtor identified as an
individual or an amendment that provides a name of a debtor identified as an individual which was
not previously provided in the financing statement to which the record relates, the record does not
identify the debtor's surname; or
(D) in the case of a record filed [or recorded] in the filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(1),
the record does not provide a sufficient description of the real property to which it relates;
(4) in the case of an initial financing statement or an amendment that adds a secured party of record,
the record does not provide a name and mailing address for the secured party of record;
(5) in the case of an initial financing statement or an amendment that provides a name of a debtor
which was not previously provided in the financing statement to which the amendment relates, the
record does not:
(A) provide a mailing address for the debtor;
(B) indicate whether the name provided as the name of the debtor is the name of an individual or
an organization;
(6) in the case of an assignment reflected in an initial financing statement under Section 9-514(a) or an
amendment filed under Section 9-514(b), the record does not provide a name and mailing address for
the assignee; or
(7) in the case of a continuation statement, the record is not filed within the six-month period
prescribed by Section 9-515(d).
(c) [Rules applicable to subsection (b).] For purposes of subsection (b):
§ 9-516. WHAT CONSTITUTES FILING; EFFECTIVENESS OF FILING
Page 2 of 3
(1) a record does not provide information if the filing office is unable to read or decipher the
information; and
(2) a record that does not indicate that it is an amendment or identify an initial financing statement to
which it relates, as required by Section 9-512, 9-514, or 9-518, is an initial financing statement.
(d) [Refusal to accept record; record effective as filed record.] A record that is communicated to the
filing office with tender of the filing fee, but which the filing office refuses to accept for a reason other than
one set forth in subsection (b), is effective as a filed record except as against a purchaser of the collateral
which gives value in reasonable reliance upon the absence of the record from the files.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Subsection (a): former Section 9-403(1); the remainder is new.
2. What Constitutes Filing. Subsection (a) deals generically with what constitutes filing of a record, including an
initial financing statement and amendments of all kinds (e.g., assignments, termination statements, and
continuation statements). It follows former Section 9-403(1), under which either acceptance of a record by the filing
office or presentation of the record and tender of the filing fee constitutes filing.
3. Effectiveness of Rejected Record. Subsection (b) provides an exclusive list of grounds upon which the filing
office may reject a record. See Section 9-520(a). Although some of these grounds would also be grounds for
rendering a filed record ineffective (e.g., an initial financing statement does not provide a name for the debtor),
many others would not be (e.g., an initial financing statement does not provide a mailing address for the debtor or
secured party of record). Neither this section nor Section 9-520 requires or authorizes the filing office to determine,
or even consider, the accuracy of information provided in a record.
A financing statement or other record that is communicated to the filing office but which the filing office refuses to
accept provides no public notice, regardless of the reason for the rejection. However, this section distinguishes
between records that the filing office rightfully rejects and those that it wrongfully rejects. A filer is able to prevent a
rightful rejection by complying with the requirements of subsection (b). No purpose is served by giving effect to
records that justifiably never find their way into the system, and subsection (b) so provides.
Subsection (d) deals with the filing office's unjustified refusal to accept a record. Here, the filer is in no position to
prevent the rejection and as a general matter should not be prejudiced by it. Although wrongfully rejected records
generally are effective, subsection (d) contains a special rule to protect a third-party purchaser of the collateral (e.g.,
a buyer or competing secured party) who gives value in reliance upon the apparent absence of the record from the
files. As against a person who searches the public record and reasonably relies on what the public record shows,
subsection (d) imposes upon the filer the risk that a record failed to make its way into the filing system because of
the filing office's wrongful rejection of it. (Compare Section 9-517, under which a mis-indexed financing statement is
fully effective.) This risk is likely to be small, particularly when a record is presented electronically, and the filer can
guard against this risk by conducting a post-filing search of the records. Moreover, Section 9-520(b) requires the
filing office to give prompt notice of its refusal to accept a record for filing.
4. Method or Medium of Communication. Rejection pursuant to subsection (b)(1) for failure to communicate a
record properly should be understood to mean noncompliance with procedures relating to security, authentication,
or other communication-related requirements that the filing office may impose. Subsection (b)(1) does not authorize
a filing office to impose additional substantive requirements. See Section 9-520, Comment 2.
§ 9-516. WHAT CONSTITUTES FILING; EFFECTIVENESS OF FILING
Page 3 of 3
5. Address for Secured Party of Record. Under subsection (b)(4) and Section 9-520(a), the lack of a mailing
address for the secured party of record requires the filing office to reject an initial financing statement. The failure to
include an address for the secured party of record no longer renders a financing statement ineffective. See Section
9-502(a). The function of the address is not to identify the secured party of record but rather to provide an address
to which others can send required notifications, e.g., of a purchase-money security interest in inventory or of the
disposition of collateral. Inasmuch as the address shown on a filed financing statement is an "address that is
reasonable under the circumstances," a person required to send a notification to the secured party may satisfy the
requirement by sending a notification to that address, even if the address is or becomes incorrect. See Section 9-
102 (definition of "send"). Similarly, because the address is "held out by [the secured party] as the place for receipt
of such communications [i.e., communications relating to security interests]," the secured party is deemed to have
received a notification delivered to that address. See Section 1-202(e).
6. Uncertainty Concerning Individual Debtor's Surname. Subsection (b)(3)(C) requires the filing office to reject
an initial financing statement or amendment adding an individual debtor if the office cannot index the record
because it does not identify the debtor's surname (e.g., it is unclear whether the debtor's surname is Elton or John).
7. Inability of Filing Office to Read or Decipher Information. Under subsection (c)(1), if the filing office cannot
read or decipher information, the information is not provided by a record for purposes of subsection (b).
8. Classification of Records. For purposes of subsection (b), a record that does not indicate it is an amendment
or identify an initial financing statement to which it relates is deemed to be an initial financing statement. See
subsection (c)(2).
9. Effectiveness of Rejectable But Unrejected Record. Section 9-520(a) requires the filing office to refuse to
accept an initial financing statement for a reason set forth in subsection (b). However, if the filing office accepts
such a financing statement nevertheless, the financing statement generally is effective if it complies with the
requirements of Section 9-502(a) and (b). See Section 9-520(c). Similarly, an otherwise effective financing
statement generally remains so even though the information in the financing statement becomes incorrect. See
Section 9-507(b). (Note that if the information required by subsection (b)(5) is incorrect when the financing
statement is filed, Section 9-338 applies.)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-517
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-517. EFFECT OF INDEXING ERRORS
The failure of the filing office to index a record correctly does not affect the effectiveness of the filed record.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Effectiveness of Mis-Indexed Records. This section provides that the filing office's error in mis-indexing a
record does not render ineffective an otherwise effective record. As did former Section 9-401, this section imposes
the risk of filing-office error on those who search the files rather than on those who file.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-518
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 1. FILING OFFICE; CONTENTS AND
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
§ 9-518. CLAIM CONCERNING INACCURATE OR WRONGFULLY FILED
RECORD
(a) [Statement with respect to record indexed under person's name.] A person may file in the filing
office an information statement with respect to a record indexed there under the person's name if the
person believes that the record is inaccurate or was wrongfully filed.
[Alternative A]
(b) [Contents of statement under subsection (a).] An information statement under subsection (a) must:
(1) identify the record to which it relates by the file number assigned to the initial financing statement to
which the record relates;
(2) indicate that it is an information statement; and
(3) provide the basis for the person's belief that the record is inaccurate and indicate the manner in
which the person believes the record should be amended to cure any inaccuracy or provide the basis
for the person's belief that the record was wrongfully filed.
[Alternative B]
(b) [Contents of statement under subsection (a).] An information statement under subsection (a) must:
(1) identify the record to which it relates by:
(A) the file number assigned to the initial financing statement to which the record relates; and
(B) if the information statement relates to a record filed [or recorded] in a filing office described in
Section 9-501(a)(1), the date [and time] that the initial financing statement was filed [or recorded]
and the information specified in Section 9-502(b);
(2) indicate that it is an information statement; and
(3) provide the basis for the person's belief that the record is inaccurate and indicate the manner in
which the person believes the record should be amended to cure any inaccuracy or provide the basis
for the person's belief that the record was wrongfully filed.
[End of Alternatives]
(c) [Statement by secured party of record.] A person may file in the filing office an information statement
with respect to a record filed there if the person is a secured party of record with respect to the financing
statement to which the record relates and believes that the person that filed the record was not entitled to
do so under Section 9-509(d).
[Alternative A]
(d) [Contents of statement under subsection (c).] An information statement under subsection (c) must:
(1) identify the record to which it relates by the file number assigned to the initial financing statement to
which the record relates;
(2) indicate that it is an information statement; and
§ 9-518. CLAIM CONCERNING INACCURATE OR WRONGFULLY FILED RECORD
Page 2 of 3
(3) provide the basis for the person's belief that the person that filed the record was not entitled to do
so under Section 9-509(d).
[Alternative B]
(d) [Contents of statement under subsection (c).] An information statement under subsection (c) must:
(1) identify the record to which it relates by:
(A) the file number assigned to the initial financing statement to which the record relates; and
(B) if the information statement relates to a record filed [or recorded] in a filing office described in
Section 9-501(a)(1), the date [and time] that the initial financing statement was filed [or recorded]
and the information specified in Section 9-502(b);
(2) indicate that it is an information statement; and
(3) provide the basis for the person's belief that the person that filed the record was not entitled to do
so under Section 9-509(d).
[End of Alternatives]
(e) [Record not affected by information statement.] The filing of an information statement does not
affect the effectiveness of an initial financing statement or other filed record.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: States whose real-estate filing offices require additional information in amendments and cannot
search their records by both the name of the debtor and the file number should enact Alternative B to Sections 9-
512(a), 9-518(b), 9-518(d), 9-519(f) and 9-522(a).
1. Source. New
2. Information Statements. Former Article 9 did not afford a nonjudicial means for a debtor to indicate that a
financing statement or other record that was inaccurate or wrongfully filed. Subsection (a) affords the debtor the
right to file an information statement. Among other requirements, the correction statement must provide the basis
for the debtor's belief that the public record should be corrected. See subsection (b). These provisions, which
resemble the analogous remedy in the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1681i, afford an aggrieved person the
opportunity to state its position on the public record. They do not permit an aggrieved person to change the legal
effect of the public record. Thus, although a filed information statement becomes part of the "financing statement,"
as defined in Section 9-102, the filing does not affect the effectiveness of the initial financing statement or any other
filed record. See subsection (e).
Sometimes a person files a termination statement or other record relating to a filed financing statement without
being entitled to do so. A secured party of record with respect to the financing statement who believes that such a
record has been filed may, but need not, file an information statement indicating that the person that filed the record
was not entitled to do so. See subsection (c). An information statement has no legal effect. Its sole purpose is to
provide some limited public notice that the efficacy of a filed record is disputed. If the person that filed the record
was not entitled to do so, the filed record is ineffective, regardless of whether the secured party of record files an
information statement. Likewise, if the person that filed the record was entitled to do so, the filed record is effective,
even if the secured party of record files an information statement. See Section 9-510(a), 9-518(e). Because an
information statement filed under subsection (c) has no legal effect, a secured party of record--even one who is
aware of the unauthorized filing of a record?has no duty to file one. Just as searchers bear the burden of
§ 9-518. CLAIM CONCERNING INACCURATE OR WRONGFULLY FILED RECORD
Page 3 of 3
determining whether the filing of initial financing statement was authorized, searchers bear the burden of
determining whether the filing of every subsequent record was authorized.
Inasmuch as the filing of an information statement has no legal effect, this section does not provide a mechanism
by which a secured party can correct an error that it discovers in its own financing statement.
This section does not displace other provisions of this Article that impose liability for making unauthorized filings
or failing to file or send a termination statement (see Section 9-625(e)), nor does it displace any available judicial
remedies.
3. Resort to Other Law. This Article cannot provide a satisfactory or complete solution to problems caused by
misuse of the public records. The problem of "bogus" filings is not limited to the UCC filing system but extends to
the real-property records, as well. A summary judicial procedure for correcting the public record and criminal
penalties for those who misuse the filing and recording systems are likely to be more effective and put less strain on
the filing system than provisions authorizing or requiring action by filing and recording offices.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-519
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE
§ 9-519. NUMBERING, MAINTAINING, AND INDEXING RECORDS;
COMMUNICATING INFORMATION PROVIDED IN RECORDS
(a) [Filing office duties.] For each record filed in a filing office, the filing office shall:
(1) assign a unique number to the filed record;
(2) create a record that bears the number assigned to the filed record and the date and time of filing;
(3) maintain the filed record for public inspection; and
(4) index the filed record in accordance with subsections (c), (d), and (e).
(b) [File number.] A file number [assigned after January 1, 2002,] must include a digit that:
(1) is mathematically derived from or related to the other digits of the file number; and
(2) aids the filing office in determining whether a number communicated as the file number includes a
single-digit or transpositional error.
(c) [Indexing: general.] Except as otherwise provided in subsections (d) and (e), the filing office shall:
(1) index an initial financing statement according to the name of the debtor and index all filed records
relating to the initial financing statement in a manner that associates with one another an initial
financing statement and all filed records relating to the initial financing statement; and
(2) index a record that provides a name of a debtor which was not previously provided in the financing
statement to which the record relates also according to the name that was not previously provided.
(d) [Indexing: real-property-related financing statement.] If a financing statement is filed as a fixture
filing or covers as-extracted collateral or timber to be cut, [it must be filed for record and] the filing office
shall index it:
(1) under the names of the debtor and of each owner of record shown on the financing statement as if
they were the mortgagors under a mortgage of the real property described; and
(2) to the extent that the law of this State provides for indexing of records of mortgages under the
name of the mortgagee, under the name of the secured party as if the secured party were the
mortgagee thereunder, or, if indexing is by description, as if the financing statement were a record of a
mortgage of the real property described.
(e) [Indexing: real-property-related assignment.] If a financing statement is filed as a fixture filing or
covers as-extracted collateral or timber to be cut, the filing office shall index an assignment filed under
Section 9-514(a) or an amendment filed under Section 9-514(b):
(1) under the name of the assignor as grantor; and
(2) to the extent that the law of this State provides for indexing a record of the assignment of a
mortgage under the name of the assignee, under the name of the assignee.
[Alternative A]
(f) [Retrieval and association capability.] The filing office shall maintain a capability:
§ 9-519. NUMBERING, MAINTAINING, AND INDEXING RECORDS; COMMUNICATING INFORMATION
PROVIDED IN RECORDS
Page 2 of 3
(1) to retrieve a record by the name of the debtor and by the file number assigned to the initial
financing statement to which the record relates; and
(2) to associate and retrieve with one another an initial financing statement and each filed record
relating to the initial financing statement.
[Alternative B]
(f) [Retrieval and association capability.] The filing office shall maintain a capability:
(1) to retrieve a record by the name of the debtor and:
(A) if the filing office is described in Section 9-501(a)(1), by the file number assigned to the initial
financing statement to which the record relates and the date [and time] that the record was filed [or
recorded]; or
(B) if the filing office is described in Section 9-501(a)(2), by the file number assigned to the initial
financing statement to which the record relates; and
(2) to associate and retrieve with one another an initial financing statement and each filed record
relating to the initial financing statement.
[End of Alternatives]
(g) [Removal of debtor's name.] The filing office may not remove a debtor's name from the index until
one year after the effectiveness of a financing statement naming the debtor lapses under Section 9-515
with respect to all secured parties of record.
(h) [Timeliness of filing office performance.] The filing office shall perform the acts required by
subsections (a) through (e) at the time and in the manner prescribed by filing-office rule, but not later than
two business days after the filing office receives the record in question.
[(i) [Inapplicability to real-property-related filing office.] Subsection[s] [(b)] [and] [(h)] do[es] not apply to
a filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(1).]
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Notes:
1. States whose filing offices currently assign file numbers that include a verification number, commonly known as
a "check digit," or can implement this requirement before the effective date of this Article should omit the bracketed
language in subsection (b).
2. In States in which writings will not appear in the real property records and indices unless actually recorded the
bracketed language in subsection (d) should be used.
3. States whose real-estate filing offices require additional information in amendments and cannot search their
records by both the name of the debtor and the file number should enact Alternative B to Sections 9-512(a), 9-
518(b), 9-518(d), 9-519(f) and 9-522(a).
4. A State that elects not to require real-estate filing offices to comply with either or both of subsections (b) and (h)
may adopt an applicable variation of subsection (i) and add "Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i)," to the
appropriate subsection or subsections.
§ 9-519. NUMBERING, MAINTAINING, AND INDEXING RECORDS; COMMUNICATING INFORMATION
PROVIDED IN RECORDS
Page 3 of 3
1. Source. Former Sections 9-403(4), (7), 9-405(2).
2. Filing Office's Duties. Subsections (a) through (e) set forth the duties of the filing office with respect to filed
records. Subsection (h), which is new, imposes a minimum standard of performance for those duties. Prompt
indexing is crucial to the effectiveness of any filing system. An accepted but un-indexed record affords no public
notice. Subsection (f) requires the filing office to maintain appropriate storage and retrieval facilities, and subsection
(g) contains minimum requirements for the retention of records.
3. File Number. Subsection (a)(1) requires the filing office to assign a unique number to each filed record. That
number is the "file number" only if the record is an initial financing statement. See Section 9-102.
4. Time of Filing. Subsection (a)(2) and Section 9-523 refer to the "date and time" of filing. The statutory text
does not contain any instructions to a filing office as to how the time of filing is to be determined. The method of
determining or assigning a time of filing is an appropriate matter for filing-office rules to address.
5. Related Records. Subsections (c) and (f) are designed to ensure that an initial financing statement and all filed
records relating to it are associated with one another, indexed under the name of the debtor, and retrieved together.
To comply with subsection (f), a filing office (other than a real-property recording office in a State that enacts
subsection (f), Alternative B) must be capable of retrieving records in each of two ways: by the name of the debtor
and by the file number of the initial financing statement to which the record relates.
6. Prohibition on Deleting Names from Index. This Article contemplates that the filing office will not delete the
name of a debtor from the index until at least one year passes after the effectiveness of the financing statement
lapses as to all secured parties of record. See subsection (g). This rule applies even if the filing office accepts an
amendment purporting to delete or modify the name of a debtor or terminate the effectiveness of the financing
statement. If an amendment provides a modified name for a debtor, the amended name should be added to the
index, see subsection (c)(2), but the pre-amendment name should remain in the index.
Compared to former Article 9, the rule in subsection (g) increases the amount of information available to those
who search the public records. The rule also contemplates that searchers--not the filing office--will determine the
significance and effectiveness of filed records.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-520
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE
§ 9-520. ACCEPTANCE AND REFUSAL TO ACCEPT RECORD
(a) [Mandatory refusal to accept record.] A filing office shall refuse to accept a record for filing for a
reason set forth in Section 9-516(b) and may refuse to accept a record for filing only for a reason set forth in
Section 9-516(b).
(b) [Communication concerning refusal.] If a filing office refuses to accept a record for filing, it shall
communicate to the person that presented the record the fact of and reason for the refusal and the date
and time the record would have been filed had the filing office accepted it. The communication must be
made at the time and in the manner prescribed by filing-office rule but [, in the case of a filing office
described in Section 9-501(a)(2),] in no event more than two business days after the filing office receives
the record.
(c) [When filed financing statement effective.] A filed financing statement satisfying Section 9-502(a)
and (b) is effective, even if the filing office is required to refuse to accept it for filing under subsection (a).
However, Section 9-338 applies to a filed financing statement providing information described in Section 9-
516(b)(5) which is incorrect at the time the financing statement is filed.
(d) [Separate application to multiple debtors.] If a record communicated to a filing office provides
information that relates to more than one debtor, this part applies as to each debtor separately.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: A State that elects not to require real-property filing offices to comply with subsection (b) should
include the bracketed language.
1. Source. New.
2. Refusal to Accept Record for Filing. In some States, filing offices considered themselves obligated by former
Article 9 to review the form and content of a financing statement and to refuse to accept those that they determine
are legally insufficient. Some filing offices imposed requirements for or conditions to filing that do not appear in the
statute. Under this section, the filing office is not expected to make legal judgments and is not permitted to impose
additional conditions or requirements.
Subsection (a) both prescribes and limits the bases upon which the filing office must and may reject records by
reference to the reasons set forth in Section 9-516(b). For the most part, the bases for rejection are limited to those
that prevent the filing office from dealing with a record that it receives--because some of the requisite information
(e.g., the debtor's name) is missing or cannot be deciphered, because the record is not communicated by a method
(e.g., it is MIME- rather than UU-encoded) or medium (e.g., it is written rather than electronic) that the filing office
accepts, or because the filer fails to tender an amount equal to or greater than the filing fee.
§ 9-520. ACCEPTANCE AND REFUSAL TO ACCEPT RECORD
Page 2 of 2
3. Consequences of Accepting Rejectable Record. Section 9-516(b) includes among the reasons for rejecting
an initial financing statement the failure to give certain information that is not required as a condition of
effectiveness. In conjunction with Section 9-516(b)(5), this section requires the filing office to refuse to accept a
financing statement that is legally sufficient to perfect a security interest under Section 9-502 but does not contain a
mailing address for the debtor or disclose whether the debtor is an individual or an organization. The information
required by Section 9-516(b)(5) assists searchers in weeding out "false positives," i.e., records that a search
reveals but which do not pertain to the debtor in question. It assists filers by helping to ensure that the debtor's
name is correct and that the financing statement is filed in the proper jurisdiction.
If the filing office accepts a financing statement that does not give this information at all, the filing is fully effective.
Section 9-520(c). The financing statement also generally is effective if the information is given but is incorrect;
however, Section 9-338 affords protection to buyers and holders of perfected security interests who give value in
reasonable reliance upon the incorrect information.
4. Filing Office's Duties with Respect to Rejected Record. Subsection (b) requires the filing office to
communicate the fact of rejection and the reason therefor within a fixed period of time. Inasmuch as a rightfully
rejected record is ineffective and a wrongfully rejected record is not fully effective, prompt communication
concerning any rejection is important.
5. Partial Effectiveness of Record. Under subsection (d), the provisions of this Part apply to each debtor
separately. Thus, a filing office may reject an initial financing statement or other record as to one named debtor but
accept it as to the other.
Example: An initial financing statement is communicated to the filing office. The financing statement names two
debtors, John Smith and Jane Smith. It contains all of the information described in Section 9-516(b)(5) with respect
to John but lacks some of the information with respect to Jane. The filing office must accept the financing statement
with respect to John, reject it with respect to Jane, and notify the filer of the rejection.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-521
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE
§ 9-521. UNIFORM FORM OF WRITTEN FINANCING STATEMENT AND
AMENDMENT
(a) [Initial financing statement form.] A filing office that accepts written records may not refuse to accept
a written initial financing statement in the following form and format except for a reason set forth in Section
9-516(b):
UCC FINANCING STATEMENT
FOLLOW INSTRUCTIONS (front and back) CAREFULLY
A. NAME & PHONE OF CONTACT AT FILER [optional]
B. E-MAIL CONTACT AT FILER (optional)
C. SEND ACKNOWLEDGMENT TO: (Name and Address)
[ ]
THE ABOVE SPACE IS FOR FILING OFFICE USE ONLY
1. DEBTOR'S NAME - insert only one debtor name (1a or 1b) (use exact, full name; do not omit,
modify, or abbreviate any word in the Debtor's name)
1a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
1b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S) THAT ARE PART OF THE NAME OF THIS DEBTOR
SUFFIX
1c. MAILING ADDRESS CITY
STATE
POSTAL CODE
COUNTRY
2. DEBTOR'S NAME - insert only one debtor name (2a or 2b) (use exact, full name; do not omit,
modify, or abbreviate any word in the Debtor's name)
2a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
2b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S) THAT ARE PART OF THE NAME OF THIS DEBTOR
SUFFIX
2c. MAILING ADDRESS CITY
STATE
POSTAL CODE
COUNTRY
3. SECURED PARTY'S NAME (or NAME of ASSIGNEE of ASSIGNOR SECURED PARTY) -
provide only one Secured Party name (3a or 3b)
§ 9-521. UNIFORM FORM OF WRITTEN FINANCING STATEMENT AND AMENDMENT
Page 2 of 6
3a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
3b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S)
SUFFIX
3c. MAILING ADDRESS CITY
STATE
POSTAL CODE
COUNTRY
4. COLLATERAL: This financing statement covers the following collateral:
5. Check only if applicable and check only one box:
Collateral is
[] held in a Trust (see Instructions)
[] being administered by a Decedent's Personal Representative.
6a. Check only if applicable and check only one box:
[] Public-Finance Transaction
[] Manufactured-Home Transaction
[] A Debtor is a Transmitting Utility
6b. Check only if applicable and check only one box:
[] Agricultural Lien
[] Non-UCC Filing
7. ALTERNATIVE DESIGNATION (if applicable):
[] Lessee/Lessor
[] Consignee/Consignor
[] Seller/Buyer
[] Bailee/Bailor
[] Licensee/Licensor
8. OPTIONAL FILER REFERENCE DATA [UCC FINANCING STATEMENT (Form UCC1)]
UCC FINANCING STATEMENT ADDENDUM
FOLLOW INSTRUCTIONS
9. NAME OF FIRST DEBTOR (same as item 1a or 1b on Financing Statement)
9a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
9b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S)
SUFFIX
THE ABOVE SPACE IS FOR FILING OFFICE USE ONLY
10. ADDITIONAL DEBTOR'S NAME - provide only one Debtor name (10a or 10b) (use exact, full
name; do not omit, modify, or abbreviate any word in the Debtor's name)
10a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
10b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S) THAT ARE PART OF THE NAME OF THIS DEBTOR
§ 9-521. UNIFORM FORM OF WRITTEN FINANCING STATEMENT AND AMENDMENT
Page 3 of 6
SUFFIX
10c. MAILING ADDRESS CITY
STATE
POSTAL CODE
COUNTRY
11. [] ADDITIONAL SECURED PARTY'S NAME or [] ASSIGNOR SECURED PARTY'S NAME -
provide only one name (11a or 11b)
11a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
11b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S)
SUFFIX
11c. MAILING ADDRESS CITY
STATE
POSTAL CODE
COUNTRY
12. [] ADDITIONAL SPACE FOR ITEM 4 (Collateral)
13. [] This FINANCING STATEMENT is to be filed [for record] (or recorded) in the REAL ESTATE
RECORDS (if applicable)
14. This FINANCING STATEMENT:
[] covers timber to be cut
[] covers as-extracted collateral
[] is filed as a fixture filing
15. Name and address of a RECORD OWNER of real estate described in item 16 (if Debtor does
not have a record interest):
16. Description of real estate:
17. MISCELLANEOUS: [UCC FINANCING STATEMENT ADDENDUM (Form UCC1Ad)]
(b) [Amendment form.] A filing office that accepts written records may not refuse to accept a written
record in the following form and format except for a reason set forth in Section 9-516(b):
UCC FINANCING STATEMENT AMENDMENT
FOLLOW INSTRUCTIONS
A. NAME & PHONE OF CONTACT AT FILER [optional]
B, E-MAIL CONTACT AT FILER (optional)
C. SEND ACKNOWLEDGMENT TO: (Name and Address)
[ ]
THE ABOVE SPACE IS FOR FILING OFFICE USE ONLY
1a. INITIAL FINANCING STATEMENT FILE NUMBER
1b. [] This FINANCING STATEMENT AMENDMENT is to be filed [for record] (or recorded) in the
REAL ESTATE RECORDS.
Filer: attach Amendment Addendum (Form UCC3Ad) and provide Debtor's name in item 13.
§ 9-521. UNIFORM FORM OF WRITTEN FINANCING STATEMENT AND AMENDMENT
Page 4 of 6
2. [] TERMINATION: Effectiveness of the Financing Statement identified above is terminated with
respect to security interest(s) of Secured Party authorizing this Termination Statement.
3. [] ASSIGNMENT (full or partial): Provide name of Assignee in item 7a or 7b, and address of
Assignee in item 7c and name of Assignor in item 9. For partial assignment, complete items 7 and
9 and also indicate affected collateral in item 8
4. [] CONTINUATION: Effectiveness of the Financing Statement identified above with respect to
the security interest(s) of Secured Party authorizing this Continuation Statement is continued for
the additional period provided by applicable law
5. [] PARTY INFORMATION CHANGE:
Check one of these two boxes:
This Change affects [] Debtor or [] Secured Party of record.
AND
Check one of these three boxes to:
[] CHANGE name and/or address: Complete item 6a or 6b, and item 7a or 7b and item 7c.
[] ADD name: Complete item 7a or 7b, and item 7c.
[] DELETE name: Give record name to be deleted in item 6a or 6b.
6. CURRENT RECORD INFORMATION: Complete for Party Information Change - provide only
one name (6a or 6b) (use exact, full name; do not omit, modify, or abbreviate any word in the
Debtor's name)
6a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
6b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S)
SUFFIX
7. CHANGED OR ADDED INFORMATION: Complete for Assignment or Party Information
Change - provide only one name (7a or 7b) (use exact full name; do not omit, modify, or abbreviate
any word in the Debtor's name)
7a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
7b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S) THAT ARE PART OF THE NAME OF THIS DEBTOR
SUFFIX
7c. MAILING ADDRESS CITY
STATE
POSTAL CODE
COUNTRY
8. [] COLLATERAL CHANGE:
Also check one of these four boxes:
[] ADD collateral
[] DELETE collateral
[] RESTATE covered collateral
[] ASSIGN collateral
Indicate collateral:
§ 9-521. UNIFORM FORM OF WRITTEN FINANCING STATEMENT AND AMENDMENT
Page 5 of 6
9. NAME OF SECURED PARTY OF RECORD AUTHORIZING THIS AMENDMENT - provide only
one name (9a or 9b) (name of Assignor, if this is an Assignment)
If this is an Amendment authorized by a DEBTOR, check here [] and provide name of authorizing
Debtor
9a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
9b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S)
SUFFIX
10. OPTIONAL FILER REFERENCE DATA [UCC FINANCING STATEMENT AMENDMENT
(Form UCC3)]
UCC FINANCING STATEMENT AMENDMENT ADDENDUM
FOLLOW INSTRUCTIONS
11. INITIAL FINANCING STATEMENT FILE NUMBER (same as item 1a on Amendment form)
12. NAME OF PARTY AUTHORIZING THIS AMENDMENT (same as item 9 on Amendment form)
12a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
12b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S)
SUFFIX
13. Name of DEBTOR on related financing statement (Name of a current Debtor of record required
for indexing purposes only in some filing offices - see Instruction for item 13 - insert only one
Debtor name (13a or 13b) (use exact, full name; do not omit, modify, or abbreviate any word in the
Debtor's name)
13a. ORGANIZATION'S NAME OR
13b. INDIVIDUAL'S SURNAME FIRST PERSONAL NAME
ADDITIONAL NAME(S)/INITIAL(S)
SUFFIX
14. ADDITIONAL SPACE FOR ITEM 8 (Collateral)
15. This FINANCING STATEMENT AMENDMENT:
[] covers timber to be cut
[] covers as-extracted collateral
[] is filed as a fixture filing
16. Name and address of a RECORD OWNER of real estate described in item 17 (if Debtor does
not have a record interest):
17.Description of real estate
18. MISCELLANEOUS: [UCC FINANCING STATEMENT AMENDMENT ADDENDUM (Form
UCC3Ad)]
Annotations
Commentary
§ 9-521. UNIFORM FORM OF WRITTEN FINANCING STATEMENT AND AMENDMENT
Page 6 of 6
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. "Safe Harbor" Written Forms. Although Section 9-520 limits the bases upon which the filing office can refuse
to accept records, this section provides sample written forms that must be accepted in every filing office in the
country, as long as the filing office's rules permit it to accept written communications. By completing one of the
forms in this section, a secured party can be certain that the filing office is obligated to accept it.
The forms in this section are based upon national financing statement forms that were in use under former Article
9. Those forms were developed over an extended period and reflect the comments and suggestions of filing
officers, secured parties and their counsel, and service companies. The formatting of those forms and of the ones in
this section has been designed to reduce error by both filers and filing offices.
A filing office that accepts written communications may not reject, on grounds of form or format, a filing using
these forms. Although filers are not required to use the forms, they are encouraged and can be expected to do so,
inasmuch as the forms are well designed and avoid the risk of rejection on the basis of form or format. As their use
expands, the forms will rapidly become familiar to both filers and filing-office personnel. Filing offices may and
should encourage the use of these forms by declaring them to be the "standard" (but not exclusive) forms for each
jurisdiction, albeit without in any way suggesting that alternative forms are unacceptable.
The multi-purpose form in subsection (b) covers changes with respect to the debtor, the secured party, the
collateral, and the status of the financing statement (termination and continuation). A single form may be used for
several different types of amendments at once (e.g., both to change a debtor's name and continue the effectiveness
of the financing statement).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-522
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE
§ 9-522. MAINTENANCE AND DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS
[Alternative A]
(a) [Post-lapse maintenance and retrieval of information.] The filing office shall maintain a record
of the information provided in a filed financing statement for at least one year after the effectiveness of
the financing statement has lapsed under Section 9-515 with respect to all secured parties of record.
The record must be retrievable by using the name of the debtor and by using the file number assigned
to the initial financing statement to which the record relates.
[Alternative B]
(a) [Post-lapse maintenance and retrieval of information.] The filing office shall maintain a record
of the information provided in a filed financing statement for at least one year after the effectiveness of
the financing statement has lapsed under Section 9-515 with respect to all secured parties of record.
The record must be retrievable by using the name of the debtor and:
(1) if the record was filed [or recorded] in the filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(1), by using
the file number assigned to the initial financing statement to which the record relates and the date
[and time] that the record was filed [or recorded]; or
(2) if the record was filed in the filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(2), by using the file
number assigned to the initial financing statement to which the record relates.
[End of Alternatives]
(b) [Destruction of written records.] Except to the extent that a statute governing disposition of
public records provides otherwise, the filing office immediately may destroy any written record
evidencing a financing statement. However, if the filing office destroys a written record, it shall maintain
another record of the financing statement which complies with subsection (a).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: States whose real-estate filing offices require additional information in amendments and cannot
search their records by both the name of the debtor and the file number should enact Alternative B to Sections 9-
512(a), 9-518(b), 9-518(d), 9-519(f) and 9-522(a).
1. Source. Former Section 9-403(3), revised substantially.
2. Maintenance of Records. Section 9-523 requires the filing office to provide information concerning certain
lapsed financing statements. Accordingly, subsection (a) requires the filing office to maintain a record of the
information in a financing statement for at least one year after lapse. During that time, the filing office may not
delete any information with respect to a filed financing statement; it may only add information. This approach
relieves the filing office from any duty to determine whether to substitute or delete information upon receipt of an
§ 9-522. MAINTENANCE AND DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS
Page 2 of 2
amendment. It also assures searchers that they will receive all information with respect to financing statements filed
against a debtor and thereby be able themselves to determine the state of the public record.
The filing office may maintain this information in any medium. Subsection (b) permits the filing office immediately
to destroy written records evidencing a financing statement, provided that the filing office maintains another record
of the information contained in the financing statement as required by subsection (a).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-523
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE
§ 9-523. INFORMATION FROM FILING OFFICE; SALE OR LICENSE OF
RECORDS
(a) [Acknowledgment of filing written record.] If a person that files a written record requests an
acknowledgment of the filing, the filing office shall send to the person an image of the record showing the
number assigned to the record pursuant to Section 9-519(a)(1) and the date and time of the filing of the
record. However, if the person furnishes a copy of the record to the filing office, the filing office may instead:
(1) note upon the copy the number assigned to the record pursuant to Section 9-519(a)(1) and the
date and time of the filing of the record; and
(2) send the copy to the person.
(b) [Acknowledgment of filing other record.] If a person files a record other than a written record, the
filing office shall communicate to the person an acknowledgment that provides:
(1) the information in the record;
(2) the number assigned to the record pursuant to Section 9-519(a)(1); and
(3) the date and time of the filing of the record.
(c) [Communication of requested information.] The filing office shall communicate or otherwise make
available in a record the following information to any person that requests it:
(1) whether there is on file on a date and time specified by the filing office, but not a date earlier than
three business days before the filing office receives the request, any financing statement that:
(A) designates a particular debtor [or, if the request so states, designates a particular debtor at the
address specified in the request];
(B) has not lapsed under Section 9-515 with respect to all secured parties of record; and
(C) if the request so states, has lapsed under Section 9-515 and a record of which is maintained
by the filing office under Section 9-522(a);
(2) the date and time of filing of each financing statement; and
(3) the information provided in each financing statement.
(d) [Medium for communicating information.] In complying with its duty under subsection (c), the filing
office may communicate information in any medium. However, if requested, the filing office shall
communicate information by issuing [its written certificate] [a record that can be admitted into evidence in
the courts of this State without extrinsic evidence of its authenticity].
(e) [Timeliness of filing office performance.] The filing office shall perform the acts required by
subsections (a) through (d) at the time and in the manner prescribed by filing-office rule, but not later than
two business days after the filing office receives the request.
(f) [Public availability of records.] At least weekly, the [insert appropriate official or governmental
agency] [filing office] shall offer to sell or license to the public on a nonexclusive basis, in bulk, copies of all
records filed in it under this part, in every medium from time to time available to the filing office.
§ 9-523. INFORMATION FROM FILING OFFICE; SALE OR LICENSE OF RECORDS
Page 2 of 3
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Notes:
1. States whose filing office does not offer the additional service of responding to search requests limited to a
particular address should omit the bracketed language in subsection (c)(1)(A).
2. A State that elects not to require real-estate filing offices to comply with either or both of subsections (e) and (f)
should specify in the appropriate subsection(s) only the filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(2).
1. Source. Former Section 9-407; subsections (d) and (e) are new.
2. Filing Office's Duty to Provide Information. Former Section 9-407, dealing with obtaining information from
the filing office, was bracketed to suggest to legislatures that its enactment was optional. Experience has shown
that the method by which interested persons can obtain information concerning the public records should be
uniform. Accordingly, the analogous provisions of this Article are not in brackets.
Most of the other changes from former Section 9-407 are for clarification, to embrace medium-neutral drafting, or
to impose standards of performance on the filing office.
3. Acknowledgments of Filing. Subsections (a) and (b) require the filing office to acknowledge the filing of a
record. Under subsection (a), the filing office is required to acknowledge the filing of a written record only upon
request of the filer. Subsection (b) requires the filing office to acknowledge the filing of a non-written record even in
the absence of a request from the filer.
4. Response to Search Request. Subsection (c)(3) requires the filing office to provide "the information contained
in each financing statement" to a person who requests it. This requirement can be satisfied by providing copies,
images, or reports. The requirement does not in any manner inhibit the filing office from also offering to provide less
than all of the information (presumably for a lower fee) to a person who asks for less. Thus, subsection (c)
accommodates the practice of providing only the type of record (e.g., initial financing statement, continuation
statement), number assigned to the record, date and time of filing, and names and addresses of the debtor and
secured party when a requesting person asks for no more (i.e., when the person does not ask for copies of
financing statements). In contrast, the filing office's obligation under subsection (b) to provide an acknowledgment
containing "the information contained in the record" is not defined by a customer's request. Thus unless the filer
stipulates otherwise, to comply with subsection (b) the filing office's acknowledgment must contain all of the
information in a record.
Subsection (c) assures that a minimum amount of information about filed records will be available to the public. It
does not preclude a filing office from offering additional services.
5. Lapsed and Terminated Financing Statements. This section reflects the policy that terminated financing
statements will remain part of the filing office's data base. The filing office may remove from the data base only
lapsed financing statements, and then only when at least a year has passed after lapse. See Section 9-519(g).
Subsection (c)(1)(C) requires a filing office to conduct a search and report as to lapsed financing statements that
have not been removed from the data base, when requested.
6. Search by Debtor's Address. Subsection (c)(1)(A) contemplates that, by making a single request, a searcher
will receive the results of a search of the entire public record maintained by any given filing office. Addition of the
bracketed language in subsection (c)(1)(A) would permit a search report limited to financing statements showing a
§ 9-523. INFORMATION FROM FILING OFFICE; SALE OR LICENSE OF RECORDS
Page 3 of 3
particular address for the debtor, but only if the search request is so limited. With or without the bracketed
language, this subsection does not permit the filing office to compel a searcher to limit a request by address.
7. Medium of Communication; Certificates. Former Article 9 provided that the filing office respond to a request
for information by providing a certificate. The principle of medium-neutrality would suggest that the statute not
require a written certificate. Subsection (d) follows this principle by permitting the filing office to respond by
communicating "in any medium." By permitting communication "in any medium," subsection (d) is not inconsistent
with a system in which persons other than filing office staff conduct searches of the filing office's (computer)
records.
Some searchers find it necessary to introduce the results of their search into evidence. Because official written
certificates might be introduced into evidence more easily than official communications in another medium,
subsection (d) affords States the option of requiring the filing office to issue written certificates upon request. The
alternative bracketed language in subsection (d) recognizes that some States may prefer to permit the filing office to
respond in another medium, as long as the response can be admitted into evidence in the courts of that State
without extrinsic evidence of its authenticity.
8. Performance Standard. The utility of the filing system depends on the ability of searchers to get current
information quickly. Accordingly, subsection (e) requires that the filing office respond to a request for information no
later than two business days after it receives the request. The information contained in the response must be
current as of a date no earlier than three business days before the filing office receives the request. See subsection
(c)(1). The failure of the filing office to comply with performance standards, such as subsection (e), has no effect on
the private rights of persons affected by the filing of records.
9. Sales of Records in Bulk. Subsection (f), which is new, mandates that the appropriate official or the filing
office sell or license the filing records to the public in bulk, on a nonexclusive basis, in every medium available to
the filing office. The details of implementation are left to filing-office rules.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-524
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE
§ 9-524. DELAY BY FILING OFFICE
Delay by the filing office beyond a time limit prescribed by this part is excused if:
(1) the delay is caused by interruption of communication or computer facilities, war, emergency
conditions, failure of equipment, or other circumstances beyond control of the filing office; and
(2) the filing office exercises reasonable diligence under the circumstances.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Source. New; derived from Section 4-109.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-525
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE
§ 9-525. FEES
(a) [Initial financing statement or other record: general rule.] Except as otherwise provided in
subsection (e), the fee for filing and indexing a record under this part, other than an initial financing
statement of the kind described in subsection (b), is [the amount specified in subsection (c), if applicable,
plus]:
(1) $ ___[X]___ if the record is communicated in writing and consists of one or two pages;
(2) $ ___[2X]___ if the record is communicated in writing and consists of more than two pages; and
(3) $ ___[1/2X]___ if the record is communicated by another medium authorized by filing-office rule.
(b) [Initial financing statement: public-finance and manufactured-housing transactions.] Except as
otherwise provided in subsection (e), the fee for filing and indexing an initial financing statement of the
following kind is [the amount specified in subsection (c), if applicable, plus]:
(1) $ ___ if the financing statement indicates that it is filed in connection with a public-finance transaction;
(2) $ ___ if the financing statement indicates that it is filed in connection with a manufactured-home
transaction.
[Alternative A]
(c) [Number of names.] The number of names required to be indexed does not affect the amount of the
fee in subsections (a) and (b).
[Alternative B]
(c) [Number of names.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e), if a record is communicated in
writing, the fee for each name more than two required to be indexed is $ ___.
[End of Alternatives]
(d) [Response to information request.] The fee for responding to a request for information from the filing
office, including for [issuing a certificate showing] [communicating] whether there is on file any financing
statement naming a particular debtor, is:
(1) $ ___ if the request is communicated in writing; and
(2) $ ___ if the request is communicated by another medium authorized by filing-office rule.
(e) [Record of mortgage.] This section does not require a fee with respect to a record of a mortgage
which is effective as a financing statement filed as a fixture filing or as a financing statement covering asextracted
collateral or timber to be cut under Section 9-502(c). However, the recording and satisfaction fees
that otherwise would be applicable to the record of the mortgage apply.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
§ 9-525. FEES
Page 2 of 2
Legislative Notes:
1. To preserve uniformity, a State that places the provisions of this section together with statutes setting fees for
other services should do so without modification.
2. A State should enact subsection (c), Alternative A, and omit the bracketed language in subsections (a) and (b)
unless its indexing system entails a substantial additional cost when indexing additional names.
1. Source. Various sections of former Part 4.
2. Fees. This section contains all fee requirements for filing, indexing, and responding to requests for information.
Uniformity in the fee structure (but not necessarily in the amount of fees) makes this Article easier for secured
parties to use and reduces the likelihood that a filed record will be rejected for failure to pay at least the correct
amount of the fee. See Section 9-516(b)(2).
The costs of processing electronic records are less than those with respect to written records. Accordingly, this
section mandates a lower fee as an incentive to file electronically and imposes the additional charge (if any) for
multiple debtors only with respect to written records. When written records are used, this Article encourages the use
of the uniform forms in Section 9-521. The fee for filing these forms should be no greater than the fee for other
written records.
To make the relevant information included in a filed record more accessible once the record is found, this section
mandates a higher fee for longer written records than for shorter ones. Finally, recognizing that financing
statements naming more than one debtor are most often filed against a husband and wife, any additional charge for
multiple debtors applies to records filed with respect to more than two debtors, rather than with respect to more than
one.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-526
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE
§ 9-526. FILING-OFFICE RULES
(a) [Adoption of filing-office rules.] The [insert appropriate governmental official or agency] shall adopt
and publish rules to implement this article. The filing-office rules must be[:
(1)] consistent with this article[; and
(2) adopted and published in accordance with the [insert any applicable state administrative
procedure act]].
(b) [Harmonization of rules.] To keep the filing-office rules and practices of the filing office in harmony
with the rules and practices of filing offices in other jurisdictions that enact substantially this part, and to
keep the technology used by the filing office compatible with the technology used by filing offices in other
jurisdictions that enact substantially this part, the [insert appropriate governmental official or agency], so far
as is consistent with the purposes, policies, and provisions of this article, in adopting, amending, and
repealing filing-office rules, shall:
(1) consult with filing offices in other jurisdictions that enact substantially this part; and
(2) consult the most recent version of the Model Rules promulgated by the International Association of
Corporate Administrators or any successor organization; and
(3) take into consideration the rules and practices of, and the technology used by, filing offices in other
jurisdictions that enact substantially this part.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New; subsection (b) derives in part from the Uniform Consumer Credit Code (1974).
2. Rules Required. Operating a filing office is a complicated business, requiring many more rules and procedures
than this Article can usefully provide. Subsection (a) requires the adoption of rules to carry out the provisions of
Article 9. The filing-office rules must be consistent with the provisions of the statute and adopted in accordance with
local procedures. The publication requirement informs secured parties about filing-office practices, aids secured
parties in evaluating filing-related risks and costs, and promotes regularity of application within the filing office.
3. Importance of Uniformity. In today's national economy, uniformity of the policies and practices of the filing
offices will reduce the costs of secured transactions substantially. The International Association of Corporate
Administrators (IACA), referred to in subsection (b), is an organization whose membership includes filing officers
from every State. These individuals are responsible for the proper functioning of the Article 9 filing system and have
worked diligently to develop model filing-office rules, with a view toward efficiency and uniformity.
Although uniformity is an important desideratum, subsection (a) affords considerable flexibility in the adoption of
filing-office rules. Each State may adopt a version of subsection (a) that reflects the desired relationship between
the statewide filing office described in Section 9-501(a)(2) and the local filing offices described in Section 9-
§ 9-526. FILING-OFFICE RULES
Page 2 of 2
501(a)(1) and that takes into account the practices of its filing offices. Subsection (a) need not designate a single
official or agency to adopt rules applicable to all filing offices, and the rules applicable to the statewide filing office
need not be identical to those applicable to the local filing office. For example, subsection (a) might provide for the
statewide filing office to adopt filing-office rules, and, if not prohibited by other law, the filing office might adopt one
set of rules for itself and another for local offices. Or, subsection (a) might designate one official or agency to adopt
rules for the statewide filing office and another to adopt rules for local filing offices.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-527
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 5. FILING > SUBPART 2. DUTIES AND OPERATION OF FILING OFFICE
§ 9-527. DUTY TO REPORT
The [insert appropriate governmental official or agency] shall report [annually on or before ___] to the
[Governor and Legislature] on the operation of the filing office. The report must contain a statement of the
extent to which:
(1) the filing-office rules are not in harmony with the rules of filing offices in other jurisdictions that
enact substantially this part and the reasons for these variations; and
(2) the filing-office rules are not in harmony with the most recent version of the Model Rules
promulgated by the International Association of Corporate Administrators, or any successor
organization, and the reasons for these variations.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New; derived in part from the Uniform Consumer Credit Code (1974).
2. Duty to Report. This section is designed to promote compliance with the standards of performance imposed
upon the filing office and with the requirement that the filing office's policies, practices, and technology be consistent
and compatible with the policies, practices, and technology of other filing offices.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-601
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-601. RIGHTS AFTER DEFAULT; JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT; CONSIGNOR
OR BUYER OF ACCOUNTS, CHATTEL PAPER, PAYMENT INTANGIBLES, OR
PROMISSORY NOTES
(a) [Rights of secured party after default.] After default, a secured party has the rights provided in this
part and, except as otherwise provided in Section 9-602, those provided by agreement of the parties. A
secured party:
(1) may reduce a claim to judgment, foreclose, or otherwise enforce the claim, security interest, or
agricultural lien by any available judicial procedure; and
(2) if the collateral is documents, may proceed either as to the documents or as to the goods they
cover.
(b) [Rights and duties of secured party in possession or control.] A secured party in possession of
collateral or control of collateral under Section 7-106, 9-104, 9-105, 9-106, or 9-107 has the rights and
duties provided in Section 9-207.
(c) [Rights cumulative; simultaneous exercise.] The rights under subsections (a) and (b) are cumulative
and may be exercised simultaneously.
(d) [Rights of debtor and obligor.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (g) and Section 9-605,
after default, a debtor and an obligor have the rights provided in this part and by agreement of the parties.
(e) [Lien of levy after judgment.] If a secured party has reduced its claim to judgment, the lien of any levy
that may be made upon the collateral by virtue of an execution based upon the judgment relates back to the
earliest of:
(1) the date of perfection of the security interest or agricultural lien in the collateral;
(2) the date of filing a financing statement covering the collateral; or
(3) any date specified in a statute under which the agricultural lien was created.
(f) [Execution sale.] A sale pursuant to an execution is a foreclosure of the security interest or agricultural
lien by judicial procedure within the meaning of this section. A secured party may purchase at the sale and
thereafter hold the collateral free of any other requirements of this article.
(g) [Consignor or buyer of certain rights to payment.] Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-
607(c), this part imposes no duties upon a secured party that is a consignor or is a buyer of accounts,
chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
§ 9-601. RIGHTS AFTER DEFAULT; JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT; CONSIGNOR OR BUYER OF ACCOUNTS,
CHATTEL PAPER, PAYMENT INTANGIBLES, OR PROMISSORY NOTES
Page 2 of 3
1. Source. Former Section 9-501(1), (2), (5).
2. Enforcement: In General. The rights of a secured party to enforce its security interest in collateral after the
debtor's default are an important feature of a secured transaction. (Note that the term "rights," as defined in Section
1-201, includes "remedies.") This Part provides those rights as well as certain limitations on their exercise for the
protection of the defaulting debtor, other creditors, and other affected persons. However, subsections (a) and (d)
make clear that the rights provided in this Part do not exclude other rights provided by agreement.
3. When Remedies Arise. Under subsection (a) the secured party's rights arise "after default." As did former
Section 9-501, this Article leaves to the agreement of the parties the circumstances giving rise to a default. This
Article does not determine whether a secured party's post-default conduct can constitute a waiver of default in the
face of an agreement stating that such conduct shall not constitute a waiver. Rather, it continues to leave to the
parties' agreement, as supplemented by law other than this Article, the determination whether a default has
occurred or has been waived. See Section 1-103.
4. Possession of Collateral; Section 9-207. After a secured party takes possession of collateral following a
default, there is no longer any distinction between a security interest that before default was nonpossessory and a
security interest that was possessory before default, as under a common-law pledge. This Part generally does not
distinguish between the rights of a secured party with a nonpossessory security interest and those of a secured
party with a possessory security interest. However, Section 9-207 addresses rights and duties with respect to
collateral in a secured party's possession. Under subsection (b) of this section, Section 9-207 applies not only to
possession before default but also to possession after default. Subsection (b) also has been conformed to Section
9-207, which, unlike former Section 9-207, applies to secured parties having control of collateral.
5. Cumulative Remedies. Former Section 9-501(1) provided that the secured party's remedies were cumulative,
but it did not explicitly provide whether the remedies could be exercised simultaneously. Subsection (c) permits the
simultaneous exercise of remedies if the secured party acts in good faith. The liability scheme of Subpart 2 affords
redress to an aggrieved debtor or obligor. Moreover, permitting the simultaneous exercise of remedies under
subsection (c) does not override any non-UCC law, including the law of tort and statutes regulating collection of
debts, under which the simultaneous exercise of remedies in a particular case constitutes abusive behavior or
harassment giving rise to liability.
6. Judicial Enforcement. Under subsection (a) a secured party may reduce its claim to judgment or foreclose its
interest by any available procedure outside this Article under applicable law. Subsection (e) generally follows former
Section 9-501(5). It makes clear that any judicial lien that the secured party may acquire against the collateral
effectively is a continuation of the original security interest (if perfected) and not the acquisition of a new interest or
a transfer of property on account of a preexisting obligation. Under former Section 9-501(5), the judicial lien was
stated to relate back to the date of perfection of the security interest. Subsection (e), however, provides that the lien
relates back to the earlier of the date of filing or the date of perfection. This provides a secured party who enforces
a security interest by judicial process with the benefit of the "first-to-file-or-perfect" priority rule of Section 9-
322(a)(1).
7. Agricultural Liens. Part 6 provides parallel treatment for the enforcement of agricultural liens and security
interests. Because agricultural liens are statutory rather than consensual, this Article does draw a few distinctions
between these liens and security interests. Under subsection (e), the statute creating an agricultural lien would
govern whether and the date to which an execution lien relates back. Section 9-606 explains when a "default"
occurs in the agricultural lien context.
8. Execution Sales. Subsection (f) also follows former Section 9-501(5). It makes clear that an execution sale is
an appropriate method of foreclosure contemplated by this Part. However, the sale is governed by other law and
not by this Article, and the limitations under Section 9-610 on the right of a secured party to purchase collateral do
not apply.
§ 9-601. RIGHTS AFTER DEFAULT; JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT; CONSIGNOR OR BUYER OF ACCOUNTS,
CHATTEL PAPER, PAYMENT INTANGIBLES, OR PROMISSORY NOTES
Page 3 of 3
9. Sales of Receivables; Consignments. Subsection (g) provides that, except as provided in Section 9-607(c),
the duties imposed on secured parties do not apply to buyers of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or
promissory notes. Although denominated "secured parties," these buyers own the entire interest in the property sold
and so may enforce their rights without regard to the seller ("debtor") or the seller's creditors. Likewise, a true
consignor may enforce its ownership interest under other law without regard to the duties that this Part imposes on
secured parties. Note, however, that Section 9-615 governs cases in which a consignee's secured party (other than
a consignor) is enforcing a security interest that is senior to the security interest (i.e., ownership interest) of a true
consignor.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-602
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-602. WAIVER AND VARIANCE OF RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-624, to the extent that they give rights to a debtor or obligor and
impose duties on a secured party, the debtor or obligor may not waive or vary the rules stated in the
following listed sections:
(1) Section 9-207(b)(4)(C), which deals with use and operation of the collateral by the secured party;
(2) Section 9-210, which deals with requests for an accounting and requests concerning a list of
collateral and statement of account;
(3) Section 9-607(c), which deals with collection and enforcement of collateral;
(4) Sections 9-608(a) and 9-615(c) to the extent that they deal with application or payment of noncash
proceeds of collection, enforcement, or disposition;
(5) Sections 9-608(a) and 9-615(d) to the extent that they require accounting for or payment of surplus
proceeds of collateral;
(6) Section 9-609 to the extent that it imposes upon a secured party that takes possession of collateral
without judicial process the duty to do so without breach of the peace;
(7) Sections 9-610(b), 9-611, 9-613, and 9-614, which deal with disposition of collateral;
(8) Section 9-615(f), which deals with calculation of a deficiency or surplus when a disposition is made
to the secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor;
(9) Section 9-616, which deals with explanation of the calculation of a surplus or deficiency;
(10) Sections 9-620, 9-621, and 9-622, which deal with acceptance of collateral in satisfaction of
obligation;
(11) Section 9-623, which deals with redemption of collateral;
(12) Section 9-624, which deals with permissible waivers; and
(13) Sections 9-625 and 9-626, which deal with the secured party's liability for failure to comply with
this article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-501(3).
2. Waiver: In General. Section 1-102(3) addresses which provisions of the UCC are mandatory and which may
be varied by agreement. With exceptions relating to good faith, diligence, reasonableness, and care, immediate
parties, as between themselves, may vary its provisions by agreement. However, in the context of rights and duties
§ 9-602. WAIVER AND VARIANCE OF RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Page 2 of 2
after default, our legal system traditionally has looked with suspicion on agreements that limit the debtor's rights and
free the secured party of its duties. As stated in former Section 9-501, Comment 4, "no mortgage clause has ever
been allowed to clog the equity of redemption." The context of default offers great opportunity for overreaching. The
suspicious attitudes of the courts have been grounded in common sense. This section, like former Section 9-501(3),
codifies this long-standing and deeply rooted attitude. The specified rights of the debtor and duties of the secured
party may not be waived or varied except as stated. Provisions that are not specified in this section are subject to
the general rules in Section 1-102(3).
3. Nonwaivable Rights and Duties. This section revises former Section 9-501(3) by restricting the ability to
waive or modify additional specified rights and duties: (i) duties under Section 9-207(b)(4)(C), which deals with the
use and operation of consumer goods, (ii) the right to a response to a request for an accounting, concerning a list of
collateral, or concerning a statement of account (Section 9-210), (iii) the duty to collect collateral in a commercially
reasonable manner (Section 9-607), (iv) the implicit duty to refrain from a breach of the peace in taking possession
of collateral under Section 9-609, (v) the duty to apply noncash proceeds of collection or disposition in a
commercially reasonable manner (Sections 9-608 and 9-615), (vi) the right to a special method of calculating a
surplus or deficiency in certain dispositions to a secured party, a person related to secured party, or a secondary
obligor (Section 9-615), (vii) the duty to give an explanation of the calculation of a surplus or deficiency (Section 9-
616), (viii) the right to limitations on the effectiveness of certain waivers (Section 9-624), and (ix) the right to hold a
secured party liable for failure to comply with this Article (Sections 9-625 and 9-626). For clarity and consistency,
this Article uses the term "waive or vary" instead of "renounc[e] or modify[]," which appeared in former Section 9-
504(3).
This section provides generally that the specified rights and duties "may not be waived or varied." However, it
does not restrict the ability of parties to agree to settle, compromise, or renounce claims for past conduct that may
have constituted a violation or breach of those rights and duties, even if the settlement involves an express
"waiver."
Section 9-610(c) limits the circumstances under which a secured party may purchase at its own private
disposition. Transactions of this kind are equivalent to "strict foreclosures" and are governed by Sections 9-620, 9-
621, and 9-622. The provisions of these sections can be waived only to the extent provided in Section 9-624(b).
See Section 9-602.
4. Waiver by Debtors and Obligors. The restrictions on waiver contained in this section apply to obligors as well
as debtors. This resolves a question under former Article 9 as to whether secondary obligors, assuming that they
were "debtors" for purposes of former Part 5, were permitted to waive, under the law of suretyship, rights and duties
under that Part.
5. Certain Post-Default Waivers. Section 9-624 permits post-default waivers in limited circumstances. These
waivers must be made in agreements that are authenticated. Under Section 1-201, an "'agreement' means the
bargain of the parties in fact." In considering waivers under Section 9-624 and analogous agreements in other
contexts, courts should carefully scrutinize putative agreements that appear in records that also address many
additional or unrelated matters.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-603
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-603. AGREEMENT ON STANDARDS CONCERNING RIGHTS AND DUTIES
(a) [Agreed standards.] The parties may determine by agreement the standards measuring the fulfillment
of the rights of a debtor or obligor and the duties of a secured party under a rule stated in Section 9-602 if
the standards are not manifestly unreasonable.
(b) [Agreed standards inapplicable to breach of peace.] Subsection (a) does not apply to the duty
under Section 9-609 to refrain from breaching the peace.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-501(3).
2. Limitation on Ability to Set Standards. Subsection (a), like former Section 9-501(3), permits the parties to set
standards for compliance with the rights and duties under this Part if the standards are not "manifestly
unreasonable." Under subsection (b), the parties are not permitted to set standards measuring fulfillment of the
secured party's duty to take collateral without breaching the peace.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-604
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-604. PROCEDURE IF SECURITY AGREEMENT COVERS REAL
PROPERTY OR FIXTURES
(a) [Enforcement: personal and real property.] If a security agreement covers both personal and real
property, a secured party may proceed:
(1) under this part as to the personal property without prejudicing any rights with respect to the real
property; or
(2) as to both the personal property and the real property in accordance with the rights with respect to
the real property, in which case the other provisions of this part do not apply.
(b) [Enforcement: fixtures.] Subject to subsection (c), if a security agreement covers goods that are or
become fixtures, a secured party may proceed:
(1) under this part; or
(2) in accordance with the rights with respect to real property, in which case the other provisions of this
part do not apply.
(c) [Removal of fixtures.] Subject to the other provisions of this part, if a secured party holding a security
interest in fixtures has priority over all owners and encumbrancers of the real property, the secured party,
after default, may remove the collateral from the real property.
(d) [Injury caused by removal.] A secured party that removes collateral shall promptly reimburse any
encumbrancer or owner of the real property, other than the debtor, for the cost of repair of any physical
injury caused by the removal. The secured party need not reimburse the encumbrancer or owner for any
diminution in value of the real property caused by the absence of the goods removed or by any necessity of
replacing them. A person entitled to reimbursement may refuse permission to remove until the secured
party gives adequate assurance for the performance of the obligation to reimburse.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Sections 9-501(4), 9-313(8).
2. Real-Property-Related Collateral. The collateral in many transactions consists of both real and personal
property. In the interest of simplicity, speed, and economy, subsection (a), like former Section 9-501(4), permits (but
does not require) the secured party to proceed as to both real and personal property in accordance with its rights
and remedies with respect to the real property. Subsection (a) also makes clear that a secured party who exercises
rights under Part 6 with respect to personal property does not prejudice any rights under real-property law.
This Article does not address certain other real-property-related problems. In a number of States, the exercise of
remedies by a creditor who is secured by both real property and non-real property collateral is governed by special
§ 9-604. PROCEDURE IF SECURITY AGREEMENT COVERS REAL PROPERTY OR FIXTURES
Page 2 of 2
legal rules. For example, under some anti-deficiency laws, creditors risk loss of rights against personal property
collateral if they err in enforcing their rights against the real property. Under a "one-form-of-action" rule (or rule
against splitting a cause of action), a creditor who judicially enforces a real property mortgage and does not
proceed in the same action to enforce a security interest in personalty may (among other consequences) lose the
right to proceed against the personalty. Although statutes of this kind create impediments to enforcement of security
interests, this Article does not override these limitations under other law.
3. Fixtures. Subsection (b) is new. It makes clear that a security interest in fixtures may be enforced either under
real-property law or under any of the applicable provisions of Part 6, including sale or other disposition either before
or after removal of the fixtures (see subsection (c)). Subsection (b) also serves to overrule cases holding that a
secured party's only remedy after default is the removal of the fixtures from the real property. See, e.g., Maplewood
Bank & Trust v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 625 A.2d 537 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1993).
Subsection (c) generally follows former Section 9-313(8). It gives the secured party the right to remove fixtures
under certain circumstances. A secured party whose security interest in fixtures has priority over owners and
encumbrancers of the real property may remove the collateral from the real property. However, subsection (d)
requires the secured party to reimburse any owner (other than the debtor) or encumbrancer for the cost of repairing
any physical injury caused by the removal. This right to reimbursement is implemented by the last sentence of
subsection (d), which gives the owner or encumbrancer a right to security or indemnity as a condition for giving
permission to remove.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-605
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-605. UNKNOWN DEBTOR OR SECONDARY OBLIGOR
A secured party does not owe a duty based on its status as secured party:
(1) to a person that is a debtor or obligor, unless the secured party knows:
(A) that the person is a debtor or obligor;
(B) the identity of the person; and
(C) how to communicate with the person; or
(2) to a secured party or lienholder that has filed a financing statement against a person, unless the
secured party knows:
(A) that the person is a debtor; and
(B) the identity of the person.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Duties to Unknown Persons. This section relieves a secured party from duties owed to a debtor or obligor, if
the secured party does not know about the debtor or obligor. Similarly, it relieves a secured party from duties owed
to a secured party or lienholder who has filed a financing statement against the debtor, if the secured party does not
know about the debtor. For example, a secured party may be unaware that the original debtor has sold the
collateral subject to the security interest and that the new owner has become the debtor. If so, the secured party
owes no duty to the new owner (debtor) or to a secured party who has filed a financing statement against the new
owner. This section should be read in conjunction with the exculpatory provisions in Section 9-628. Note that it
relieves a secured party not only from duties arising under this Article but also from duties arising under other law
by virtue of the secured party's status as such under this Article, unless the other law otherwise provides.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-606
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-606. TIME OF DEFAULT FOR AGRICULTURAL LIEN
For purposes of this part, a default occurs in connection with an agricultural lien at the time the secured party
becomes entitled to enforce the lien in accordance with the statute under which it was created.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Time of Default. Remedies under this Part become available upon the debtor's "default." See Section 9-601.
This section explains when "default" occurs in the agricultural-lien context. It requires one to consult the enabling
statute to determine when the lienholder is entitled to enforce the lien.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-607
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-607. COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT BY SECURED PARTY
(a) [Collection and enforcement generally.] If so agreed, and in any event after default, a secured party:
(1) may notify an account debtor or other person obligated on collateral to make payment or otherwise
render performance to or for the benefit of the secured party;
(2) may take any proceeds to which the secured party is entitled under Section 9-315;
(3) may enforce the obligations of an account debtor or other person obligated on collateral and
exercise the rights of the debtor with respect to the obligation of the account debtor or other person
obligated on collateral to make payment or otherwise render performance to the debtor, and with
respect to any property that secures the obligations of the account debtor or other person obligated on
the collateral;
(4) if it holds a security interest in a deposit account perfected by control under Section 9-104(a)(1),
may apply the balance of the deposit account to the obligation secured by the deposit account; and
(5) if it holds a security interest in a deposit account perfected by control under Section 9-104(a)(2) or
(3), may instruct the bank to pay the balance of the deposit account to or for the benefit of the secured
party.
(b) [Nonjudicial enforcement of mortgage.] If necessary to enable a secured party to exercise under
subsection (a)(3) the right of a debtor to enforce a mortgage nonjudicially, the secured party may record in
the office in which a record of the mortgage is recorded:
(1) a copy of the security agreement that creates or provides for a security interest in the obligation
secured by the mortgage; and
(2) the secured party's sworn affidavit in recordable form stating that:
(A) a default has occurred with respect to the obligation secured by the mortgage; and
(B) the secured party is entitled to enforce the mortgage nonjudicially.
(c) [Commercially reasonable collection and enforcement.] A secured party shall proceed in a
commercially reasonable manner if the secured party:
(1) undertakes to collect from or enforce an obligation of an account debtor or other person obligated
on collateral; and
(2) is entitled to charge back uncollected collateral or otherwise to full or limited recourse against the
debtor or a secondary obligor.
(d) [Expenses of collection and enforcement.] A secured party may deduct from the collections made
pursuant to subsection (c) reasonable expenses of collection and enforcement, including reasonable
attorney's fees and legal expenses incurred by the secured party.
(e) [Duties to secured party not affected.] This section does not determine whether an account debtor,
bank, or other person obligated on collateral owes a duty to a secured party.
Annotations
§ 9-607. COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT BY SECURED PARTY
Page 2 of 4
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-502; subsections (b), (d), and (e) are new.
2. Collections: In General. Collateral consisting of rights to payment is not only the most liquid asset of a typical
debtor's business but also is property that may be collected without any interruption of the debtor's business This
situation is far different from that in which collateral is inventory or equipment, whose removal may bring the
business to a halt. Furthermore, problems of valuation and identification, present with collateral that is tangible
personal property, frequently are not as serious in the case of rights to payment and other intangible collateral.
Consequently, this section, like former Section 9-502, recognizes that financing through assignments of intangibles
lacks many of the complexities that arise after default in other types of financing. This section allows the assignee to
liquidate collateral by collecting whatever may become due on the collateral, whether or not the method of collection
contemplated by the security arrangement before default was direct (i.e., payment by the account debtor to the
assignee, "notification" financing) or indirect (i.e., payment by the account debtor to the assignor, "nonnotification"
financing).
3. Scope. The scope of this section is broader than that of former Section 9-502. It applies not only to collections
from account debtors and obligors on instruments but also to enforcement more generally against all persons
obligated on collateral. It explicitly provides for the secured party's enforcement of the debtor's rights in respect of
the account debtor's (and other third parties') obligations and for the secured party's enforcement of supporting
obligations with respect to those obligations. (Supporting obligations are components of the collateral under Section
9-203(f).) The rights of a secured party under subsection (a) include the right to enforce claims that the debtor may
enjoy against others. For example, the claims might include a breach- of-warranty claim arising out of a defect in
equipment that is collateral or a secured party's action for an injunction against infringement of a patent that is
collateral. Those claims typically would be proceeds of original collateral under Section 9-315.
4. Collection and Enforcement Before Default. Like Part 6 generally, this section deals with the rights and
duties of secured parties following default. However, as did former Section 9-502 with respect to collection rights,
this section also applies to the collection and enforcement rights of secured parties even if a default has not
occurred, as long as the debtor has so agreed. It is not unusual for debtors to agree that secured parties are
entitled to collect and enforce rights against account debtors prior to default.
5. Collections by Junior Secured Party. A secured party who holds a security interest in a right to payment may
exercise the right to collect and enforce under this section, even if the security interest is subordinate to a conflicting
security interest in the same right to payment. Whether the junior secured party has priority in the collected
proceeds depends on whether the junior secured party qualifies for priority as a purchaser of an instrument (e.g.,
the account debtor's check) under Section 9-330(d), as a holder in due course of an instrument under Sections 3-
305 and 9-331(a), or as a transferee of money under Section 9-332(a). See Sections 9-330, Comment 7; 9-331,
Comment 5; and 9-332.
6. Relationship to Rights and Duties of Persons Obligated on Collateral. This section permits a secured
party to collect and enforce obligations included in collateral in its capacity as a secured party. It is not necessary
for a secured party first to become the owner of the collateral pursuant to a disposition or acceptance. However, the
secured party's rights, as between it and the debtor, to collect from and enforce collateral against account debtors
and others obligated on collateral under subsection (a) are subject to Section 9-341, Part 4, and other applicable
law. Neither this section nor former Section 9-502 should be understood to regulate the duties of an account debtor
or other person obligated on collateral. Subsection (e) makes this explicit. For example, the secured party may be
unable to exercise the debtor's rights under an instrument if the debtor is in possession of the instrument, or under
a non-transferable letter of credit if the debtor is the beneficiary. Unless a secured party has control over a letter-ofcredit
right and is entitled to receive payment or performance from the issuer or a nominated person under Article 5,
§ 9-607. COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT BY SECURED PARTY
Page 3 of 4
its remedies with respect to the letter-of-credit right may be limited to the recovery of any identifiable proceeds from
the debtor. This section establishes only the baseline rights of the secured party vis-a-vis the debtor--the secured
party is entitled to enforce and collect after default or earlier if so agreed.
7. Deposit Account Collateral. Subsections (a)(4) and (5) set forth the self-help remedy for a secured party
whose collateral is a deposit account. Subsection (a)(4) addresses the rights of a secured party that is the bank with
which the deposit account is maintained. That secured party automatically has control of the deposit account under
Section 9-104(a)(1). After default, and otherwise if so agreed, the bank/secured party may apply the funds on
deposit to the secured obligation.
If a security interest of a third party is perfected by control (Section 9-104(a)(2) or (a)(3)), then after default, and
otherwise if so agreed, the secured party may instruct the bank to pay out the funds in the account. If the third party
has control under Section 9-104(a)(3), the depositary institution is obliged to obey the instruction because the
secured party is its customer. See Section 4-401. If the third party has control under Section 9-104(a)(2), the control
agreement determines the depositary institution's obligation to obey.
If a security interest in a deposit account is unperfected, or is perfected by filing by virtue of the proceeds rules of
Section 9-315, the depositary institution ordinarily owes no obligation to obey the secured party's instructions. See
Section 9-341. To reach the funds without the debtor's cooperation, the secured party must use an available judicial
procedure.
8. Rights Against Mortgagor of Real Property. Subsection (b) addresses the situation in which the collateral
consists of a mortgage note (or other obligation secured by a mortgage on real property). After the debtor's
(mortgagee's) default, the secured party (assignee) may wish to proceed with a nonjudicial foreclosure of the
mortgage securing the note but may be unable to do so because it has not become the assignee of record. The
assignee/secured party may not have taken a recordable assignment at the commencement of the transaction
(perhaps the mortgage note in question was one of hundreds assigned to the secured party as collateral). Having
defaulted, the mortgagee may be unwilling to sign a recordable assignment. This section enables the secured party
(assignee) to become the assignee of record by recording in the applicable real-property records the security
agreement and an affidavit certifying default. Of course, the secured party's rights derive from those of its debtor.
Subsection (b) would not entitle the secured party to proceed with a foreclosure unless the mortgagor also were in
default or the debtor (mortgagee) otherwise enjoyed the right to foreclose.
9. Commercial Reasonableness. Subsection (c) provides that the secured party's collection and enforcement
rights under subsection (a) must be exercised in a commercially reasonable manner. These rights include the right
to settle and compromise claims against the account debtor. The secured party's failure to observe the standard of
commercial reasonableness could render it liable to an aggrieved person under Section 9-625, and the secured
party's recovery of a deficiency would be subject to Section 9-626. Subsection (c) does not apply if, as is
characteristic of most sales of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, and promissory notes, the secured
party (buyer) has no right of recourse against the debtor (seller) or a secondary obligor. However, if the secured
party does have a right of recourse, the commercial-reasonableness standard applies to collection and enforcement
even though the assignment to the secured party was a "true" sale. The obligation to proceed in a commercially
reasonable manner arises because the collection process affects the extent of the seller's recourse liability, not
because the seller retains an interest in the sold collateral (the seller does not). Concerning classification of a
transaction, see Section 9-109, Comment 4.
10. Attorney's Fees and Legal Expenses. The phrase "reasonable attorney's fees and legal expenses," which
appears in subsection (d), includes only those fees and expenses incurred in proceeding against account debtors or
other third parties. The secured party's right to recover these expenses from the collections arises automatically
under this section. The secured party also may incur other attorney's fees and legal expenses in proceeding against
the debtor or obligor. Whether the secured party has a right to recover those fees and expenses depends on
whether the debtor or obligor has agreed to pay them, as is the case with respect to attorney's fees and legal
expenses under Sections 9-608(a)(1)(A) and 9-615(a)(1). The parties also may agree to allocate a portion of the
secured party's overhead to collection and enforcement under subsection (d) or Section 9-608(a).
§ 9-607. COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT BY SECURED PARTY
Page 4 of 4
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-608
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-608. APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS OF COLLECTION OR
ENFORCEMENT; LIABILITY FOR DEFICIENCY AND RIGHT TO SURPLUS
(a) [Application of proceeds, surplus, and deficiency if obligation secured.] If a security interest or
agricultural lien secures payment or performance of an obligation, the following rules apply:
(1) A secured party shall apply or pay over for application the cash proceeds of collection or
enforcement under Section 9-607 in the following order to:
(A) the reasonable expenses of collection and enforcement and, to the extent provided for by
agreement and not prohibited by law, reasonable attorney's fees and legal expenses incurred by
the secured party;
(B) the satisfaction of obligations secured by the security interest or agricultural lien under which
the collection or enforcement is made; and
(C) the satisfaction of obligations secured by any subordinate security interest in or other lien on
the collateral subject to the security interest or agricultural lien under which the collection or
enforcement is made if the secured party receives an authenticated demand for proceeds before
distribution of the proceeds is completed.
(2) If requested by a secured party, a holder of a subordinate security interest or other lien shall furnish
reasonable proof of the interest or lien within a reasonable time. Unless the holder complies, the
secured party need not comply with the holder's demand under paragraph (1)(C).
(3) A secured party need not apply or pay over for application noncash proceeds of collection and
enforcement under Section 9-607 unless the failure to do so would be commercially unreasonable. A
secured party that applies or pays over for application noncash proceeds shall do so in a commercially
reasonable manner.
(4) A secured party shall account to and pay a debtor for any surplus, and the obligor is liable for any
deficiency.
(b) [No surplus or deficiency in sales of certain rights to payment.] If the underlying transaction is a
sale of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes, the debtor is not entitled to any
surplus, and the obligor is not liable for any deficiency.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Subsection (a) is new; subsection (b) derives from former Section 9-502(2).
§ 9-608. APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS OF COLLECTION OR ENFORCEMENT; LIABILITY FOR
DEFICIENCY AND RIGHT TO SURPLUS
Page 2 of 2
2. Modifications of Prior Law. Subsections (a) and (b) modify former Section 9-502(2) by explicitly providing for
the application of proceeds recovered by the secured party in substantially the same manner as provided in Section
9-615(a) and (e) for dispositions of collateral.
3. Surplus and Deficiency. Subsections (a)(4) and (b) omit, as unnecessary, the references contained in former
Section 9-502(2) to agreements varying the baseline rules on surplus and deficiency. The parties are always free to
agree that an obligor will not be liable for a deficiency, even if the collateral secures an obligation, and that an
obligor is liable for a deficiency, even if the transaction is a sale of receivables. For parallel provisions, see Section
9-615(d) and (e).
4. Noncash Proceeds. Subsection (a)(3) addresses the situation in which an enforcing secured party receives
noncash proceeds.
Example: An enforcing secured party receives a promissory note from an account debtor who is unable to pay an
account when it is due. The secured party accepts the note in exchange for extending the date on which the
account debtor's obligation is due. The secured party may wish to credit its debtor (the assignor) with the principal
amount of the note upon receipt of the note, but probably will prefer to credit the debtor only as and when the note
is paid.
Under subsection (a)(3), the secured party is under no duty to apply the note or its value to the outstanding
obligation unless its failure to do so would be commercially unreasonable. If the secured party does apply the note
to the outstanding obligation, however, it must do so in a commercially reasonable manner. The parties may
provide for the method of application of noncash proceeds by agreement, if the method is not manifestly
unreasonable. See Section 9-603. This section does not explain when the failure to apply noncash proceeds would
be commercially unreasonable; it leaves that determination to case-by-case adjudication. In the example, the
secured party appears to have accepted the account debtor's note in order to increase the likelihood of payment
and decrease the likelihood that the account debtor would dispute its obligation. Under these circumstances, it may
well be commercially reasonable for the secured party to credit its debtor's obligations only as and when cash
proceeds are collected from the account debtor, especially given the uncertainty that attends the account debtor's
eventual payment. For an example of a secured party's receipt of noncash proceeds in which it may well be
commercially unreasonable for the secured party to delay crediting its debtor's obligations with the value of noncash
proceeds, see Section 9-615, Comment 3.
When the secured party is not required to "apply or pay over for application noncash proceeds," the proceeds
nonetheless remain collateral subject to this Article. If the secured party were to dispose of them, for example,
appropriate notification would be required (see Section 9-611), and the disposition would be subject to the
standards provided in this Part (see Section 9-610). Moreover, a secured party in possession of the noncash
proceeds would have the duties specified in Section 9-207.
5. No Effect on Priority of Senior Security Interest. The application of proceeds required by subsection (a)
does not affect the priority of a security interest in collateral which is senior to the interest of the secured party who
is collecting or enforcing collateral under Section 9-607. Although subsection (a) imposes a duty to apply proceeds
to the enforcing secured party's expenses and to the satisfaction of the secured obligations owed to it and to
subordinate secured parties, that duty applies only among the enforcing secured party and those persons.
Concerning the priority of a junior secured party who collects and enforces collateral, see Section 9-607, Comment
5.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-609
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-609. SECURED PARTY'S RIGHT TO TAKE POSSESSION AFTER
DEFAULT
(a) [Possession; rendering equipment unusable; disposition on debtor's premises.] After default, a
secured party:
(1) may take possession of the collateral; and
(2) without removal, may render equipment unusable and dispose of collateral on a debtor's premises
under Section 9-610.
(b) [Judicial and nonjudicial process.] A secured party may proceed under subsection (a):
(1) pursuant to judicial process; or
(2) without judicial process, if it proceeds without breach of the peace.
(c) [Assembly of collateral.] If so agreed, and in any event after default, a secured party may require the
debtor to assemble the collateral and make it available to the secured party at a place to be designated by
the secured party which is reasonably convenient to both parties.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-503.
2. Secured Party's Right to Possession. This section follows former Section 9-503 and earlier uniform
legislation. It provides that the secured party is entitled to take possession of collateral after default.
3. Judicial Process; Breach of Peace. Subsection (b) permits a secured party to proceed under this section
without judicial process if it does so "without breach of the peace." Although former Section 9-503 placed the same
condition on a secured party's right to take possession of collateral, subsection (b) extends the condition to the right
provided in subsection (a)(2) as well. Like former Section 9-503, this section does not define or explain the conduct
that will constitute a breach of the peace, leaving that matter for continuing development by the courts. In
considering whether a secured party has engaged in a breach of the peace, however, courts should hold the
secured party responsible for the actions of others taken on the secured party's behalf, including independent
contractors engaged by the secured party to take possession of collateral.
This section does not authorize a secured party who repossesses without judicial process to utilize the assistance
of a law-enforcement officer. A number of cases have held that a repossessing secured party's use of a lawenforcement
officer without benefit of judicial process constituted a failure to comply with former Section 9-503.
4. Damages for Breach of Peace. Concerning damages that may be recovered based on a secured party's
breach of the peace in connection with taking possession of collateral, see Section 9-625, Comment 3.
§ 9-609. SECURED PARTY'S RIGHT TO TAKE POSSESSION AFTER DEFAULT
Page 2 of 2
5. Multiple Secured Parties. More than one secured party may be entitled to take possession of collateral under
this section. Conflicting rights to possession among secured parties are resolved by the priority rules of this Article.
Thus, a senior secured party is entitled to possession as against a junior claimant. Non-UCC law governs whether a
junior secured party in possession of collateral is liable to the senior in conversion. Normally, a junior who refuses to
relinquish possession of collateral upon the demand of a secured party having a superior possessory right to the
collateral would be liable in conversion.
6. Secured Party's Right to Disable and Dispose of Equipment on Debtor's Premises. In the case of some
collateral, such as heavy equipment, the physical removal from the debtor's plant and the storage of the collateral
pending disposition may be impractical or unduly expensive. This section follows former Section 9-503 by providing
that, in lieu of removal, the secured party may render equipment unusable or may dispose of collateral on the
debtor's premises. Unlike former Section 9-503, however, this section explicitly conditions these rights on the
debtor's default. Of course, this section does not validate unreasonable action by a secured party. Under Section 9-
610, all aspects of a disposition must be commercially reasonable.
7. Debtor's Agreement to Assemble Collateral. This section follows former Section 9-503 also by validating a
debtor's agreement to assemble collateral and make it available to a secured party at a place that the secured party
designates. Similar to the treatment of agreements to permit collection prior to default under Section 9-607 and
former 9-502, however, this section validates these agreements whether or not they are conditioned on the debtor's
default. For example, a debtor might agree to make available to a secured party, from time to time, any instruments
or negotiable documents that the debtor receives on account of collateral. A court should not infer from this
section's validation that a debtor's agreement to assemble and make available collateral would not be enforceable
under other applicable law.
8. Agreed Standards. Subject to the limitation imposed by Section 9-603(b), this section's provisions concerning
agreements to assemble and make available collateral and a secured party's right to disable equipment and
dispose of collateral on a debtor's premises are likely topics for agreement on standards as contemplated by
Section 9-603.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-610
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-610. DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL AFTER DEFAULT
(a) [Disposition after default.] After default, a secured party may sell, lease, license, or otherwise dispose
of any or all of the collateral in its present condition or following any commercially reasonable preparation or
processing.
(b) [Commercially reasonable disposition.] Every aspect of a disposition of collateral, including the
method, manner, time, place, and other terms, must be commercially reasonable. If commercially
reasonable, a secured party may dispose of collateral by public or private proceedings, by one or more
contracts, as a unit or in parcels, and at any time and place and on any terms.
(c) [Purchase by secured party.] A secured party may purchase collateral:
(1) at a public disposition; or
(2) at a private disposition only if the collateral is of a kind that is customarily sold on a recognized
market or the subject of widely distributed standard price quotations.
(d) [Warranties on disposition.] A contract for sale, lease, license, or other disposition includes the
warranties relating to title, possession, quiet enjoyment, and the like which by operation of law accompany
a voluntary disposition of property of the kind subject to the contract.
(e) [Disclaimer of warranties.] A secured party may disclaim or modify warranties under subsection (d):
(1) in a manner that would be effective to disclaim or modify the warranties in a voluntary disposition of
property of the kind subject to the contract of disposition; or
(2) by communicating to the purchaser a record evidencing the contract for disposition and including
an express disclaimer or modification of the warranties.
(f) [Record sufficient to disclaim warranties.] A record is sufficient to disclaim warranties under
subsection (e) if it indicates "There is no warranty relating to title, possession, quiet enjoyment, or the like in
this disposition" or uses words of similar import.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-504(1), (3)
2. Commercially Reasonable Dispositions. Subsection (a) follows former Section 9-504 by permitting a
secured party to dispose of collateral in a commercially reasonable manner following a default. Although subsection
(b) permits both public and private dispositions, including public and private dispositions conducted over the
Internet, "every aspect of a disposition . . . must be commercially reasonable." This section encourages private
dispositions on the assumption that they frequently will result in higher realization on collateral for the benefit of all
concerned. Subsection (a) does not restrict dispositions to sales; collateral may be sold, leased, licensed, or
§ 9-610. DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL AFTER DEFAULT
Page 2 of 4
otherwise disposed. Section 9-627 provides guidance for determining the circumstances under which a disposition
is "commercially reasonable."
3. Time of Disposition. This Article does not specify a period within which a secured party must dispose of
collateral. This is consistent with this Article's policy to encourage private dispositions through regular commercial
channels. It may, for example, be prudent not to dispose of goods when the market has collapsed. Or, it might be
more appropriate to sell a large inventory in parcels over a period of time instead of in bulk. Of course, under
subsection (b) every aspect of a disposition of collateral must be commercially reasonable. This requirement
explicitly includes the "method, manner, time, place and other terms." For example, if a secured party does not
proceed under Section 9-620 and holds collateral for a long period of time without disposing of it, and if there is no
good reason for not making a prompt disposition, the secured party may be determined not to have acted in a
"commercially reasonable" manner. See also Section 1-203 (general obligation of good faith).
4. Pre-Disposition Preparation and Processing. Former Section 9-504(1) appeared to give the secured party
the choice of disposing of collateral either "in its then condition or following any commercially reasonable
preparation or processing." Some courts held that the "commercially reasonable" standard of former Section 9-
504(3) nevertheless could impose an affirmative duty on the secured party to process or prepare the collateral prior
to disposition. Subsection (a) retains the substance of the quoted language. Although courts should not be quick to
impose a duty of preparation or processing on the secured party, subsection (a) does not grant the secured party
the right to dispose of the collateral "in its then condition" under all circumstances. A secured party may not dispose
of collateral "in its then condition" when, taking into account the costs and probable benefits of preparation or
processing and the fact that the secured party would be advancing the costs at its risk, it would be commercially
unreasonable to dispose of the collateral in that condition.
5. Disposition by Junior Secured Party. Disposition rights under subsection (a) are not limited to first-priority
security interests. Rather, any secured party as to whom there has been a default enjoys the right to dispose of
collateral under this subsection. The exercise of this right by a secured party whose security interest is subordinate
to that of another secured party does not of itself constitute a conversion or otherwise give rise to liability in favor of
the holder of the senior security interest. Section 9-615 addresses application of the proceeds of a disposition by a
junior secured party. Under Section 9-615(a), a junior secured party owes no obligation to apply the proceeds of
disposition to the satisfaction of obligations secured by a senior security interest. Section 9-615(g) builds on this
general rule by protecting certain juniors from claims of a senior concerning cash proceeds of the disposition. Even
if a senior were to have a non-Article 9 claim to proceeds of a junior's disposition, Section 9-615(g) would protect a
junior that acts in good faith and without knowledge that its actions violate the rights of a senior party. Because the
disposition by a junior would not cut off a senior's security interest or other lien (see Section 9-617), in many
(probably most) cases the junior's receipt of the cash proceeds would not violate the rights of the senior.
The holder of a senior security interest is entitled, by virtue of its priority, to take possession of collateral from the
junior secured party and conduct its own disposition, provided that the senior enjoys the right to take possession of
the collateral from the debtor. See Section 9-609. The holder of a junior security interest normally must notify the
senior secured party of an impending disposition. See Section 9-611. Regardless of whether the senior receives a
notification from the junior, the junior's disposition does not of itself discharge the senior's security interest. See
Section 9-617. Unless the senior secured party has authorized the disposition free and clear of its security interest,
the senior's security interest ordinarily will survive the disposition by the junior and continue under Section 9-315(a).
If the senior enjoys the right to repossess the collateral from the debtor, the senior likewise may recover the
collateral from the transferee.
When a secured party's collateral is encumbered by another security interest or other lien, one of the claimants
may seek to invoke the equitable doctrine of marshaling. As explained by the Supreme Court, that doctrine "rests
upon the principle that a creditor having two funds to satisfy his debt, may not by his application of them to his
demand, defeat another creditor, who may resort to only one of the funds." Meyer v. United States, 375 U.S. 233,
236 (1963), quoting Sowell v. Federal Reserve Bank, 268 U.S. 449, 456-57 (1925). The purpose of the doctrine is
"to prevent the arbitrary action of a senior lienor from destroying the rights of a junior lienor or a creditor having less
§ 9-610. DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL AFTER DEFAULT
Page 3 of 4
security." Id. at 237. Because it is an equitable doctrine, marshaling "is applied only when it can be equitably
fashioned as to all of the parties" having an interest in the property. Id. This Article leaves courts free to determine
whether marshaling is appropriate in any given case. See Section 1-103.
6. Security Interests of Equal Rank. Sometimes two security interests enjoy the same priority. This situation
may arise by contract, e.g., pursuant to "equal and ratable" provisions in indentures, or by operation of law. See
Section 9-328(6). This Article treats a security interest having equal priority like a senior security interest in many
respects. Assume, for example, that SP-X and SP-Y enjoy equal priority, SP-W is senior to them, and SP-Z is
junior. If SP-X disposes of the collateral under this section, then (i) SP-W's and SP-Y's security interests survive the
disposition but SP-Z's does not, see Section 9-617, and (ii) neither SP-W nor SP-Y is entitled to receive a
distribution of proceeds, but SP-Z is. See Section 9-615(a)(3).
When one considers the ability to obtain possession of the collateral, a secured party with equal priority is unlike a
senior secured party. As the senior secured party, SP-W should enjoy the right to possession as against SP-X. See
Section 9-609, Comment 5. If SP-W takes possession and disposes of the collateral under this section, it is entitled
to apply the proceeds to satisfy its secured claim. SP-Y, however, should not have such a right to take possession
from SP-X; otherwise, once SP-Y took possession from SP-X, SP-X would have the right to get possession from
SP-Y, which would be obligated to redeliver possession to SP-X, and so on. Resolution of this problem is left to the
parties and, if necessary, the courts.
7. Public vs. Private Dispositions. This Part maintains two distinctions between "public" and other dispositions:
(i) the secured party may buy at the former, but normally not at the latter (Section 9-610(c)), and (ii) the debtor is
entitled to notification of "the time and place of a public disposition" and notification of "the time after which" a
private disposition or other intended disposition is to be made (Section 9-613(1)(E)). It does not retain the distinction
under former Section 9-504(4), under which transferees in a noncomplying public disposition could lose protection
more easily than transferees in other noncomplying dispositions. Instead, Section 9-617(b) adopts a unitary
standard. Although the term is not defined, as used in this Article, a "public disposition" is one at which the price is
determined after the public has had a meaningful opportunity for competitive bidding. "Meaningful opportunity" is
meant to imply that some form of advertisement or public notice must precede the sale (or other disposition) and
that the public must have access to the sale (disposition).
A secured party's purchase of collateral at its own private disposition is equivalent to a "strict foreclosure" and is
governed by Sections 9-620, 9-621, and 9-622. The provisions of these sections can be waived only to the extent
provided in Section 9-624(b). See Section 9-602.
8. Investment Property. Dispositions of investment property may be regulated by the federal securities laws.
Although a "public" disposition of securities under this Article may implicate the registration requirements of the
Securities Act of 1933, it need not do so. A disposition that qualifies for a "private placement" exemption under the
Securities Act of 1933 nevertheless may constitute a "public" disposition within the meaning of this section.
Moreover, the "commercially reasonable" requirements of subsection (b) need not prevent a secured party from
conducting a foreclosure sale without the issuer's compliance with federal registration requirements.
9. "Recognized Market." A "recognized market," as used in subsection (c) and Section 9-611(d), is one in which
the items sold are fungible and prices are not subject to individual negotiation. For example, the New York Stock
Exchange is a recognized market. A market in which prices are individually negotiated or the items are not fungible
is not a recognized market, even if the items are the subject of widely disseminated price guides or are disposed of
through dealer auctions.
10. Relevance of Price. While not itself sufficient to establish a violation of this Part, a low price suggests that a
court should scrutinize carefully all aspects of a disposition to ensure that each aspect was commercially
reasonable. Note also that even if the disposition is commercially reasonable, Section 9-615(f) provides a special
method for calculating a deficiency or surplus if (i) the transferee in the disposition is the secured party, a person
related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor, and (ii) the amount of proceeds of the disposition is
§ 9-610. DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL AFTER DEFAULT
Page 4 of 4
significantly below the range of proceeds that a complying disposition to a person other than the secured party, a
person related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor would have brought.
11. Warranties. Subsection (d) affords the transferee in a disposition under this section the benefit of any title,
possession, quiet enjoyment, and similar warranties that would have accompanied the disposition by operation of
non-Article 9 law had the disposition been conducted under other circumstances. For example, the Article 2
warranty of title would apply to a sale of goods, the analogous warranties of Article 2A would apply to a lease of
goods, and any common-law warranties of title would apply to dispositions of other types of collateral. See, e.g.,
Restatement (2d), Contracts § 333 (warranties of assignor).
Subsection (e) explicitly provides that these warranties can be disclaimed either under other applicable law or by
communicating a record containing an express disclaimer. The record need not be written, but an oral
communication would not be sufficient. See Section 9-102 (definition of "record"). Subsection (f) provides a sample
of wording that will effectively exclude the warranties in a disposition under this section, whether or not the
exclusion would be effective under non-Article 9 law.
The warranties incorporated by subsection (d) are those relating to "title, possession, quiet enjoyment, and the
like." Depending on the circumstances, a disposition under this section also may give rise to other statutory or
implied warranties, e.g., warranties of quality or fitness for purpose. Law other than this Article determines whether
such other warranties apply to a disposition under this section. Other law also determines issues relating to
disclaimer of such warranties. For example, a foreclosure sale of a car by a car dealer could give rise to an implied
warranty of merchantability (Section 2-314) unless effectively disclaimed or modified (Section 2-316).
This section's approach to these warranties conflicts with the former Comment to Section 2-312. This Article
rejects the baseline assumption that commercially reasonable dispositions under this section are out of the ordinary
commercial course or peculiar. The Comment to Section 2-312 has been revised accordingly.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-611
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-611. NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
(a) ["Notification date."] In this section, "notification date" means the earlier of the date on which:
(1) a secured party sends to the debtor and any secondary obligor an authenticated notification of
disposition; or
(2) the debtor and any secondary obligor waive the right to notification.
(b) [Notification of disposition required.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), a secured
party that disposes of collateral under Section 9-610 shall send to the persons specified in subsection (c) a
reasonable authenticated notification of disposition.
(c) [Persons to be notified.] To comply with subsection (b), the secured party shall send an authenticated
notification of disposition to:
(1) the debtor;
(2) any secondary obligor; and
(3) if the collateral is other than consumer goods:
(A) any other person from which the secured party has received, before the notification date, an
authenticated notification of a claim of an interest in the collateral;
(B) any other secured party or lienholder that, 10 days before the notification date, held a security
interest in or other lien on the collateral perfected by the filing of a financing statement that:
(i) identified the collateral;
(ii) was indexed under the debtor's name as of that date; and
(iii) was filed in the office in which to file a financing statement against the debtor covering the
collateral as of that date; and
(C) any other secured party that, 10 days before the notification date, held a security interest in the
collateral perfected by compliance with a statute, regulation, or treaty described in Section 9-
311(a).
(d) [Subsection (b) inapplicable: perishable collateral; recognized market.] Subsection (b) does not
apply if the collateral is perishable or threatens to decline speedily in value or is of a type customarily sold
on a recognized market.
(e) [Compliance with subsection (c)(3)(B).] A secured party complies with the requirement for
notification prescribed by subsection (c)(3)(B) if:
(1) not later than 20 days or earlier than 30 days before the notification date, the secured party
requests, in a commercially reasonable manner, information concerning financing statements indexed
under the debtor's name in the office indicated in subsection (c)(3)(B); and
(2) before the notification date, the secured party:
(A) did not receive a response to the request for information; or
§ 9-611. NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 4
(B) received a response to the request for information and sent an authenticated notification of
disposition to each secured party or other lienholder named in that response whose financing
statement covered the collateral.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-504(3).
2. Reasonable Notification. This section requires a secured party who wishes to dispose of collateral under
Section 9-610 to send "a reasonable authenticated notification of disposition" to specified interested persons,
subject to certain exceptions. The notification must be reasonable as to the manner in which it is sent, its timeliness
(i.e., a reasonable time before the disposition is to take place), and its content. See Sections 9-612 (timeliness of
notification), 9-613 (contents of notification generally), 9-614 (contents of notification in consumer-goods
transactions).
3. Notification to Debtors and Secondary Obligors. This section imposes a duty to send notification of a
disposition not only to the debtor but also to any secondary obligor. Subsections (b) and (c) resolve an uncertainty
under former Article 9 by providing that secondary obligors (sureties) are entitled to receive notification of an
intended disposition of collateral, regardless of who created the security interest in the collateral. If the surety
created the security interest, it would be the debtor. If it did not, it would be a secondary obligor. (This Article also
resolves the question of the secondary obligor's ability to waive, pre-default, the right to notification-waiver generally
is not permitted. See Section 9-602.) Section 9-605 relieves a secured party from any duty to send notification to a
debtor or secondary obligor unknown to the secured party.
Under subsection (b), the principal obligor (borrower) is not always entitled to notification of disposition.
Example: Behnfeldt borrows on an unsecured basis, and Bruno grants a security interest in her car to secure the
debt. Behnfeldt is a primary obligor, not a secondary obligor. As such, she is not entitled to notification of disposition
under this section.
4. Notification to Other Secured Parties. Prior to the 1972 amendments to Article 9, former Section 9-504(3)
required the enforcing secured party to send reasonable notification of the disposition:
except in the case of consumer goods to any other person who has a security interest in the collateral and who
has duly filed a financing statement indexed in the name of the debtor in this State or who is known by the secured
party to have a security interest in the collateral.
The 1972 amendments eliminated the duty to give notice to secured parties other than those from whom the
foreclosing secured party had received written notice of a claim of an interest in the collateral.
Many of the problems arising from dispositions of collateral encumbered by multiple security interests can be
ameliorated or solved by informing all secured parties of an intended disposition and affording them the opportunity
to work with one another. To this end, subsection (c)(3)(B) expands the duties of the foreclosing secured party to
include the duty to notify (and the corresponding burden of searching the files to discover) certain competing
secured parties. The subsection imposes a search burden that in some cases may be greater than the pre-1972
burden on foreclosing secured parties but certainly is more modest than that faced by a new secured lender.
To determine who is entitled to notification, the foreclosing secured party must determine the proper office for
filing a financing statement as of a particular date, measured by reference to the "notification date," as defined in
subsection (a). This determination requires reference to the choice-of-law provisions of Part 3. The secured party
must ascertain whether any financing statements covering the collateral and indexed under the debtor's name, as
§ 9-611. NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
Page 3 of 4
the name existed as of that date, in fact were filed in that office. The foreclosing secured party generally need not
notify secured parties whose effective financing statements have become more difficult to locate because of
changes in the location of the debtor, proceeds rules, or changes in the name that is sufficient as the name of the
debtor under Section 9-503(a).
Under subsection (c)(3)(C), the secured party also must notify a secured party who has perfected a security
interest by complying with a statute or treaty described in Section 9-311(a), such as a certificate-of-title statute.
Subsection (e) provides a "safe harbor" that takes into account the delays that may be attendant to receiving
information from the public filing offices. It provides, generally, that the secured party will be deemed to have
satisfied its notification duty under subsection (c)(3)(B) if it requests a search from the proper office at least 20 but
not more than 30 days before sending notification to the debtor and if it also sends a notification to all secured
parties (and other lienholders) reflected on the search report. The secured party's duty under subsection (c)(3)(B)
also will be satisfied if the secured party requests but does not receive a search report before the notification is sent
to the debtor. Thus, if subsection (e) applies, a secured party who is entitled to notification under subsection
(c)(3)(B) has no remedy against a foreclosing secured party who does not send the notification. The foreclosing
secured party has complied with the notification requirement. Subsection (e) has no effect on the requirements of
the other paragraphs of subsection (c). For example, if the foreclosing secured party received a notification from the
holder of a conflicting security interest in accordance with subsection (c)(3)(A) but failed to send to the holder a
notification of the disposition, the holder of the conflicting security interest would have the right to recover any loss
under Section 9-625(b).
5. Authentication Requirement. Subsections (b) and (c) explicitly provide that a notification of disposition must
be "authenticated." Some cases read former Section 9-504(3) as validating oral notification.
6. Second Try. This Article leaves to judicial resolution, based upon the facts of each case, the question whether
the requirement of "reasonable not ification" requires a "second try," i.e., whether a secured party who sends
notification and learns that the debtor did not receive it must attempt to locate the debtor and send another
notification.
7. Recognized Market; Perishable Collateral. New subsection (d) makes it clear that there is no obligation to
give notification of a disposition in the case of perishable collateral or collateral customarily sold on a recognized
market (e.g., marketable securities). Former Section 9-504(3) might be read (incorrectly) to relieve the secured
party from its duty to notify a debtor but not from its duty to notify other secured parties in connection with
dispositions of such collateral.
8. Failure to Conduct Notified Disposition. Nothing in this Article prevents a secured party from electing not to
conduct a disposition after sending a notification. Nor does this Article prevent a secured party from electing to send
a revised notification if its plans for disposition change. This assumes, however, that the secured party acts in good
faith, the revised notification is reasonable, and the revised plan for disposition and any attendant delay are
commercially reasonable.
9. Waiver. A debtor or secondary obligor may waive the right to notification under this section only by a postdefault
authenticated agreement. See Section 9-624(a).
10. Other Law. Other State or federal law may contain requirements concerning notification of a disposition of
property by a secured party. For example, federal law imposes notification requirements with respect to the
enforcement of mortgages on federally documented vessels. Principles of statutory interpretation and, in the context
of federal law, supremacy and preemption determine whether and to what extent law other than this Article
supplements, displaces, or is displaced by this Article. See Sections 1-103, 1-104, 9-109(c)(1).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 9-611. NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
Page 4 of 4
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-612
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-612. TIMELINESS OF NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF
COLLATERAL
(a) [Reasonable time is question of fact.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), whether a
notification is sent within a reasonable time is a question of fact.
(b) [10-day period sufficient in non-consumer transaction.] In a transaction other than a consumer
transaction, a notification of disposition sent after default and 10 days or more before the earliest time of
disposition set forth in the notification is sent within a reasonable time before the disposition.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Reasonable Notification. Section 9-611(b) requires the secured party to send a "reasonable authenticated
notification." Under that section, as under former Section 9-504(3), one aspect of a reasonable notification is its
timeliness. This generally means that the notification must be sent at a reasonable time in advance of the date of a
public disposition or the date after which a private disposition is to be made. A notification that is sent so near to the
disposition date that a notified person could not be expected to act on or take account of the notification would be
unreasonable.
3. Timeliness of Notification: Safe Harbor. The 10-day notice period in subsection (b) is intended to be a "safe
harbor" and not a minimum requirement. To qualify for the "safe harbor" the notification must be sent after default.
A notification also must be sent in a commercially reasonable manner. See Section 9-611(b) ("reasonable
authenticated notification"). These requirements prevent a secured party from taking advantage of the "safe harbor"
by, for example, giving the debtor a notification at the time of the original extension of credit or sending the notice by
surface mail to a debtor overseas.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-613
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-613. CONTENTS AND FORM OF NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION
OF COLLATERAL: GENERAL
Except in a consumer-goods transaction, the following rules apply:
(1) The contents of a notification of disposition are sufficient if the notification:
(A) describes the debtor and the secured party;
(B) describes the collateral that is the subject of the intended disposition;
(C) states the method of intended disposition;
(D) states that the debtor is entitled to an accounting of the unpaid indebtedness and states the
charge, if any, for an accounting; and
(E) states the time and place of a public disposition or the time after which any other disposition is
to be made.
(2) Whether the contents of a notification that lacks any of the information specified in paragraph (1)
are nevertheless sufficient is a question of fact.
(3) The contents of a notification providing substantially the information specified in paragraph (1) are
sufficient, even if the notification includes:
(A) information not specified by that paragraph; or
(B) minor errors that are not seriously misleading.
(4) A particular phrasing of the notification is not required.
(5) The following form of notification and the form appearing in Section 9-614(3), when completed,
each provides sufficient information:
NOTIFICATION OF DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
To: ___ [Name of debtor, obligor, or other person to which the notification is sent]
From: ___ [Name, address, and telephone number of secured party]
Name of Debtor(s): ___ [Include only if debtor(s) are not an addressee]
[For a public disposition:]
We will sell [or lease or license, as applicable] the ___ [describe collateral] [to the highest qualified bidder]
in public as follows:
Day and Date: ___
Time: ___
Place: ___
[For a private disposition:]
We will sell [or lease or license, as applicable] the ___ [describe collateral] privately sometime after
___ [day and date].
§ 9-613. CONTENTS AND FORM OF NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL: GENERAL
Page 2 of 2
You are entitled to an accounting of the unpaid indebtedness secured by the property that we intend
to sell [or lease or license, as applicable] [for a charge of $ ___]. You may request an accounting by
calling us at ___ [telephone number]
[End of Form]
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Contents of Notification. To comply with the "reasonable authenticated notification" requirement of Section 9-
611(b), the contents of a notification must be reasonable. Except in a consumer-goods transaction, the contents of
a notification that includes the information set forth in paragraph (1) are sufficient as a matter of law, unless the
parties agree otherwise. (The reference to "time" of disposition means here, as it did in former Section 9-504(3), not
only the hour of the day but also the date.) Although a secured party may choose to include additional information
concerning the transaction or the debtor's rights and obligations, no additional information is required unless the
parties agree otherwise. A notification that lacks some of the information set forth in paragraph (1) nevertheless
may be sufficient if found to be reasonable by the trier of fact, under paragraph (2). A properly completed sample
form of notification in paragraph (5) or in Section 9-614(a)(3) is an example of a notification that would contain the
information set forth in paragraph (1). Under paragraph (4), however, no particular phrasing of the notification is
required.
This section applies to a notification of a public disposition conducted electronically. A notification of an electronic
disposition satisfies paragraph (1)(E) if it states the time when the disposition is scheduled to begin and states the
electronic location. For example, under the technology current in 2010, the Uniform Resource Locator (URL) or
other Internet address where the site of the public disposition can be accessed suffices as an electronic location.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-614
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-614. CONTENTS AND FORM OF NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION
OF COLLATERAL: CONSUMER-GOODS TRANSACTION
In a consumer-goods transaction, the following rules apply:
(1) A notification of disposition must provide the following information:
(A) the information specified in Section 9-613(1);
(B) a description of any liability for a deficiency of the person to which the notification is sent;
(C) a telephone number from which the amount that must be paid to the secured party to redeem
the collateral under Section 9-623 is available; and
(D) a telephone number or mailing address from which additional information concerning the
disposition and the obligation secured is available.
(2) A particular phrasing of the notification is not required.
(3) The following form of notification, when completed, provides sufficient information:
___ [Name and address of secured party]
___ [Date]
NOTICE OF OUR PLAN TO SELL PROPERTY
___ [Name and address of any obligor who is also a debtor]
Subject: ___ [Identification of Transaction]
We have your ___ [describe collateral], because you broke promises in our agreement.
[For a public disposition:]
We will sell ___ [describe collateral] at public sale. A sale could include a lease or license. The sale will be
held as follows:
Date: ___
Time: ___
Place: ___
You may attend the sale and bring bidders if you want.
[For a private disposition:]
We will sell ___ [describe collateral] at private sale sometime after ___ [date]. A sale could include a
lease or license.
The money that we get from the sale (after paying our costs) will reduce the amount you owe. If we
get less money than you owe, you ___ [will or will not, as applicable] still owe us the difference. If we
get more money than you owe, you will get the extra money, unless we must pay it to someone else.
You can get the property back at any time before we sell it by paying us the full amount you owe (not
just the past due payments), including our expenses. To learn the exact amount you must pay, call us
at ___ [telephone number].
§ 9-614. CONTENTS AND FORM OF NOTIFICATION BEFORE DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL:
CONSUMER-GOODS TRANSACTION
Page 2 of 2
If you want us to explain to you in writing how we have figured the amount that you owe us, you may
call us at ___ [telephone number] [or write us at ___ [secured party's address]] and request a written
explanation. [We will charge you $ ___ for the explanation if we sent you another written explanation of
the amount you owe us within the last six months.]
If you need more information about the sale call us at ___ [telephone number]] [or write us at ___
[secured party's address]].
We are sending this notice to the following other people who have an interest in ___ [describe collateral] or
who owe money under your agreement:
___ [Names of all other debtors and obligors, if any]
[End of Form]
(4) A notification in the form of paragraph (3) is sufficient, even if additional information appears at
the end of the form.
(5) A notification in the form of paragraph (3) is sufficient, even if it includes errors in information
not required by paragraph (1), unless the error is misleading with respect to rights arising under this
article.
(6) If a notification under this section is not in the form of paragraph (3), law other than this article
determines the effect of including information not required by paragraph (1).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Notification in Consumer-Goods Transactions. Paragraph (1) sets forth the information required for a
reasonable notification in a consumer-goods transaction. A notification that lacks any of the information set forth in
paragraph (1) is insufficient as a matter of law. Compare Section 9-613(2), under which the trier of fact may find a
notification to be sufficient even if it lacks some information listed in paragraph (1) of that section.
3. Safe-Harbor Form of Notification; Errors in Information. Although paragraph (2) provides that a particular
phrasing of a notification is not required, paragraph (3) specifies a safe-harbor form that, when properly completed,
satisfies paragraph (1). Paragraphs (4), (5), and (6) contain special rules applicable to erroneous and additional
information. Under paragraph (4), a notification in the safe-harbor form specified in paragraph (3) is not rendered
insufficient if it contains additional information at the end of the form. Paragraph (5) provides that non-misleading
errors in information contained in a notification are permitted if the safe-harbor form is used and if the errors are in
information not required by paragraph (1). Finally, if a notification is in a form other than the paragraph (3) safeharbor
form, other law determines the effect of including in the notification information other than that required by
paragraph (1).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-615
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-615. APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS OF DISPOSITION; LIABILITY FOR
DEFICIENCY AND RIGHT TO SURPLUS
(a) [Application of proceeds.] A secured party shall apply or pay over for application the cash proceeds
of disposition under Section 9-610 in the following order to:
(1) the reasonable expenses of retaking, holding, preparing for disposition, processing, and disposing,
and, to the extent provided for by agreement and not prohibited by law, reasonable attorney's fees and
legal expenses incurred by the secured party;
(2) the satisfaction of obligations secured by the security interest or agricultural lien under which the
disposition is made;
(3) the satisfaction of obligations secured by any subordinate security interest in or other subordinate
lien on the collateral if:
(A) the secured party receives from the holder of the subordinate security interest or other lien an
authenticated demand for proceeds before distribution of the proceeds is completed; and
(B) in a case in which a consignor has an interest in the collateral, the subordinate security interest
or other lien is senior to the interest of the consignor; and
(4) a secured party that is a consignor of the collateral if the secured party receives from the consignor
an authenticated demand for proceeds before distribution of the proceeds is completed.
(b) [Proof of subordinate interest.] If requested by a secured party, a holder of a subordinate security
interest or other lien shall furnish reasonable proof of the interest or lien within a reasonable time. Unless
the holder does so, the secured party need not comply with the holder's demand under subsection (a)(3).
(c) [Application of noncash proceeds.] A secured party need not apply or pay over for application
noncash proceeds of disposition under Section 9-610 unless the failure to do so would be commercially
unreasonable. A secured party that applies or pays over for application noncash proceeds shall do so in a
commercially reasonable manner.
(d) [Surplus or deficiency if obligation secured.] If the security interest under which a disposition is
made secures payment or performance of an obligation, after making the payments and applications
required by subsection (a) and permitted by subsection (c):
(1) unless subsection (a)(4) requires the secured party to apply or pay over cash proceeds to a
consignor, the secured party shall account to and pay a debtor for any surplus; and
(2) the obligor is liable for any deficiency.
(e) [No surplus or deficiency in sales of certain rights to payment.] If the underlying transaction is a
sale of accounts, chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes:
(1) the debtor is not entitled to any surplus; and
(2) the obligor is not liable for any deficiency.
§ 9-615. APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS OF DISPOSITION; LIABILITY FOR DEFICIENCY AND RIGHT TO
SURPLUS
Page 2 of 4
(f) [Calculation of surplus or deficiency in disposition to person related to secured party.] The
surplus or deficiency following a disposition is calculated based on the amount of proceeds that would have
been realized in a disposition complying with this part to a transferee other than the secured party, a person
related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor if:
(1) the transferee in the disposition is the secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a
secondary obligor; and
(2) the amount of proceeds of the disposition is significantly below the range of proceeds that a
complying disposition to a person other than the secured party, a person related to the secured party,
or a secondary obligor would have brought.
(g) [Cash proceeds received by junior secured party.] A secured party that receives cash proceeds of a
disposition in good faith and without knowledge that the receipt violates the rights of the holder of a security
interest or other lien that is not subordinate to the security interest or agricultural lien under which the
disposition is made:
(1) takes the cash proceeds free of the security interest or other lien;
(2) is not obligated to apply the proceeds of the disposition to the satisfaction of obligations secured by
the security interest or other lien; and
(3) is not obligated to account to or pay the holder of the security interest or other lien for any surplus.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-504(1), (2).
2. Application of Proceeds. This section contains the rules governing application of proceeds and the debtor's
liability for a deficiency following a disposition of collateral. Subsection (a) sets forth the basic order of application.
The proceeds are applied first to the expenses of disposition, second to the obligation secured by the security
interest that is being enforced, and third, in the specified circumstances, to interests that are subordinate to that
security interest.
Subsections (a) and (d) also address the right of a consignor to receive proceeds of a disposition by a secured
party whose interest is senior to that of the consignor. Subsection (a) requires the enforcing secured party to pay
excess proceeds first to subordinate secured parties or lienholders whose interests are senior to that of a consignor
and, finally, to a consignor. Inasmuch as a consignor is the owner of the collateral, secured parties and lienholders
whose interests are junior to the consignor's interest will not be entitled to any proceeds. In like fashion, under
subsection (d)(1) the debtor is not entitled to a surplus when the enforcing secured party is required to pay over
proceeds to a consignor.
3. Noncash Proceeds. Subsection (c) addresses the application of noncash proceeds of a disposition, such as a
note or lease. The explanation in Section 9-608, Comment 4, generally applies to this subsection.
Example: A secured party in the business of selling or financing automobiles takes possession of collateral (an
automobile) following its debtor's default. The secured party decides to sell the automobile in a private disposition
under Section 9-610 and sends appropriate notification under Section 9-611. After undertaking its normal credit
investigation and in accordance with its normal credit policies, the secured party sells the automobile on credit, on
terms typical of the credit terms normally extended by the secured party in the ordinary course of its business. The
automobile stands as collateral for the remaining balance of the price. The noncash proceeds received by the
§ 9-615. APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS OF DISPOSITION; LIABILITY FOR DEFICIENCY AND RIGHT TO
SURPLUS
Page 3 of 4
secured party are chattel paper. The secured party may wish to credit its debtor (the assignor) with the principal
amount of the chattel paper or may wish to credit the debtor only as and when the payments are made on the
chattel paper by the buyer.
Under subsection (c), the secured party is under no duty to apply the noncash proceeds (here, the chattel paper)
or their value to the secured obligation unless its failure to do so would be commercially unreasonable. If a secured
party elects to apply the chattel paper to the outstanding obligation, however, it must do so in a commercially
reasonable manner. The facts in the example indicate that it would be commercially unreasonable for the secured
party to fail to apply the value of the chattel paper to the original debtor's secured obligation. Unlike the example in
Comment 4 to Section 9-608, the noncash proceeds received in this example are of the type that the secured party
regularly generates in the ordinary course of its financing business in nonforeclosure transactions. The original
debtor should not be exposed to delay or uncertainty in this situation. Of course, there will be many situations that
fall between the examples presented in the Comment to Section 9-608 and in this Comment. This Article leaves
their resolution to the court based on the facts of each case.
One would expect that where noncash proceeds are or may be material, the secured party and debtor would
agree to more specific standards in an agreement entered into before or after default. The parties may agree to the
method of application of noncash proceeds if the method is not manifestly unreasonable. See Section 9-603.
When the secured party is not required to "apply or pay over for application noncash proceeds," the proceeds
nonetheless remain collateral subject to this Article. See Section 9-608, Comment 4.
4. Surplus and Deficiency. Subsection (d) deals with surplus and deficiency. It revises former Section 9-504(2)
by imposing an explicit requirement that the secured party "pay" the debtor for any surplus, while retaining the
secured party's duty to "account." Inasmuch as the debtor may not be an obligor, subsection (d) provides that the
obligor (not the debtor) is liable for the deficiency. The special rule governing surplus and deficiency when
receivables have been sold likewise takes into account the distinction between a debtor and an obligor. Subsection
(d) also addresses the situation in which a consignor has an interest that is subordinate to the security interest
being enforced.
5. Collateral Under New Ownership. When the debtor sells collateral subject to a security interest, the original
debtor (creator of the security interest) is no longer a debtor inasmuch as it no longer has a property interest in the
collateral; the buyer is the debtor. See Section 9-102. As between the debtor (buyer of the collateral) and the
original debtor (seller of the collateral), the debtor (buyer) normally would be entitled to the surplus following a
disposition. Subsection (d) therefore requires the secured party to pay the surplus to the debtor (buyer), not to the
original debtor (seller) with which it has dealt. But, because this situation typically arises as a result of the debtor's
wrongful act, this Article does not expose the secured party to the risk of determining ownership of the collateral. If
the secured party does not know about the buyer and accordingly pays the surplus to the original debtor, the
exculpatory provisions of this Article exonerate the secured party from liability to the buyer. See Sections 9-605, 9-
628(a), (b). If a debtor sells collateral free of a security interest, as in a sale to a buyer in ordinary course of
business (see Section 9-320(a)), the property is no longer collateral and the buyer is not a debtor.
6. Certain "Low-Price" Dispositions. Subsection (f) provides a special method for calculating a deficiency or
surplus when the secured party, a person related to the secured party (defined in Section 9-102), or a secondary
obligor acquires the collateral at a foreclosure disposition. It recognizes that when the foreclosing secured party or a
related party is the transferee of the collateral, the secured party sometimes lacks the incentive to maximize the
proceeds of disposition. As a consequence, the disposition may comply with the procedural requirements of this
Article (e.g., it is conducted in a commercially reasonable manner following reasonable notice) but nevertheless
fetch a low price.
Subsection (f) adjusts for this lack of incentive. If the proceeds of a disposition of collateral to a secured party, a
person related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor are "significantly below the range of proceeds that a
complying disposition to a person other than the secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a
secondary obligor would have brought," then instead of calculating a deficiency (or surplus) based on the actual net
§ 9-615. APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS OF DISPOSITION; LIABILITY FOR DEFICIENCY AND RIGHT TO
SURPLUS
Page 4 of 4
proceeds, the calculation is based upon the amount that would have been received in a commercially reasonable
disposition to a person other than the secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor.
Subsection (f) thus rejects the view that the secured party's receipt of such a price necessarily constitutes
noncompliance with Part 6. However, such a price may suggest the need for greater judicial scrutiny. See Section
9-610, Comment 10.
7. "Person Related To." Section 9-102 defines "person related to." That term is a key element of the system
provided in subsection (f) for low-price dispositions. One part of the definition applies when the secured party is an
individual, and the other applies when the secured party is an organization. The definition is patterned closely on
the corresponding definition in Section 1.301(32) of the Uniform Consumer Credit Code.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-616
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-616. EXPLANATION OF CALCULATION OF SURPLUS OR DEFICIENCY
(a) [Definitions.] In this section:
(1) "Explanation" means a writing that:
(A) states the amount of the surplus or deficiency;
(B) provides an explanation in accordance with subsection (c) of how the secured party calculated
the surplus or deficiency;
(C) states, if applicable, that future debits, credits, charges, including additional credit service
charges or interest, rebates, and expenses may affect the amount of the surplus or deficiency; and
(D) provides a telephone number or mailing address from which additional information concerning
the transaction is available.
(2) "Request" means a record:
(A) authenticated by a debtor or consumer obligor;
(B) requesting that the recipient provide an explanation; and
(C) sent after disposition of the collateral under Section 9-610.
(b) [Explanation of calculation.] In a consumer-goods transaction in which the debtor is entitled to a
surplus or a consumer obligor is liable for a deficiency under Section 9-615, the secured party shall:
(1) send an explanation to the debtor or consumer obligor, as applicable, after the disposition and:
(A) before or when the secured party accounts to the debtor and pays any surplus or first makes
written demand on the consumer obligor after the disposition for payment of the deficiency; and
(B) within 14 days after receipt of a request; or
(2) in the case of a consumer obligor who is liable for a deficiency, within 14 days after receipt of a
request, send to the consumer obligor a record waiving the secured party's right to a deficiency.
(c) [Required information.] To comply with subsection (a)(1)(B), a writing must provide the following
information in the following order:
(1) the aggregate amount of obligations secured by the security interest under which the disposition
was made, and, if the amount reflects a rebate of unearned interest or credit service charge, an
indication of that fact, calculated as of a specified date:
(A) if the secured party takes or receives possession of the collateral after default, not more than
35 days before the secured party takes or receives possession; or
(B) if the secured party takes or receives possession of the collateral before default or does not
take possession of the collateral, not more than 35 days before the disposition;
(2) the amount of proceeds of the disposition;
(3) the aggregate amount of the obligations after deducting the amount of proceeds;
§ 9-616. EXPLANATION OF CALCULATION OF SURPLUS OR DEFICIENCY
Page 2 of 3
(4) the amount, in the aggregate or by type, and types of expenses, including expenses of retaking,
holding, preparing for disposition, processing, and disposing of the collateral, and attorney's fees
secured by the collateral which are known to the secured party and relate to the current disposition;
(5) the amount, in the aggregate or by type, and types of credits, including rebates of interest or credit
service charges, to which the obligor is known to be entitled and which are not reflected in the amount
in paragraph (1); and
(6) the amount of the surplus or deficiency.
(d) [Substantial compliance.] A particular phrasing of the explanation is not required. An explanation
complying substantially with the requirements of subsection (a) is sufficient, even if it includes minor errors
that are not seriously misleading.
(e) [Charges for responses.] A debtor or consumer obligor is entitled without charge to one response to a
request under this section during any six-month period in which the secured party did not send to the debtor
or consumer obligor an explanation pursuant to subsection (b)(1). The secured party may require payment
of a charge not exceeding $ 25 for each additional response.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Duty to Send Information Concerning Surplus or Deficiency. This section reflects the view that, in every
consumer-goods transaction, the debtor or obligor is entitled to know the amount of a surplus or deficiency and the
basis upon which the surplus or deficiency was calculated. Under subsection (b)(1), a secured party is obligated to
provide this information (an "explanation," defined in subsection (a)(1)) no later than the time that it accounts for
and pays a surplus or the time of its first written attempt to collect the deficiency. The obligor need not make a
request for an accounting in order to receive an explanation. A secured party who does not attempt to collect a
deficiency in writing or account for and pay a surplus has no obligation to send an explanation under subsection
(b)(1) and, consequently, cannot be liable for noncompliance.
A debtor or secondary obligor need not wait until the secured party commences written collection efforts in order
to receive an explanation of how a deficiency or surplus was calculated. Subsection (b)(1)(B) obliges the secured
party to send an explanation within 14 days after it receives a "request" (defined in subsection (a)(2)).
3. Explanation of Calculation of Surplus or Deficiency. Subsection (c) contains the requirements for how a
calculation of a surplus or deficiency must be explained in order to satisfy subsection (a)(1)(B). It gives a secured
party some discretion concerning rebates of interest or credit service charges. The secured party may include these
rebates in the aggregate amount of obligations secured, under subsection (c)(1), or may include them with other
types of rebates and credits under subsection (c)(5). Rebates of interest or credit service charges are the only types
of rebates for which this discretion is provided. If the secured party provides an explanation that includes rebates of
pre-computed interest, its explanation must so indicate. The expenses and attorney's fees to be described pursuant
to subsection (c)(4) are those relating to the most recent disposition, not those that may have been incurred in
connection with earlier enforcement efforts and which have been resolved by the parties.
4. Liability for Noncompliance. A secured party who fails to comply with subsection (b)(2) is liable for any loss
caused plus $ 500. See Section 9-625(b), (c), (e)(6). A secured party who fails to send an explanation under
subsection (b)(1) is liable for any loss caused plus, if the noncompliance was "part of a pattern, or consistent with a
§ 9-616. EXPLANATION OF CALCULATION OF SURPLUS OR DEFICIENCY
Page 3 of 3
practice of noncompliance," $ 500. See Section 9-625(b), (c), (e)(5). However, a secured party who fails to comply
with this section is not liable for statutory minimum damages under Section 9-625(c)(2). See Section 9-628(d).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-617
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-617. RIGHTS OF TRANSFEREE OF COLLATERAL
(a) [Effects of disposition.] A secured party's disposition of collateral after default:
(1) transfers to a transferee for value all of the debtor's rights in the collateral;
(2) discharges the security interest under which the disposition is made; and
(3) discharges any subordinate security interest or other subordinate lien [other than liens created
under [cite acts or statutes providing for liens, if any, that are not to be discharged]].
(b) [Rights of good-faith transferee.] A transferee that acts in good faith takes free of the rights and
interests described in subsection (a), even if the secured party fails to comply with this article or the
requirements of any judicial proceeding.
(c) [Rights of other transferee.] If a transferee does not take free of the rights and interests described in
subsection (a), the transferee takes the collateral subject to:
(1) the debtor's rights in the collateral;
(2) the security interest or agricultural lien under which the disposition is made; and
(3) any other security interest or other lien.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-504(4).
2. Title Taken by Good-Faith Transferee. Subsection (a) sets forth the rights acquired by persons who qualify
under subsection (b)--transferees who act in good faith. Such a person is a "transferee," inasmuch as a buyer at a
foreclosure sale does not meet the definition of "purchaser" in Section 1-201 (the transfer is not, vis-a-vis the
debtor, "voluntary"). By virtue of the expanded definition of the term "debtor" in Section 9-102, subsection (a) makes
clear that the ownership interest of a person who bought the collateral subject to the security interest is terminated
by a subsequent disposition under this Part. Such a person is a debtor under this Article. Under former Article 9, the
result arguably was the same, but the statute was less clear. Under subsection (a), a disposition normally
discharges the security interest being foreclosed and any subordinate security interests and other liens.
A disposition has the effect specified in subsection (a), even if the secured party fails to comply with this Article.
An aggrieved person (e.g., the holder of a subordinate security interest to whom a notification required by Section
9-611 was not sent) has a right to recover any loss under Section 9-625(b).
3. Unitary Standard in Public and Private Dispositions. Subsection (b) now contains a unitary standard that
applies to transferees in both private and public dispositions--acting in good faith. However, this change from former
Section 9-504(4) should not be interpreted to mean that a transferee acts in good faith even though it has
§ 9-617. RIGHTS OF TRANSFEREE OF COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
knowledge of defects or buys in collusion, standards applicable to public dispositions under the former section.
Properly understood, those standards were specific examples of the absence of good faith.
4. Title Taken by Nonqualifying Transferee. Subsection (c) specifies the consequences for a transferee who
does not qualify for protection under subsections (a) and (b) (i.e., a transferee who does not act in good faith). The
transferee takes subject to the rights of the debtor, the enforcing secured party, and other security interests or other
liens.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-618
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-618. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CERTAIN SECONDARY OBLIGORS
(a) [Rights and duties of secondary obligor.] A secondary obligor acquires the rights and becomes
obligated to perform the duties of the secured party after the secondary obligor:
(1) receives an assignment of a secured obligation from the secured party;
(2) receives a transfer of collateral from the secured party and agrees to accept the rights and assume
the duties of the secured party; or
(3) is subrogated to the rights of a secured party with respect to collateral.
(b) [Effect of assignment, transfer, or subrogation.] An assignment, transfer, or subrogation described
in subsection (a):
(1) is not a disposition of collateral under Section 9-610; and
(2) relieves the secured party of further duties under this article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-504(5).
2. Scope of This Section. Under this section, assignments of secured obligations and other transactions
(regardless of form) that function like assignments of secured obligations are not dispositions to which Part 6
applies. Rather, they constitute assignments of rights and (occasionally) delegations of duties. Application of this
section may require an investigation into the agreement of the parties, which may not be reflected in the words of
the repurchase agreement (e.g., when the agreement requires a recourse party to "purchase the collateral" but
contemplates that the purchaser will then conduct an Article 9 foreclosure disposition).
This section, like former Section 9-504(5), does not constitute a general and comprehensive rule for allocating
rights and duties upon assignment of a secured obligation. Rather, it applies only in situations involving a secondary
obligor described in subsection (a). In other contexts, the agreement of the parties and applicable law other than
Article 9 determine whether the assignment imposes upon the assignee any duty to the debtor and whether the
assignor retains its duties to the debtor after the assignment.
Subsection (a)(1) applies when there has been an assignment of an obligation that is secured at the time it is
assigned. Thus, if a secondary obligor acquires the collateral at a disposition under Section 9-610 and
simultaneously or subsequently discharges the unsecured deficiency claim, subsection (a)(1) is not implicated.
Similarly, subsection (a)(3) applies only when the secondary obligor is subrogated to the secured party's rights with
respect to collateral. Thus, this subsection will not be implicated if a secondary obligor discharges the debtor's
unsecured obligation for a post-disposition deficiency. Similarly, if the secured party disposes of some of the
collateral and the secondary obligor thereafter discharges the remaining obligation, subsection (a) applies only with
§ 9-618. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF CERTAIN SECONDARY OBLIGORS
Page 2 of 2
respect to rights and duties concerning the remaining collateral, and, under subsection (b), the subrogation is not a
disposition of the remaining collateral.
As discussed more fully in Comment 3, a secondary obligor may receive a transfer of collateral in a disposition
under Section 9-610 in exchange for a payment that is applied against the secured obligation. However, a
secondary obligor who pays and receives a transfer of collateral does not necessarily become subrogated to the
rights of the secured party as contemplated by subsection (a)(3). Only to the extent the secondary obligor makes a
payment in satisfaction of its secondary obligation would it become subrogated. To the extent its payment
constitutes the price of the collateral in a Section 9-610 disposition by the secured party, the secondary obligor
would not be subrogated. Thus, if the amount paid by the secondary obligor for the collateral in a Section 9-610
disposition is itself insufficient to discharge the secured obligation, but the secondary obligor makes an additional
payment that satisfies the remaining balance, the secondary obligor would be subrogated to the secured party's
deficiency claim. However, the duties of the secured party as such would have come to an end with respect to that
collateral. In some situations the capacity in which the payment is made may be unclear. Accordingly, the parties
should in their relationship provide clear evidence of the nature and circumstances of the payment by the secondary
obligor.
3. Transfer of Collateral to Secondary Obligor. It is possible for a secured party to transfer collateral to a
secondary obligor in a transaction that is a disposition under Section 9-610 and that establishes a surplus or
deficiency under Section 9-615. Indeed, this Article includes a special rule, in Section 9-615(f), for establishing a
deficiency in the case of some dispositions to, inter alia, secondary obligors. This Article rejects the view, which
some may have ascribed to former Section 9-504(5), that a transfer of collateral to a recourse party can never
constitute a disposition of collateral which discharges a security interest. Inasmuch as a secured party could itself
buy collateral at its own public sale, it makes no sense to prohibit a recourse party ever from buying at the sale.
4. Timing and Scope of Obligations. Under subsection (a), a recourse party acquires rights and incurs
obligations only "after" one of the specified circumstances occurs. This makes clear that when a successor
assignee, transferee, or subrogee becomes obligated it does not assume any liability for earlier actions or inactions
of the secured party whom it has succeeded unless it agrees to do so. Once the successor becomes obligated,
however, it is responsible for complying with the secured party's duties thereafter. For example, if the successor is
in possession of collateral, then it has the duties specified in Section 9-207.
Under subsection (b), the same event (assignment, transfer, or subrogation) that gives rise to rights to, and
imposes obligations on, a successor relieves its predecessor of any further duties under this Article. For example, if
the security interest is enforced after the secured obligation is assigned, the assignee-but not the assignor-has the
duty to comply with this Part. Similarly, the assignment does not excuse the assignor from liability for failure to
comply with duties that arose before the event or impose liability on the assignee for the assignor's failure to
comply.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-619
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-619. TRANSFER OF RECORD OR LEGAL TITLE
(a) ["Transfer statement."] In this section, "transfer statement" means a record authenticated by a
secured party stating:
(1) that the debtor has defaulted in connection with an obligation secured by specified collateral;
(2) that the secured party has exercised its post-default remedies with respect to the collateral;
(3) that, by reason of the exercise, a transferee has acquired the rights of the debtor in the collateral;
and
(4) the name and mailing address of the secured party, debtor, and transferee.
(b) [Effect of transfer statement.] A transfer statement entitles the transferee to the transfer of record of
all rights of the debtor in the collateral specified in the statement in any official filing, recording, registration,
or certificate-of-title system covering the collateral. If a transfer statement is presented with the applicable
fee and request form to the official or office responsible for maintaining the system, the official or office
shall:
(1) accept the transfer statement;
(2) promptly amend its records to reflect the transfer; and
(3) if applicable, issue a new appropriate certificate of title in the name of the transferee.
(c) [Transfer not a disposition; no relief of secured party's duties.] A transfer of the record or legal title
to collateral to a secured party under subsection (b) or otherwise is not of itself a disposition of collateral
under this article and does not of itself relieve the secured party of its duties under this article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Transfer of Record or Legal Title. Potential buyers of collateral that is covered by a certificate of title (e.g., an
automobile) or is subject to a registration system (e.g., a copyright) typically require as a condition of their purchase
that the certificate or registry reflect their ownership. In many cases, this condition can be met only with the consent
of the record owner. If the record owner is the debtor and, as may be the case after the default, the debtor refuses
to cooperate, the secured party may have great difficulty disposing of the collateral.
Subsection (b) provides a simple mechanism for obtaining record or legal title, for use primarily when other law
does not provide one. Of course, use of this mechanism will not be effective to clear title to the extent that
subsection (b) is preempted by federal law. Subsection (b) contemplates a transfer of record or legal title to a third
party, following a secured party's exercise of its disposition or acceptance remedies under this Part, as well as a
§ 9-619. TRANSFER OF RECORD OR LEGAL TITLE
Page 2 of 2
transfer by a debtor to a secured party prior to the secured party's exercise of those remedies. Under subsection
(c), a transfer of record or legal title (under subsection (b) or under other law) to a secured party prior to the
exercise of those remedies merely puts the secured party in a position to pass legal or record title to a transferee at
foreclosure. A secured party who has obtained record or legal title retains its duties with respect to enforcement of
its security interest, and the debtor retains its rights as well.
3. Title-Clearing Systems Under Other Law. Applicable non-UCC law (e.g., a certificate-of-title statute, federal
registry rules, or the like) may provide a means by which the secured party may obtain or transfer record or legal
title for the purpose of a disposition of the property under this Article. The mechanism provided by this section is in
addition to any title-clearing provision under law other than this Article.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-620
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-620. ACCEPTANCE OF COLLATERAL IN FULL OR PARTIAL
SATISFACTION OF OBLIGATION; COMPULSORY DISPOSITION OF
COLLATERAL
(a) [Conditions to acceptance in satisfaction.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (g), a
secured party may accept collateral in full or partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures only if:
(1) the debtor consents to the acceptance under subsection (c);
(2) the secured party does not receive, within the time set forth in subsection (d), a notification of
objection to the proposal authenticated by:
(A) a person to which the secured party was required to send a proposal under Section 9-621; or
(B) any other person, other than the debtor, holding an interest in the collateral subordinate to the
security interest that is the subject of the proposal;
(3) if the collateral is consumer goods, the collateral is not in the possession of the debtor when the
debtor consents to the acceptance; and
(4) subsection (e) does not require the secured party to dispose of the collateral or the debtor waives
the requirement pursuant to Section 9-624.
(b) [Purported acceptance ineffective.] A purported or apparent acceptance of collateral under this
section is ineffective unless:
(1) the secured party consents to the acceptance in an authenticated record or sends a proposal to the
debtor; and
(2) the conditions of subsection (a) are met.
(c) [Debtor's consent.] For purposes of this section:
(1) a debtor consents to an acceptance of collateral in partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures
only if the debtor agrees to the terms of the acceptance in a record authenticated after default; and
(2) a debtor consents to an acceptance of collateral in full satisfaction of the obligation it secures only if
the debtor agrees to the terms of the acceptance in a record authenticated after default or the secured
party:
(A) sends to the debtor after default a proposal that is unconditional or subject only to a condition
that collateral not in the possession of the secured party be preserved or maintained;
(B) in the proposal, proposes to accept collateral in full satisfaction of the obligation it secures; and
(C) does not receive a notification of objection authenticated by the debtor within 20 days after the
proposal is sent.
(d) [Effectiveness of notification.] To be effective under subsection (a)(2), a notification of objection must
be received by the secured party:
§ 9-620. ACCEPTANCE OF COLLATERAL IN FULL OR PARTIAL SATISFACTION OF OBLIGATION;
COMPULSORY DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 5
(1) in the case of a person to which the proposal was sent pursuant to Section 9-621, within 20 days
after notification was sent to that person; and
(2) in other cases:
(A) within 20 days after the last notification was sent pursuant to Section 9-621; or
(B) if a notification was not sent, before the debtor consents to the acceptance under subsection
(c).
(e) [Mandatory disposition of consumer goods.] A secured party that has taken possession of collateral
shall dispose of the collateral pursuant to Section 9-610 within the time specified in subsection (f) if:
(1) 60 percent of the cash price has been paid in the case of a purchase-money security interest in
consumer goods; or
(2) 60 percent of the principal amount of the obligation secured has been paid in the case of a nonpurchase-
money security interest in consumer goods.
(f) [Compliance with mandatory disposition requirement.] To comply with subsection (e), the secured
party shall dispose of the collateral:
(1) within 90 days after taking possession; or
(2) within any longer period to which the debtor and all secondary obligors have agreed in an
agreement to that effect entered into and authenticated after default.
(g) [No partial satisfaction in consumer transaction.] In a consumer transaction, a secured party may
not accept collateral in partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-505.
2. Overview. This section and the two sections following deal with strict foreclosure, a procedure by which the
secured party acquires the debtor's interest in the collateral without the need for a sale or other disposition under
Section 9-610. Although these provisions derive from former Section 9-505, they have been entirely reorganized
and substantially rewritten. The more straightforward approach taken in this Article eliminates the fiction that the
secured party always will present a "proposal" for the retention of collateral and the debtor will have a fixed period
to respond. By eliminating the need (but preserving the possibility) for proceeding in that fashion, this section
eliminates much of the awkwardness of former Section 9-505. It reflects the belief that strict foreclosures should be
encouraged and often will produce better results than a disposition for all concerned.
Subsection (a) sets forth the conditions necessary to an effective acceptance (formerly, retention) of collateral in
full or partial satisfaction of the secured obligation. Section 9-621 requires in addition that a secured party who
wishes to proceed under this section notify certain other persons who have or claim to have an interest in the
collateral. Unlike the failure to meet the conditions in subsection (a), under Section 9-622(b) the failure to comply
with the notification requirement of Section 9-621 does not render the acceptance of collateral ineffective. Rather,
the acceptance can take effect notwithstanding the secured party's noncompliance. A person to whom the required
notice was not sent has the right to recover damages under Section 9-625(b). Section 9-622(a) sets forth the effect
of an acceptance of collateral.
§ 9-620. ACCEPTANCE OF COLLATERAL IN FULL OR PARTIAL SATISFACTION OF OBLIGATION;
COMPULSORY DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
Page 3 of 5
3. Conditions to Effective Acceptance. Subsection (a) contains the conditions necessary to the effectiveness of
an acceptance of collateral. Subsection (a)(1) requires the debtor's consent. Under subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2),
the debtor may consent by agreeing to the acceptance in writing after default. Subsection (c)(2) contains an
alternative method by which to satisfy the debtor's-consent condition in subsection (a)(1). It follows the proposaland-
objection model found in former Section 9-505: The debtor consents if the secured party sends a proposal to
the debtor and does not receive an objection within 20 days. Under subsection (c)(1), however, that silence is not
deemed to be consent with respect to acceptances in partial satisfaction. Thus, a secured party who wishes to
conduct a "partial strict foreclosure" must obtain the debtor's agreement in a record authenticated after default. In all
other respects, the conditions necessary to an effective partial strict foreclosure are the same as those governing
acceptance of collateral in full satisfaction. (But see subsection (g), prohibiting partial strict foreclosure of a security
interest in consumer transactions.)
The time when a debtor consents to a strict foreclosure is significant in several circumstances under this section
and the following one. See Sections 9-620(a)(1), (d)(2), 9-621(a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3). For purposes of determining the
time of consent, a debtor's conditional consent constitutes consent.
Subsection (a)(2) contains the second condition to the effectiveness of an acceptance under this section--the
absence of a timely objection from a person holding a junior interest in the collateral or from a secondary obligor.
Any junior party--secured party or lienholder--is entitled to lodge an objection to a proposal, even if that person was
not entitled to notification under Section 9-621. Subsection (d), discussed below, indicates when an objection is
timely.
Subsections (a)(3) and (a)(4) contain special rules for transactions in which consumers are involved. See
Comment 12.
4. Proposals. Section 9-102 defines the term "proposal." It is necessary to send a "proposal" to the debtor only if
the debtor does not agree to an acceptance in an authenticated record as described in subsection (c)(1) or (c)(2).
Section 9-621(a) determines whether it is necessary to send a proposal to third parties. A proposal need not take
any particular form as long as it sets forth the terms under which the secured party is willing to accept collateral in
satisfaction. A proposal to accept collateral should specify the amount (or a means of calculating the amount, such
as by including a per diem accrual figure) of the secured obligations to be satisfied, state the conditions (if any)
under which the proposal may be revoked, and describe any other applicable conditions. Note, however, that a
conditional proposal generally requires the debtor's agreement in order to take effect. See subsection (c).
5. Secured Party's Agreement; No "Constructive" Strict Foreclosure. The conditions of subsection (a) relate
to actual or implied consent by the debtor and any secondary obligor or holder of a junior security interest or lien. To
ensure that the debtor cannot unilaterally cause an acceptance of collateral, subsection (b) provides that
compliance with these conditions is necessary but not sufficient to cause an acceptance of collateral. Rather, under
subsection (b), acceptance does not occur unless, in addition, the secured party consents to the acceptance in an
authenticated record or sends to the debtor a proposal. For this reason, a mere delay in collection or disposition of
collateral does not constitute a "constructive" strict foreclosure. Instead, delay is a factor relating to whether the
secured party acted in a commercially reasonable manner for purposes of Section 9-607 or 9-610. A debtor's
voluntary surrender of collateral to a secured party and the secured party's acceptance of possession of the
collateral does not, of itself, necessarily raise an implication that the secured party intends or is proposing to accept
the collateral in satisfaction of the secured obligation under this section.
6. When Acceptance Occurs. This section does not impose any formalities or identify any steps that a secured
party must take in order to accept collateral once the conditions of subsections (a) and (b) have been met. Absent
facts or circumstances indicating a contrary intention, the fact that the conditions have been met provides a
sufficient indication that the secured party has accepted the collateral on the terms to which the secured party has
consented or proposed and the debtor has consented or failed to object. Following a proposal, acceptance of the
collateral normally is automatic upon the secured party's becoming bound and the time for objection passing. As a
matter of good business practice, an enforcing secured party may wish to memorialize its acceptance following a
§ 9-620. ACCEPTANCE OF COLLATERAL IN FULL OR PARTIAL SATISFACTION OF OBLIGATION;
COMPULSORY DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
Page 4 of 5
proposal, such as by notifying the debtor that the strict foreclosure is effective or by placing a written record to that
effect in its files. The secured party's agreement to accept collateral is self-executing and cannot be breached. The
secured party is bound by its agreement to accept collateral and by any proposal to which the debtor consents.
7. No Possession Requirement. This section eliminates the requirement in former Section 9-505 that the
secured party be "in possession" of collateral. It clarifies that intangible collateral, which cannot be possessed, may
be subject to a strict foreclosure under this section. However, under subsection (a)(3), if the collateral is consumer
goods, acceptance does not occur unless the debtor is not in possession.
8. When Objection Timely. Subsection (d) explains when an objection is timely and thus prevents an acceptance
of collateral from taking effect. An objection by a person to which notification was sent under Section 9-621 is
effective if it is received by the secured party within 20 days from the date the notification was sent to that person.
Other objecting parties (i.e., third parties who are not entitled to notification) may object at any time within 20 days
after the last notification is sent under Section 9-621. If no such notification is sent, third parties must object before
the debtor agrees to the acceptance in writing or is deemed to have consented by silence. The former may occur
any time after default, and the latter requires a 20-day waiting period. See subsection (c).
9. Applicability of Other Law. This section does not purport to regulate all aspects of the transaction by which a
secured party may become the owner of collateral previously owned by the debtor. For example, a secured party's
acceptance of a motor vehicle in satisfaction of secured obligations may require compliance with the applicable
motor vehicle certificate-of-title law. State legislatures should conform those laws so that they mesh well with this
section and Section 9-610, and courts should construe those laws and this section harmoniously. A secured party's
acceptance of collateral in the possession of the debtor also may implicate statutes dealing with a seller's retention
of possession of goods sold.
10. Accounts, Chattel Paper, Payment Intangibles, and Promissory Notes. If the collateral is accounts,
chattel paper, payment intangibles, or promissory notes, then a secured party's acceptance of the collateral in
satisfaction of secured obligations would constitute a sale to the secured party. That sale normally would give rise
to a new security interest (the ownership interest) under Sections 1-201(37) and 9-109. In the case of accounts and
chattel paper, the new security interest would remain perfected by a filing that was effective to perfect the secured
party's original security interest. In the case of payment intangibles or promissory notes, the security interest would
be perfected when it attaches. See Section 9-309. However, the procedures for acceptance of collateral under this
section satisfy all necessary formalities and a new security agreement authenticated by the debtor would not be
necessary.
11. Role of Good Faith. Section 1-304 imposes an obligation of good faith on a secured party's enforcement
under this Article. This obligation may not be disclaimed by agreement. See Section 1-302. Thus, a proposal and
acceptance made under this section in bad faith would not be effective. For example, a secured party's proposal to
accept marketable securities worth $ 1,000 in full satisfaction of indebtedness in the amount of $ 100, made in the
hopes that the debtor might inadvertently fail to object, would be made in bad faith. On the other hand, in the normal
case proposals and acceptances should be not second-guessed on the basis of the "value" of the collateral
involved. Disputes about valuation or even a clear excess of collateral value over the amount of obligations satisfied
do not necessarily demonstrate the absence of good faith.
12. Special Rules in Consumer Cases. Subsection (e) imposes an obligation on the secured party to dispose of
consumer goods under certain circumstances. Subsection (f) explains when a disposition that is required under
subsection (e) is timely. An effective acceptance of collateral cannot occur if subsection (e) requires a disposition
unless the debtor waives this requirement pursuant to Section 9-624(b). Moreover, a secured party who takes
possession of collateral and unreasonably delays disposition violates subsection (e), if applicable, and may also
violate Section 9-610 or other provisions of this Part. Subsection (e) eliminates as superfluous the express statutory
reference to "conversion" found in former Section 9-505. Remedies available under other law, including conversion,
remain available under this Article in appropriate cases. See Sections 1-103, 1-305.
§ 9-620. ACCEPTANCE OF COLLATERAL IN FULL OR PARTIAL SATISFACTION OF OBLIGATION;
COMPULSORY DISPOSITION OF COLLATERAL
Page 5 of 5
Subsection (g) prohibits the secured party in consumer transactions from accepting collateral in partial satisfaction
of the obligation it secures. If a secured party attempts an acceptance in partial satisfaction in a consumer
transaction, the attempted acceptance is void.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-621
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-621. NOTIFICATION OF PROPOSAL TO ACCEPT COLLATERAL
(a) [Persons to which proposal to be sent.] A secured party that desires to accept collateral in full or
partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures shall send its proposal to:
(1) any person from which the secured party has received, before the debtor consented to the
acceptance, an authenticated notification of a claim of an interest in the collateral;
(2) any other secured party or lienholder that, 10 days before the debtor consented to the acceptance,
held a security interest in or other lien on the collateral perfected by the filing of a financing statement
that:
(A) identified the collateral;
(B) was indexed under the debtor's name as of that date; and
(C) was filed in the office or offices in which to file a financing statement against the debtor
covering the collateral as of that date; and
(3) any other secured party that, 10 days before the debtor consented to the acceptance, held a
security interest in the collateral perfected by compliance with a statute, regulation, or treaty described
in Section 9-311(a).
(b) [Proposal to be sent to secondary obligor in partial satisfaction.] A secured party that desires to
accept collateral in partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures shall send its proposal to any secondary
obligor in addition to the persons described in subsection (a).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-505.
2. Notification Requirement. Subsection (a) specifies three classes of competing claimants to whom the
secured party must send notification of its proposal: (i) those who notify the secured party that they claim an interest
in the collateral, (ii) holders of certain security interests and liens who have filed against the debtor, and (iii) holders
of certain security interests who have perfected by compliance with a statute (including a certificate-of-title statute),
regulation, or treaty described in Section 9-311(a). With regard to (ii), see Section 9-611, Comment 4. Subsection
(b) also requires notification to any secondary obligor if the proposal is for acceptance in partial satisfaction.
Unlike Section 9-611, this section contains no "safe harbor," which excuses an enforcing secured party from
notifying certain secured parties and other lienholders. This is because, unlike Section 9-610, which requires that a
disposition of collateral be commercially reasonable, Section 9-620 permits the debtor and secured party to set the
amount of credit the debtor will receive for the collateral subject only to the requirement of good faith. An effective
acceptance discharges subordinate security interests and other subordinate liens. See Section 9-622. If collateral is
§ 9-621. NOTIFICATION OF PROPOSAL TO ACCEPT COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
subject to several liens securing debts much larger than the value of the collateral, the debtor may be disinclined to
refrain from consenting to an acceptance by the holder of the senior security interest, even though, had the debtor
objected and the senior disposed of the collateral under Section 9-610, the collateral may have yielded more than
enough to satisfy the senior security interest (but not enough to satisfy all the liens). Accordingly, this section
imposes upon the enforcing secured party the risk of the filing office's errors and delay. The holder of a security
interest who is entitled to notification under this section but to whom the enforcing secured party does not send
notification has the right to recover under Section 9-625(b) any loss resulting from the secured party's
noncompliance with this section.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-622
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-622. EFFECT OF ACCEPTANCE OF COLLATERAL
(a) [Effect of acceptance.] A secured party's acceptance of collateral in full or partial satisfaction of the
obligation it secures:
(1) discharges the obligation to the extent consented to by the debtor;
(2) transfers to the secured party all of a debtor's rights in the collateral;
(3) discharges the security interest or agricultural lien that is the subject of the debtor's consent and
any subordinate security interest or other subordinate lien; and
(4) terminates any other subordinate interest.
(b) [Discharge of subordinate interest notwithstanding noncompliance.] A subordinate interest is
discharged or terminated under subsection (a), even if the secured party fails to comply with this article.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Effect of Acceptance. Subsection (a) specifies the effect of an acceptance of collateral in full or partial
satisfaction of the secured obligation. The acceptance to which it refers is an effective acceptance. If a purported
acceptance is ineffective under Section 9-620, e.g., because the secured party receives a timely objection from a
person entitled to notification, then neither this subsection nor subsection (b) applies. Paragraph (1) expresses the
fundamental consequence of accepting collateral in full or partial satisfaction of the secured obligation--the
obligation is discharged to the extent consented to by the debtor. Unless otherwise agreed, the obligor remains
liable for any deficiency. Paragraphs (2) through (4) indicate the effects of an acceptance on various property rights
and interests. Paragraph (2) follows Section 9-617(a) in providing that the secured party acquires "all of a debtor's
rights in the collateral." Under paragraph (3), the effect of strict foreclosure on holders of junior security interests
and other liens is the same regardless of whether the collateral is accepted in full or partial satisfaction of the
secured obligation: all junior encumbrances are discharged. Paragraph (4) provides for the termination of other
subordinate interests.
Subsection (b) makes clear that subordinate interests are discharged under subsection (a) regardless of whether
the secured party complies with this Article. Thus, subordinate interests are discharged regardless of whether a
proposal was required to be sent or, if required, was sent. However, a secured party's failure to send a proposal or
otherwise to comply with this Article may subject the secured party to liability under Section 9-625.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 9-622. EFFECT OF ACCEPTANCE OF COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-623
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-623. RIGHT TO REDEEM COLLATERAL
(a) [Persons that may redeem.] A debtor, any secondary obligor, or any other secured party or lienholder
may redeem collateral.
(b) [Requirements for redemption.] To redeem collateral, a person shall tender:
(1) fulfillment of all obligations secured by the collateral; and
(2) the reasonable expenses and attorney's fees described in Section 9-615(a)(1).
(c) [When redemption may occur.] A redemption may occur at any time before a secured party:
(1) has collected collateral under Section 9-607;
(2) has disposed of collateral or entered into a contract for its disposition under Section 9-610; or
(3) has accepted collateral in full or partial satisfaction of the obligation it secures under Section 9-622.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-506.
2. Redemption Right. Under this section, as under former Section 9-506, the debtor or another secured party
may redeem collateral as long as the secured party has not collected (Section 9-607), disposed of or contracted for
the disposition of (Section 9-610), or accepted (Section 9-620) the collateral. Although this section generally follows
former Section 9-506, it extends the right of redemption to holders of nonconsensual liens. To redeem the collateral
a person must tender fulfillment of all obligations secured, plus certain expenses. If the entire balance of a secured
obligation has been accelerated, it would be necessary to tender the entire balance. A tender of fulfillment obviously
means more than a new promise to perform an existing promise. It requires payment in full of all monetary
obligations then due and performance in full of all other obligations then matured. If unmatured secured obligations
remain, the security interest continues to secure them (i.e., as if there had been no default).
3. Redemption of Remaining Collateral Following Partial Enforcement. Under Section 9-610 a secured party
may make successive dispositions of portions of its collateral. These dispositions would not affect the debtor's,
another secured party's, or a lienholder's right to redeem the remaining collateral.
4. Effect of "Repledging." Section 9-207 generally permits a secured party having possession or control of
collateral to create a security interest in the collateral. As explained in the Comments to that section, the debtor's
right (as opposed to its practical ability) to redeem collateral is not affected by, and does not affect, the priority of a
security interest created by the debtor's secured party.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
§ 9-623. RIGHT TO REDEEM COLLATERAL
Page 2 of 2
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-624
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 1. DEFAULT AND ENFORCEMENT OF
SECURITY INTEREST
§ 9-624. WAIVER
(a) [Waiver of disposition notification.] A debtor or secondary obligor may waive the right to notification
of disposition of collateral under Section 9-611 only by an agreement to that effect entered into and
authenticated after default.
(b) [Waiver of mandatory disposition.] A debtor may waive the right to require disposition of collateral
under Section 9-620(e) only by an agreement to that effect entered into and authenticated after default.
(c) [Waiver of redemption right.] Except in a consumer-goods transaction, a debtor or secondary obligor
may waive the right to redeem collateral under Section 9-623 only by an agreement to that effect entered
into and authenticated after default.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Sections 9-504(3), 9-505, 9-506.
2. Waiver. This section is a limited exception to Section 9-602, which generally prohibits waiver by debtors and
obligors. It makes no provision for waiver of the rule prohibiting a secured party from buying at its own private
disposition. Transactions of this kind are equivalent to "strict foreclosures" and are governed by Sections 9-620, 9-
621, and 9-622.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-625
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 2. NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE
§ 9-625. REMEDIES FOR SECURED PARTY'S FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH
ARTICLE
(a) [Judicial orders concerning noncompliance.] If it is established that a secured party is not
proceeding in accordance with this article, a court may order or restrain collection, enforcement, or
disposition of collateral on appropriate terms and conditions.
(b) [Damages for noncompliance.] Subject to subsections (c), (d), and (f), a person is liable for damages
in the amount of any loss caused by a failure to comply with this article. Loss caused by a failure to comply
may include loss resulting from the debtor's inability to obtain, or increased costs of, alternative financing.
(c) [Persons entitled to recover damages; statutory damages if collateral is consumer goods.]
Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-628:
(1) a person that, at the time of the failure, was a debtor, was an obligor, or held a security interest in
or other lien on the collateral may recover damages under subsection (b) for its loss; and
(2) if the collateral is consumer goods, a person that was a debtor or a secondary obligor at the time a
secured party failed to comply with this part may recover for that failure in any event an amount not less
than the credit service charge plus 10 percent of the principal amount of the obligation or the time-price
differential plus 10 percent of the cash price.
(d) [Recovery when deficiency eliminated or reduced.] A debtor whose deficiency is eliminated under
Section 9-626 may recover damages for the loss of any surplus. However, a debtor or secondary obligor
whose deficiency is eliminated or reduced under Section 9-626 may not otherwise recover under
subsection (b) for noncompliance with the provisions of this part relating to collection, enforcement,
disposition, or acceptance.
(e) [Statutory damages: noncompliance with specified provisions.] In addition to any damages
recoverable under subsection (b), the debtor, consumer obligor, or person named as a debtor in a filed
record, as applicable, may recover $ 500 in each case from a person that:
(1) fails to comply with Section 9-208;
(2) fails to comply with Section 9-209;
(3) files a record that the person is not entitled to file under Section 9-509(a);
(4) fails to cause the secured party of record to file or send a termination statement as required by
Section 9-513(a) or (c);
(5) fails to comply with Section 9-616(b)(1) and whose failure is part of a pattern, or consistent with a
practice, of noncompliance; or
(6) fails to comply with Section 9-616(b)(2).
(f) [Statutory damages: noncompliance with Section 9-210.] A debtor or consumer obligor may
recover damages under subsection (b) and, in addition, $ 500 in each case from a person that, without
reasonable cause, fails to comply with a request under Section 9-210. A recipient of a request under
Section 9-210 which never claimed an interest in the collateral or obligations that are the subject of a
§ 9-625. REMEDIES FOR SECURED PARTY'S FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ARTICLE
Page 2 of 3
request under that section has a reasonable excuse for failure to comply with the request within the
meaning of this subsection.
(g) [Limitation of security interest: noncompliance with Section 9-210.] If a secured party fails to
comply with a request regarding a list of collateral or a statement of account under Section 9-210, the
secured party may claim a security interest only as shown in the list or statement included in the request as
against a person that is reasonably misled by the failure.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-507.
2. Remedies for Noncompliance; Scope. Subsections (a) and (b) provide the basic remedies afforded to those
aggrieved by a secured party's failure to comply with this Article. Like all provisions that create liability, they are
subject to Section 9-628, which should be read in conjunction with Section 9-605. The principal limitations under
this Part on a secured party's right to enforce its security interest against collateral are the requirements that it
proceed in good faith (Section 1-203), in a commercially reasonable manner (Sections 9-607 and 9-610), and, in
most cases, with reasonable notification (Sections 9-611 through 9-614). Following former Section 9-507, under
subsection (a) an aggrieved person may seek injunctive relief, and under subsection (b) the person may recover
damages for losses caused by noncompliance. Unlike former Section 9-507, however, subsections (a) and (b) are
not limited to noncompliance with provisions of this Part of Article 9. Rather, they apply to noncompliance with any
provision of this Article. The change makes this section applicable to noncompliance with Sections 9-207 (duties of
secured party in possession of collateral), 9-208 (duties of secured party having control over deposit account), 9-
209 (duties of secured party if account debtor has been notified of an assignment), 9-210 (duty to comply with
request for accounting, etc.), 9-509(a) (duty to refrain from filing unauthorized financing statement), and 9-513(a) or
(c) (duty to provide termination statement). Subsection (a) also modifies the first sentence of former Section 9-
507(1) by adding the references to "collection" and "enforcement." Subsection (c)(2), which gives a minimum
damage recovery in consumer-goods transactions, applies only to noncompliance with the provisions of this Part.
3. Damages for Noncompliance with This Article. Subsection (b) sets forth the basic remedy for failure to
comply with the requirements of this Article: a damage recovery in the amount of loss caused by the
noncompliance. Subsection (c) identifies who may recover under subsection (b). It affords a remedy to any
aggrieved person who is a debtor or obligor. However, a principal obligor who is not a debtor may recover damages
only for noncompliance with Section 9-616, inasmuch as none of the other rights and duties in this Article run in
favor of such a principal obligor. Such a principal obligor could not suffer any loss or damage on account of
noncompliance with rights or duties of which it is not a beneficiary. Subsection (c) also affords a remedy to an
aggrieved person who holds a competing security interest or other lien, regardless of whether the aggrieved person
is entitled to notification under Part 6. The remedy is available even to holders of senior security interests and other
liens. The exercise of this remedy is subject to the normal rules of pleading and proof. A person who has delegated
the duties of a secured party but who remains obligated to perform them is liable under this subsection. The last
sentence of subsection (d) eliminates the possibility of double recovery or other over-compensation arising out of a
reduction or elimination of a deficiency under Section 9-626, based on noncompliance with the provisions of this
Part relating to collection, enforcement, disposition, or acceptance. Assuming no double recovery, a debtor whose
deficiency is eliminated under Section 9-626 may pursue a claim for a surplus. Because Section 9-626 does not
apply to consumer transactions, the statute is silent as to whether a double recovery or other over-compensation is
possible in a consumer transaction.
Damages for violation of the requirements of this Article, including Section 9-609, are those reasonably calculated
to put an eligible claimant in the position that it would have occupied had no violation occurred. See Section 1-106.
§ 9-625. REMEDIES FOR SECURED PARTY'S FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ARTICLE
Page 3 of 3
Subsection (b) supports the recovery of actual damages for committing a breach of the peace in violation of Section
9-609, and principles of tort law supplement this subsection. See Section 1-103. However, to the extent that
damages in tort compensate the debtor for the same loss dealt with by this Article, the debtor should be entitled to
only one recovery.
4. Minimum Damages in Consumer-Goods Transactions. Subsection (c)(2) provides a minimum, statutory,
damage recovery for a debtor and secondary obligor in a consumer-goods transaction. It is patterned on former
Section 9-507(1) and is designed to ensure that every noncompliance with the requirements of Part 6 in a
consumer-goods transaction results in liability, regardless of any injury that may have resulted. Subsection (c)(2)
leaves the treatment of statutory damages as it was under former Article 9. A secured party is not liable for statutory
damages under this subsection more than once with respect to any one secured obligation (see Section 9-628(e)),
nor is a secured party liable under this subsection for failure to comply with Section 9-616 (see Section 9-628(d)).
Following former Section 9-507(1), this Article does not include a definition or explanation of the terms "credit
service charge," "principal amount," "time-price differential," or "cash price," as used in subsection (c)(2). It leaves
their construction and application to the court, taking into account the subsection's purpose of providing a minimum
recovery in consumer-goods transactions.
5. Supplemental Damages. Subsections (e) and (f) provide damages that supplement the recovery, if any, under
subsection (b). Subsection (e) imposes an additional $ 500 liability upon a person who fails to comply with the
provisions specified in that subsection, and subsection (f) imposes like damages on a person who, without
reasonable excuse, fails to comply with a request for an accounting or a request regarding a list of collateral or
statement of account under Section 9-210. However, under subsection (f), a person has a reasonable excuse for
the failure if the person never claimed an interest in the collateral or obligations that were the subject of the request.
6. Estoppel. Subsection (g) limits the extent to which a secured party who fails to comply with a request
regarding a list of collateral or statement of account may claim a security interest.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-626
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 2. NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE
§ 9-626. ACTION IN WHICH DEFICIENCY OR SURPLUS IS IN ISSUE
(a) [Applicable rules if amount of deficiency or surplus in issue.] In an action arising from a
transaction, other than a consumer transaction, in which the amount of a deficiency or surplus is in issue,
the following rules apply:
(1) A secured party need not prove compliance with the provisions of this part relating to collection,
enforcement, disposition, or acceptance unless the debtor or a secondary obligor places the secured
party's compliance in issue.
(2) If the secured party's compliance is placed in issue, the secured party has the burden of
establishing that the collection, enforcement, disposition, or acceptance was conducted in accordance
with this part.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-628, if a secured party fails to prove that the collection,
enforcement, disposition, or acceptance was conducted in accordance with the provisions of this part
relating to collection, enforcement, disposition, or acceptance, the liability of a debtor or a secondary
obligor for a deficiency is limited to an amount by which the sum of the secured obligation, expenses,
and attorney's fees exceeds the greater of:
(A) the proceeds of the collection, enforcement, disposition, or acceptance; or
(B) the amount of proceeds that would have been realized had the noncomplying secured party
proceeded in accordance with the provisions of this part relating to collection, enforcement,
disposition, or acceptance.
(4) For purposes of paragraph (3)(B), the amount of proceeds that would have been realized is equal
to the sum of the secured obligation, expenses, and attorney's fees unless the secured party proves
that the amount is less than that sum.
(5) If a deficiency or surplus is calculated under Section 9-615(f), the debtor or obligor has the burden
of establishing that the amount of proceeds of the disposition is significantly below the range of prices
that a complying disposition to a person other than the secured party, a person related to the secured
party, or a secondary obligor would have brought.
(b) [Non-consumer transactions; no inference.] The limitation of the rules in subsection (a) to
transactions other than consumer transactions is intended to leave to the court the determination of the
proper rules in consumer transactions. The court may not infer from that limitation the nature of the proper
rule in consumer transactions and may continue to apply established approaches.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
§ 9-626. ACTION IN WHICH DEFICIENCY OR SURPLUS IS IN ISSUE
Page 2 of 3
2. Scope. The basic damage remedy under Section 9-625(b) is subject to the special rules in this section for
transactions other than consumer transactions. This section addresses situations in which the amount of a
deficiency or surplus is in issue, i.e., situations in which the secured party has collected, enforced, disposed of, or
accepted the collateral. It contains special rules applicable to a determination of the amount of a deficiency or
surplus. Because this section affects a person's liability for a deficiency, it is subject to Section 9-628, which should
be read in conjunction with Section 9-605. The rules in this section apply only to noncompliance in connection with
the "collection, enforcement, disposition, or acceptance" under Part 6. For other types of noncompliance with Part
6, the general liability rule of Section 9-625(b)--recovery of actual damages--applies. Consider, for example, a
repossession that does not comply with Section 9-609 for want of a default. The debtor's remedy is under Section
9-625(b). In a proper case, the secured party also may be liable for conversion under non-UCC law. If the secured
party thereafter disposed of the collateral, however, it would violate Section 9-610 at that time, and this section
would apply.
3. Rebuttable Presumption Rule. Subsection (a) establishes the rebuttable presumption rule for transactions
other than consumer transactions. Under paragraph (1), the secured party need not prove compliance with the
relevant provisions of this Part as part of its prima facie case. If, however, the debtor or a secondary obligor raises
the issue (in accordance with the forum's rules of pleading and practice), then the secured party bears the burden
of proving that the collection, enforcement, disposition, or acceptance complied. In the event the secured party is
unable to meet this burden, then paragraph (3) explains how to calculate the deficiency. Under this rebuttable
presumption rule, the debtor or obligor is to be credited with the greater of the actual proceeds of the disposition or
the proceeds that would have been realized had the secured party complied with the relevant provisions. If a
deficiency remains, then the secured party is entitled to recover it. The references to "the secured obligation,
expenses, and attorney's fees" in paragraphs (3) and (4) embrace the application rules in Sections 9-608(a) and 9-
615(a).
Unless the secured party proves that compliance with the relevant provisions would have yielded a smaller
amount, under paragraph (4) the amount that a complying collection, enforcement, or disposition would have
yielded is deemed to be equal to the amount of the secured obligation, together with expenses and attorney's fees.
Thus, the secured party may not recover any deficiency unless it meets this burden.
4. Consumer Transactions. Although subsection (a) adopts a version of the rebuttable presumption rule for
transactions other than consumer transactions, with certain exceptions Part 6 does not specify the effect of a
secured party's noncompliance in consumer transactions. (The exceptions are the provisions for the recovery of
damages in Section 9-625.) Subsection (b) provides that the limitation of subsection (a) to transactions other than
consumer transactions is intended to leave to the court the determination of the proper rules in consumer
transactions. It also instructs the court not to draw any inference from the limitation as to the proper rules for
consumer transactions and leaves the court free to continue to apply established approaches to those transactions.
Courts construing former Section 9-507 disagreed about the consequences of a secured party's failure to comply
with the requirements of former Part 5. Three general approaches emerged. Some courts have held that a
noncomplying secured party may not recover a deficiency (the "absolute bar" rule). A few courts held that the
debtor can offset against a claim to a deficiency all damages recoverable under former Section 9-507 resulting from
the secured party's noncompliance (the "offset" rule). A plurality of courts considering the issue held that the
noncomplying secured party is barred from recovering a deficiency unless it overcomes a rebuttable presumption
that compliance with former Part 5 would have yielded an amount sufficient to satisfy the secured debt. In addition
to the nonuniformity resulting from court decisions, some States enacted special rules governing the availability of
deficiencies.
5. Burden of Proof When Section 9-615(f) Applies. In a non-consumer transaction, subsection (a)(5) imposes
upon a debtor or obligor the burden of proving that the proceeds of a disposition are so low that, under Section 9-
615(f), the actual proceeds should not serve as the basis upon which a deficiency or surplus is calculated. Were the
burden placed on the secured party, then debtors might be encouraged to challenge the price received in every
disposition to the secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor.
§ 9-626. ACTION IN WHICH DEFICIENCY OR SURPLUS IS IN ISSUE
Page 3 of 3
6. Delay in Applying This Section. There is an inevitable delay between the time a secured party engages in a
noncomplying collection, enforcement, disposition, or acceptance and the time of a subsequent judicial
determination that the secured party did not comply with Part 6. During the interim, the secured party, believing that
the secured obligation is larger than it ultimately is determined to be, may continue to enforce its security interest in
collateral. If some or all of the secured indebtedness ultimately is discharged under this section, a reasonable
application of this section would impose liability on the secured party for the amount of any excess, unwarranted
recoveries but would not make the enforcement efforts wrongful.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-627
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 2. NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE
§ 9-627. DETERMINATION OF WHETHER CONDUCT WAS COMMERCIALLY
REASONABLE
(a) [Greater amount obtainable under other circumstances; no preclusion of commercial
reasonableness.] The fact that a greater amount could have been obtained by a collection, enforcement,
disposition, or acceptance at a different time or in a different method from that selected by the secured
party is not of itself sufficient to preclude the secured party from establishing that the collection,
enforcement, disposition, or acceptance was made in a commercially reasonable manner.
(b) [Dispositions that are commercially reasonable.] A disposition of collateral is made in a
commercially reasonable manner if the disposition is made:
(1) in the usual manner on any recognized market;
(2) at the price current in any recognized market at the time of the disposition; or
(3) otherwise in conformity with reasonable commercial practices among dealers in the type of property
that was the subject of the disposition.
(c) [Approval by court or on behalf of creditors.] A collection, enforcement, disposition, or acceptance
is commercially reasonable if it has been approved:
(1) in a judicial proceeding;
(2) by a bona fide creditors' committee;
(3) by a representative of creditors; or
(4) by an assignee for the benefit of creditors.
(d) [Approval under subsection (c) not necessary; absence of approval has no effect.] Approval
under subsection (c) need not be obtained, and lack of approval does not mean that the collection,
enforcement, disposition, or acceptance is not commercially reasonable.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. Former Section 9-507(2).
2. Relationship of Price to Commercial Reasonableness. Some observers have found the notion contained in
subsection (a) (derived from former Section 9-507(2)) (the fact that a better price could have been obtained does
not establish lack of commercial reasonableness) to be inconsistent with that found in Section 9-610(b) (derived
from former Section 9-504(3) (every aspect of the disposition, including its terms, must be commercially
reasonable). There is no such inconsistency. While not itself sufficient to establish a violation of this Part, a low
price suggests that a court should scrutinize carefully all aspects of a disposition to ensure that each aspect was
commercially reasonable.
§ 9-627. DETERMINATION OF WHETHER CONDUCT WAS COMMERCIALLY REASONABLE
Page 2 of 2
The law long has grappled with the problem of dispositions of personal and real property which comply with
applicable procedural requirements (e.g., advertising, notification to interested persons, etc.) but which yield a price
that seems low. This Article addresses that issue in Section 9-615(f). That section applies only when the transferee
is the secured party, a person related to the secured party, or a secondary obligor. It contains a special rule for
calculating a deficiency or surplus in a complying disposition that yields a price that is "significantly below the range
of proceeds that a complying disposition to a person other than the secured party, a person related to the secured
party, or a secondary obligor would have brought."
3. Determination of Commercial Reasonableness; Advance Approval. It is important to make clear the
conduct and procedures that are commercially reasonable and to provide a secured party with the means of
obtaining, by court order or negotiation with a creditors' committee or a representative of creditors, advance
approval of a proposed method of enforcement as commercially reasonable. This section contains rules that assist
in that determination and provides for advance approval in appropriate situations. However, none of the specific
methods of disposition specified in subsection (b) is required or exclusive.
4. "Recognized Market." As in Sections 9-610(c) and 9-611(d), the concept of a "recognized market" in
subsections (b)(1) and (2) is quite limited; it applies only to markets in which there are standardized price quotations
for property that is essentially fungible, such as stock exchanges.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-628
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 6. DEFAULT > SUBPART 2. NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE
§ 9-628. NONLIABILITY AND LIMITATION ON LIABILITY OF SECURED
PARTY; LIABILITY OF SECONDARY OBLIGOR
(a) [Limitation of liability of secured party for noncompliance with article.] Unless a secured party
knows that a person is a debtor or obligor, knows the identity of the person, and knows how to
communicate with the person:
(1) the secured party is not liable to the person, or to a secured party or lienholder that has filed a
financing statement against the person, for failure to comply with this article; and
(2) the secured party's failure to comply with this article does not affect the liability of the person for a
deficiency.
(b) [Limitation of liability based on status as secured party.] A secured party is not liable because of
its status as secured party:
(1) to a person that is a debtor or obligor, unless the secured party knows:
(A) that the person is a debtor or obligor;
(B) the identity of the person; and
(C) how to communicate with the person; or
(2) to a secured party or lienholder that has filed a financing statement against a person, unless the
secured party knows:
(A) that the person is a debtor; and
(B) the identity of the person.
(c) [Limitation of liability if reasonable belief that transaction not a consumer-goods transaction or
consumer transaction.] A secured party is not liable to any person, and a person's liability for a
deficiency is not affected, because of any act or omission arising out of the secured party's reasonable
belief that a transaction is not a consumer-goods transaction or a consumer transaction or that goods are
not consumer goods, if the secured party's belief is based on its reasonable reliance on:
(1) a debtor's representation concerning the purpose for which collateral was to be used, acquired, or
held; or
(2) an obligor's representation concerning the purpose for which a secured obligation was incurred.
(d) [Limitation of liability for statutory damages.] A secured party is not liable to any person under
Section 9-625(c)(2) for its failure to comply with Section 9-616.
(e) [Limitation of multiple liability for statutory damages.] A secured party is not liable under Section 9-
625(c)(2) more than once with respect to any one secured obligation.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 9-628. NONLIABILITY AND LIMITATION ON LIABILITY OF SECURED PARTY; LIABILITY OF
SECONDARY OBLIGOR
Page 2 of 2
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Source. New.
2. Exculpatory Provisions. Subsections (a), (b), and (c) contain exculpatory provisions that should be read in
conjunction with Section 9-605. Without this group of provisions, a secured party could incur liability to unknown
persons and under circumstances that would not allow the secured party to protect itself. The broadened definition
of the term "debtor" underscores the need for these provisions.
If a secured party reasonably, but mistakenly, believes that a consumer transaction or consumer-goods
transaction is a non-consumer transaction or non-consumer-goods transaction, and if the secured party's belief is
based on its reasonable reliance on a representation of the type specified in subsection (c)(1) or (c)(2), then this
Article should be applied as if the facts reasonably believed and the representation reasonably relied upon were
true. For example, if a secured party reasonably believed that a transaction was a non-consumer transaction and its
belief was based on reasonable reliance on the debtor's representation that the collateral secured an obligation
incurred for business purposes, the secured party is not liable to any person, and the debtor's liability for a
deficiency is not affected, because of any act or omission of the secured party which arises out of the reasonable
belief. Of course, if the secured party's belief is not reasonable or, even if reasonable, is not based on reasonable
reliance on the debtor's representation, this limitation on liability is inapplicable.
3. Inapplicability of Statutory Damages to Section 9-616. Subsection (d) excludes noncompliance with Section
9-616 entirely from the scope of statutory damage liability under Section 9-625(c)(2).
4. Single Liability for Statutory Minimum Damages. Subsection (e) ensures that a secured party will incur
statutory damages only once in connection with any one secured obligation.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-701
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 7. TRANSITION
§ 9-701. EFFECTIVE DATE
This [Act] takes effect on July 1, 2001.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
A uniform law as complex as Article 9 necessarily gives rise to difficult problems and uncertainties during the
transition to the new law. As is customary for uniform laws, this Article is based on the general assumption that all
States will have enacted substantially identical versions. While always important, uniformity is essential to the
success of this Article. If former Article 9 is in effect in some jurisdictions, and this Article is in effect in others,
horrendous complications may arise. For example, the proper place in which to file to perfect a security interest
(and thus the status of a particular security interest as perfected or unperfected) would depend on whether the
matter was litigated in a State in which former Article 9 was in effect or a State in which this Article was in effect.
Accordingly, this section contemplates that States will adopt a uniform effective date for this Article. Any one State's
failure to adopt the uniform effective date will greatly increase the cost and uncertainty surrounding the transition.
Other problems arise from transactions and relationships that were entered into under former Article 9 or under
non-UCC law and which remain outstanding on the effective date of this Article. The difficulties arise primarily
because this Article expands the scope of former Article 9 to cover additional types of collateral and transactions
and because it provides new methods of perfection for some types of collateral, different priority rules, and different
choice-of-law rules governing perfection and priority. This Section and the other sections in this Part address
primarily this second set of problems.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-702
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 7. TRANSITION
§ 9-702. SAVINGS CLAUSE
(a) [Pre-effective-date transactions or liens.] Except as otherwise provided in this part, this [Act] applies
to a transaction or lien within its scope, even if the transaction or lien was entered into or created before this
[Act] takes effect.
(b) [Continuing validity.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) and Sections 9-703 through 9-
709:
(1) transactions and liens that were not governed by [former Article 9], were validly entered into or
created before this [Act] takes effect, and would be subject to this [Act] if they had been entered into or
created after this [Act] takes effect, and the rights, duties, and interests flowing from those transactions
and liens remain valid after this [Act] takes effect; and
(2) the transactions and liens may be terminated, completed, consummated, and enforced as required
or permitted by this [Act] or by the law that otherwise would apply if this [Act] had not taken effect.
(c) [Pre-effective-date proceedings.] This [Act] does not affect an action, case, or proceeding
commenced before this [Act] takes effect.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Pre-Effective-Date Transactions. Subsection (a) contains the general rule that this Article applies to
transactions, security interests, and other liens within its scope (see Section 9-109), even if the transaction or lien
was entered into or created before the effective date. Thus, secured transactions entered into under former Article 9
must be terminated, completed, consummated, and enforced under this Article. Subsection (b) is an exception to
the general rule. It applies to valid, pre-effective-date transactions and liens that were not governed by former
Article 9 but would be governed by this Article if they had been entered into or created after this Article takes effect.
Under subsection (b), these valid transactions, such as the creation of agricultural liens and security interests in
commercial tort claims, retain their validity under this Article and may be terminated, completed, consummated, and
enforced under this Article. However, these transactions also may be terminated, completed, consummated, and
enforced by the law that otherwise would apply had this Article not taken effect.
2. Judicial Proceedings Commenced Before Effective Date. As is usual in transition provisions, subsection (c)
provides that this Article does not affect litigation pending on the effective date.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-703
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 7. TRANSITION
§ 9-703. SECURITY INTEREST PERFECTED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE
(a) [Continuing priority over lien creditor: perfection requirements satisfied.] A security interest that
is enforceable immediately before this [Act] takes effect and would have priority over the rights of a person
that becomes a lien creditor at that time is a perfected security interest under this [Act] if, when this [Act]
takes effect, the applicable requirements for enforceability and perfection under this [Act] are satisfied
without further action.
(b) [Continuing priority over lien creditor: perfection requirements not satisfied.] Except as
otherwise provided in Section 9-705, if, immediately before this [Act] takes effect, a security interest is
enforceable and would have priority over the rights of a person that becomes a lien creditor at that time, but
the applicable requirements for enforceability or perfection under this [Act] are not satisfied when this [Act]
takes effect, the security interest:
(1) is a perfected security interest for one year after this [Act] takes effect;
(2) remains enforceable thereafter only if the security interest becomes enforceable under Section 9-
203 before the year expires; and
(3) remains perfected thereafter only if the applicable requirements for perfection under this [Act] are
satisfied before the year expires.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Perfected Security Interests Under Former Article 9 and This Article. This section deals with security
interests that are perfected (i.e., that are enforceable and have priority over the rights of a lien creditor) under
former Article 9 or other applicable law immediately before this Article takes effect. Subsection (a) provides, not
surprisingly, that if the security interest would be a perfected security interest under this Article (i.e., if the
transaction satisfies this Article's requirements for enforceability (attachment) and perfection), no further action
need be taken for the security interest to be a perfected security interest.
2. Security Interests Enforceable and Perfected Under Former Article 9 but Unenforceable or Unperfected
Under This Article. Subsection (b) deals with security interests that are enforceable and perfected under former
Article 9 or other applicable law immediately before this Article takes effect but do not satisfy the requirements for
enforceability (attachment) or perfection under this Article. Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-705, these
security interests are perfected security interests for one year after the effective date. If the security interest satisfies
the requirements for attachment and perfection within that period, the security interest remains perfected thereafter.
If the security interest satisfies only the requirements for attachment within that period, the security interest
becomes unperfected at the end of the one-year period.
Example 1: A pre-effective-date security agreement in a consumer transaction covers "all securities accounts."
The security interest is properly perfected. The collateral description was adequate under former Article 9 (see
§ 9-703. SECURITY INTEREST PERFECTED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE
Page 2 of 2
former Section 9-115(3)) but is insufficient under this Article (see Section 9-108(e)(2)). Unless the debtor
authenticates a new security agreement describing the collateral other than by "type" (or Section 9-203(b)(3)
otherwise is satisfied) within the one-year period following the effective date, the security interest becomes
unenforceable at the end of that period.
Other examples under former Article 9 or other applicable law that may be effective as attachment or
enforceability steps but may be ineffective under this Article include an oral agreement to sell a payment intangible
or possession by virtue of a notification to a bailee under former Section 9-305. Neither the oral agreement nor the
notification would satisfy the revised Section 9-203 requirements for attachment.
Example 2: A pre-effective-date possessory security interest in instruments is perfected by a bailee's receipt of
notification under former 9-305. The bailee has not, however, acknowledged that it holds for the secured party's
benefit under revised Section 9-313. Unless the bailee authenticates a record acknowledging that it holds for the
secured party (or another appropriate perfection step is taken) within the one-year period following the effective
date, the security interest becomes unperfected at the end of that period.
3. Interpretation of Pre-Effective-Date Security Agreements. Section 9-102 defines "security agreement" as
"an agreement that creates or provides for a security interest." Under Section 1-201(3), an "agreement" is a
"bargain of the parties in fact." If parties to a pre-effective-date security agreement describe the collateral by using a
term defined in former Article 9 in one way and defined in this Article in another way, in most cases it should be
presumed that the bargain of the parties contemplated the meaning of the term under former Article 9.
Example 3: A pre-effective-date security agreement covers "all accounts" of a debtor. As defined under former
Article 9, an "account" did not include a right to payment for lottery winnings. These rights to payment are
"accounts" under this Article, however. The agreement of the parties presumptively created a security interest in
"accounts" as defined in former Article 9. A different result might be appropriate, for example, if the security
agreement explicitly contemplated future changes in the Article 9 definitions of types of collateral--e.g., "'Accounts'
means 'accounts' as defined in the UCC Article 9 of [State X], as that definition may be amended from time to time."
Whether a different approach is appropriate in any given case depends on the bargain of the parties, as determined
by applying ordinary principles of contract construction.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-704
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 7. TRANSITION
§ 9-704. SECURITY INTEREST UNPERFECTED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE
A security interest that is enforceable immediately before this [Act] takes effect but which would be
subordinate to the rights of a person that becomes a lien creditor at that time:
(1) remains an enforceable security interest for one year after this [Act] takes effect;
(2) remains enforceable thereafter if the security interest becomes enforceable under Section 9-203
when this [Act] takes effect or within one year thereafter; and
(3) becomes perfected:
(A) without further action, when this [Act] takes effect if the applicable requirements for perfection
under this [Act] are satisfied before or at that time; or
(B) when the applicable requirements for perfection are satisfied if the requirements are satisfied
after that time.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section deals with security interests that are enforceable but unperfected (i.e., subordinate to the rights of a
person who becomes a lien creditor) under former Article 9 or other applicable law immediately before this Article
takes effect. These security interests remain enforceable for one year after the effective date, and thereafter if the
appropriate steps for attachment under this Article are taken before the one-year period expires. (This section's
treatment of enforceability is the same as that of Section 9-703.) The security interest becomes a perfected security
interest on the effective date if, at that time, the security interest satisfies the requirements for perfection under this
Article. If the security interest does not satisfy the requirements for perfection until sometime thereafter, it becomes
a perfected security interest at that later time.
Example: A security interest has attached under former Article 9 but is unperfected because the filed financing
statement covers "all of debtor's personal property" and controlling case law in the applicable jurisdiction has
determined that this identification of collateral in a financing statement is insufficient. Upon the effective date of this
Article, the financing statement becomes sufficient under Section 9-504(2). On that date the security interest
becomes perfected. (This assumes, of course, that the financing statement is filed in the proper filing office under
this Article.)
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-705
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 7. TRANSITION
§ 9-705. EFFECTIVENESS OF ACTION TAKEN BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE
(a) [Pre-effective-date action; one-year perfection period unless reperfected.] If action, other than the
filing of a financing statement, is taken before this [Act] takes effect and the action would have resulted in
priority of a security interest over the rights of a person that becomes a lien creditor had the security interest
become enforceable before this [Act] takes effect, the action is effective to perfect a security interest that
attaches under this [Act] within one year after this [Act] takes effect. An attached security interest becomes
unperfected one year after this [Act] takes effect unless the security interest becomes a perfected security
interest under this [Act] before the expiration of that period.
(b) [Pre-effective-date filing.] The filing of a financing statement before this [Act] takes effect is effective
to perfect a security interest to the extent the filing would satisfy the applicable requirements for perfection
under this [Act].
(c) [Pre-effective-date filing in jurisdiction formerly governing perfection.] This [Act] does not render
ineffective an effective financing statement that, before this [Act] takes effect, is filed and satisfies the
applicable requirements for perfection under the law of the jurisdiction governing perfection as provided in
[former Section 9-103]. However, except as otherwise provided in subsections (d) and (e) and Section 9-
706, the financing statement ceases to be effective at the earlier of:
(1) the time the financing statement would have ceased to be effective under the law of the jurisdiction
in which it is filed; or
(2) June 30, 2006.
(d) [Continuation statement.] The filing of a continuation statement after this [Act] takes effect does not
continue the effectiveness of the financing statement filed before this [Act] takes effect. However, upon the
timely filing of a continuation statement after this [Act] takes effect and in accordance with the law of the
jurisdiction governing perfection as provided in Part 3, the effectiveness of a financing statement filed in the
same office in that jurisdiction before this [Act] takes effect continues for the period provided by the law of
that jurisdiction.
(e) [Application of subsection (c)(2) to transmitting utility financing statement.] Subsection (c)(2)
applies to a financing statement that, before this [Act] takes effect, is filed against a transmitting utility and
satisfies the applicable requirements for perfection under the law of the jurisdiction governing perfection as
provided in [former Section 9-103] only to the extent that Part 3 provides that the law of a jurisdiction other
than the jurisdiction in which the financing statement is filed governs perfection of a security interest in
collateral covered by the financing statement.
(f) [Application of Part 5.] A financing statement that includes a financing statement filed before this [Act]
takes effect and a continuation statement filed after this [Act] takes effect is effective only to the extent that
it satisfies the requirements of Part 5 for an initial financing statement.
Annotations
Commentary
§ 9-705. EFFECTIVENESS OF ACTION TAKEN BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE
Page 2 of 4
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. General. This section addresses primarily the situation in which the perfection step is taken under former
Article 9 or other applicable law before the effective date of this Article, but the security interest does not attach until
after that date.
2. Perfection Other Than by Filing. Subsection (a) applies when the perfection step is a step other than the
filing of a financing statement. If the step that would be a valid perfection step under former Article 9 or other law is
taken before this Article takes effect, and if a security interest attaches within one year after this Article takes effect,
then the security interest becomes a perfected security interest upon attachment. However, the security interest
becomes unperfected one year after the effective date unless the requirements for attachment and perfection under
this Article are satisfied within that period.
3. Perfection by Filing: Ineffective Filings Made Effective. Subsection (b) deals with financing statements that
were filed under former Article 9 and which would not have perfected a security interest under the former Article
(because, e.g., they did not accurately describe the collateral or were filed in the wrong place), but which would
perfect a security interest under this Article. Under subsection (b), such a financing statement is effective to perfect
a security interest to the extent it complies with this Article. Subsection (b) applies regardless of the reason for the
filing. For example, a secured party need not wait until the effective date to respond to the change this Article
makes with respect to the jurisdiction whose law governs perfection of certain security interests. Rather, a secured
party may wish to prepare for this change by filing a financing statement before the effective date in the jurisdiction
whose law governs perfection under this Article. When this Article takes effect, the filing becomes effective to
perfect a security interest (assuming the filing satisfies the perfection requirements of this Article). Note, however,
that Section 9-706 determines whether a financing statement filed before the effective date operates to continue the
effectiveness of a financing statement filed in another office before the effective date.
4. Perfection by Filing: Change in Applicable Law or Filing Office. Subsection (c) provides that a financing
statement filed in the proper jurisdiction under former Section 9-103 remains effective for all purposes, despite the
fact that this Article would require filing of a financing statement in a different jurisdiction or in a different office in the
same jurisdiction. This means that, during the early years of this Article's effectiveness, it may be necessary to
search not only in the filing office of the jurisdiction whose law governs perfection under this Article but also (if
different) in the jurisdiction(s) and filing office(s) designated by former Article 9. To limit this burden, subsection (c)
provides that a financing statement filed in the jurisdiction determined by former Section 9-103 becomes ineffective
at the earlier of the time it would become ineffective under the law of that jurisdiction or June 30, 2006. The June
30, 2006, limitation addresses some nonuniform versions of former Article 9 that extended the effectiveness of a
financing statement beyond five years. Note that a financing statement filed before the effective date may remain
effective beyond June 30, 2006, if subsection (d) (concerning continuation statements) or (e) (concerning
transmitting utilities) or Section 9-706 (concerning initial financing statements that operate to continue pre-effectivedate
financing statements) so provides.
Subsection (c) is an exception to Section 9-703(b). Under the general rule in Section 9-703(b), a security interest
that is enforceable and perfected on the effective date of this Article is a perfected security interest for one year
after this Article takes effect, even if the security interest is not enforceable under this Article and the applicable
requirements for perfection under this Article have not been met. However, in some cases subsection (c) may
shorten the one-year period of perfection; in others, if the security interest is enforceable under Section 9-203, it
may extend the period of perfection.
Example 1: On July 3, 1996, D, a State X corporation, creates a security interest in certain manufacturing
equipment located in State Y. On July 6, 1996, SP perfects a security interest in the equipment under former Article
9 by filing in the office of the State Y Secretary of State. See former Section 9-103(1)(b). This Article takes effect in
States X and Y on July 1, 2001. Under Section 9-705(c), the financing statement remains effective until it lapses in
July 2001. See former Section 9-403. Had SP continued the effectiveness of the financing statement by filing a
continuation statement in State Y under former Article 9 before July 1, 2001, the financing statement would have
remained effective to perfect the security interest through June 30, 2006. See subsection (c)(2). Alternatively, SP
§ 9-705. EFFECTIVENESS OF ACTION TAKEN BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE
Page 3 of 4
could have filed an initial financing statement in State X under subsection (b) or Section 9-706 before the State Y
financing statement lapsed. Had SP done so, the security interest would have remained perfected without
interruption until the State X financing statement lapsed.
5. Continuing Effectiveness of Filed Financing Statement. A financing statement filed before the effective date
of this Article may be continued only by filing in the State and office designated by this Article. This result is
accomplished in the following manner: Subsection (d) indicates that, as a general matter, a continuation statement
filed after the effective date of this Article does not continue the effectiveness of a financing statement filed under
the law designated by former Section 9-103. Instead, an initial financing statement must be filed under Section 9-
706. The second sentence of subsection (d) contains an exception to the general rule. It provides that a
continuation statement is effective to continue the effectiveness of a financing statement filed before this Article
takes effect if this Article prescribes not only the same jurisdiction but also the same filing office.
Example 2: On November 8, 2000, D, a State X corporation, creates a security interest in certain manufacturing
equipment located in State Y. On November 15, 2000, SP perfects a security interest in the equipment under
former Article 9 by filing in office of the State Y Secretary of State. See former Section 9-103(1)(b). This Article
takes effect in States X and Y on July 1, 2001. Under Section 9-705(c), the financing statement ceases to be
effective in November, 2005, when it lapses. See Section 9-515. Under this Article, the law of D's location (State X,
see Section 9-307) governs perfection. See Section 9-301. Thus, the filing of a continuation statement in State Y
after the effective date would not continue the effectiveness of the financing statement. See subsection (d).
However, the effectiveness of the financing statement could be continued under Section 9-706.
Example 3: The facts are as in Example 2, except that D is a State Y corporation. Assume State Y adopted
former Section 9-401(1) (second alternative). State Y law governs perfection under Part 3 of this Article. (See
Sections 9-301, 9-307.) Under the second sentence of subsection (d), the timely filing of a continuation statement in
accordance with the law of State Y continues the effectiveness of the financing statement.
Example 4: The facts are as in Example 3, except that the collateral is equipment used in farming operations
and, in accordance with former Section 9-401(1) (second alternative) as enacted in State Y, the financing statement
was filed in State Y, in the office of the Shelby County Recorder of Deeds. Under this Article, a continuation
statement must be filed in the office of the State Y Secretary of State. See Section 9-501(a)(2). Under the second
sentence of subsection (d), the timely filing of a continuation statement in accordance with the law of State Y
operates to continue a pre-effective-date financing statement only if the continuation statement is filed in the same
office as the financing statement. Accordingly, the continuation statement is not effective in this case, but the
financing statement may be continued under Section 9-706.
Example 5: The facts are as in Example 3, except that State Y enacted former Section 9-401(1) (third
alternative). As required by former Section 9-401(1), SP filed financing statements in both the office of the State Y
Secretary of State and the office of the Shelby County Recorder of Deeds. Under this Article, a continuation
statement must be filed in the office of the State Y Secretary of State. See Section 9-501(a)(2). The timely filing of a
continuation statement in that office after this Article takes effect would be effective to continue the effectiveness of
the financing statement (and thus continue the perfection of the security interest), even if the financing statement
filed with the County Recorder lapses.
6. Continuation Statements. In some cases, this Article reclassifies collateral covered by a financing statement
filed under former Article 9. For example, collateral consisting of the right to payment for real property sold would be
a "general intangible" under the former Article but an "account" under this Article. To continue perfection under
those circumstances, a continuation statement must comply with the normal requirements for a continuation
statement. See Section 9-515. In addition, the pre-effective-date financing statement and continuation statement,
taken together, must satisfy the requirements of this Article concerning the sufficiency of the debtor's name,
secured party's name, and indication of collateral. See subsection (f).
Example 6: A pre-effective-date financing statement covers "all general intangibles" of a debtor. As defined under
former Article 9, a "general intangible," would include rights to payment for lottery winnings. These rights to
§ 9-705. EFFECTIVENESS OF ACTION TAKEN BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE
Page 4 of 4
payment are "accounts" under this Article, however. A post-effective-date continuation statement will not continue
the effectiveness of the pre-effective-date financing statement with respect to lottery winnings unless it amends the
indication of collateral covered to include lottery winnings (e.g., by adding "accounts," "rights to payment for lottery
winnings," or the like). If the continuation statement does not amend the indication of collateral, the continuation
statement will be effective to continue the effectiveness of the financing statement only with respect to "general
intangibles" as defined in this Article.
Example 7: The facts are as in Example 6, except that the pre-effective-date financing statement covers "all
accounts and general intangibles." Even though rights to payment for lottery winnings are "general intangibles"
under former Article 9 and "accounts" under this Article, a post-effective-date continuation statement would continue
the effectiveness of the pre-effective-date financing statement with respect to lottery winnings. There would be no
need to amend the indication of collateral covered, inasmuch as the indication ("accounts") satisfies the
requirements of this Article.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-706
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 7. TRANSITION
§ 9-706. WHEN INITIAL FINANCING STATEMENT SUFFICES TO CONTINUE
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT
(a) [Initial financing statement in lieu of continuation statement.] The filing of an initial financing
statement in the office specified in Section 9-501 continues the effectiveness of a financing statement filed
before this [Act] takes effect if:
(1) the filing of an initial financing statement in that office would be effective to perfect a security
interest under this [Act];
(2) the pre-effective-date financing statement was filed in an office in another State or another office in
this State; and
(3) the initial financing statement satisfies subsection (c).
(b) [Period of continued effectiveness.] The filing of an initial financing statement under subsection (a)
continues the effectiveness of the pre-effective-date financing statement:
(1) if the initial financing statement is filed before this [Act] takes effect, for the period provided in
[former Section 9-403] with respect to a financing statement; and
(2) if the initial financing statement is filed after this [Act] takes effect, for the period provided in Section
9-515 with respect to an initial financing statement.
(c) [Requirements for initial financing statement under subsection (a).] To be effective for purposes of
subsection (a), an initial financing statement must:
(1) satisfy the requirements of Part 5 for an initial financing statement;
(2) identify the pre-effective-date financing statement by indicating the office in which the financing
statement was filed and providing the dates of filing and file numbers, if any, of the financing statement
and of the most recent continuation statement filed with respect to the financing statement; and
(3) indicate that the pre-effective-date financing statement remains effective.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Continuation of Financing Statements Not Filed in Proper Filing Office Under This Article. This section
deals with continuing the effectiveness of financing statements that are filed in the proper State and office under
former Article 9, but which would be filed in the wrong State or in the wrong office of the proper State under this
Article. Section 9-705(d) provides that, under these circumstances, filing a continuation statement after the effective
date of this Article in the office designated by former Article 9 would not be effective. This section provides the
means by which the effectiveness of such a financing statement can be continued if this Article governs perfection
under the applicable choice-of-law rule: filing an initial financing statement in the office specified by Section 9-501.
§ 9-706. WHEN INITIAL FINANCING STATEMENT SUFFICES TO CONTINUE EFFECTIVENESS OF
FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 2 of 2
Although it has the effect of continuing the effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing statement, an initial
financing statement described in this section is not a continuation statement. Rather, it is governed by the rules
applicable to initial financing statements. (However, the debtor need not authorize the filing. See Section 9-707.)
Unlike a continuation statement, the initial financing statement described in this section may be filed any time during
the effectiveness of the pre-effective-date financing statement-even before this Article is enacted-- and not only
within the six months immediately prior to lapse. In contrast to a continuation statement, which extends the lapse
date of a filed financing statement for five years, the initial financing statement has its own lapse date, which bears
no relation to the lapse date of the pre-effective-date financing statement whose effectiveness the initial financing
statement continues. See subsection (b).
As subsection (a) makes clear, the filing of an initial financing statement under this section continues the
effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing statement. If the effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing
statement lapses before the initial financing statement is filed, the effectiveness of the pre-effective-date financing
statement cannot be continued. Rather, unless the security interest is perfected otherwise, there will be a period
during which the security interest is unperfected before becoming perfected again by the filing of the initial financing
statement under this section.
If an initial financing statement is filed under this section before the effective date of this Article, it takes effect
when this Article takes effect (assuming that it is ineffective under former Article 9). Note, however, that former
Article 9 determines whether the filing office is obligated to accept such an initial financing statement. For the
reason given in the preceding paragraph, an initial financing statement filed before the effective date of this Article
does not continue the effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing statement unless the latter remains effective on
the effective date of this Article. Thus, for example, if the effectiveness of the pre-effective-date financing statement
lapses before this Article takes effect, the initial financing statement would not continue its effectiveness.
2. Requirements of Initial Financing Statement Filed in Lieu of Continuation Statement. Subsection (c) sets
forth the requirements for the initial financing statement under subsection (a). These requirements are needed to
inform searchers that the initial financing statement operates to continue a financing statement filed elsewhere and
to enable searchers to locate and discover the attributes of the other financing statement. The notice-filing policy of
this Article applies to the initial financing statements described in this section. Accordingly, an initial financing
statement that substantially satisfies the requirements of subsection (c) is effective, even if it has minor errors or
omissions, unless the errors or omissions make the financing statement seriously misleading. See Section 9-506.
A single initial financing statement may continue the effectiveness of more than one financing statement filed
before this Article's effective date. See Section 1-106 (words in the singular include the plural). If a financing
statement has been filed in more than one office in a given jurisdiction, as may be the case if the jurisdiction had
adopted former Section 9-401(1), third alternative, then an identification of the filing in the central filing office
suffices for purposes of subsection (c)(2). If under this Article the collateral is of a type different from its type under
former Article 9--as would be the case, e.g., with a right to payment of lottery winnings (a "general intangible" under
former Article 9 and an "account" under this Article), then subsection (c) requires that the initial financing statement
indicate the type under this Article.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-707
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 7. TRANSITION
§ 9-707. AMENDMENT OF PRE-EFFECTIVE-DATE FINANCING STATEMENT
(a) [?Pre-effective-date financing statement".] In this section, "pre-effective-date financing statement"
means a financing statement filed before this [Act] takes effect.
(b) [Applicable law.] After this [Act] takes effect, a person may add or delete collateral covered by,
continue or terminate the effectiveness of, or otherwise amend the information provided in, a pre-effectivedate
financing statement only in accordance with the law of the jurisdiction governing perfection as provided
in Part 3. However, the effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing statement also may be terminated in
accordance with the law of the jurisdiction in which the financing statement is filed.
(c) [Method of amending: general rule.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), if the law of this
State governs perfection of a security interest, the information in a pre-effective-date financing statement
may be amended after this [Act] takes effect only if:
(1) the pre-effective-date financing statement and an amendment are filed in the office specified in
Section 9-501;
(2) an amendment is filed in the office specified in Section 9-501 concurrently with, or after the filing in
that office of, an initial financing statement that satisfies Section 9-706(c); or
(3) an initial financing statement that provides the information as amended and satisfies Section 9-
706(c) is filed in the office specified in Section 9-501.
(d) [Method of amending: continuation.] If the law of this State governs perfection of a security interest,
the effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing statement may be continued only under Section 9-705(d)
and (f) or 9-706.
(e) [Method of amending: additional termination rule.] Whether or not the law of this State governs
perfection of a security interest, the effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing statement filed in this
State may be terminated after this [Act] takes effect by filing a termination statement in the office in which
the pre-effective-date financing statement is filed, unless an initial financing statement that satisfies Section
9-706(c) has been filed in the office specified by the law of the jurisdiction governing perfection as provided
in Part 3 as the office in which to file a financing statement.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Scope of This Section. This section addresses post-effective-date amendments to pre-effective-date financing
statements.
2. Applicable Law. Determining how to amend a pre-effective-date financing statement requires one first to
determine the jurisdiction whose law applies. Subsection (b) provides that, as a general matter, post-effective-date
amendments to pre-effective-date financing statements are effective only if they are accomplished in accordance
with the substantive (or local) law of the jurisdiction governing perfection under Part 3 of this Article. However,
§ 9-707. AMENDMENT OF PRE-EFFECTIVE-DATE FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 2 of 3
under certain circumstances, the effectiveness of a financing statement may be terminated in accordance with the
substantive law of the jurisdiction in which the financing statement is filed. See Comment 5, below.
Example 1: D is a corporation organized under the law of State Y. It owns equipment located in State X. Under
former Article 9, SP properly perfected a security interest in the equipment by filing a financing statement in State X.
Under this Article, the law of State Y governs perfection of the security interest. See Sections 9-301, 9-307. After
this Article takes effect, SP wishes to amend the financing statement to reflect a change in D's name. Under
subsection (b), the financing statement may be amended in accordance with the law of State Y, i.e., in accordance
with subsection (c) as enacted in State Y.
Example 2: The facts are as in Example 1, except that SP wishes to terminate the effectiveness of the State X
filing. The first sentence of subsection (b) provides that the financing statement may be terminated after the
effective date of this Article in accordance with the law of State Y, i.e., in accordance with subsection (c) as enacted
in State Y. However, the second sentence provides that the financing statement also may be terminated in
accordance with the law of the jurisdiction in which it is filed, i.e., in accordance with subsection (e) as enacted in
State X. If the pre-effective-date financing statement is filed in the jurisdiction whose law governs perfection (here,
State Y), then both sentences would designate the law of State Y as applicable to the termination of the financing
statement. That is, the financing statement could be terminated in accordance with subsection (c) or (e) as enacted
in State Y.
3. Method of Amending. Subsection (c) provides three methods of effectuating a post-effective-date amendment
to a pre-effective-date financing statement. Under subsection (c)(1), if the financing statement is filed in the
jurisdiction and office determined by this Article, then an effective amendment may be filed in the same office.
Example 3: D is a corporation organized under the law of State Z. It owns equipment located in State Z. Before
the effective date of this Article, SP perfected a security interest in the equipment by filing in two offices in State Z, a
local filing office and the office of the Secretary of State. See former Section 9-401(1) (third alternative). State Z
enacts this Article and specifies in Section 9-501 that a financing statement covering equipment is to be filed in the
office of the Secretary of State. SP wishes to assign its power as secured party of record. Under subsection (b), the
substantive law of State Z applies. Because the pre-effective-date financing statement is filed in the office specified
in subsection (c)(1) as enacted by State Z, SP may effectuate the assignment by filing an amendment under
Section 9-514 with the office of the Secretary of State. SP need not amend the local filing, and the priority of the
security interest perfected by the filing of the financing statement would not be affected by the failure to amend the
local filing.
If a pre-effective-date financing statement is filed in an office other than the one specified by Section 9-501 of the
relevant jurisdiction, then ordinarily an amendment filed in that office is ineffective. (Subsection (e) provides an
exception for termination statements.) Rather, the amendment must be effectuated by a filing in the jurisdiction and
office determined by this Article. That filing may consist of an initial financing statement followed by an amendment,
an initial financing statement together with an amendment, or an initial financing statement that indicates the
information provided in the financing statement, as amended. Subsection (c)(2) encompasses the first two options;
subsection (c)(3) contemplates the last. In each instance, the initial financing statement must satisfy Section 9-
706(c).
4. Continuation. Subsection (d) refers to the two methods by which a secured party may continue the
effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing statement under this Part. The Comments to Sections 9-705 and 9-
706 explain these methods.
5. Termination. The effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing statement may be terminated pursuant to
subsection (c). This section also provides an alternative method for accomplishing this result: filing a termination
statement in the office in which the financing statement is filed. The alternative method becomes unavailable once
an initial financing statement that relates to the pre-effective-date financing statement and satisfies Section 9-706(c)
is filed in the jurisdiction and office determined by this Article.
§ 9-707. AMENDMENT OF PRE-EFFECTIVE-DATE FINANCING STATEMENT
Page 3 of 3
Example 4: The facts are as in Example 1, except that SP wishes to terminate a financing statement filed in State
X. As explained in Example 1, the financing statement may be amended in accordance with the law of the
jurisdiction governing perfection under this Article, i.e., in accordance with the substantive law of State Y. As
enacted in State Y, subsection (c)(1) is inapplicable because the financing statement was not filed in the State Y
filing office specified in Section 9-501. Under subsection (c)(2), the financing statement may be amended by filing in
the State Y filing office an initial financing statement followed by a termination statement. The filing of an initial
financing statement together with a termination statement also would be legally sufficient under subsection (c)(2),
but Section 9-512(a)(1) may render this method impractical. The financing statement also may be amended under
subsection (c)(3), but the resulting initial financing statement is likely to be very confusing. In each instance, the
initial financing statement must satisfy Section 9-706(c). Applying the law of State Y, subsection (e) is inapplicable,
because the financing statement was not filed in "this State," i.e., State Y.
This section affords another option to SP. Subsection (b) provides that the effectiveness of a financing statement
may be terminated either in accordance with the law of the jurisdiction governing perfection (here, State Y) or in
accordance with the substantive law of the jurisdiction in which the financing statement is filed (here, State X).
Applying the law of State X, the financing statement is filed in "this State," i.e., State X, and subsection (e) applies.
Accordingly, the effectiveness of the financing statement can be terminated by filing a termination statement in the
State X office in which the financing statement is filed, unless an initial financing statement that relates to the
financing statement and satisfies Section 9-706(c) as enacted in State X has been filed in the jurisdiction and office
determined by this Article (here, the State Y filing office).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-708
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 7. TRANSITION
§ 9-708. PERSONS ENTITLED TO FILE INITIAL FINANCING STATEMENT OR
CONTINUATION STATEMENT
A person may file an initial financing statement or a continuation statement under this part if:
(1) the secured party of record authorizes the filing; and
(2) the filing is necessary under this part:
(A) to continue the effectiveness of a financing statement filed before this [Act] takes effect; or
(B) to perfect or continue the perfection of a security interest.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
This section permits a secured party to file an initial financing statement or continuation statement necessary
under this Part to continue the effectiveness of a financing statement filed before this Article takes effect or to
perfect or otherwise continue the perfection of a security interest. Because a filing described in this section typically
operates to continue the effectiveness of a financing statement whose filing the debtor already has authorized, this
section does not require authorization from the debtor.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-709
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 7. TRANSITION
§ 9-709. PRIORITY
(a) [Law governing priority.] This [Act] determines the priority of conflicting claims to collateral. However,
if the relative priorities of the claims were established before this [Act] takes effect, [former Article 9]
determines priority.
(b) [Priority if security interest becomes enforceable under Section 9-203.] For purposes of Section
9-322(a), the priority of a security interest that becomes enforceable under Section 9-203 of this [Act] dates
from the time this [Act] takes effect if the security interest is perfected under this [Act] by the filing of a
financing statement before this [Act] takes effect which would not have been effective to perfect the security
interest under [former Article 9]. This subsection does not apply to conflicting security interests each of
which is perfected by the filing of such a financing statement.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Law Governing Priority. Ordinarily, this Article determines the priority of conflicting claims to collateral.
However, when the relative priorities of the claims were established before this Article takes effect, former Article 9
governs.
Example 1: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in a right to payment for goods sold ("account"). SP-1 fails to
file a financing statement. This Article takes effect on July 1, 2001. Thereafter, on August 1, 2001, D creates a
security interest in the same account in favor of SP-2, who files a financing statement. This Article determines the
relative priorities of the claims. SP-2's security interest has priority under Section 9-322(a)(1).
Example 2: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in a right to payment for goods sold ("account"). SP-1 fails to
file a financing statement. In 2000, D creates a security interest in the same account in favor of SP-2, who likewise
fails to file a financing statement. This Article takes effect on July 1, 2001. Because the relative priorities of the
security interests were established before the effective date of this Article, former Article 9 governs priority, and SP-
1's security interest has priority under former Section 9-312(5)(b).
Example 3: The facts are as in Example 2, except that, on August 1, 2001, SP-2 files a proper financing
statement under this Article. Until August 1, 2001, the relative priorities of the security interests were established
before the effective date of this Article, as in Example 2. However, by taking the affirmative step of filing a financing
statement, SP-2 established anew the relative priority of the conflicting claims after the effective date. Thus, this
Article determines priority. SP-2's security interest has priority under Section 9-322(a)(1).
As Example 3 illustrates, relative priorities that are "established" before the effective date do not necessarily
remain unchanged following the effective date. Of course, unlike priority contests among unperfected security
interests, some priorities are established permanently, e.g., the rights of a buyer of property who took free of a
security interest under former Article 9.
§ 9-709. PRIORITY
Page 2 of 3
One consequence of the rule in subsection (a) is that the mere taking effect of this Article does not of itself
adversely affect the priority of conflicting claims to collateral.
Example 4: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in a right to payment for lottery winnings (a "general
intangible" as defined in former Article 9 but an "account" as defined in this Article). SP-1's security interest is
unperfected because its filed financing statement covers only "accounts." In 2000, D creates a security interest in
the same right to payment in favor of SP-2, who files a financing statement covering "accounts and general
intangibles." Before this Article takes effect on July 1, 2001, SP-2's perfected security interest has priority over SP-
1's unperfected security interest under former 9-312(5). Because the relative priorities of the security interests were
established before the effective date of this Article, former Article 9 continues to govern priority after this Article
takes effect. Thus, SP-2's priority is not adversely affected by this Article's having taken effect.
Note that were this Article to govern priority, SP-2 would become subordinated to SP-1 under Section 9-322(a)(1),
even though nothing changes other than this Article's having taken effect. Under Section 9-704, SP-1's security
interest would become perfected; the financing statement covering "accounts" adequately covers the lottery
winnings and complies with the other perfection requirements of this Article, e.g., it is filed in the proper office.
Example 5: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in a right to payment for lottery winnings--a "general
intangible" (as defined under former Article 9). SP-1's security interest is unperfected because its filed financing
statement covers only "accounts." In 2000, D creates a security interest in the same right to payment in favor of SP-
2, who makes the same mistake and also files a financing statement covering only "accounts." Before this Article
takes effect on July 1, 2001, SP-1's unperfected security interest has priority over SP-2's unperfected security
interest, because SP-1's security interest was the first to attach. See former Section 9-312(5)(b). Because the
relative priorities of the security interests were established before the effective date of this Article, former Article 9
continues to govern priority after this Article takes effect. Although Section 9-704 makes both security interests
perfected for purposes of this Article, both are unperfected under former Article 9, which determines their relative
priorities.
2. Financing Statements Ineffective Under Former Article 9 but Effective Under This Article. If this Article
determines priority, subsection (b) may apply. It deals with the case in which a filing that occurs before the effective
date of this Article would be ineffective to perfect a security interest under former Article 9 but effective under this
Article. For purposes of Section 9-322(a), the priority of a security interest that attaches after this Article takes effect
and is perfected in this manner dates from the time this Article takes effect.
Example 6: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in D's existing and after-acquired instruments and files a
financing statement covering "instruments." In 2000, D grants a security interest in its existing and after-acquired
accounts in favor of SP-2, who files a financing statement covering "accounts." After this Article takes effect on July
1, 2001, one of D's account debtors gives D a negotiable note to evidence its obligation to pay an overdue account.
Under the first-to-file-or-perfect rule in Section 9-322(a), SP-1 would have priority in the instrument, which
constitutes SP-2's proceeds. SP-1's filing in 1999 was earlier than SP-2's in 2000. However, subsection (b)
provides that, for purposes of Section 9-322(a), SP-1's priority dates from the time this Article takes effect (July 1,
2001). Under Section 9-322(b), SP-2's priority with respect to the proceeds (instrument) dates from its filing as to
the original collateral (accounts). Accordingly, SP-2's security interest would be senior.
Subsection (b) does not apply to conflicting security interests each of which is perfected by a pre-effective-date
filing that was not effective under former Article 9 but is effective under this Article.
Example 7: In 1999, SP-1 obtains a security interest in D's existing and after-acquired instruments and files a
financing statement covering "instruments." In 2000, D grants a security interest in its existing and after-acquired
instruments in favor of SP-2, who files a financing statement covering "instruments." After this Article takes effect on
July 1, 2001, one of D's account debtors gives D a negotiable note to evidence its obligation to pay an overdue
account. Under the first-to-file-or-perfect rule in Section 9-322(a), SP-1 would have priority in the instrument. Both
filings are effective under this Article, see Section 9-705(b), and SP-1's filing in 1999 was earlier than SP-2's in
2000. Subsection (b) does not change this result.
§ 9-709. PRIORITY
Page 3 of 3
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-801
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 8. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR 2010 AMENDMENTS
§ 9-801. EFFECTIVE DATE
This [Act] takes effect on July 1, 2013.
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: Because these amendments change the proper place in which to file to perfect certain security
interests, it is particularly important that States adopt a uniform effective date. Otherwise, the status of a particular
security interest as perfected or unperfected would depend on whether the matter was litigated in a State in which
the amendments were in effect or a State in which the amendments were not in effect. Any one State's failure to
adopt the uniform effective date will significantly increase the cost and uncertainty surrounding the affected
transactions.
Official Comment
These transition provisions largely track the provisions of Part 7, which govern the transition to the 1998 revision
of this Article. The Comments to the sections of Part 7 generally are relevant to the corresponding sections of Part
8. The 2010 amendments are less far-reaching than the 1998 revision. Although Part 8 does not carry forward
those Part 7 provisions that clearly would have no application to the transition to the amendments, as a matter of
prudence Part 8 does carry forward all Part 7 provisions that are even arguably relevant to the transition.
The most significant transition problem raised by the 2010 amendments arises from changes to Section 9-503(a),
concerning the name of the debtor that must be provided for a financing statement to be sufficient. Sections 9-805
and 9-806 address this problem.
Example: On November 8, 2012, Debtor, an individual whose "individual name" is "Lon Debtor" and whose
principal residence is located in State A, creates a security interest in certain manufacturing equipment. On
November 15, 2012, SP perfects a security interest in the equipment under Article 9 (as in effect prior to the 2010
amendments) by filing a financing statement against "Lon Debtor" in the State A filing office. On July 1, 2013, the
2010 amendments, including Alternative A to Section 9-503(a), take effect in State A. Debtor's unexpired State A
driver's indicates that Debtor's name is "Polonius Debtor." Assuming that a search under "Polonius Debtor" using
the filing office's standard search logic would not disclose the filed financing statement, the financing statement
would be insufficient under amended Section 9-503(a)(4) (Alt. A). However, Section 9-805(b) provides that the 2010
amendments do not render the financing statement ineffective. Rather, the financing statement remains effective--
even if it has become seriously misleading--until it would have ceased to be effective had the amendments not
taken effect. See Section 9-805(b)(1). SP can continue the effectiveness of the financing statement by filing a
continuation statement with the State A filing office. To do so, however, SP must amend Debtor's name on the
financing statement to provide the name that is sufficient under Section 9-503(a)(4) (Alt. A) at the time the
continuation statement is filed. See Section 9-805(c), (e).
The most significant transition problem addressed by the 1998 revision arose from the change in the choice-oflaw
rules governing where to file a financing statement. The 2010 amendments do not change the choice-of-law
rules. Even so, the amendments will change the place to file in a few cases, because certain entities that were not
previously classified as "registered organizations" would fall within that category under the amendments.
§ 9-801. EFFECTIVE DATE
Page 2 of 2
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-802
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 8. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR 2010 AMENDMENTS
§ 9-802. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
(a) [Pre-effective-date transactions or liens.] Except as otherwise provided in this part, this [Act] applies
to a transaction or lien within its scope, even if the transaction or lien was entered into or created before this
[Act] takes effect.
(b) [Pre-effective-date proceedings.] This [Act] does not affect an action, case, or proceeding
commenced before this [Act] takes effect.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-803
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 8. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR 2010 AMENDMENTS
§ 9-803. SECURITY INTEREST PERFECTED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE.
(a) [Continuing perfection: perfection requirements satisfied.] A security interest that is a perfected
security interest immediately before this [Act] takes effect is a perfected security interest under [Article 9 as
amended by this [Act]] if, when this [Act] takes effect, the applicable requirements for attachment and
perfection under [Article 9 as amended by this [Act]] are satisfied without further action.
(b) [Continuing perfection: perfection requirements not satisfied.] Except as otherwise provided in
Section 9-805, if, immediately before this [Act] takes effect, a security interest is a perfected security
interest, but the applicable requirements for perfection under [Article 9 as amended by this [Act]] are not
satisfied when this [Act] takes effect, the security interest remains perfected thereafter only if the applicable
requirements for perfection under [Article 9 as amended by this [Act]] are satisfied within one year after this
[Act] takes effect.]
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-804
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 8. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR 2010 AMENDMENTS
§ 9-804. SECURITY INTEREST UNPERFECTED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE.
A security interest that is an unperfected security interest immediately before this [Act] takes effect
becomes a perfected security interest:
(1) without further action, when this [Act] takes effect if the applicable requirements for perfection
under [Article 9 as amended by this [Act]] are satisfied before or at that time; or
(2) when the applicable requirements for perfection are satisfied if the requirements are satisfied after
that time.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-805
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 8. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR 2010 AMENDMENTS
§ 9-805. EFFECTIVENESS OF ACTION TAKEN BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE.
(a) [Pre-effective-date filing effective.] The filing of a financing statement before this [Act] takes effect is
effective to perfect a security interest to the extent the filing would satisfy the applicable requirements for
perfection under [Article 9 as amended by this [Act]].
(b) [When pre-effective-date filing becomes ineffective.] This [Act] does not render ineffective an
effective financing statement that, before this [Act] takes effect, is filed and satisfies the applicable
requirements for perfection under the law of the jurisdiction governing perfection as provided in [Article 9 as
it existed before amendment]. However, except as otherwise provided in subsections (c) and (d) and
Section 9-806, the financing statement ceases to be effective:
(1) if the financing statement is filed in this State, at the time the financing statement would have
ceased to be effective had this [Act] not taken effect; or
(2) if the financing statement is filed in another jurisdiction, at the earlier of:116
(A) the time the financing statement would have ceased to be effective under the law of that
jurisdiction; or
(B) June 30, 2018.
(c) [Continuation statement.] The filing of a continuation statement after this [Act] takes effect does not
continue the effectiveness of a financing statement filed before this [Act] takes effect. However, upon the
timely filing of a continuation statement after this [Act] takes effect and in accordance with the law of the
jurisdiction governing perfection as provided in [Article 9 as amended by this [Act]], the effectiveness of a
financing statement filed in the same office in that jurisdiction before this [Act] takes effect continues for the
period provided by the law of that jurisdiction.
(d) [Application of subsection (b)(2)(B) to transmitting utility financing statement.] Subsection
(b)(2)(B) applies to a financing statement that, before this [Act] takes effect, is filed against a transmitting
utility and satisfies the applicable requirements for perfection under the law of the jurisdiction governing
perfection as provided in [Article 9 as it existed before amendment], only to the extent that [Article 9 as
amended by this [Act]] provides that the law of a jurisdiction other than the jurisdiction in which the financing
statement is filed governs perfection of a security interest in collateral covered by the financing statement.
(e) [Application of Part 5.] A financing statement that includes a financing statement filed before this [Act]
takes effect and a continuation statement filed after this [Act] takes effect is effective only to the extent that
it satisfies the requirements of [Part 5 as amended by this [Act]] for an initial financing statement. A
financing statement that indicates that the debtor is a decedent's estate indicates that the collateral is being
administered by a personal representative within the meaning of Section 9-503(a)(2) as amended by this
[Act]. A financing statement that indicates that the debtor is a trust or is a trustee acting with respect to
property held in trust indicates that the collateral is held in a trust within the meaning of Section 9-503(a)(3)
as amended by this [Act].
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 9-805. EFFECTIVENESS OF ACTION TAKEN BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-806
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 8. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR 2010 AMENDMENTS
§ 9-806. WHEN INITIAL FINANCING STATEMENT SUFFICES TO CONTINUE
EFFECTIVENESS OF FINANCING STATEMENT.
(a) [Initial financing statement in lieu of continuation statement.] The filing of an initial financing
statement in the office specified in Section 9-501 continues the effectiveness of a financing statement filed
before this [Act] takes effect if:
(1) the filing of an initial financing statement in that office would be effective to perfect a security
interest under [Article 9 as amended by this [Act]];
(2) the pre-effective-date financing statement was filed in an office in another State; and
(3) the initial financing statement satisfies subsection (c).
(b) [Period of continued effectiveness.] The filing of an initial financing statement under subsection (a)
continues the effectiveness of the pre-effective-date financing statement:
(1) if the initial financing statement is filed before this [Act] takes effect, for the period provided in
[unamended Section 9-515] with respect to an initial financing statement; and
(2) if the initial financing statement is filed after this [Act] takes effect, for the period provided in Section
9-515 as amended by this [Act] with respect to an initial financing statement.
(c) [Requirements for initial financing statement under subsection (a).] To be effective for purposes of
subsection (a), an initial financing statement must:
(1) satisfy the requirements of [Part 5 as amended by this [Act]] for an initial financing statement;
(2) identify the pre-effective-date financing statement by indicating the office in which the financing
statement was filed and providing the dates of filing and file numbers, if any, of the financing statement
and of the most recent continuation statement filed with respect to the financing statement; and
(3) indicate that the pre-effective-date financing statement remains effective.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-807
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 8. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR 2010 AMENDMENTS
§ 9-807. AMENDMENT OF PRE-EFFECTIVE-DATE FINANCING STATEMENT.
(a) ["Pre-effective-date financing statement".] In this section, "pre-effective-date financing statement"
means a financing statement filed before this [Act] takes effect.
(b) [Applicable law.] After this [Act] takes effect, a person may add or delete collateral covered by,
continue or terminate the effectiveness of, or otherwise amend the information provided in, a pre-effectivedate
financing statement only in accordance with the law of the jurisdiction governing perfection as provided
in [Article 9 as amended by this [Act]]. However, the effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing
statement also may be terminated in accordance with the law of the jurisdiction in which the financing
statement is filed.
(c) [Method of amending: general rule.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), if the law of this
State governs perfection of a security interest, the information in a pre-effective-date financing statement
may be amended after this [Act] takes effect only if:
(1) the pre-effective-date financing statement and an amendment are filed in the office specified in
Section 9-501;
(2) an amendment is filed in the office specified in Section 9-501 concurrently with, or after the filing in
that office of, an initial financing statement that satisfies Section 9-806(c); or
(3) an initial financing statement that provides the information as amended and satisfies Section 9-
806(c) is filed in the office specified in Section 9-501.
(d) [Method of amending: continuation.] If the law of this State governs perfection of a security interest,
the effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing statement may be continued only under Section 9-805(c)
and (e) or 9-806.
(e) [Method of amending: additional termination rule.] Whether or not the law of this State governs
perfection of a security interest, the effectiveness of a pre-effective-date financing statement filed in this
State may be terminated after this [Act] takes effect by filing a termination statement in the office in which
the pre-effective-date financing statement is filed, unless an initial financing statement that satisfies Section
9-806(c) has been filed in the office specified by the law of the jurisdiction governing perfection as provided
in [Article 9 as amended by this [Act]] as the office in which to file a financing statement.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-808
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 8. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR 2010 AMENDMENTS
§ 9-808. PERSON ENTITLED TO FILE INITIAL FINANCING STATEMENT OR
CONTINUATION STATEMENT.
A person may file an initial financing statement or a continuation statement under this part if:
(1) the secured party of record authorizes the filing; and
(2) the filing is necessary under this part:
(A) to continue the effectiveness of a financing statement filed before this [Act] takes effect; or
(B) to perfect or continue the perfection of a security interest.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 9-809
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> PART 8. TRANSITION PROVISIONS FOR 2010 AMENDMENTS
§ 9-809. PRIORITY
This [Act] determines the priority of conflicting claims to collateral. However, if the relative priorities of the claims
were established before this [Act] takes effect, [Article 9 as it existed before amendment] determines priority.
Annotations
Commentary
Legislative Note: The term "this [Act]" as used in this part refers to the legislation enactingthese amendments to
Article 9, not to the legislation that enacted Article 9. States should substitute appropriate references.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 10-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 10. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
REPEALER
§ 10-101. Effective Date.
This Act shall become effective at midnight on December 31st following its enactment. It applies to transactions
entered into and events occurring after that date.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
This effective date is suggested so that there may be ample time for all those who will be affected by the provisions
of the Code to become familiar with them.
[See Article 11 for Transition Provisions for those jurisdictions adopting the 1972 amendments.]
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 10-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 10. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
REPEALER
§ 10-102. Specific Repealer; Provision for Transition.
(1) The following acts and all other acts and parts of acts inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed:
(Here should follow the acts to be specifically repealed including the following:
Uniform Negotiable Instruments Act
Uniform Warehouse Receipts Act
Uniform Sales Act
Uniform Bills of Lading Act
Uniform Stock Transfer Act
Uniform Conditional Sales Act
Uniform Trust Receipts Act
Also any acts regulating:
Bank collections
Bulk sales
Chattel mortgages
Conditional sales
Factor's lien acts
Farm storage of grain and similar acts
Assignment of accounts receivable)
(2) Transactions validly entered into before the effective date specified in Section 10-101 and the rights,
duties and interests flowing from them remain valid thereafter and may be terminated, completed,
consummated or enforced as required or permitted by any statute or other law amended or repealed by this
Act as though such repeal or amendment had not occurred.
Note
Subsection (1) should be separately prepared for each state. The foregoing is a list of statutes to be
checked.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
Subsection (1) provides for the repeal of present uniform and other acts superseded by this Act. Subsection (2)
provides for the transition to the Code.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
§ 10-102. Specific Repealer; Provision for Transition.
Page 2 of 2
End of Document
U.C.C. § 10-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 10. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
REPEALER
§ 10-103. General Repealer.
Except as provided in the following section, all acts and parts of acts inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
This section provides for the repeal of all other legislation inconsistent with this Act.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 10-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 10. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
REPEALER
§ 10-104. Laws Not Repealed.
[(1) ] The Article on Documents of Title (Article 7) does not repeal or modify any laws prescribing the form or
contents of documents of title or the services or facilities to be afforded by bailees, or otherwise regulating bailees'
businesses in respects not specifically dealt with herein; but the fact that such laws are violated does not affect the
status of a document of title which otherwise complies with the definition of a document of title ( Section 1-201).
As amended in 1962 and 1994.
See Appendix XII for material relating to changes made in text in 1994.
Annotations
Commentary
Official Comment
This section subordinates the Article of this Act on Documents of Title (Article 7) to the more specialized regulations
of particular classes of bailees under other legislation and international treaties. Particularly, the provisions of that
Article are superseded by applicable inconsistent provisions regarding the obligation of carriers and the limitation of
their liability found in federal legislation dealing with transportation by water (including the Harter Act, Act of
February 13, 1893, 27 Stat. 445, and the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, Act of April 16, 1936, 49 Stat. 1207); the
Warsaw Convention on International Air Transportation, 49 Stat. 3000, and Section 20(11) of the Interstate
Commerce Act, Act of February 20, 1887, 24 Stat. 386, as amended. The Documents of Title provisions of this Act
supplement such legislation largely in matters other than obligation of the bailee, e.g., form and effects of
negotiation, procedure in the case of lost documents, effect of overissue, possibility of rapid transmission.
Cross Reference:
Section 7-103.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 11-101
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 11. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
TRANSITION PROVISIONS
§ 11-101. Effective Date.
This Act shall become effective at 12:01 A.M. on ......., 19…
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 11-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 11. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
TRANSITION PROVISIONS
§ 11-102. Preservation of Old Transition Provision.
The provisions of [here insert reference to the original transition provision in the particular state] shall continue to
apply to [the new U.C.C.] and for this purpose the [old U.C.C. and new U.C.C.] shall be considered one continuous
statute.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 11-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 11. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
TRANSITION PROVISIONS
§ 11-103. Transition to [New Code]-General Rule.
Transactions validly entered into after [effective date of old U.C.C.] and before [effective date of new U.C.C.], and
which were subject to the provisions of [old U.C.C.] and which would be subject to this Act as amended if they had
been entered into after the effective date of [new U.C.C.] and the rights, duties and interests flowing from such
transactions remain valid after the latter date and may be terminated, completed, consummated or enforced as
required or permitted by the [new U.C.C.]. Security interests arising out of such transactions which are perfected
when [new U.C.C.] becomes effective shall remain perfected until they lapse as provided in [new U.C.C.], and may
be continued as permitted by [new U.C.C.], except as stated in Section 11-105.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 11-104
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 11. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
TRANSITION PROVISIONS
§ 11-104. Transition Provision on Change of Requirement of Filing.
A security interest for the perfection of which filing or the taking of possession was required under [old U.C.C.] and
which attached prior to the effective date of [new U.C.C.] but was not perfected shall be deemed perfected on the
effective date of [new U.C.C.] if [new U.C.C.] permits perfection without filing or authorizes filing in the office or
offices where a prior ineffective filing was made.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 11-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 11. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
TRANSITION PROVISIONS
§ 11-105. Transition Provision on Change of Place of Filing.
(1) A financing statement or continuation statement filed prior to [effective date of new U.C.C.] which shall
not have lapsed prior to [the effective date of new U.C.C.] shall remain effective for the period provided in
the [old Code], but not less than five years after the filing.
(2) With respect to any collateral acquired by the debtor subsequent to the effective date of [new U.C.C.],
any effective financing statement or continuation statement described in this section shall apply only if the
filing or filings are in the office or offices that would be appropriate to perfect the security interests in the
new collateral under [new U.C.C.].
(3) The effectiveness of any financing statement or continuation statement filed prior to [effective date of
new U.C.C.] may be continued by a continuation statement as permitted by [new U.C.C.], except that if
[new U.C.C.] requires a filing in an office where there was no previous financing statement, a new financing
statement conforming to Section 11-106 shall be filed in that office.
(4) If the record of a mortgage of real estate would have been effective as a fixture filing of goods
described therein if [new U.C.C.] had been in effect on the date of recording the mortgage, the mortgage
shall be deemed effective as a fixture filing as to such goods under subsection (6) of Section 9-402 of the
[new U.C.C.] on the effective date of [new U.C.C.].
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 11-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 11. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
TRANSITION PROVISIONS
§ 11-106. Required Refilings.
(1) If a security interest is perfected or has priority when this Act takes effect as to all persons or as to
certain persons without any filing or recording, and if the filing of a financing statement would be required
for the perfection or priority of the security interest against those persons under [new U.C.C.], the perfection
and priority rights of the security interest continue until 3 years after the effective date of [new U.C.C.]. The
perfection will then lapse unless a financing statement is filed as provided in subsection (4) or unless the
security interest is perfected otherwise than by filing.
(2) If a security interest is perfected when [new U.C.C.] takes effect under a law other than [U.C.C.] which
requires no further filing, refiling or recording to continue its perfection, perfection continues until and will
lapse 3 years after [new U.C.C.] takes effect, unless a financing statement is filed as provided in subsection
(4) or unless the security interest is perfected otherwise than by filing, or unless under subsection (3) of
Section 9-302 the other law continues to govern filing.
(3) If a security interest is perfected by a filing, refiling or recording under a law repealed by this Act which
required further filing, refiling or recording to continue its perfection, perfection continues and will lapse on
the date provided by the law so repealed for such further filing, refiling or recording unless a financing
statement is filed as provided in subsection (4) or unless the security interest is perfected otherwise than by
filing.
(4) A financing statement may be filed within six months before the perfection of a security interest would
otherwise lapse. Any such financing statement may be signed by either the debtor or the secured party. It
must identify the security agreement, statement or notice (however denominated in any statute or other law
repealed or modified by this Act), state the office where and the date when the last filing, refiling or
recording, if any, was made with respect thereto, and the filing number, if any, or book and page, if any, of
recording and further state that the security agreement, statement or notice, however denominated, in
another filing office under the [U.C.C.] or under any statute or other law repealed or modified by this Act is
still effective. Section 9-401 and Section 9-103 determine the proper place to file such a financing
statement. Except as specified in this subsection, the provisions of Section 9-403(3) for continuation
statements apply to such a financing statement.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 11-107
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 11. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
TRANSITION PROVISIONS
§ 11-107. Transition Provisions as to Priorities.
Except as otherwise provided in [Article 11], [old U.C.C.] shall apply to any questions of priority if the positions of
the parties were fixed prior to the effective date of [new U.C.C.]. In other cases questions of priority shall be
determined by [new U.C.C.].
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. § 11-108
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 11. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
TRANSITION PROVISIONS
§ 11-108. Presumption That Rule of Law Continues Unchanged.
Unless a change in law has clearly been made, the provisions of [new U.C.C.] shall be deemed declaratory of the
meaning of the [old U.C.C.].
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 1-105
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
1-105. TERRITORIAL APPLICATION OF THE ACT; PARTIES' POWER TO
CHOOSE APPLICABLE LAW
* * *
(2) Where one of the following provisions of this Act specifies the applicable law, that provision
governs and a contrary agreement is effective only to the extent permitted by the law (including the
conflict of laws rules) so specified:
Rights of creditors against sold goods. Section 2-402.
Applicability of the Article on Leases. Sections 2A-105 and 2A-106.
Applicability of the Article on Bank Deposits and Collections. Section 4-102.
Governing law in the Article on Funds Transfers. Section 4A-507.
Letters of Credit. Section 5-116.
Bulk sales subject to the Article on Bulk Sales. Section 6-103.
[If a State adopts the repealer of Article 6, then this item should be deleted.]
Applicability of the Article on Investment Securities. Section 8-110.
Law governing perfection, the effect of perfection or nonperfection, and the priority of security
interests and agricultural liens. Sections 9-301 through 9-307.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
* * *
6. Sections 9-301 through 9-307 should be consulted as to the rules for perfection of security interests ___ and
agricultural liens, the effect of perfection and nonperfection, and priority.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
2-103. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
* * *
(3) The following definitions in other Articles apply to this Article:
"Check". Section 3-104.
"Consignee". Section 7-102.
"Consignor". Section 7-102.
"Consumer goods". Section 9-102.
"Dishonor". Section 3-502.
"Draft". Section 3-104.
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2-210
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
2-210. DELEGATION OF PERFORMANCE; ASSIGNMENT OF RIGHTS
* * *
(2) Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-406, unless otherwise agreed, all rights of either seller or
buyer can be assigned except where the assignment would materially change the duty of the other
party, or increase materially the burden or risk imposed on him by his contract, or impair materially his
chance of obtaining return performance. A right to damages for breach of the whole contract or a right
arising out of the assignor's due performance of his entire obligation can be assigned despite
agreement otherwise.
(3) The creation, attachment, perfection, or enforcement of a security interest in the seller's interest
under a contract is not a transfer that materially changes the duty of or increases materially the burden
or risk imposed on the buyer or impairs materially the buyer's chance of obtaining return performance
within the purview of subsection (2) unless, and then only to the extent that, enforcement actually
results in a delegation of material performance of the seller. Even in that event, the creation,
attachment, perfection, and enforcement of the security interest remain effective, but (i) the seller is
liable to the buyer for damages caused by the delegation to the extent that the damages could not
reasonably be prevented by the buyer, and (ii) a court having jurisdiction may grant other appropriate
relief, including cancellation of the contract for sale or an injunction against enforcement of the security
interest or consummation of the enforcement.
* * *
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
Legislative Note: Succeeding subsections must be renumbered.
3. Under subsection (2) rights which are no longer executory such as a right to damages for breach may be
assigned although the agreement prohibits assignment. In such cases no question of delegation of any
performance is involved. Subsection (2) is subject to Section 9-406, which makes rights to payment for goods sold
("accounts"), whether or not earned, freely alienable notwithstanding a contrary agreement or rule of law.
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2-312
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
2-312. WARRANTY OF TITLE AND AGAINST INFRINGEMENT; BUYER'S
OBLIGATION AGAINST INFRINGEMENT
* * *
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
* * *
5. Subsection (2) recognizes that sales by sheriffs, executors, certain foreclosing lienors and persons similarly
situated may be so out of the ordinary commercial course that their peculiar character is immediately apparent to
the buyer and therefore no personal obligation is imposed upon the seller who is purporting to sell only an unknown
or limited right. This subsection does not touch upon and leaves open all questions of restitution arising in such
cases, when a unique article so sold is reclaimed by a third party as the rightful owner.
Foreclosure sales under Article 9 are another matter. Section 9-610 provides that a disposition of collateral under
that section includes warranties such as those imposed by this section on a voluntary disposition of property of the
kind involved. Consequently, unless properly excluded under subsection (2) or under the special provisions for
exclusion in Section 9-610, a disposition under Section 9-610 of collateral consisting of goods includes the
warranties imposed by subsection (1) and, if applicable, subsection (3).
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2-326
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
2-326. SALE ON APPROVAL AND SALE OR RETURN; RIGHTS OF
CREDITORS
(1) Unless otherwise agreed, if delivered goods may be returned by the buyer even though they conform to
the contract, the transaction is
(a) a "sale on approval" if the goods are delivered primarily for use, and
(b) a "sale or return" if the goods are delivered primarily for resale.
(2) Goods held on approval are not subject to the claims of the buyer's creditors until acceptance; goods
held on sale or return are subject to such claims while in the buyer's possession.
(3) Any "or return" term of a contract for sale is to be treated as a separate contract for sale within the
statute of frauds section of this Article ( Section 2-201) and as contradicting the sale aspect of the contract
within the provisions of this Article on parol or extrinsic evidence ( Section 2-202).
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Both a "sale on approval" and a "sale or return" should be distinguished from other types of transactions with
which they frequently have been confused. A "sale on approval," sometimes also called a sale "on trial" or "on
satisfaction," deals with a contract under which the seller undertakes a risk in order to satisfy its prospective buyer
with the appearance or performance of the goods that are sold. The goods are delivered to the proposed purchaser
but they remain the property of the seller until the buyer accepts them. The price has already been agreed. The
buyer's willingness to receive and test the goods is the consideration for the seller's engagement to deliver and sell.
A "sale or return," on the other hand, typically is a sale to a merchant whose unwillingness to buy is overcome by
the seller's engagement to take back the goods (or any commercial unit of goods) in lieu of payment if they fail to be
resold. A sale or return is a present sale of goods which may be undone at the buyer's option. Accordingly,
subsection (2) provides that goods delivered on approval are not subject to the prospective buyer's creditors until
acceptance, and goods delivered in a sale or return are subject to the buyer's creditors while in the buyer's
possession.
These two transactions are so strongly delineated in practice and in general understanding that every
presumption runs against a delivery to a consumer being a "sale or return" and against a delivery to a merchant for
resale being a "sale on approval."
2. The right to return goods for failure to conform to the contract of sale does not make the transaction a "sale on
approval" or "sale or return" and has nothing to do with this section or Section 2-327. This section is not concerned
with remedies for breach of contract. It deals instead with a power given by the contract to turn back the goods even
though they are wholly as warranted. This section nevertheless presupposes that a contract for sale is
contemplated by the parties, although that contract may be of the particular character that this section addresses
(i.e., a sale on approval or a sale or return).
2-326. SALE ON APPROVAL AND SALE OR RETURN; RIGHTS OF CREDITORS
Page 2 of 2
If a buyer's obligation as a buyer is conditioned not on its personal approval but on the article's passing a
described objective test, the risk of loss by casualty pending the test is properly the seller's and proper return is at
its expense. On the point of "satisfaction" as meaning "reasonable satisfaction" when an industrial machine is
involved, this Article takes no position.
3. Subsection (3) resolves a conflict in the pre-UCC case law by recognizing that an "or return" provision is so
definitely at odds with any ordinary contract for sale of goods that if a written agreement is involved the "or return"
term must be contained in a written memorandum. The "or return" aspect of a sales contract must be treated as a
separate contract under the Statute of Frauds section and as contradicting the sale insofar as questions of parol or
extrinsic evidence are concerned.
4. Certain true consignment transactions were dealt with in former Sections 2-326(3) and 9-114. These provisions
have been deleted and have been replaced by new provisions in Article 9. See, e.g., Sections 9-109(a)(4); 9-
103(d); 9-319.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2-502
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
2-502. BUYER'S RIGHT TO GOODS ON SELLER'S REPUDIATION, FAILURE
TO DELIVER, OR INSOLVENCY
(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3) and even though the goods have not been shipped a buyer who has
paid a part or all of the price of goods in which he has a special property under the provisions of the
immediately preceding section may on making and keeping good a tender of any unpaid portion of their
price recover them from the seller if:
(a) in the case of goods bought for personal, family, or household purposes, the seller repudiates or
fails to deliver as required by the contract; or
(b) in all cases, the seller becomes insolvent within ten days after receipt of the first installment on their
price.
(2) The buyer's right to recover the goods under subsection (1)(a) vests upon acquisition of a special
property, even if the seller had not then repudiated or failed to deliver.
(3) If the identification creating his special property has been made by the buyer he acquires the right to
recover the goods only if they conform to the contract for sale.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section gives an additional right to the buyer as a result of identification of the goods to the contract in the
manner provided in Section 2-501. The buyer is given a right to recover the goods, conditioned upon making and
keeping good a tender of any unpaid portion of the price, in two limited circumstances. First, the buyer may recover
goods bought for personal, family, or household purposes if the seller repudiates the contract or fails to deliver the
goods. Second, in any case, the buyer may recover the goods if the seller becomes insolvent within 10 days after
the seller receives the first installment on their price. The buyer's right to recover the goods under this section is an
exception to the usual rule, under which the disappointed buyer must resort to an action to recover damages.
2. The question of whether the buyer also acquires a security interest in identified goods and has rights to the
goods when insolvency takes place after the ten-day period provided in this section depends upon compliance with
the provisions of the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9).
3. Under subsection (2), the buyer's right to recover consumer goods under subsection (1)(a) vests upon
acquisition of a special property, which occurs upon identification of the goods to the contract. See Section 2-501.
Inasmuch as a secured party normally acquires no greater rights in its collateral that its debtor had or had power to
convey, see Section 2-403(1) (first sentence), a buyer who acquires a right to recover under this section will take
free of a security interest created by the seller if it attaches to the goods after the goods have been identified to the
contract. The buyer will take free, even if the buyer does not buy in ordinary course and even if the security interest
is perfected. Of course, to the extent that the buyer pays the price after the security interest attaches, the payments
will constitute proceeds of the security interest.
2-502. BUYER'S RIGHT TO GOODS ON SELLER'S REPUDIATION, FAILURE TO DELIVER, OR
INSOLVENCY
Page 2 of 2
4. Subsection (3) is included to preclude the possibility of unjust enrichment, which would exist if the buyer were
permitted to recover goods even though they were greatly superior in quality or quantity to that called for by the
contract for sale.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2-716
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
2-716. BUYER'S RIGHT TO SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OR REPLEVIN
(1) Specific performance may be decreed where the goods are unique or in other proper circumstances.
(2) The decree for specific performance may include such terms and conditions as to payment of the price,
damages, or other relief as the court may deem just.
(3) The buyer has a right of replevin for goods identified to the contract if after reasonable effort he is
unable to effect cover for such goods or the circumstances reasonably indicate that such effort will be
unavailing or if the goods have been shipped under reservation and satisfaction of the security interest in
them has been made or tendered. In the case of goods bought for personal, family, or household purposes,
the buyer's right of replevin vests upon acquisition of a special property, even if the seller had not then
repudiated or failed to deliver.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
* * *
3. The legal remedy of replevin is given to the buyer in cases in which cover is reasonably unavailable and goods
have been identified to the contract. This is in addition to the buyer's right to recover identified goods under Section
2-502. For consumer goods, the buyer's right to replevin vests upon the buyer's acquisition of a special property,
which occurs upon identification of the goods to the contract. See Section 2-501. Inasmuch as a secured party
normally acquires no greater rights in its collateral that its debtor had or had power to convey, see Section 2-403(1)
(first sentence), a buyer who acquires a right of replevin under subsection (3) will take free of a security interest
created by the seller if it attaches to the goods after the goods have been identified to the contract. The buyer will
take free, even if the buyer does not buy in ordinary course and even if the security interest is perfected. Of course,
to the extent that the buyer pays the price after the security interest attaches, the payments will constitute proceeds
of the security interest.
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2A-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
2A-103. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
* * *
(3) The following definitions in other Articles apply to this Article:
"Account". Section 9-102(a)(2).
"Between merchants". Section 2-104(3).
"Buyer". Section 2-103(1)(a).
"Chattel paper". Section 9-102(a)(11).
"Consumer goods". Section 9-102(a)(23).
"Document". Section 9-102(a)(30).
"Entrusting". Section 2-403(3).
"General intangible". Section 9-102(a)(42).
"Good faith". Section 2-103(1)(b).
"Instrument". Section 9-102(a)(47).
"Merchant". Section 2-104(1).
"Mortgage". Section 9-102(a)(55).
"Pursuant to commitment". Section 9-102(a)(69).
"Receipt". Section 2-103(1)(c).
"Sale". Section 2-106(1).
"Sale on approval". Section 2-326.
"Sale or return". Section 2-326.
"Seller". Section 2-103(1)(d).
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2A-303
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
2A-303. ALIENABILITY OF PARTY'S INTEREST UNDER LEASE CONTRACT
OR OF LESSOR'S RESIDUAL INTEREST IN GOODS; DELEGATION OF
PERFORMANCE; TRANSFER OF RIGHTS
(1) As used in this section, "creation of a security interest" includes the sale of a lease contract that is
subject to Article 9, Secured Transactions, by reason of Section 9-109(a)(3).
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3) and Section 9-407, a provision in a lease agreement which (i)
prohibits the voluntary or involuntary transfer, including a transfer by sale, sublease, creation or
enforcement of a security interest, or attachment, levy, or other judicial process, of an interest of a party
under the lease contract or of the lessor's residual interest in the goods, or (ii) makes such a transfer an
event of default, gives rise to the rights and remedies provided in subsection (4), but a transfer that is
prohibited or is an event of default under the lease agreement is otherwise effective.
(3) A provision in a lease agreement which (i) prohibits a transfer of a right to damages for default with
respect to the whole lease contract or of a right to payment arising out of the transferor's due performance
of the transferor's entire obligation, or (ii) makes such a transfer an event of default, is not enforceable, and
such a transfer is not a transfer that materially impairs the prospect of obtaining return performance by,
materially changes the duty of, or materially increases the burden or risk imposed on, the other party to the
lease contract within the purview of subsection (4).
(4) Subject to subsection (3) and Section 9-407:
(a) if a transfer is made which is made an event of default under a lease agreement, the party to the
lease contract not making the transfer, unless that party waives the default or otherwise agrees, has
the rights and remedies described in Section 2A-501(2);
(b) if paragraph (a) is not applicable and if a transfer is made that (i) is prohibited under a lease
agreement or (ii) materially impairs the prospect of obtaining return performance by, materially changes
the duty of, or materially increases the burden or risk imposed on, the other party to the lease contract,
unless the party not making the transfer agrees at any time to the transfer in the lease contract or
otherwise, then, except as limited by contract, (i) the transferor is liable to the party not making the
transfer for damages caused by the transfer to the extent that the damages could not reasonably be
prevented by the party not making the transfer and (ii) a court having jurisdiction may grant other
appropriate relief, including cancellation of the lease contract or an injunction against the transfer.
(5) A transfer of "the lease" or of "all my rights under the lease", or a transfer in similar general terms, is a
transfer of rights and, unless the language or the circumstances, as in a transfer for security, indicate the
contrary, the transfer is a delegation of duties by the transferor to the transferee. Acceptance by the
transferee constitutes a promise by the transferee to perform those duties. The promise is enforceable by
either the transferor or the other party to the lease contract.
(6) Unless otherwise agreed by the lessor and the lessee, a delegation of performance does not relieve the
transferor as against the other party of any duty to perform or of any liability for default.
(7) In a consumer lease, to prohibit the transfer of an interest of a party under the lease contract or to make
a transfer an event of default, the language must be specific, by a writing, and conspicuous.
2A-303. ALIENABILITY OF PARTY'S INTEREST UNDER LEASE CONTRACT OR OF LESSOR'S RESIDUAL
INTEREST IN GOODS; DELEGATION OF PERFORMANCE; TRANSFER OF RIGHTS
Page 2 of 3
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (2) states a rule, consistent with Section 9-401(b), that voluntary and involuntary transfers of an
interest of a party under the lease contract or of the lessor's residual interest, including by way of the creation or
enforcement of a security interest, are effective, notwithstanding a provision in the lease agreement prohibiting the
transfer or making the transfer an event of default. Although the transfers are effective, the provision in the lease
agreement is nevertheless enforceable, but only as provided in subsection (4). Under subsection (4) the prejudiced
party is limited to the remedies on "default under the lease contract" in this Article and, except as limited by this
Article, as provided in the lease agreement, if the transfer has been made an event of default. Section 2A-501(2).
Usually, there will be a specific provision to this effect or a general provision making a breach of a covenant an
event of default. In those cases where the transfer is prohibited, but not made an event of default, the prejudiced
party may recover damages; or, if the damage remedy would be ineffective adequately to protect that party, the
court can order cancellation of the lease contract or enjoin the transfer. This rule that such provisions generally are
enforceable is subject to subsection (3) and Section 9-407, which make such provisions unenforceable in certain
instances.
2. Under Section 9-407, a provision in a lease agreement which prohibits the creation or enforcement of a security
interest, including sales of lease contracts subject to Article 9 (Section 9-109(a)(3)), or makes it an event of default
is generally not enforceable, reflecting the policy of Section 9-406 and former Section 9-318(4).
3. Subsection (3) is based upon Section 2-210(2) and Section 9-406. It makes unenforceable a prohibition against
transfers of certain rights to payment or a provision making the transfer an event of default. It also provides that
such transfers do not materially impair the prospect of obtaining return performance by, materially change the duty
of, or materially increase the burden or risk imposed on, the other party to the lease contract so as to give rise to
the rights and remedies stated in subsection (4). Accordingly, a transfer of a right to payment cannot be prohibited
or made an event of default, or be one that materially impairs performance, changes duties or increases risk, if the
right is already due or will become due without further performance being required by the party to receive payment.
Thus, a lessor can transfer the right to future payments under the lease contract, including by way of a grant of a
security interest, and the transfer will not give rise to the rights and remedies stated in subsection (4) if the lessor
has no remaining performance under the lease contract. The mere fact that the lessor is obligated to allow the
lessee to remain in possession and to use the goods as long as the lessee is not in default does not mean that
there is remaining performance on the part of the lessor. Likewise, the fact that the lessor has potential liability
under a "non-operating" lease contract for breaches of warranty does not mean that there is remaining
performance. In contrast, the lessor would have remaining performance under a lease contract requiring the lessor
to regularly maintain and service the goods or to provide "upgrades" of the equipment on a periodic basis in order to
avoid obsolescence. The basic distinction is between a mere potential duty to respond which is not remaining
performance, and an affirmative duty to render stipulated performance. Although the distinction may be difficult to
draw in some cases, it is instructive to focus on the difference between "operating" and "non-operating" leases as
generally understood in the marketplace. Even if there is remaining performance under a lease contract, a transfer
for security of a right to payment that is made an event of default or that is in violation of a prohibition against
transfer does not give rise to the rights and remedies under subsection (4) if it does not constitute an actual
delegation of a material performance under Section 9-407.
4. The application of either the rule of Section 9-407 or the rule of subsection (3) to the grant by the lessor of a
security interest in the lessor's right to future payment under the lease contract may produce the same result. Both
provisions generally protect security transfers by the lessor in particular because the creation by the lessor of a
security interest or the enforcement of that interest generally will not prejudice the lessee's rights if it does not result
in a delegation of the lessor's duties. To the contrary, the receipt of loan proceeds or relief from the enforcement of
2A-303. ALIENABILITY OF PARTY'S INTEREST UNDER LEASE CONTRACT OR OF LESSOR'S RESIDUAL
INTEREST IN GOODS; DELEGATION OF PERFORMANCE; TRANSFER OF RIGHTS
Page 3 of 3
an antecedent debt normally should enhance the lessor's ability to perform its duties under the lease contract.
Nevertheless, there are circumstances where relief might be justified. For example, if ownership of the goods is
transferred pursuant to enforcement of a security interest to a party whose ownership would prevent the lessee
from continuing to possess the goods, relief might be warranted. See 49 U.S.C. § 1401(a) and (b) which places
limitations on the operation of aircraft in the United States based on the citizenship or corporate qualification of the
registrant.
5. Relief on the ground of material prejudice when the lease agreement does not prohibit the transfer or make it
an event of default should be afforded only in extreme circumstances, considering the fact that the party asserting
material prejudice did not insist upon a provision in the lease agreement that would protect against such a transfer.
6. Subsection (4) implements the rule of subsection (2). Subsection (2) provides that, even though a transfer is
effective, a provision in the lease agreement prohibiting it or making it an event of default may be enforceable as
provided in subsection (4). See Brummond v. First National Bank of Clovis, 656 P.2d 884, 35 U.C.C.Rep.Serv.
(Callaghan) 1311 (N.Mex.1983), stating the analogous rule for Section 9-311. If the transfer prohibited by the lease
agreement is made an event of default, then, under subsection (4)(a), unless the default is waived or there is an
agreement otherwise, the aggrieved party has the rights and remedies referred to in Section 2A-501(2), viz. those in
this Article and, except as limited in the Article, those provided in the lease agreement. In the unlikely circumstance
that the lease agreement prohibits the transfer without making a violation of the prohibition an event of default or,
even if there is no prohibition against the transfer, and the transfer is one that materially impairs performance,
changes duties, or increases risk (for example, a sublease or assignment to a party using the goods improperly or
for an illegal purpose), then subsection (4)(b) is applicable. In that circumstance, unless the party aggrieved by the
transfer has otherwise agreed in the lease contract, such as by assenting to a particular transfer or to transfers in
general, or agrees in some other manner, the aggrieved party has the right to recover damages from the transferor
and a court may, in appropriate circumstances, grant other relief, such as cancellation of the lease contract or an
injunction against the transfer.
7. If a transfer gives rise to the rights and remedies provided in subsection (4), the transferee as an alternative
may propose, and the other party may accept, adequate cure or compensation for past defaults and adequate
assurance of future due performance under the lease contract. Subsection (4) does not preclude any other relief
that may be available to a party to the lease contract aggrieved by a transfer subject to an enforceable prohibition,
such as an action for interference with contractual relations.
8. Subsection (7) requires that a provision in a consumer lease prohibiing a transfer, or making it an event of
default, must be specific, written and conspicuous. See Section 1-201(10). This assists in protecting a consumer
lessee against surprise assertions of default.
9. Subsection (5) is taken almost verbatim from the provisions of Section 2-210(5). The subsection states a rule of
construction that distinguishes a commercial assignment, which substitutes the assignee for the assignor as to
rights and duties, and an assignment for security or financing assignment, which substitutes the assignee for the
assignor only as to rights. Note that the assignment for security or financing assignment is a subset of all security
interests. Security interest is defined to include "any interest of a buyer of … chattel paper". Section 1-201(37).
Chattel paper is defined to include a lease. Section 9-102. Thus, a buyer of leases is the holder of a security
interest in the leases. That conclusion should not influence this issue, as the policy is quite different. Whether a
buyer of leases is the holder of a commercial assignment, or an assignment for security or financing assignment
should be determined by the language of the assignment or the circumstances of the assignment.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2A-307
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
2A-307. PRIORITY OF LIENS ARISING BY ATTACHMENT OR LEVY ON,
SECURITY INTERESTS IN, AND OTHER CLAIMS TO GOODS
(1) Except as otherwise provided in Section 2A-306, a creditor of a lessee takes subject to the lease
contract.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (3) and in Sections 2A-306 and 2A-308, a creditor of a
lessor takes subject to the lease contract unless
the creditor holds a lien that attached to the goods before the lease contract became enforceable.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in Sections 9-317, 9-321, and 9-323, a lessee takes a leasehold interest
subject to a security interest held by a creditor of the lessor.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
* * *
3. To take priority over the lease contract, and the interests derived therefrom, the creditor must come within the
exception stated in subsection (2) or within one of the provisions of Article 9 mentioned in subsection (3).
Subsection (2) provides that where the creditor holds a lien (Section 2A-103(1)(r)) that attached before the lease
contract became enforceable (Section 2A-301), the creditor does not take subject to the lease. Subsection (3)
provides that a lessee takes its leasehold interest subject to a security interest except as otherwise provided in
Sections 9-317, 9-321, or 9-323.
4. The rules of this section operate in favor of whichever party to the lease contract may enforce it, even if one
party perhaps may not, e.g., under Section 2A-201(1)(b).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 2A-309
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
2A-309. LESSOR'S AND LESSEE'S RIGHTS WHEN GOODS BECOME
FIXTURES
(1) In this section:
* * *
(b) a "fixture filing" is the filing, in the office where a record of a mortgage on the real estate would be
filed or recorded, of a financing statement covering goods that are or are to become fixtures and
conforming to the requirements of Section 9-502(a) and (b);
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 4-210
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
4-210. SECURITY INTEREST OF COLLECTING BANK IN ITEMS,
ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS AND PROCEEDS
* * *
(c) Receipt by a collecting bank of a final settlement for an item is a realization on its security interest
in the item, accompanying documents, and proceeds. So long as the bank does not receive final
settlement for the item or give up possession of the item or accompanying documents for purposes
other than collection, the security interest continues to that extent and is subject to Article 9, but:
(1) no security agreement is necessary to make the security interest enforceable ( Section 9-
203(b)(3)(A));
(2) no filing is required to perfect the security interest; and
(3) the security interest has priority over conflicting perfected security interests in the item,
accompanying documents, or proceeds.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 5-118
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
5-118. SECURITY INTEREST OF ISSUER OR NOMINATED PERSON
(a) An issuer or nominated person has a security interest in a document presented under a letter of credit
to the extent that the issuer or nominated person honors or gives value for the presentation.
(b) So long as and to the extent that an issuer or nominated person has not been reimbursed or has not
otherwise recovered the value given with respect to a security interest in a document under subsection (a),
the security interest continues and is subject to Article 9, but:
(1) a security agreement is not necessary to make the security interest enforceable under Section 9-
203(b)(3);
(2) if the document is presented in a medium other than a written or other tangible medium, the
security interest is perfected; and
(3) if the document is presented in a written or other tangible medium and is not a certificated security,
chattel paper, a document of title, an instrument, or a letter of credit, the security interest is perfected
and has priority over a conflicting security interest in the document so long as the debtor does not have
possession of the document.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. This section gives the issuer of a letter of credit or a nominated person thereunder an automatic perfected
security interest in a "document" (as that term is defined in Section 5-102(a)(6)). The security interest arises only if
the document is presented to the issuer or nominated person under the letter of credit and only to the extent of the
value that is given. This security interest is analogous to that awarded to a collecting bank under Section 4-210.
Subsection (b) contains special rules governing the security interest arising under this section. In all other respects,
a security interest arising under this section is subject to Article 9. See Section 9-109. Thus, for example, a security
interest arising under this section may give rise to a security interest in proceeds under Section 9-315.
2. Subsection (b)(1) makes a security agreement unnecessary to the creation of a security interest under this
section. Under subsection (b)(2), a security interest arising under this section is perfected if the document is
presented in a medium other than a written or tangible medium. Documents that are written and that are not an
otherwise-defined type of collateral under Article 9 (e.g., an invoice or inspection certificate) may be goods, in which
an issuer or nominated person could perfect its security interest by possession. Because the definition of document
in Section 5-102(a)(6) includes records (e.g., electronic records) that may not be goods, subsection (b)(2) provides
for automatic perfection (i.e., without filing or possession).
Under subsection (b)(3), if the document (i) is in a written or tangible medium, (ii) is not a certificated security,
chattel paper, a document of title, an instrument, or a letter of credit, and (iii) is not in the debtor's possession, the
security interest is perfected and has priority over a conflicting security interest. If the document is a type of tangible
collateral that subsection (b)(3) excludes from its perfection and priority rules, the issuer or nominated person must
comply with the normal method of perfection (e.g., possession of an instrument) and is subject to the applicable
5-118. SECURITY INTEREST OF ISSUER OR NOMINATED PERSON
Page 2 of 2
Article 9 priority rules. Documents to which subsection (b)(3) applies may be important to an issuer or nominated
person. For example, a confirmer who pays the beneficiary must be assured that its rights to all documents are not
impaired. It will find it necessary to present all of the required documents to the issuer in order to be reimbursed.
Moreover, when a nominated person sends documents to an issuer in connection with the nominated person's
reimbursement, that activity is not a collection, enforcement, or disposition of collateral under Article 9.
One purpose of this section is to protect an issuer or nominated person from claims of a beneficiary's creditors. It
is a fallback provision inasmuch as issuers and nominated persons frequently may obtain and perfect security
interests under the usual Article 9 rules, and, in many cases, the documents will be owned by the issuer, nominated
person, or applicant.
UCC Article 6, Alternative A:
Legislative Note: To take account of differences between former Article 9 and revised Article 9, a State that
repeals Article 6 after revised Article 9 takes effect must make the following changes to Alternative A. First,
inasmuch as revised Article 9 contains no counterpart of former Section 9-111, the reference to that section in
Section 1 of the repealer should be deleted, and Section 4 of the repeal bill should allude to former Section 9-111.
Second, the last entry in Section 1-105(2) should be amended as shown above in this Appendix.
UCC Article 6, Alternative B:
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 6-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
6-102. DEFINITIONS AND INDEX OF DEFINITIONS
(1) In this Article, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Assets" means the inventory that is the subject of a bulk sale and any tangible and intangible
personal property used or held for use primarily in, or arising from, the seller's business and sold in
connection with that inventory, but the term does not include:
(i) fixtures ( Section 9-102(a)(41)) other than readily removable factory and office machines;
(ii) the lessee's interest in a lease of real property; or
(iii) property to the extent it is generally exempt from creditor process under nonbankruptcy law.
* * *
(2) The following definitions in other Articles apply to this Article:
(a) "Buyer." Section 2-103(1)(a).
(b) "Equipment." Section 9-102(a)(33).
(c) "Inventory." Section 9-102(a)(48).
(d) "Sale." Section 2-106(1).
(e) "Seller." Section 2-103(1)(d).
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 6-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
6-103. APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE
* * *
(3) This Article does not apply to:
(a) a transfer made to secure payment or performance of an obligation;
(b) a transfer of collateral to a secured party pursuant to Section 9-609;
(c) a disposition of collateral pursuant to Section 9-610;
(d) retention of collateral pursuant to Section 9-620;
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 7-503
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
7-503. DOCUMENT OF TITLE TO GOODS DEFEATED IN CERTAIN CASES
(1) A document of title confers no right in goods against a person who before issuance of the document
had a legal interest or a perfected security interest in them and who neither
(a) delivered or entrusted them or any document of title covering them to the bailor or his nominee with
actual or apparent authority to ship, store or sell or with power to obtain delivery under this Article (
Section 7-403) or with power of disposition under this Act ( Sections 2-403 and 9-320) or other statute
or rule of law; nor
(b) acquiesced in the procurement by the bailor or his nominee of any document of title.
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-102
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
8-102. DEFINITIONS
* * *
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
* * *
7. "Entitlement holder." This term designates those who hold financial assets through intermediaries in the indirect
holding system. Because many of the rules of Part 5 impose duties on securities intermediaries in favor of
entitlement holders, the definition of entitlement holder is, in most cases, limited to the person specifically
designated as such on the records of the intermediary. The last sentence of the definition covers the relatively
unusual cases where a person may acquire a security entitlement under Section 8-501 even though the person
may not be specifically designated as an entitlement holder on the records of the securities intermediary.
A person may have an interest in a security entitlement, and may even have the right to give entitlement orders to
the securities intermediary with respect to it, even though the person is not the entitlement holder. For example, a
person who holds securities through a securities account in its own name may have given discretionary trading
authority to another person, such as an investment adviser. Similarly, the control provisions in Section 8-106 and
the related provisions in Article 9 are designed to facilitate transactions in which a person who holds securities
through a securities account uses them as collateral in an arrangement where the securities intermediary has
agreed that if the secured party so directs the intermediary will dispose of the positions. In such arrangements, the
debtor remains the entitlement holder but has agreed that the secured party can initiate entitlement orders.
Moreover, an entitlement holder may be acting for another person as a nominee, agent, trustee, or in another
capacity. Unless the entitlement holder is itself acting as a securities intermediary for the other person, in which
case the other person would be an entitlement holder with respect to the securities entitlement, the relationship
between an entitlement holder and another person for whose benefit the entitlement holder holds a securities
entitlement is governed by other law.
8. "Entitlement order." This term is defined as a notification communicated to a securities intermediary directing
transfer or redemption of the financial asset to which an entitlement holder has a security entitlement. The term is
used in the rules for the indirect holding system in a fashion analogous to the use of the terms "indorsement" and
"instruction" in the rules for the direct holding system. If a person directly holds a certificated security in registered
form and wishes to transfer it, the means of transfer is an indorsement. If a person directly holds an uncertificated
security and wishes to transfer it, the means of transfer is an instruction. If a person holds a security entitlement, the
means of disposition is an entitlement order. An entitlement order includes a direction under Section 8-508 to the
securities intermediary to transfer a financial asset to the account of the entitlement holder at another financial
intermediary or to cause the financial asset to be transferred to the entitlement holder in the direct holding system
(e.g., the delivery of a securities certificate registered in the name of the former entitlement holder). As noted in
Comment 7, an entitlement order need not be initiated by the entitlement holder in order to be effective, so long as
the entitlement holder has authorized the other party to initiate entitlement orders. See Section 8-107(b).
8-102. DEFINITIONS
Page 2 of 2
* * *
13. "Registered form." The definition of "registered form" is substantially the same as in the prior version of Article
8. Like the definition of bearer form, it serves primarily to distinguish Article 8 securities from instruments governed
by other law, such as Article 3.
Contrary to the holding in Highland Capital Management LP v. Schneider, 8 N.Y.3d 406 (2007), the registrability
requirement in the definition of "registered form," and its parallel in the definition of "security," are satisfied only if
books are maintained by or on behalf of the issuer for the purpose of registration of transfer, including the
determination of rights under Section 8-207(a) (or if, in the case of a certificated security, the security certificate so
states). It is not sufficient that the issuer records ownership, or records transfers thereof, for other purposes. Nor is
it sufficient that the issuer, while not in fact maintaining books for the purpose of registration of transfer, could do so,
for such is always the case.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-103
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
8-103. RULES FOR DETERMINING WHETHER CERTAIN OBLIGATIONS AND
INTERESTS ARE SECURITIES OR FINANCIAL ASSETS
* * *
(f) A commodity contract, as defined in Section 9-102(a)(15), is not a security or a financial asset.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
8-106. CONTROL
(a) A purchaser has "control" of a certificated security in bearer form if the certificated security is delivered
to the purchaser.
(b) A purchaser has "control" of a certificated security in registered form if the certificated security is
delivered to the purchaser, and:
(1) the certificate is indorsed to the purchaser or in blank by an effective indorsement; or
(2) the certificate is registered in the name of the purchaser, upon original issue or registration of
transfer by the issuer.
(c) A purchaser has "control" of an uncertificated security if:
(1) the uncertificated security is delivered to the purchaser; or
(2) the issuer has agreed that it will comply with instructions originated by the purchaser without further
consent by the registered owner.
(d) A purchaser has "control" of a security entitlement if:
(1) the purchaser becomes the entitlement holder;
(2) the securities intermediary has agreed that it will comply with entitlement orders originated by the
purchaser without further consent by the entitlement holder; or
(3) another person has control of the security entitlement on behalf of the purchaser or, having
previously acquired control of the security entitlement, acknowledges that it has control on behalf of the
purchaser.
(e) If an interest in a security entitlement is granted by the entitlement holder to the entitlement holder's
own securities intermediary, the securities intermediary has control.
(f) A purchaser who has satisfied the requirements of subsection (c) or (d) has control, even if the
registered owner in the case of subsection (c) or the entitlement holder in the case of subsection (d) retains
the right to make substitutions for the uncertificated security or security entitlement, to originate instructions
or entitlement orders to the issuer or securities intermediary, or otherwise to deal with the uncertificated
security or security entitlement.
(g) An issuer or a securities intermediary may not enter into an agreement of the kind described in
subsection (c)(2) or (d)(2) without the consent of the registered owner or entitlement holder, but an issuer or
a securities intermediary is not required to enter into such an agreement even though the registered owner
or entitlement holder so directs. An issuer or securities intermediary that has entered into such an
agreement is not required to confirm the existence of the agreement to another party unless requested to
do so by the registered owner or entitlement holder.
Annotations
Commentary
8-106. CONTROL
Page 2 of 4
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. The concept of "control" plays a key role in various provisions dealing with the rights of purchasers, including
secured parties. See Sections 8-303 (protected purchasers); 8-503(e) (purchasers from securities intermediaries);
8-510 (purchasers of security entitlements from entitlement holders); 9-314 (perfection of security interests); 9-328
(priorities among conflicting security interests).
Obtaining "control" means that the purchaser has taken whatever steps are necessary, given the manner in which
the securities are held, to place itself in a position where it can have the securities sold, without further action by the
owner.
* * *
4. Subsection (d) specifies the means by which a purchaser can obtain control of a security entitlement. Three
mechanisms are possible, analogous to those provided in subsection (c) for uncertificated securities. Under
subsection (d)(1), a purchaser has control if it is the entitlement holder. This subsection would apply whether the
purchaser holds through the same intermediary that the debtor used, or has the securities position transferred to its
own intermediary. Subsection (d)(2) provides that a purchaser has control if the securities intermediary has agreed
to act on entitlement orders originated by the purchaser if no further consent by the entitlement holder is required.
Under subsection (d)(2), control may be achieved even though the original entitlement holder remains as the
entitlement holder. Finally, a purchaser may obtain control under subsection (d)(3) if another person has control and
the person acknowledges that it has control on the purchaser's behalf. Control under subsection (d)(3) parallels the
delivery of certificated securities and uncertificated securities under Section 8-301. Of course, the acknowledging
person cannot be the debtor.
This section specifies only the minimum requirements that such an arrangement must meet to confer "control";
the details of the arrangement can be specified by agreement. The arrangement might cover all of the positions in a
particular account or subaccount, or only specified positions. There is no requirement that the control party's right to
give entitlement orders be exclusive. The arrangement might provide that only the control party can give entitlement
orders, or that either the entitlement holder or the control party can give entitlement orders. See subsection (f).
The following examples illustrate the application of subsection (d):
Example 1. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Alpha also has an account with Able. Debtor
instructs Able to transfer the shares to Alpha, and Able does so by crediting the shares to Alpha's account. Alpha
has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1). Although Debtor may have become the beneficial owner of
the new securities entitlement, as between Debtor and Alpha, Able has agreed to act on Alpha's entitlement orders
because, as between Able and Alpha Alpha has become the entitlement holder. See Section 8-506.
Example 2. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Alpha does not have an account with Able.
Alpha uses Beta as its securities custodian. Debtor instructs Able to transfer the shares to Beta, for the account of
Alpha, and Able does so. Alpha has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1). As in Example 1, although
Debtor may have become the beneficial owner of the new securities entitlement, as between Debtor and Alpha,
Beta has agreed to act on Alpha's entitlement orders because, as between Beta and Alpha, Alpha has become the
entitlement holder.
Example 3. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Debtor, Able, and Alpha enter into an
agreement under which Debtor will continue to receive dividends and distributions, and will continue to have the
right to direct dispositions, but Alpha also has the right to direct dispositions. Alpha has control of the 1000 shares
under subsection (d)(2).
Example 4. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Able causes
8-106. CONTROL
Page 3 of 4
Clearing Corporation to transfer the shares into Alpha's account at Clearing Corporation. As in Example 1, Alpha
has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1).
Example 5. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Alpha does
not have an account with Clearing Corporation. It holds its securities through Beta Bank, which does have an
account with Clearing Corporation. Able causes Clearing Corporation to transfer the shares into Beta's account at
Clearing Corporation. Beta credits the position to Alpha's account with Beta. As in Example 2, Alpha has control of
the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(1).
Example 6. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Able causes
Clearing Corporation to transfer the shares into a pledge account, pursuant to an agreement under which Able will
continue to receive dividends, distributions, and the like, but Alpha has the right to direct dispositions. As in
Example 3, Alpha has control of the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(2).
Example 7. Able & Co., a securities dealer, grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Able holds through an account with Clearing Corporation. Able, Alpha,
and Clearing Corporation enter into an agreement under which Clearing Corporation will act on instructions from
Alpha with respect to the XYZ Co. stock carried in Able's account, but Able will continue to receive dividends,
distributions, and the like, and will also have the right to direct dispositions. As in Example 3, Alpha has control of
the 1000 shares under subsection (d)(2).
Example 8. Able & Co., a securities dealer, holds a wide range of securities through its account at Clearing
Corporation. Able enters into an arrangement with Alpha Bank pursuant to which Alpha provides financing to Able
secured by securities identified as the collateral on lists provided by Able to Alpha on a daily or other periodic basis.
Able, Alpha, and Clearing Corporation enter into an agreement under which Clearing Corporation agrees that if at
any time Alpha directs Clearing Corporation to do so, Clearing Corporation will transfer any securities from Able's
account at Alpha's instructions. Because Clearing Corporation has agreed to act on Alpha's instructions with
respect to any securities carried in Able's account, at the moment that Alpha's security interest attaches to
securities listed by Able, Alpha obtains control of those securities under subsection (d)(2). There is no requirement
that Clearing Corporation be informed of which securities Able has pledged to Alpha.
Example 9. Debtor grants Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Beta Bank agrees with Alpha to act as Alpha's
collateral agent with respect to the security entitlement. Debtor, Able, and Beta enter into an agreement under
which Debtor will continue to receive dividends and distributions, and will continue to have the right to direct
dispositions, but Beta also has the right to direct dispositions. Because Able has agreed that it will comply with
entitlement orders originated by Beta without further consent by Debtor, Beta has control of the security entitlement
(see Example 3). Because Beta has control on behalf of Alpha, Alpha also has control under subsection (d)(3). It is
not necessary for Able to enter into an agreement directly with Alpha or for Able to be aware of Beta's agency
relationship with Alpha.
* * *
7. The term "control" is used in a particular defined sense. The requirements for obtaining control are set out in
this section. The concept is not to be interpreted by reference to similar concepts in other bodies of law. In
particular, the requirements for "possession" derived from the common law of pledge are not to be used as a basis
for interpreting subsection (c)(2) or (d)(2). Those provisions are designed to supplant the concepts of "constructive
possession" and the like. A principal purpose of the "control" concept is to eliminate the uncertainty and confusion
that results from attempting to apply common law possession concepts to modern securities holding practices.
The key to the control concept is that the purchaser has the ability to have the securities sold or transferred
without further action by the transferor. There is no requirement that the powers held by the purchaser be exclusive.
For example, in a secured lending arrangement, if the secured party wishes, it can allow the debtor to retain the
right to make substitutions, to direct the disposition of the uncertificated security or security entitlement, or otherwise
8-106. CONTROL
Page 4 of 4
to give instructions or entitlement orders. (As explained in Section 8-102, Comment 8, an entitlement order includes
a direction under Section 8-508 to the securities intermediary to transfer a financial asset to the account of the
entitlement holder at another financial intermediary or to cause the financial asset to be transferred to the
entitlement holder in the direct holding system (e.g., by delivery of a securities certificate registered in the name of
the former entitlement holder).) Subsection (f) is included to make clear the general point stated in subsections (c)
and (d) that the test of control is whether the purchaser has obtained the requisite power, not whether the debtor
has retained other powers. There is no implication that retention by the debtor of powers other than those
mentioned in subsection (f) is inconsistent with the purchaser having control. Nor is there a requirement that the
purchaser's powers be unconditional, provided that further consent of the entitlement holder is not a condition.
Example 10. Debtor grants to Alpha Bank and to Beta Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that
includes 1000 shares of XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. By agreement among
the parties, Alpha's security interest is senior and Beta's is junior. Able agrees to act on the entitlement orders of
either Alpha or Beta. Alpha and Beta each has control under subsection (d)(2). Moreover, Beta has control
notwithstanding a term of Able's agreement to the effect that Able's obligation to act on Beta's entitlement orders is
conditioned on Alpha's consent. The crucial distinction is that Able's agreement to act on Beta's entitlement orders
is not conditioned on Debtor's further consent.
Example 11. Debtor grants to Alpha Bank a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of
XYZ Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Able agrees to act on the entitlement orders of
Alpha, but Alpha's right to give entitlement orders to the securities intermediary is conditioned on the Debtor's
default. Alternatively, Alpha's right to give entitlement orders is conditioned upon Alpha's statement to Able that
Debtor is in default. Because Able's agreement to act on Alpha's* entitlement orders is not conditioned on Debtor's
further consent, Alpha has control of the securities entitlement under either alternative. *Amendments in italics
approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform Commercial Code January 15, 2000.
In many situations, it will be better practice for both the securities intermediary and the purchaser to insist that any
conditions relating in any way to the entitlement holder be effective only as between the purchaser and the
entitlement holder. That practice would avoid the risk that the securities intermediary could be caught between
conflicting assertions of the entitlement holder and the purchaser as to whether the conditions in fact have been
met. Nonetheless, the existence of unfulfilled conditions effective against the intermediary would not preclude the
purchaser from having control.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-110
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
8-110. APPLICABILITY; CHOICE OF LAW
* * *
(e) The following rules determine a "securities intermediary's jurisdiction" for purposes of this section:
(1) If an agreement between the securities intermediary and its entitlement holder governing the
securities account expressly provides that a particular jurisdiction is the securities intermediary's
jurisdiction for purposes of this part, this article, or this [Act], that jurisdiction is the securities
intermediary's jurisdiction.
(2) If paragraph (1) does not apply and an agreement between the securities intermediary and its
entitlement holder governing the securities account expressly provides that the agreement is
governed by the law of a particular jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the securities intermediary's
jurisdiction.
(3) If neither paragraph (1) nor paragraph (2) applies and an agreement between the securities
intermediary and its entitlement holder governing the securities account expressly provides that the
securities account is maintained at an office in a particular jurisdiction, that jurisdiction is the
securities intermediary's jurisdiction.
(4) If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the securities intermediary's jurisdiction is the
jurisdiction in which the office identified in an account statement as the office serving the
entitlement holder's account is located.
(5) If none of the preceding paragraphs applies, the securities intermediary's jurisdiction is the
jurisdiction in which the chief executive office of the securities intermediary is located.
(f) A securities intermediary's jurisdiction is not determined by the physical location of certificates
representing financial assets, or by the jurisdiction in which is organized the issuer of the financial asset
with respect to which an entitlement holder has a security entitlement, or by the location of facilities for
data processing or other record keeping concerning the account.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
* * *
3. Subsection (b) provides that the law of the securities intermediary's jurisdiction governs the issues concerning
the indirect holding system that are dealt with in Article 8. Paragraphs (1) and (2) cover the matters dealt with in the
Article 8 rules defining the concept of security entitlement and specifying the duties of securities intermediaries.
Paragraph (3) provides that the law of the security intermediary's jurisdiction determines whether the intermediary
owes any duties to an adverse claimant. Paragraph (4) provides that the law of the security intermediary's
jurisdiction determines whether adverse claims can be asserted against entitlement holders and others.
8-110. APPLICABILITY; CHOICE OF LAW
Page 2 of 2
Subsection (e) determines what is a "securities intermediary's jurisdiction." The policy of subsection (b) is to
ensure that a securities intermediary and all of its entitlement holders can look to a single, readily-identifiable body
of law to determine their rights and duties. Accordingly, subsection (e) sets out a sequential series of tests to
facilitate identification of that body of law. Paragraph (1) of subsection (e) permits specification of the securities
intermediary's jurisdiction by agreement. In the absence of such a specification, the law chosen by the parties to
govern the securities account determines the securities intermediary's jurisdiction. See paragraph (2). Because the
policy of this section is to enable parties to determine, in advance and with certainty, what law will apply to
transactions governed by this Article, the validation of the parties' selection of governing law by agreement is not
conditioned upon a determination that the jurisdiction whose law is chosen bear a "reasonable relation" to the
transaction. See Section 4A-507; compare Section 1-105(1). That is also true with respect to the similar provisions
in subsection (d) of this section and in Section 9-305. The remaining paragraphs in subsection (e) contain additional
default rules for determining the securities intermediary's jurisdiction.
* * *
5. The following examples illustrate how a court in a jurisdiction which has enacted this section would determine
the governing law:
Example 1. John Doe, a resident of Kansas, maintains a securities account with Able & Co. Able is incorporated
in Delaware. Its chief executive offices are located in Illinois. The office where Doe transacts business with Able is
located in Missouri. The agreement between Doe and Able specifies that Illinois is the securities intermediary's
(Able's) jurisdiction. Through the account, Doe holds securities of a Colorado corporation, which Able holds through
Clearing Corporation. The rules of Clearing Corporation provide that the rights and duties of Clearing Corporation
and its participants are governed by New York law. Subsection (a) specifies that a controversy concerning the rights
and duties as between the issuer and Clearing Corporation is governed by Colorado law. Subsections (b) and (e)
specify that a controversy concerning the rights and duties as between the Clearing Corporation and Able is
governed by New York law, and that a controversy concerning the rights and duties as between Able and Doe is
governed by Illinois law.
* * *
7. The choice of law provisions concerning security interests in securities and security entitlements are set out in
Section 9-305.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-301
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
8-301. DELIVERY
(a) Delivery of a certificated security to a purchaser occurs when:
(1) the purchaser acquires possession of the security certificate;
(2) another person, other than a securities intermediary, either acquires possession of the security
certificate on behalf of the purchaser or, having previously acquired possession of the certificate,
acknowledges that it holds for the purchaser; or
(3) a securities intermediary acting on behalf of the purchaser acquires possession of the security
certificate, only if the certificate is in registered form and is (i) registered in the name of the purchaser,
(ii) payable to the order of the purchaser, or (iii) specially indorsed to the purchaser by an effective
indorsement and has not been indorsed to the securities intermediary or in blank.
* * *
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
* * *
2. Subsection (a) defines delivery with respect to certificated securities. Paragraph (1) deals with simple cases
where purchasers themselves acquire physical possession of certificates. Paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (a)
specify the circumstances in which delivery to a purchaser can occur although the certificate is in the possession of
a person other than the purchaser. Paragraph (2) contains the general rule that a purchaser can take delivery
through another person, so long as the other person is actually acting on behalf of the purchaser or acknowledges
that it is holding on behalf of the purchaser. Paragraph (2) does not apply to acquisition of possession by a
securities intermediary, because a person who holds securities through a securities account acquires a security
entitlement, rather than having a direct interest. See Section 8-501. Subsection (a)(3) specifies the limited
circumstances in which delivery of security certificates to a securities intermediary is treated as a delivery to the
customer. Note that delivery is a method of perfecting a security interest in a certificated security. See Section 9-
313(a), (e).
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-302
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
8-302. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER
(a) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c), a purchaser of a certificated or uncertificated
security acquires all rights in the security that the transferor had or had power to transfer.
(b) A purchaser of a limited interest acquires rights only to the extent of the interest purchased.
(c) A purchaser of a certificated security who as a previous holder had notice of an adverse claim does not
improve its position by taking from a protected purchaser.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
1. Subsection (a) provides that a purchaser of a certificated or uncertificated security acquires all rights that the
transferor had or had power to transfer. This statement of the familiar "shelter" principle is qualified by the
exceptions that a purchaser of a limited interest acquires only that interest, subsection (b), and that a person who
does not qualify as a protected purchaser cannot improve its position by taking from a subsequent protected
purchaser, subsection (c).
2. Although this section provides that a purchaser acquires a property interest in a certificated or uncertificated
security, it does not state that a person can acquire an interest in a security only by purchase. Article 8 also is not a
comprehensive codification of all of the law governing the creation or transfer of interests in securities by pur*. For
example, the grant of a security interest is a transfer of a property interest, but the formal steps necessary to
effectuate such a transfer are governed by Article 9, not by Article 8. Under the Article 9 rules, a security interest in
a certificated or uncertificated security can be created by execution of a security agreement under Section 9-203
and can be perfected by filing. A transfer of an Article 9 security interest can be implemented by an Article 8
delivery, but need not be. *Amendments in italics approved by the Permanent Editorial Board for Uniform
Commercial Code January 15, 2000.
Similarly, Article 8 does not determine whether a property interest in certificated or uncertificated security is
acquired under other law, such as the law of gifts, trusts, or equitable remedies. Nor does Article 8 deal with
transfers by operation of law. For example, transfers from decedent to administrator, from ward to guardian, and
from bankrupt to trustee in bankruptcy are governed by other law as to both the time they occur and the substance
of the transfer. The Article 8 rules do, however, determine whether the issuer is obligated to recognize the rights
that a third party, such as a transferee, may acquire under other law. See Sections 8-207, 8-401, and 8-404.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-502
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
8-502. ASSERTION OF ADVERSE CLAIM AGAINST ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
* * *
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
* * *
3. The following examples illustrate the operation of Section 8-502.
* * *
Example 4. Debtor holds XYZ Co. shares in a securities account with Able & Co. As collateral for a loan from
Bank, Debtor grants Bank a security interest in the security entitlement to the XYZ Co. shares. Bank perfects by a
method which leaves Debtor with the ability to dispose of the shares. See Section 9-312. In violation of the security
agreement, Debtor sells the XYZ Co. shares and absconds with the proceeds. Assume -- implausibly -- that Bank is
able to trace the XYZ Co. shares and show that the "same shares" ended up in Buyer's securities account with
Baker & Co. Section 8-502 precludes any action by Bank against Buyer, whether framed in constructive trust or
other theory, provided that Buyer acquired the security entitlement for value and without notice of adverse claims.
* * *
Example 6. Debtor grants Alpha Co. a security interest in a security entitlement that includes 1000 shares of XYZ
Co. stock that Debtor holds through an account with Able & Co. Alpha also has an account with Able. Debtor
instructs Able to transfer the shares to Alpha, and Able does so by crediting the shares to Alpha's account. Alpha
has control of the 1000 shares under Section 8-106(d). (The facts to this point are identical to those in Section 8-
106, Comment 4, Example 1, except that Alpha Co. was Alpha Bank.) Alpha next grants Beta Co. a security interest
in the 1000 shares included in Alpha's security entitlement. See Section 9-207(c)(3). Alpha instructs Able to transfer
the shares to Gamma Co., Beta's custodian. Able does so, and Gamma credits the 1000 shares to Beta's account.
Beta now has control under Section 8-106(d). By virtue of Debtor's explicit permission or by virtue of the permission
inherent in Debtor's creation of a security interest in favor of Alpha and Alpha's resulting power to grant a security
interest under Section 9-207, Debtor has no adverse claim to assert against Beta, assuming implausibly that Debtor
could "trace" an interest to the Gamma account. Moreover, even if Debtor did hold an adverse claim, if Beta did not
have notice of Debtor's claim, Section 8-502 will preclude any action by Debtor against Beta, whether framed in
constructive trust or other theory.
* * *
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. I, 8-510
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
> APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
8-510. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER OF SECURITY ENTITLEMENT FROM
ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
(a) In a case not covered by the priority rules in Article 9 or the rules stated in subsection (c), an action
based on an adverse claim to a financial asset or security entitlement, whether framed in conversion,
replevin, constructive trust, equitable lien, or other theory, may not be asserted against a person who
purchases a security entitlement, or an interest therein, from an entitlement holder if the purchaser gives
value, does not have notice of the adverse claim, and obtains control.
(b) If an adverse claim could not have been asserted against an entitlement holder under Section 8-502,
the adverse claim cannot be asserted against a person who purchases a security entitlement, or an interest
therein, from the entitlement holder.
(c) In a case not covered by the priority rules in Article 9, a purchaser for value of a security entitlement, or
an interest therein, who obtains control has priority over a purchaser of a security entitlement, or an interest
therein, who does not obtain control. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), purchasers who have
control rank according to priority in time of:
(1) the purchaser's becoming the person for whom the securities account, in which the security
entitlement is carried, is maintained, if the purchaser obtained control under Section 8-106(d)(1);
(2) the securities intermediary's agreement to comply with the purchaser's entitlement orders with
respect to security entitlements carried or to be carried in the securities account in which the security
entitlement is carried, if the purchaser obtained control under Section 8-106(d)(2); or
(3) if the purchaser obtained control through another person under Section 8-106(d)(3), the time on
which priority would be based under this subsection if the other person were the secured party.
(d) A securities intermediary as purchaser has priority over a conflicting purchaser who has control unless
otherwise agreed by the securities intermediary.
Annotations
Commentary
OFFICIAL COMMENT
* * *
4. Subsection (c) specifies a priority rule for cases where an entitlement holder transfers conflicting interests in the
same security entitlement to different purchasers. It follows the same principle as the Article 9 priority rule for
investment property, that is, control trumps non-control. Indeed, the most significant category of conflicting
"purchasers" may be secured parties. Priority questions for security interests, however, are governed by the rules in
Article 9. Subsection (c) applies only to cases not covered by the Article 9 rules. It is intended primarily for disputes
over conflicting claims arising out of repurchase agreement transactions that are not covered by the other rules set
out in Articles 8 and 9.
The following example illustrates subsection (c):
8-510. RIGHTS OF PURCHASER OF SECURITY ENTITLEMENT FROM ENTITLEMENT HOLDER
Page 2 of 2
Example 4. Dealer holds securities through an account at Alpha Bank. Alpha Bank in turn holds through a
clearing corporation account. Dealer transfers securities to RP1 in a "hold in custody" repo transaction. Dealer then
transfers the same securities to RP2 in another repo transaction. The repo to RP2 is implemented by transferring
the securities from Dealer's regular account at Alpha Bank to a special account maintained by Alpha Bank for
Dealer and RP2. The agreement among Dealer, RP2, and Alpha Bank provides that Dealer can make substitutions
for the securities but RP2 can direct Alpha Bank to sell any securities held in the special account. Dealer becomes
insolvent. RP1 claims a prior interest in the securities transferred to RP2.
In this example Dealer remained the entitlement holder but agreed that RP2 could initiate entitlement orders to
Dealer's security intermediary, Alpha Bank. If RP2 had become the entitlement holder, the adverse claim rule of
Section 8-502 would apply. Even if RP2 does not become the entitlement holder, the arrangement among Dealer,
Alpha Bank, and RP2 does suffice to give RP2 control. Thus, under Section 8-510(c), RP2 has priority over RP1,
because RP2 is a purchaser who obtained control, and RP1 is a purchaser who did not obtain control. The same
result could be reached under Section 8-510(a) which provides that RP1's earlier in time interest cannot be
asserted as an adverse claim against RP2. The same result would follow under the Article 9 priority rules if the
interests of RP1 and RP2 are characterized as "security interests," see Section 9-328(1). The main point of the
rules of Section 8-510(c) is to ensure that there will be clear rules to cover the conflicting claims of RP1 and RP2
without characterizing their interests as Article 9 security interests.
The priority rules in Article 9 for conflicting security interests also include a default temporal priority rule for cases
where multiple secured parties have obtained control but omitted to specify their respective rights by agreement.
See Section 9-328(2) and Comment 5 to Section 9-328. Because the purchaser priority rule in Section 8-510(c) is
intended to track the Article 9 priority rules, it too has a temporal priority rule for cases where multiple non-secured
party purchasers have obtained control but omitted to specify their respective rights by agreement. The rule is
patterned on Section 9-328(2).
5. If a securities intermediary itself is a purchaser, subsection (d) provides that it has priority over the interest of
another purchaser who has control. Article 9 contains a similar rule. See Section 9-328(3).
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 7, Appx. I
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE
APPENDIX I. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ARTICLES
View conforming amendments to Articles 1, 2, 2A, 4, 5, and 9.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. III
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
APPENDIX III. [RESERVED]
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. IV
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
APPENDIX IV. [RESERVED]
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 9, Appx. V
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 9. SECURED TRANSACTIONS
APPENDIX V. 2010 AMENDMENTS TO UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
ARTICLE 9
View 2010 amendments to Article 9 and transition provisions.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 2A, Foreword
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 2A. LEASES
Art. 2A, Foreword
Article 2A of the Uniform Commercial Code, along with Conforming Amendments to Articles 1 and 9, is presented,
upon the recommendation of the Permanent Editorial Board for the Uniform Commercial Code, by the National
Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and the American Law Institute. It represents a major
development in commercial law, addressing a type of business transaction, the leasing of personal property, that
has long existed. Under present law, transactions of this type are governed partly by common law principles
relating to personal property, partly by principles relating to real estate leases, and partly by reference to Articles 2
and 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code, dealing with Sales and Secured Transactions respectively. The legal rules
and concepts derived from these sources imperfectly fit a transaction that involves personal property rather than
realty, and a lease rather than either a sale or a security interest as such. A statute directly addressing the personal
property lease is therefore appropriate.
Such a statute has become especially appropriate with the exponential expansion of the number and scale of
personal property lease transactions. Article 2A will apply to transactions involving billions of dollars annually. It
will apply to consumer's rental of automobiles or do-it-yourself equipment, on the one hand, and to leases of such
items as commercial aircraft (to the extent not preempted by federal law) and industrial machinery, on the other.
The text recognizes the differences between consumer and business leasing, while resting upon concepts that
apply generally to any personal property lease transactions.
The final product represents an important undertaking of the Conference and the Institute. It has proceeded,
following recommendations by the Conference's Study Committee in 1981, through preparation and review by the
Conference's Drafting Committee first of a proposed free-standing Uniform Personal Property Leasing Act, which
was approved by the Conference, and later of Article 2A, which proceeded through the Permanent Editorial Board,
the Executive Committee of the Conference, the Conference, and the Council of the Institute and the Annual
Meeting of the members of the Institute. Carrying the text through these several stages has required coordination
of somewhat different procedures, and continued patience and mutual forbearance. At the same time, the text has
been subjected to analysis and criticism from many points of view and thereby steadily improved.
The resulting product borrows from both Articles 2 and 9. These existing Articles of the Uniform Commercial Code
have certain imperfections revealed by the long experience since their adoption. Article 2A cannot overcome those
imperfections but seeks to minimize their significance as applied to leases. More fundamentally, there is important
conceptual dissonance between Article 2 and Article 9. The formulation of Article 2A takes Articles 2 and 9 as they
are for the time being and hence has required careful adjustment to this dissonance.
The drafting task has been complicated both as a matter of substance and as a matter of process. The Reporter,
Ronald DeKoven, has been a master of substance and a steady and receptive principal in the process. We join
with the Conference and the Institute in expressing our admiration and appreciation for his contribution to this
important field of law.
Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr., Chairman
Permanent Editorial
Board for the Uniform
Commercial Code
Art. 2A, Foreword
Page 2 of 2
October 1, 1987
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 4A, Prefatory Note
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS >
PART 1. SUBJECT MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
The National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State laws and The American Law Institute have approved
a new Article 4A to the Uniform Commercial Code. Comments that follow each of the sections of the statute are
intended as official comments. They explain in detail the purpose and meaning of the various sections and the
policy considerations on which they are based.
Description of transaction covered by Article 4A.
There are a number of mechanisms for making payments through the banking system. Most of these mechanisms
are covered in whole or part by state or federal statutes. In terms of number of transactions, payments made by
check or credit card are the most common payment methods. Payment by check is covered by Articles 3 and 4 of
the UCC and some aspects of payment by credit card are covered by federal law. In recent years electronic funds
transfers have been increasingly common in consumer transactions. For example, in some cases a retail customer
can pay for purchases by use of an access or debit card inserted in a terminal at the retail store that allows the bank
account of the customer to be instantly debited. Some aspects of these point-of-sale transactions and other
consumer payments that are effected electronically are covered by a federal statute, the Electronic Fund Transfer
Act (EFTA). If any part of a funds transfer is covered by EFTA, the entire funds transfer is excluded from Article 4A.
Another type of payment, commonly referred to as a wholesale wire transfer, is the primary focus of Article 4A.
Payments that are covered by Article 4A are overwhelmingly between business or financial institutions. The dollar
volume of payments made by wire transfer far exceeds the dollar volume of payments made by other means. The
volume of payments by wire transfer over the two principal wire payment systems-the Federal Reserve wire transfer
network (Fedwire) and the New York Clearing House Interbank Payments Systems (CHIPS)-exceeds one trillion
dollars per day. Most payments carried out by use of automated clearing houses are consumer payments covered
by EFTA and therefore not covered by Article 4A. There is, however, a significant volume of nonconsumer ACH
payments that closely resemble wholesale wire transfers. These payments are also covered by Article 4A.
There is some resemblance between payments made by wire transfer and payments made by other means such as
paper-based checks and credit cards or electronically-based consumer payments, but there are also many
differences. Article 4A excludes from its coverage these other payment mechanisms. Article 4A follows a policy of
treating the transaction that it covers-a "funds transfer"-as a unique method of payment that is governed by unique
principles of law that address the operational and policy issues presented by this kind of payment.
The funds transfer that is covered by Article 4A is not a complex transaction and can be illustrated by the following
example which is used throughout the Prefatory Note as a basis for discussion. X, a debtor, wants to pay an
obligation owed to Y. Instead of delivering to Y a negotiable instrument such as a check or some other writing such
as a credit card slip that enables Y to obtain payment from a bank, X transmits an instruction to X's bank to credit a
sum of money to the bank account of Y. In most cases X's bank and Y's bank are different banks. X's bank may
carry out X's instruction by instructing Y's bank to credit Y's account in the amount that X requested. The
instruction that X issues to its bank is a "payment order." X is the "sender" of the payment order and X's bank is the
"receiving bank" with respect to X's order. Y is the "beneficiary" of X's order. When X's bank issues an instruction
to Y's bank to carry out X's payment order, X's bank "executes" X's order. The instruction of X's bank to Y's bank is
also a payment order. With respect to that order, X's bank is the sender, Y's bank is the receiving bank, and Y is
the beneficiary. The entire series of transactions by which X pays Y is knows as the "funds transfer." With respect
to the funds transfer, X is the "originator," X's bank is the "originator's bank," Y is the "beneficiary" and Y's bank is
Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
Page 2 of 6
the "beneficiary's bank." In more complex transactions there are one or more additional banks known as
"intermediary banks" between X's bank and Y's bank. In the funds transfer the instruction contained in the payment
order of X to its bank is carried out by a series of payment orders by each bank in the transmission chain to the next
bank in the chain until Y's bank receives a payment order to make the credit to Y's account. In most cases, the
payment order of each bank to the next bank in the chain is transmitted electronically, and often the payment order
of X to its bank is also transmitted electronically, but the means of transmission oes not have any legal significance.
A payment order may be transmitted by any means, and in some cases the payment order is transmitted by a slow
means such as first class mail. To reflect this fact, the broader term "funds transfer" rather than the narrower term
"wire transfer" is used in Article 4A to describe the overall payment transaction.
Funds transfers are divided into two categories determined by whether the instruction to pay is given by the person
making payment or the person receiving payment. If the instruction is given by the person making the payment, the
transfer is commonly referred to as a "credit transfer." If the instruction is given by the person receiving payment,
the transfer is commonly referred to as a "debit transfer." Article 4A governs credit transfers and excludes debit
transfers.
Why is Article 4A needed?
There is no comprehensive body of law that defines the rights and obligations that arise from wire transfers. Some
aspects of wire transfers are governed by rules of the principal transfer systems. Transfers made by Fedwire are
governed by Federal Reserve Regulation J and transfers over CHIPS are governed by the CHIPS rules. Transfers
made by means of automated clearing houses are governed by uniform rules adopted by various associations of
banks in various parts of the nation or by Federal Reserve rules or operating circulars. But the various funds
transfer system rules apply to only limited aspects of wire transfer transactions. The resolution of the many issues
that are not covered by funds transfer system rules depends on contracts of the parties, to the extent that they exist,
or principles of law applicable to other payment mechanisms that might be applied by analogy. The result is a great
deal of uncertainty. There is no consensus about the juridical nature of a wire transfer and consequently of the
rights and obligations that are created. Article 4A is intended to provide the comprehensive body of law that we do
not have today.
Characteristics of a funds transfer.
There are a number of characteristics of funds transfers covered by Article 4A that have influenced the drafting of
the statute. The typical funds transfer involves a large amount of money. Multimillion dollar transactions are
commonplace. The originator of the transfer and the beneficiary are typically sophisticated business or financial
organizations. High speed is another predominant characteristic. Most funds transfers are completed on the same
day, even in complex transactions in which there are several intermediary banks in the transmission chain. A funds
transfer is a highly efficient substitute for payments made by the delivery of paper instruments. Another
characteristic is extremely low cost. A transfer that involves many millions of dollars can be made for a price of a
few dollars. Price does not normally vary very much or at all with the amount of the transfer. This system of pricing
may not be feasible if the bank is exposed to very large liabilities in connection with the transaction. The pricing
system assumes that the price reflects primarily the cost of the mechanical operation performed by the bank, but in
fact, a bank may have more or less potential liability with respect to a funds transfer depending upon the amount of
the transfer. Risk of loss to banks carrying out a funds transfer may arise from a variety of causes. In some funds
transfers, there may be extensions of very large amounts of credit for short periods of time by the banks that carry
out a funds transfer. If a payment order is issued to the beneficiary's bank, it is normal for the bank to release funds
to the beneficiary immediately. Sometimes, payment to the beneficiary's bank by the bank that issued the order to
the beneficiary's bank is delayed until the end of the day. If that payment is not received because of the insolvency
of the bank that is obliged to pay, the beneficiary's bank may suffer a loss. There is also risk of loss if a bank fails
to execute the payment order of a customer, or if the order is excuted late. There also may be an error in the
payment order issued by a bank that is executing the payment order of its customer. For example, the error might
relate to the amount to be paid or to the identity of the person to be paid. Because the dollar amounts involved in
funds transfers are so large, the risk of loss if something goes wrong in a transaction may also be very large. A
Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
Page 3 of 6
major policy issue in the drafting of Article 4A is that of determining how risk of loss is to be allocated given the price
structure in the industry.
Concept of acceptance and effect of acceptance by the beneficiary's bank.
Rights and obligations under Article 4A arise as the result of "acceptance" of a payment order by the bank to which
the order is addressed. Section 4A-209. The effect of acceptance varies depending upon whether the payment
order is issued to the beneficiary's bank or to a bank other than the beneficiary's bank. Acceptance by the
beneficiary's bank is particularly important because it defines when the beneficiary's bank becomes obligated to the
beneficiary to pay the amount of the payment order. Although Article 4A follows convention in using the term "funds
transfer" to identify the payment from X to Y that is described above, no money or property right of X is actually
transferred to Y. X pays Y by causing Y's bank to become indebted to Y in the amount of the payment. This debt
arises when Y's bank accepts the payment order that X's bank issued to Y's bank to execute X's order. If the funds
transfer was carried out by use of one or more intermediary banks between X's bank and Y's bank, Y's bank
becomes indebted to Y when Y's bank accepts the payment order issued to it by an intermediary bank. The funds
transfer is completed when this debt is incurred. Acceptance, the event that determines when the debt of Y's bank
to Y arises, occurs (i) when Y's bank pays Y or notifies Y of receipt of the payment order, or (ii) when Y's bank
receives payment from the bank that issued a payment order to Y's bank.
The only obligation of the beneficiary's bank that results from acceptance of a payment order is to pay the amount
of the order to the beneficiary. No obligation is owed to either the sender of the payment order accepted by the
beneficiary's bank or to the originator of the funds transfer. The obligation created by acceptance by the
beneficiary's bank is for the benefit of the beneficiary. The purpose of the sender's payment order is to effect
payment by the originator to the beneficiary and that purpose is achieved when the beneficiary's bank accepts the
payment order. Section 4A-405 states rules for determining when the obligation of the beneficiary's bank to the
beneficiary has been paid.
Acceptance by a bank other than the beneficiary's bank.
In the funds transfer described above, what is the obligation of X's bank when it receives X's payment order?
Funds transfers by a bank on behalf of its customer are made pursuant to an agreement or arrangement that may
or may not be reduced to a formal document signed by the parties. It is probably true that in most cases there is
either no express agreement or the agreement addresses only some aspects of the transaction. Substantial risk is
involved in funds transfers and a bank may not be willing to give this service to all customers, and may not be
willing to offer it to any customer unless certain safeguards against loss such as security procedures are in effect.
Funds transfers often involve the giving of credit by the receiving bank to the customer, and that also may involve
an agreement. These considerations are reflected in Article 4A by the principle that, in the absence of a contrary
agreement, a receiving bank does not incur liability with respect to a payment order until it accepts it. If X and X's
bank in the hypothetical case had an agreement that obliged the bank to act on X's payment orders and the bank
failed to comply with the agreement, the bank can be held liable for breach of the agreement. But apart from any
obligation arising by agreement, the bank does not incur any liability with respect to X's payment order until the
bank accepts the order. X's payment order is treated by Article 4A as a request by X to the bank to take action that
will cause X's payment order to be carried out. That request can be accepted by X's bank by "executing" X's
payment order. Execution occurs when X's bank sends a payment order to Y's bank intended by X's bank to carry
out the payment order of X. X's bank could also execute X's payment order by issuing a payment order to an
intermediary bank instructing the intermediary bank to instruct Y's bank to make the credit to Y's account. In that
case execution and acceptance of X's order occur when the payment order of X's bank is sent to the intermediary
ank. When X's bank executes X's payment order the bank is entitled to receive payment from X and may debit an
authorized account of X. If X's bank does not execute X's order and the amount of the order is covered by a
withdrawable credit balance in X's authorized account, the bank must pay X interest on the money represented by
X's order unless X is given prompt notice of rejection of the order. Section 4A-210(b).
Bank error in funds transfers.
Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
Page 4 of 6
If a bank, other than the beneficiary's bank, accepts a payment order, the obligations and liabilities are owed to the
originator of the funds transfer. Assume in the example stated above, that X's bank executes X's payment order by
issuing a payment order to an intermediary bank that executes the order of X's bank by issuing a payment order to
Y's bank. The obligations of X's bank with respect to execution are owed to X. The obligations of the intermediary
bank with respect to execution are also owed to X. Section 4A-302 states standards with respect to the time and
manner of execution of payment orders. Section 4A-305 states the measure of damages for improper execution. It
also states that a receiving bank is liable for damages if it fails to execute a payment order that it was obliged by
express agreement to execute. In each case consequential damages are not recoverable unless an express
agreement of the receiving bank provides for them. The policy basis for this limitation is discussed in Comment 2 to
Section 4A-305.
Error in the consummation of a funds transfer is not uncommon. There may be a discrepancy in the amount that
the originator orders to be paid to the beneficiary and the amount that the beneficiary's bank is ordered to pay. For
example, if the originator's payment order instructs payment of $100,000 and the payment order of the originator's
bank instructs payment of $1,000,000, the originator's bank is entitled to receive only $100,000 from the originator
and has the burden of recovering the additional $900,000 paid to the beneficiary by mistake. In some cases the
originator's bank or an intermediary bank instructs payment to a beneficiary other than the beneficiary stated in the
originator's payment order. If the wrong beneficiary is paid the bank that issued the erroneous payment order is not
entitled to receive payment of the payment order that it executed and has the burden of recovering the mistaken
payment. The originator is not obliged to pay its payment order. Section 4A-303 and Section 4A-207 state rules for
determining the rights and obligations of the various parties to the funds transfer in these cases and in other typical
cases in which error is made.
Pursuant to Section 4A-402(c) the originator is excused from the obligation to pay the originator's bank if the funds
transfer is not completed, i.e. payment by the originator to the beneficiary is not made. Payment by the originator to
the beneficiary occurs when the beneficiary's bank accepts a payment order for the benefit of the beneficiary of the
originator's payment order. Section 4A-406. If for any reason that acceptance does not occur, the originator is not
required to pay the payment order that it issued or, if it already paid, is entitled to refund of the payment with
interest. This "money-back guarantee" is an important protection of the originator of a funds transfer. The same
rule applies to any other sender in the funds transfer. Each sender's obligation to pay is excused if the beneficiary's
bank does not accept a payment order for the benefit of the beneficiary of that sender's order. There is an
important exception to this rule. It is common practice for the originator of a funds transfer to designate the
intermediary bank or banks through which the funds transfer is to be routed. The originator's bank is required by
Section 4A-302 to follow the instruction of the originator with respect to intermediary banks. If the originator's bank
sends a payment order to the intermediary bank designated in the originator's order and the intermediary bank
causes the funds transfer to miscarry by failing to execute the payment order or by instructing payment to the wrong
beneficiary, the originator's bank is not required to pay its payment order and if it has already paid it is entitled to
recover payment from the intermediary bank. This remedy is normally adequate, but if the originator's bank already
paid its order and the intermediary bank has suspended payments or is not permitted by law to refund payment, the
originator's bank will suffer a loss. Since the originator required the originator's bank to use the failed intermediary
bank, Section 4A-402(e) provides that in this case the originator is obliged to pay its payment order and has a claim
against the intermediary bank for the amount of the order. The same principle applies to any other sender that
designates a subsequent intermediary bank.
Unauthorized payment orders.
An important issue addressed in Section 4A-202 and Section 4A-203 is how the risk of loss from unauthorized
payment orders is to be allocated. In a large percentage of cases, the payment order of the originator of the funds
transfer is transmitted electronically to the originator's bank. In these cases it may not be possible for the bank to
know whether the electronic message has been authorized by its customer. To ensure that no unauthorized person
is transmitting messages to the bank, the normal practice is to establish security procedures that usually involve the
use of codes or identifying numbers or words. If the bank accepts a payment order that purports to be that of its
Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
Page 5 of 6
customer after verifying its authenticity by complying with a security procedure agreed to by the customer and the
bank, the customer is bound to pay the order even if it was not authorized. But there is an important limitation on
this rule. The bank is entitled to payment in the case of an unauthorized order only if the court finds that the
security procedure was a commercially reasonable method of providing security against unauthorized payment
orders. The customer can also avoid liability if it can prove that the unauthorized order was not initiated by an
employee or other agent of the customer having access to confidential security information or by a person who
obtained that information from a source controlled by the customer. The policy issues are discussed in the
comments following Section 4A-203. If the bank accepts an unauthorized payment order without verifying it in
compliance with a security procedure, the loss falls on the bank.
Security procedures are also important in cases of error in the transmission of payment orders. There may be an
error by the sender in the amount of the order, or a sender may transmit a payment order and then erroneously
transmit a duplicate of the order. Normally, the sender is bound by the payment order even if it is issued by
mistake. But in some cases an error of this kind can be detected by a security procedure. Although the receiving
bank is not obliged to provide a security procedure for the detection of error, if such a procedure is agreed to by the
bank Section 4A-205 provides that if the error is not detected because the receiving bank does not comply with the
procedure, any resulting loss is borne by the bank failing to comply with the security procedure.
Insolvency losses.
Some payment orders do not involve the granting of credit to the sender by the receiving bank. In those cases, the
receiving bank accepts the sender's order at the same time the bank receives payment of the order. This is true of
a transfer of funds by Fedwire or of cases in which the receiving bank can debit a funded account of the sender.
But in some cases the granting of credit is the norm. This is true of a payment order over CHIPS. In a CHIPS
transaction the receiving bank usually will accept the order before receiving payment from the sending bank.
Payment is delayed until the end of the day when settlement is made through the Federal Reserve System. If the
receiving bank is an intermediary bank, it will accept by issuing a payment order to another bank and the
intermediary bank is obliged to pay that payment order. If the receiving bank is the beneficiary's bank, the bank
usually will accept by releasing funds to the beneficiary before the bank has received payment. If a sending bank
suspends payments before settling its liabilities at the end of the day, the financial stability of banks that are net
creditors of the insolvent bank may also be put into jeopardy, because the dollar volume of funds transfers between
the banks may be extremely large. With respect to two banks that are dealing with each other in a series of
transactions in which each bank is sometimes a receiving bank and sometimes a sender, the risk of insolvency can
be managed if amounts payable as a sender and amounts receivable as a receiving bank are roughly equal. But if
these amounts are significantly out of balance, a net creditor bank may have a very significant credit risk during the
day before settlement occurs. The Federal Reserve System and the banking community are greatly concerned with
this risk, and various measures have been instituted to reduce this credit exposure. Article 4A also addresses this
problem. A receiving bank can always avoid this risk by delaying acceptance of a payment order until after the
bank as received payment. For example, if the beneficiary's bank credits the beneficiary's account it can avoid
acceptance by not notifying the beneficiary of the receipt of the order or by notifying the beneficiary that the credit
may not be withdrawn until the beneficiary's bank receives payment. But if the beneficiary's bank releases funds to
the beneficiary before receiving settlement, the result in a funds transfer other than a transfer by means of an
automated clearing house or similar provisional settlement system is that the beneficiary's bank may not recover
the funds if it fails to receive settlement. This rule encourages the banking system to impose credit limitations on
banks that issue payment orders. These limitations are already in effect. CHIPS has also proposed a loss-sharing
plan to be adopted for implementation in the second half of 1990 under which CHIPS participants will be required to
provide funds necessary to complete settlement of the obligations of one or more participants that are unable to
meet settlement obligations. Under this plan, it will be a virtual certainty that there will be settlement on CHIPS in
the event of failure by a single bank. Section 4A-403(b) and (c) are also addressed to reducing risks of insolvency.
Under these provisions the amount owed by a failed bank with respect to payment orders it issued is the net
amount owing after setting off amounts owed to the failed bank with respect to payment orders it received. This
rule allows credit exposure to be managed by limitations on the net debit position of a bank.
Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
Page 6 of 6
International transfers.
The major international legal document dealing with the subject of electronic funds transfers is the Model Law on
International Credit Transfers adopted in 1992 by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law. It
covers basically the same type of transaction as does Article 4A, although it requires the funds transferred to have
an international component. The Model Law and Article 4A basically live together in harmony, but to the extent
there are differences they must be recognized and, to the extent possible, avoided or adjusted by agreement. See
PEB Commentary No. 13, dated February 16, 1994 [Appendix V, infra].
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 11, Note
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 11. EFFECTIVE DATE AND
TRANSITION PROVISIONS
Art. 11, Note
This material has been numbered Article 11 to distinguish it from Article 10, the transition provision of the 1962
Code, which may still remain in effect in some states to cover transition problems from pre-Code law to the original
Uniform Commercial Code. Adaptation may be necessary in particular states. The terms "[old Code]" and "[new
Code]" and "[old U.C.C.]" and "[new U.C.C.]" are used herein, and should be suitably changed in each state.
This draft was prepared by the Reporters and has not been passed upon by the Review Committee, the Permanent
Editorial Board, the American Law Institute, or the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws.
It is submitted as a working draft which may be adapted as appropriate in each state. The "Discussions" were
written by the Reporters to assist in understanding the purpose of the drafts.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 6, Note
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 6. BULK SALES
PREFATORY NOTE
Background. Bulk sale legislation originally was enacted in response to a fraud perceived to be common around
the turn of the century: a merchant would acquire his stock in trade on credit, then sell his entire inventory ("in bulk")
and abscond with the proceeds, leaving creditors unpaid. The creditors had a right to sue the merchant on the
unpaid debts, but that right often was of little practical value. Even if the merchant-debtor was found, in personam
jurisdiction over him might not have been readily available. Those creditors who succeeded in obtaining a judgment
often were unable to satisfy it because the defrauding seller had spent or hidden the sale proceeds. Nor did the
creditors ordinarily have recourse to the merchandise sold. The transfer of the inventory to an innocent buyer
effectively immunized the goods from the reach of the seller's creditors. The creditors of a bulk seller thus might be
left without a means to satisfy their claims.
To a limited extent, the law of fraudulent conveyances ameliorated the creditors' plight. When the buyer in bulk was
in league with the seller or paid less than full value for the inventory, fraudulent conveyance law enabled the
defrauded creditors to avoid the sale and apply the transferred inventory toward the satisfaction of their claims
against the seller. But fraudulent conveyance law provided no remedy against persons who bought in good faith,
without reason to know of the seller's intention to pocket the proceeds and disappear, and for adequate value. In
those cases, the only remedy for the seller's creditors was to attempt to recover from the absconding seller.
State legislatures responded to this perceived "bulk sale risk" with a variety of legislative enactments. Common to
these statutes was the imposition of a duty on the buyer in bulk to notify the seller's creditors of the impending sale.
The buyer's failure to comply with these and any other statutory duties generally afforded the seller's creditors a
remedy analogous to the remedy for fraudulent conveyances: the creditors acquired the right to set aside the sale
and reach the transferred inventory in the hands of the buyer.
Like its predecessors, Article 6 (1987 Official Text) is remarkable in that it obligates buyers in bulk to incur costs to
protect the interests of the seller's creditors, with whom they usually have no relationship. Even more striking is that
Article 6 affords creditors a remedy against a good faith purchaser for full value without notice of any wrongdoing on
the part of the seller. The Article thereby impedes normal business transactions, many of which can be expected to
benefit the seller's creditors. For this reason, Article 6 has been subjected to serious criticism. See, e.g., Rapson,
U.C.C. Article 6: Should It Be Revised or "Deep-Sixed"? 38 Bus. Law. 1753 (1983).
In the legal context in which Article 6 (1987 Official Text) and its nonuniform predecessors were enacted, the
benefits to creditors appeared to justify the costs of interfering with good faith transactions. Today, however,
creditors are better able than ever to make informed decisions about whether to extend credit. Changes in
technology have enabled credit reporting services to provide fast, accurate, and more complete credit histories at
relatively little cost. A search of the public real estate and personal property records will disclose most
encumbrances on a debtor's property with little inconvenience.
In addition, changes in the law now afford creditors greater opportunities to collect their debts. The development of
"minimum contacts" with the forum state as a basis for in personam jurisdiction and the universal promulgation of
state long-arm statutes and rules have greatly improved the possibility of obtaining personal jurisdiction over a
debtor who flees to another state. Widespread enactment of the Uniform Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act
has facilitated nation-wide collection of judgments. And to the extent that a bulk sale is fraudulent and the buyer is
a party to fraud, aggrieved creditors have a remedy under the Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act. Moreover, creditors
of a merchant no longer face the choice of extending unsecured credit or no credit at all. Retaining an interest in
inventory to secure its price has become relatively simple and inexpensive under Article 9.
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 2 of 2
Finally, there is no evidence that, in today's economy, fraudulent bulk sales are frequent enough, or engender credit
losses significant enough, to require regulation of all bulk sales, including the vast majority that are conducted in
good faith. Indeed, the experience of the Canadian Province of British Columbia, which repealed its Sale of Goods
in Bulk Act in 1985, and of the United Kingdom, which never has enacted bulk sales legislation, suggests that
regulation of bulk sales no longer is necessary.
Recommendation. The National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and the American Law
Institute believe that changes in the business and legal contexts in which sales are conducted have made
regulation of bulk sales unnecessary. The Conference and the Institute therefore withdraw their support for Article
6 of the Uniform Commercial Code and encourage those states that have enacted the Article to repeal it.
The Conference and the Institute recognize that bulk sales may present a particular problem in some states and
that some legislatures may wish to continue to regulate bulk sales. They believe that existing Article 6 has become
inadequate for that purpose. For those states that are disinclined to repeal Article 6, they have promulgated a
revised version of Article 6. The revised Article is designed to afford better protection to creditors while minimizing
the impediments to good-faith transactions.
The Official Comment to Section 6-101 explains the rationale underlying the revisions and highlights the major
substantive changes reflected in them. Of particular interest is Section 6-103(1)(a), which limits the application of
the revised Article to bulk sales by sellers whose principal business is the sale of inventory from stock. In approving
this provision, the Conference and the Institute were mindful that some states have expanded the coverage of
existing Article 6 to include bulk sales conducted by sellers whose principal business is the operation of a restaurant
or tavern. Expansion of the scope of revised Article 6 is inconsistent with the recommendation that Article 6 be
repealed. Nevertheless, the inclusion of restaurants and taverns within the scope of the revised Article as it is
enacted in particular jurisdictions would not disturb the internal logic and structure of the revised Article.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document
U.C.C. Art. 8, Note
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) > ARTICLE 8. INVESTMENT SECURITIES
PREFATORY NOTE
The present version of Article 8 is the product of a major revision made necessary by the fact that the prior
version of Article 8 did not adequately deal with the system of securities holding through securities
intermediaries that has developed in the past few decades. Although the prior version of Article 8 did
contain some provisions dealing with securities holding through securities intermediaries, these were
engrafted onto a structure designed for securities practices of earlier times. The resulting legal uncertainties
adversely affected all participants. The revision is intended to eliminate these uncertainties by providing a
modern legal structure for current securities holding practices.
I. EVOLUTION OF SECURITIES HOLDING SYSTEMS
A. The Traditional Securities Holding System The original version of Article 8, drafted in the
1940s and 1950s, was based on the assumption that possession and delivery of physical
certificates are the key elements in the securities holding system. Ownership of securities was
traditionally evidenced by possession of the certificates, and changes were accomplished by
delivery of the certificates.
Transfer of securities in the traditional certificate-based system was a complicated, labor-intensive
process. Each time securities were traded, the physical certificates had to be delivered from the
seller to the buyer, and in the case of registered securities the certificates had to be surrendered to
the issuer or its transfer agent for registration of transfer. As is well known, the mechanical
problems of processing the paperwork for securities transfers reached crisis proportions in the late
1960s, leading to calls for the elimination of the physical certificate and development of modern
electronic systems for recording ownership of securities and transfers of ownership. That was the
focus of the revision effort that led to the promulgation of the 1978 amendments to Article 8
concerning uncertificated securities.
B. The Uncertificated Securities System Envisioned by the 1978 Amendments In 1978,
amendments to Article 8 were approved to establish the commercial law rules that were thought
necessary to permit the evolution of a system in which issuers would no longer issue certificates.
The Drafting Committee that produced the 1978 amendments was given a fairly limited charge. It
was to draft the revisions that would be needed for uncertificated securities, but otherwise leave the
Article 8 rules unchanged. Accordingly, the 1978 amendments primarily took the form of adding
parallel provisions dealing with uncertificated securities to the existing rules of Article 8 on
certificated securities.
The system of securities holding contemplated by the 1978 amendments differed from the
traditional system only in that ownership of securities would not be evidenced by physical
certificates. It was contemplated that changes in ownership would continue to be reflected by
changes in the records of the issuer. The main difference would be that instead of surrendering an
indorsed certificate for registration of transfer, an instruction would be sent to the issuer directing it
to register the transfer. Although a system of the sort contemplated by the 1978 amendments may
well develop in the coming decades, this has not yet happened for most categories of securities.
Mutual funds shares have long been issued in uncertificated form, but virtually all other forms of
publicly traded corporate securities are still issued in certificated form. Individual investors who wish
to be recorded as registered owners on the issuers' books still obtain and hold physical certificates.
The certificates representing the largest portion of the shares of publicly traded companies,
however, are not held by the beneficial owners, but by clearing corporations. Settlement of
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 2 of 30
securities trading occurs not by delivery of certificates or by registration of transfer on the records of
the issuers or their transfer agents, but by computer entries in the records of clearing corporations
and securities intermediaries. That is quite different from the system envisioned by the 1978
amendments.
C. Evolution of the Indirect Holding System At the time of the "paperwork crunch" in the late
1960s, the trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange that so seriously strained the
capacities of the clearance and settlement system was in the range of 10 million shares per day.
Today, the system can easily handle trading volume on routine days of hundreds of millions of
shares. This processing capacity could have been achieved only by the application of modern
electronic information processing systems. Yet the legal rules under which the system operates are
not the uncertificated securities provisions of Article 8. To understand why this is so, one must
delve at least a bit deeper into the operations of the current system.
If one examines the shareholder records of large corporations whose shares are publicly traded on
the exchanges or in the over the counter market, one would find that one entity -- Cede & Co. -- is
listed as the shareholder of record of somewhere in the range of sixty to eighty percent of the
outstanding shares of all publicly traded companies. Cede & Co. is the nominee name used by The
Depository Trust Company ("DTC"), a limited purpose trust company organized under New York
law for the purpose of acting as a depository to hold securities for the benefit of its participants,
some 600 or so broker-dealers and banks. Essentially all of the trading in publicly held companies
is executed through the broker-dealers who are participants in DTC, and the great bulk of public
securities -- the sixty to eighty percent figure noted above -- are held by these broker-dealers and
banks on behalf of their customers. If all of these broker-dealers and banks held physical
certificates, then as trades were executed each day it would be necessary to deliver the certificates
back and forth among these broker-dealers and banks. By handing all of their securities over to a
common depository all of these deliveries can be eliminated. Transfers can be accomplished by
adjustments to the participants' DTC accounts.
Although the use of a common depository eliminates the needs for physical deliveries, an
enormous number of entries would still have to be made on DTC's books if each transaction
between its participants were recorded one by one on DTC's books. Any two major broker-dealers
may have executed numerous trades with each other in a given security on a single day. Significant
processing efficiency has been achieved by netting all of the transactions among the participants
that occur each day, so that entries need be made on the depository's books only for the net
changes in the positions of each participant at the end of each day. This clearance and netting
function might well be performed by the securities exchanges or by the same institution that acts as
the depository, as is the case in many other securities markets around the world. In the United
States, however, this clearance and netting function is carried out by a separate corporation,
National Securities Clearing Corporation ("NSCC"). All that needs to be done to settle each day's
trading is for NSCC to compute the net receive and deliver obligations and to instruct DTC to make
the corresponding adjustments in the participants' accounts.
The broker-dealers and banks who are participants in the DTC-NSCC system in turn provide
analogous clearance and settlement functions to their own customers. If Customer A buys 100
shares of XYZ Co. through Broker, and Customer B sells 100 shares of XYZ Co. through the same
Broker, the trade can be settled by entries on Broker's books. Neither DTC's books showing
Broker's total position in XYZ Co., nor XYZ Co.'s books showing DTC's total position in XYZ Co.,
need be changed to reflect the settlement of this trade. One can readily appreciate the significance
of the settlement function performed at this level if one considers that a single major bank may be
acting as securities custodian for hundreds or thousands of mutual funds, pension funds, and other
institutional investors. On any given day, the customers of that bank may have entered into an
enormous number of trades, yet it is possible that relatively little of this trading activity will result in
any net change in the custodian bank's positions on the books of DTC.
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 3 of 30
Settlement of market trading in most of the major U.S. securities markets is now effected primarily
through some form of netted clearance and depository system. Virtually all publicly traded
corporate equity securities, corporate debt securities, and municipal debt securities are now eligible
for deposit in the DTC system. Recently, DTC has implemented a similar depository settlement
system for the commercial paper market, and could, but for limitations in present Article 8, handle
other forms of short-term money market securities such as bankers' acceptances. For trading in
mortgage-backed securities, such as Ginnie Mae's, a similar depository settlement system has
been developed by Participants Trust Company. For trading in U.S. Treasury securities, a
somewhat analogous book-entry system is operated under Treasury rules by the Federal Reserve
System.
D. Need for Different Legal Rules for the Direct and Indirect Holding Systems Both the
traditional paper-based system, and the uncertificated system contemplated by the 1978
amendments, can be described as "direct" securities holding systems; that is, the beneficial owners
of securities have a direct relationship with the issuer of the securities. For securities in bearer
form, whoever has possession of the certificate thereby has a direct claim against the issuer. For
registered securities, the registered owner, whether of certificated or uncertificated securities, has a
direct relationship with the issuer by virtue of being recorded as the owner on the records
maintained by the issuer or its transfer agent.
By contrast, the DTC depository system for corporate equity and debt securities can be described
as an "indirect holding" system, that is, the issuer's records do not show the identity of all of the
beneficial owners. Instead, a large portion of the outstanding securities of any given issue are
recorded on the issuer's records as belonging to a depository. The depository's records in turn
show the identity of the banks or brokers who are its members, and the records of those securities
intermediaries show the identity of their customers.
Even after the 1978 amendments, the rules of Article 8 did not deal effectively with the indirect
holding system. The rules of the 1978 version of Article 8 were based on the assumption that
changes in ownership of securities would still be effected either by delivery of physical certificates
or by registration of transfer on the books of the issuer. Yet in the indirect holding system,
settlement of the vast majority of securities trades does not involve either of these events. For
most, if not all, of the securities held through DTC, physical certificates representing DTC's total
position do exist. These "jumbo certificates," however, are never delivered from person to person.
Just as nothing ever happens to these certificates, virtually nothing happens to the official registry
of stockholders maintained by the issuers or their transfer agents to reflect the great bulk of the
changes in ownership of shares that occur each day.
The principal mechanism through which securities trades are settled today is not delivery of
certificates or registration of transfers on the issuer's books, but netted settlement arrangements
and accounting entries on the books of a multi-tiered pyramid of securities intermediaries. Herein is
the basic problem. Virtually all of the rules of the prior version of Article 8 specifying how changes
in ownership of securities are effected, and what happens if something goes awry in the process,
were keyed to the concepts of a transfer of physical certificates or registration of transfers on the
books of the issuers, yet that is not how changes in ownership are actually reflected in the modern
securities holding system.
II. BRIEF OVERVIEW OF REVISED ARTICLE 8
A. Drafting Approach -- Neutrality Principle One of the objectives of the revision of Article 8 is
to devise a structure of commercial law rules for investment securities that will be sufficiently
flexible to respond to changes in practice over the next few decades. If it were possible to predict
with confidence how the securities holding and trading system would develop, one could produce a
statute designed specifically for the system envisioned. Recent experience, however, shows the
danger of that approach. The 1978 amendments to Article 8 were based on the assumption that the
solution to the problems that plagued the paper-based securities trading system of the 1960s would
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 4 of 30
be the development of uncertificated securities. Instead, the solution thus far has been the
development of the indirect holding system.
If one thought that the indirect holding system would come to dominate securities holding, one
might draft Article 8 rules designed primarily for the indirect holding system, giving limited attention
to the traditional direct holding system of security certificates or any uncertificated version of a
direct holding system that might develop in the future. It is, however, by no means clear whether
the long-term evolution will be toward decreased or increased use of direct holdings. At present,
investors in most equity securities can either hold their securities through brokers or request that
certificates be issued in their own name. For the immediate future it seems likely that that situation
will continue. One can imagine many plausible scenarios for future evolution. Direct holding might
become less and less common as investors become more familiar and comfortable with book-entry
systems and/or as market or regulatory pressures develop that discourage direct holding. One
might note, for example, that major brokerage firms are beginning to impose fees for having
certificates issued and that some observers have suggested that acceleration of the cycle for
settlement of securities trades might be facilitated by discouraging customers from obtaining
certificates. On the other hand, other observers feel that it is important for investors to retain the
option of holding securities in certificated form, or at least in some form that gives them a direct
relationship with the issuer and does not require them to hold through brokers or other securities
intermediaries. Some groups within the securities industry are beginning to work on development of
uncertificated systems that would preserve this option.
Revised Article 8 takes a neutral position on the evolution of securities holding practices. The
revision was based on the assumption that the path of development will be determined by market
and regulatory forces and that the Article 8 rules should not seek to influence that development in
any specific direction. Although various drafting approaches were considered, it became apparent
early in the revision process that the differences between the direct holding system and the indirect
holding system are sufficiently significant that it is best to treat them as separate systems requiring
different legal concepts. Accordingly, while the rules of the prior version of Article 8 have, in large
measure, been retained for the direct holding system, a new Part 5 has been added, setting out the
commercial law rules for the indirect securities holding system. The principle of neutrality does
carry some implications for the design of specific Article 8 rules. At the very least, the Article 8 rules
for all securities holding systems should be sufficiently clear and predictable that uncertainty about
the governing law does not itself operate as a constraint on market developments. In addition, an
effort has been made to identify and eliminate any Article 8 rules that might act as impediments to
any of the foreseeable paths of development.
B. Direct Holding System
With respect to securities held directly, Revised Article 8 retains the basic conceptual structure and rules of
present law. Part 2, which is largely unchanged from former law, deals with certain aspects of the
obligations of issuers. The primary purpose of the rules of Part 2 is to apply to investment securities the
principles of negotiable instruments law that preclude the issuers of negotiable instruments from asserting
defenses against subsequent purchasers. Part 3 deals with transfer for securities held directly. One of its
principal purposes is to apply to investment securities the principles of negotiable instruments law that
protect purchasers of negotiable instruments against adverse claims. Part 4 deals with the process of
registration of transfer by the issuer or transfer agent.
Although the basic concepts of the direct holding system rules have been retained, there are significant
changes in terminology, organization, and statement of the rules. Some of the major changes are as
follows:
Simplification of Part 3. The addition of the new Part 5 on the indirect holding system makes
unnecessary the rather elaborate provisions of former law, such as those in Section 8-313, that sought
to fit the indirect holding system into the conceptual structure of the direct holding system. Thus, Part 3
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 5 of 30
of Revised Article 8 is, in many respects, more similar to the original version of Article 8 than to the
1978 version.
Protected purchaser. The prior version of Article 8 used the term "bona fide purchaser" to refer to
those purchasers who took free from adverse claims, and it used the phrase "good faith" in stating the
requirements for such status. In order to promote clarity, Revised Article 8 states the rules that protect
purchasers against adverse claims without using the phrase "good faith" and uses the new term
"protected purchaser" to refer to purchasers in the direct holding system who are protected against
adverse claims. See Sections 8-105 and 8-303.
Certificated versus uncertificated securities. The rules of the 1978 version of Article 8 concerning
uncertificated securities have been simplified considerably. The 1978 version added provisions on
uncertificated securities parallel to the provisions of the original version of Article 8 dealing with
securities represented by certificates. Thus, virtually every section had one set of rules on "certificated
securities" and another on "uncertificated securities." The constant juxtaposition of "certificated
securities" and "uncertificated securities" has probably led readers to overemphasize the differences.
Revised Article 8 has a unitary definition of "security" in Section 8-102(a)(15) which refers to the
underlying intangible interest or obligation. In Revised Article 8, the difference between certificated and
uncertificated is treated not as an inherent attribute of the security but as a difference in the means by
which ownership is evidenced. The terms "certificated" and "uncertificated" security are used in those
sections where it is important to distinguish between these two means of evidencing ownership.
Revised Article 8 also deletes the provisions of the 1978 version concerning "transaction statements"
and "registered pledges." These changes are explained in the Revision Notes 3, 4, and 5, below.
Scope of Parts 2, 3, and 4. The rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 deal only with the rights of persons who
hold securities directly. In typical securities holding arrangements in the modern depository system,
only the clearing corporation would be a direct holder of the securities. Thus, while the rules of Parts 2,
3, and 4 would apply to the relationship between the issuer and the clearing corporation, they have no
application to relationships below the clearing corporation level. Under Revised Article 8, a person who
holds a security through a broker or securities custodian has a security entitlement governed by the
Part 5 rules but is not the direct holder of the security. Thus, the rules of Revised Section 8-303 on the
rights of "protected purchasers," which are the analog of the bona fide purchaser rules of former Article
8, do not apply to persons who hold securities through brokers or securities custodians. Instead, Part 5
contains its own rules to protect investors in the indirect holding system against adverse claims. See
Revised Section 8-502.
C. Indirect Holding System Although the Revised Article 8 provisions for the indirect holding
system are somewhat complex, the basic approach taken can be summarized rather briefly.
Revised Article 8 abandons the attempt to describe all of the complex relationships in the indirect
holding system using the simple concepts of the traditional direct holding system. Instead, new
rules specifically designed for the indirect holding system are added as Part 5 of Article 8. In a
nutshell, the approach is to describe the core of the package of rights of a person who holds a
security through a securities intermediary and then give that package of rights a name.
The starting point of Revised Article 8's treatment of the indirect holding system is the concept of
"security entitlement." The term is defined in Section 8-102(a)(17) as "the rights and property
interest of an entitlement holder with respect to a financial asset specified in Part 5." Like many
legal concepts, however, the meaning of "security entitlement" is to be found less in any specific
definition than in the matrix of rules that use the term. In a sense, then, the entirety of Part 5 is the
definition of "security entitlement" because the Part 5 rules specify the rights and property interest
that comprise a security entitlement.
Part 5 begins by specifying, in Section 8-501, when an entitlement holder acquires a security
entitlement. The basic rule is very simple. A person acquires a security entitlement when the
securities intermediary credits the financial asset to the person's account. The remaining sections
of Part 5 specify the content of the security entitlement concept. Section 8-504 provides that a
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 6 of 30
securities intermediary must maintain a sufficient quantity of financial assets to satisfy the claims of
all of its entitlement holders. Section 8-503 provides that these financial assets are held by the
intermediary for the entitlement holders, are not the property of the securities intermediary, and are
not subject to claims of the intermediary's general creditors. Thus, a security entitlement is itself a
form of property interest not merely an in personam claim against the intermediary. The concept of
a security entitlement does, however, include a package of in personam rights against the
intermediary. Other Part 5 rules identify the core of this package of rights, subject to specification
by agreement and regulatory law. See Sections 8-505 through 8-509.
To illustrate the basic features of the new rules, consider a simple example of two investors, John
and Mary, each of whom owns 1000 shares of Acme, Inc., a publicly traded company. John has a
certificate representing his 1000 shares and is registered on the books maintained by Acme's
transfer agent as the holder of record of those 1000 shares. Accordingly, he has a direct claim
against the issuer, he receives dividends and distributions directly from the issuer, and he receives
proxies directly from the issuer for purposes of voting his shares. Mary has chosen to hold her
securities through her broker. She does not have a certificate and is not registered on Acme's stock
books as a holder of record. She enjoys the economic and corporate benefits of ownership but
does so through her broker and any other intermediaries in the chain back to the issuer. John's
interest in Acme common stock would be described under Revised Article 8 as a direct interest in a
"security." Thus, if John grants a security interest in his investment position, the collateral would be
described as a "security." Mary's interest in Acme common stock would be described under
Revised Article 8 as a "security entitlement." Thus, if Mary grants a security interest in her
investment position, the collateral would be described as a "security entitlement."
For many purposes, there is no need to differentiate among the various ways that an investor might
hold securities. For example, for purposes of financial accounting, John and Mary would each be
described as the owner of 1000 shares of Acme common stock. For those purposes it is irrelevant
that John is the registered owner and has physical possession of a certificate, while Mary holds her
position through an intermediary. Revised Article 8 recognizes this point in Section 8-104 which
provides that acquiring a security entitlement and acquiring a security certificate are different ways
of acquiring an interest in the underlying security.
D. Security Interests Along with the revision of Article 8, significant changes have been made in
the rules concerning security interests in securities. The revision returns to the pre-1978 structure
in which the rules on security interests in investment securities are set out in Article 9, rather than in
Article 8. The changes in Article 9 are, in part, conforming changes to adapt Article 9 to the new
concept of a security entitlement. The Article 9 changes, however, go beyond that to establish a
simplified structure for the creation and perfection of security interests in investment securities,
whether held directly or indirectly. In order to avoid disruption of the current numbering sequence of
Article 9, the new rules on security interests in investment securities are primarily set out in a new
Section 9-115.
The Revised Article 9 rules continue the long-established principle that a security interest in a
security represented by a certificate can be perfected by a possessory pledge. The revised rules,
however, do not require that all security interests in investment securities be implemented by
procedures based on the conceptual structure of the common law pledge. Under the revised Article
9 rules, a security interest in securities can be created pursuant to Section 9-203 in the same
fashion as a security interest in any other form of property, that is, by agreement between the
debtor and secured party. There is no requirement of a "transfer," "delivery," or any similar action,
physical or metaphysical, for the creation of an effective security interest. A security interest in
securities is, of course, a form of property interest, but the only requirements for creation of this
form of property interest are those set out in Section 9-203.
The perfection methods for security interests in investment securities are set out in Revised Section
9-115(4). The basic rule is that a security interest may be perfected by "control." The concept of
control, defined in Section 8-106, plays an important role in both Article 8 and Article 9. In general,
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 7 of 30
obtaining control means taking the steps necessary to place the lender in a position where it can
have the collateral sold off without the further cooperation of the debtor. Thus, for certificated
securities, a lender obtains control by taking possession of the certificate with any necessary
indorsement. For securities held through a securities intermediary, the lender can obtain control in
two ways. First, the lender obtains control if it becomes the entitlement holder; that is, has the
securities positions transferred to an account in its own name. Second, the lender obtains control if
the securities intermediary agrees to act on instructions from the secured party to dispose of the
positions, even though the debtor remains the entitlement holder. Such an arrangement suffices to
give the lender control even though the debtor retains the right to trade and exercise other ordinary
rights of an entitlement holder.
Except where the debtor is itself a securities firm, filing of an ordinary Article 9 financing statement
is also a permissible alternative method of perfection. However, filing with respect to investment
property does not assure the lender the same protections as for other forms of collateral, since the
priority rules provide that a secured party who obtains control has priority over a secured party who
does not obtain control.
The details of the new rules on security interests, as applied both to the retail level and to
arrangements for secured financing of securities dealers, are explained in the Official Comments to
Section 9-115.
III. SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 8
A. Terminology
To understand the scope and application of the rules of Revised Article 8, and the related security interest
rules of Article 9, it is necessary to understand some of the key defined terms:
Security, defined in Section 8-102(a)(15), has essentially the same meaning as under the prior version
of Article 8. The difference in Revised Article 8 is that the definition of security does not determine the
coverage of all of Article 8. Although the direct holding system rules in Parts 2, 3, and 4 apply only to
securities, the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 apply to the broader category of "financial assets."
Financial asset, defined in Section 8-103(a)(9), is the term used to describe the forms of property to
which the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 apply. The term includes not only "securities," but also
other interests, obligations, or property that are held through securities accounts. The best illustration of
the broader scope of the term financial asset is the treatment of money market instruments, discussed
below.
Security entitlement, defined in Section 8-103(a)(17), is the term used to describe the property
interest of a person who holds a security or other financial asset through a securities intermediary.
Securities intermediary, defined in Section 8-103(a)(14), is the term used for those who hold
securities for others in the indirect holding system. It covers clearing corporations, banks acting as
securities custodians, and brokers holding securities for their customers.
Entitlement holder, defined in Section 8-103(a)(7), is the term used for those who hold securities
through intermediaries.
Securities account, defined in Section 8-501(a), describes the form of arrangement between a
securities intermediary and an entitlement holder that gives rise to a security entitlement. As explained
below, the definition of securities account plays a key role in setting the scope of the indirect holding
system rules of Part 5.
Investment property, defined in Section 9-115(1)(f), determines the application of the new Article 9
rules for secured transactions. In addition to securities and security entitlements, the Article 9 term
"investment property" is defined to include "securities account" in order to simplify the drafting of the
Article 9 rules that permit debtors to grant security interests either in specific security entitlements or in
an entire securities account. The other difference between the coverage of the Article 8 and Article 9
terms is that commodity futures contracts are excluded from Article 8, but are included within the Article
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 8 of 30
9 definition of "investment property." Thus, the new Article 9 rules apply to security interests in
commodity futures positions as well as security interests in securities positions.
B. Notes on Scope of Article 8 Article 8 is in no sense a comprehensive codification of the law
governing securities or transactions in securities. Although Article 8 deals with some aspects of the
rights of securities holders against issuers, most of that relationship is governed not by Article 8,
but by corporation, securities, and contract law. Although Article 8 deals with some aspects of the
rights and duties of parties who transfer securities, it is not a codification of the law of contracts for
the purchase or sale of securities. (The prior version of Article 8 did include a few miscellaneous
rules on contracts for the sale of securities, but these have not been included in Revised Article 8).
Although the new indirect holding system rules of Part 5 deal with some aspects of the relationship
between brokers or other securities professionals and their customers, Article 8 is still not in any
sense a comprehensive code of the law governing the relationship between broker-dealers or other
securities intermediaries and their customers. Most of the law governing that relationship is the
common law of contract and agency, supplemented or supplanted by regulatory law.
The distinction between the aspects of the broker-customer relationship that are and are not dealt
with in this Article may be illuminated by considering the differing roles of the broker in a typical
securities transaction, in which the broker acts as agent for the customer. When a customer directs
a broker to buy or sell securities for the customer, and the broker executes that trade on a
securities exchange or in the over the counter market, the broker is entering into a contract for the
purchase or sale of the securities as agent of the customer. The rules of the exchange, practices of
the market, or regulatory law will specify when and how that contract is to be performed. For
example, today the terms of the standard contract for trades in most corporate securities require
the seller to deliver the securities, and the buyer to pay for them, five business days after the date
that the contract was made, although the SEC has recently promulgated a rule that will accelerate
the cycle to require settlement in three business days. In the common speech of the industry, the
transaction in which the broker enters into a contract for the purchase or sale of the securities is
referred to as executing the trade, and the transaction in which the securities are delivered and
paid for is referred to as settlement. Thus, the current settlement cycle is known as T+5, that is,
settlement is required on the fifth business day after the date of the trade, and the new SEC rule
will change it to T+3. One must be careful in moving from the jargon of the securities industry to the
jargon of the legal profession. For most practical economic purposes, the trade date is the date that
counts, because that is the time at which the price is set, the risk of price changes shifts, and the
parties become bound to perform. For purposes of precise legal analysis, however, the securities
phrase "trade" or "execute a trade" means enter into a contract for the purchase or sale of the
securities. The transfer of property interests occurs not at the time the contract is made but at the
time it is performed, that is, at settlement.
The distinction between trade and settlement is important in understanding the scope of Article 8.
Article 8 deals with the settlement phase of securities transactions. It deals with the mechanisms by
which interests in securities are transferred, and the rights and duties of those who are involved in
the transfer process. It does not deal with the process of entering into contracts for the transfer of
securities or regulate the rights and duties of those involved in the contracting process. To use
securities parlance, Article 8 deals not with the trade, but with settlement of the trade. Indeed,
Article 8 does not even deal with all aspects of settlement. In a netted clearance and settlement
system such as the NSCC-DTC system, individual trades are not settled one-by-one by
corresponding entries on the books of any depository. Rather, settlement of the individual trades
occurs through the clearing arrangements, in accordance with the rules and agreements that
govern those arrangements.
In the rules dealing with the indirect holding system, one must be particularly careful to bear in mind
the distinction between trade and settlement. Under Revised Article 8, the property interest of a
person who holds securities through an intermediary is described as a "security entitlement," which
is defined in Revised Section 8-102(a)(17) as the package of rights and property interest of an
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 9 of 30
entitlement holder specified in Part 5. Saying that the security entitlement is a package of rights
against the broker does not mean that all of the customer's rights against the broker are part of the
security entitlement and hence part of the subject matter of Article 8. The distinction between trade
and settlement remains fundamental. The rules of this Article on the indirect holding system deal
with brokers and other intermediaries as media through which investors hold their financial assets.
Brokers are also media through which investors buy and sell their financial assets, but that aspect
of their role is not the subject of this Article.
The principal goal of the Article 8 revision project is to provide a satisfactory framework for analysis
of the indirect holding system. The technique used in Revised Article 8 is to acknowledge explicitly
that the relationship between a securities intermediary and its entitlement holders is sui generis,
and to state the applicable commercial law rules directly, rather than by inference from a
categorization of the relationship based on legal concepts of a different era. One of the
consequences of this drafting technique is that in order to provide content to the concept of security
entitlement it becomes necessary to identify the core of the package of rights that make up a
security entitlement. Sections 8-504 through 8-508 cover such basic matters as the duty of the
securities intermediary to maintain a sufficient quantity of securities to satisfy all of its entitlement
holders, the duty of the securities intermediary to pass through to entitlement holder the economic
and corporate law rights of ownership of the security, and the duty of the securities intermediary to
comply with authorized entitlement orders originated by the entitlement holder. These sections are
best thought of as definitional; that is, a relationship which does not include these rights is not the
kind of relationship that Revised Article 8 deals with. Because these sections take the form of
statements of the duties of an intermediary toward its entitlement holders, one must be careful to
avoid a distorted perspective on what Revised Article 8 is and is not designed to do. Revised Article
8 is not, and should not be, a comprehensive body of private law governing the relationship
between brokers and their customers, nor a body of regulatory law to police against improper
conduct by brokers or other intermediaries. Many, if not most, aspects of the relationship between
brokers and customers are governed by the common law of contract and agency, supplemented or
supplanted by federal and state regulatory law. Revised Article 8 does not take the place of this
body of private and regulatory law. If there are gaps in the regulatory law, they should be dealt with
as such; Article 8 is not the place to address them. Article 8 deals with how interests in securities
are evidenced and how they are transferred. By way of a rough analogy, one might think of Article
8 as playing the role for the securities markets that real estate recording acts play for the real
estate markets. Real estate recording acts do not regulate the conduct of parties to real estate
transactions; Article 8 does not regulate the conduct of parties to securities transactions.
C. Application of Revised Articles 8 and 9 to Common Investments and Investment
Arrangements It may aid understanding to sketch briefly the treatment under Revised Articles 8
and 9 of a variety of relatively common products and arrangements.
1. Publicly traded stocks and bonds.
"Security" is defined in Revised Section 8-102(a)(15) in substantially the same terms as in the
prior version of Article 8. It covers the ordinary publicly traded investment securities, such as
corporate stocks and bonds. Parts 2, 3, and 4 govern the interests of persons who hold
securities directly, and Part 5 governs the interest of those who hold securities indirectly.
Ordinary publicly traded securities provide a good illustration of the relationship between the
direct and indirect holding system rules. The distinction between the direct and indirect holding
systems is not an attribute of the securities themselves but of the way in which a particular
person holds the securities. Thus, whether one looks to the direct holding system rules of Parts
2, 3, and 4 or the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 will depend on the level in the
securities holding system being analyzed.
Consider, for example, corporate stock which is held through a depository, such as DTC. The
clearing corporation, or its nominee, is the registered owner of all of the securities it holds on
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 10 of 30
behalf of all of its participants. Thus the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 of Revised Article 8 apply to
the relationship between the issuer and the clearing corporation. If, as is typically the case
today, the securities are still represented by certificates, the clearing corporation will be the
holder of the security certificate or certificates representing its total holdings. So far as Article 8
is concerned, the relationship between the issuer and the clearing corporation is no different
from the relationship between the issuer and any other registered owner.
The relationship between the clearing corporation and its participants is governed by the
indirect holding system rules of Part 5. At that level, the clearing corporation is the securities
intermediary and the participant is the entitlement holder. If the participant is itself a securities
intermediary, such as a broker holding for its customers or a bank acting as a securities
custodian, the Part 5 rules apply to its relationship to its own customers. At that level the broker
or bank custodian is the securities intermediary and the customer is the entitlement holder.
Note that the broker or bank custodian is both an entitlement holder and a securities
intermediary -- but is so with respect to different security entitlements. For purposes of Article 8
analysis, the customer's security entitlement against the broker or bank custodian is a different
item of property from the security entitlement of the broker or bank custodian against the
clearing corporation.
For investors who hold their securities directly, it makes no difference that some other investors
hold their interests indirectly. Many investors today choose to hold their securities directly,
becoming the registered owners on the books of the issuer and obtaining certificates registered
in their names. For such investors, the addition of the new indirect holding system rules to
Article 8 is entirely irrelevant. They will continue to deal directly with the issuers, or their
transfer agents, under essentially the same rules as in the prior version of Article 8.
The securities holding options available to investors in a particular form of security may depend
on the terms of the security. For example, direct holding is frequently not available for new
issues of state and local government bonds. At one time, state and local government bonds
were commonly issued in bearer form. Today, however, new issues of state and local
government bonds must be in registered form and most are issued in what is known as "bookentry
only" form; that is, the issuer specifies that the only person it will directly register as the
registered owner is a clearing corporation. Thus, one of the inherent terms of the security is
that investors can hold only in the indirect holding system.
2. Treasury securities.
U.S. government securities fall within the definition of security in Article 8 and therefore are
governed by Article 8 in the same fashion as any other publicly held debt security, except
insofar as Article 8 is preempted by applicable federal law or regulation.
New Treasury securities are no longer issued in certificated form; they can be held only through
the book-entry systems established by the Treasury and Federal Reserve Banks. The Treasury
offers a book-entry system, known as "Treasury Direct" which enables individual investors to
have their positions recorded directly on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank, in a fashion
somewhat similar to the uncertificated direct holding system contemplated by the 1978 version
of Article 8. The governing law for the Treasury Direct system, however, is set out in the
applicable Treasury regulations. The Treasury Direct system is not designed for active trading.
The great bulk of Treasury securities are held not through the Treasury Direct system but
through a multi-tiered indirect holding system. The Federal Reserve Banks, acting as fiscal
agent for the Treasury, maintain records of the holdings of member banks of the Federal
Reserve System, and those banks in turn maintain records showing the extent to which they
are holding for themselves or their own customers, including government securities dealers,
institutional investors, or smaller banks who in turn may act as custodians for investors. The
indirect holding system for Treasury securities was established under federal regulations
promulgated in the 1970s. In the 1980s, Treasury released the proposed TRADES regulations
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 11 of 30
that would have established a more comprehensive body of federal commercial law for the
Treasury holding system. During the Article 8 revision process, Treasury withdrew these
regulations, anticipating that once Revised Article 8 is enacted, it will be possible to base the
law for the Treasury system on the new Article 8 rules.
3. Broker-customer relationships.
Whether the relationship between a broker and its customer is governed by the Article 8 Part 5
rules depends on the nature of the services that the broker performs for the customer.
Some investors use brokers only to purchase and sell securities. These customers take
delivery of certificates representing the securities they purchase and hold them in their own
names. When they wish to sell, they deliver the certificates to the brokers. The Article 8 Part 5
rules would not affect such customers, because the Part 5 rules deal with arrangements in
which investors hold securities through securities intermediaries. The transaction between the
customer and broker might be the traditional agency arrangement in which the broker buys or
sells on behalf of the customer as agent for an undisclosed principal, or it might be a dealer
transaction in which the "broker" as principal buys from or sells to the customer. In either case,
if the customer takes delivery and holds the securities directly, she will become the "purchaser"
of a "security" whose interest therein is governed by the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 of Article 8. If
the customer meets the other requirements of Section 8-303(a), the customer who takes
delivery can qualify as a "protected purchaser" who takes free from any adverse claims under
Section 8-303(b). The broker's role in such transactions is primarily governed by non-Article 8
law. There are only a few provisions of Article 8 that affect the relationship between the
customer and broker in such cases. See Sections 8-108 (broker makes to the customer the
warranties of a transferor) and 8-115 (broker not liable in conversion if customer was acting
wrongfully against a third party in selling securities).
Many investors use brokers not only to purchase and sell securities, but also as the custodians
through whom they hold their securities. The indirect holding system rules of Part 5 apply to the
custodial aspect of this relationship. If a customer purchases a security through a broker and
directs the broker to hold the security in an account for the customer, the customer will never
become a "purchaser" of a "security" whose interest therein is governed by the rules of Parts 2,
3, and 4 of Article 8. Accordingly, the customer does not become a "protected purchaser" under
Section 8-303. Rather, the customer becomes an "entitlement holder" who has a "security
entitlement" to the security against the broker as "securities intermediary." See Section 8-501.
It would make no sense to say that the customer in such a case takes an interest in the security
free from all other claims, since the nature of the relationship is that the customer has an
interest in common with other customers who hold positions in the same security through the
same broker. Section 8-502, however, does protect an entitlement holder against adverse
claims, in the sense that once the entitlement holder has acquired the package of rights that
comprise a security entitlement no one else can take that package of rights away by arguing
that the transaction that resulted in the customer's acquisition of the security entitlement was
the traceable product of a transfer or transaction that was wrongful as against the claimant.
4. Bank deposit accounts; brokerage asset management accounts.
An ordinary bank deposit account would not fall within the definition of "security" in Section 8-
102(a)(15), so the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 of Article 8 do not apply to deposit accounts. Nor
would the relationship between a bank and its depositors be governed by the rules of Part 5 of
Article 8. The Part 5 rules apply to "security entitlements." Section 8-501(b) provides that a
person has a security entitlement when a securities intermediary credits a financial asset to the
person's "securities account." "Securities account" is defined in Section 8-501(a) as "an
account to which a financial asset is or may be credited in accordance with an agreement
under which the person maintaining the account undertakes to treat the person for whom the
account is maintained as entitled to exercise the rights that comprise the financial asset." The
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 12 of 30
definition of securities account plays a key role in setting the scope of Part 5 of Article 8. A
person has a security entitlement governed by Part 5 only if the relationship in question falls
within the definition of "securities account." The definition of securities account in Section 8-
501(a) excludes deposit accounts from the Part 5 rules of Article 8. One of the basic elements
of the relationship between a securities intermediary and an entitlement holder is that the
securities intermediary has the duty to hold exactly the quantity of securities that it carries for
the account of its customers. See Section 8-504. The assets that a securities intermediary
holds for its entitlement holder are not assets that the securities intermediary can use in its own
proprietary business. See Section 8-503. A deposit account is an entirely different
arrangement. A bank is not required to hold in its vaults or in deposit accounts with other banks
a sum of money equal to the claims of all of its depositors. Banks are permitted to use
depositors' funds in their ordinary lending business; indeed, that is a primary function of banks.
A deposit account, unlike a securities account, is simply a debtor-creditor relationship. Thus a
bank or other financial institution maintaining deposit accounts is not covered by Part 5 of
Article 8.
Today, it is common for brokers to maintain securities accounts for their customers which
include arrangements for the customers to hold liquid "cash" assets in the form of money
market mutual fund shares. Insofar as the broker is holding money market mutual fund shares
for its customer, the customer has a security entitlement to the money market mutual fund
shares. It is also common for brokers to offer their customers an arrangement in which the
customer has access to those liquid assets via a deposit account with a bank, whereby shares
of the money market fund are redeemed to cover checks drawn on the account. Article 8
applies only to the securities account; the linked bank account remains an account covered by
other law. Thus the rights and duties of the customer and the bank are governed not by Article
8, but by the relevant payment system law, such as Article 4 or Article 4A.
5. Trusts.
The indirect holding system rules of Part 5 of Article 8 are not intended to govern all
relationships in which one person holds securities "on behalf of" another. Rather, the Part 5
rules come into play only if the relationship in question falls within the definition of securities
account in Section 8-501(a). The definition of securities account serves the important function
of ensuring that ordinary trust arrangements are not inadvertently swept into Part 5 of Article 8.
Suppose that Bank serves as trustee of a trust for the benefit of Beneficiary. The corpus of the
trust is invested in securities and other financial assets. Although Bank is, in some senses,
holding securities for Beneficiary, the arrangement would not fall within the definition of
securities account. Bank, as trustee, has not undertaken to treat Beneficiary as entitled to
exercise all of the rights that comprise the portfolio securities. For instance, although
Beneficiary receives the economic benefit of the portfolio securities, Beneficiary does not have
the right to direct dispositions of individual trust assets or to exercise voting or other corporate
law rights with respect to the individual securities. Thus Bank's obligations to Beneficiary as
trustee are governed by ordinary trust law, not by Part 5 of Article 8. Of course, if Bank, as
trustee, holds the securities through an intermediary, Part 5 of Revised Article 8 would govern
the relationship between Bank, as entitlement holder, and the intermediary through which Bank
holds the securities. It is also possible that a different department of Bank acts as the
intermediary through which Bank, as trustee, holds the securities. Bank, qua securities
custodian, might be holding securities for a large number of customers, including Bank's own
trust department. Insofar as Bank may be regarded as acting in different capacities, Part 5 of
Article 8 may be relevant to the relationship between the two sides of Bank's business.
However, the relationship between Bank as trustee and the beneficiaries of the trust would
remain governed by trust law, not Article 8.
6. Mutual fund shares.
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 13 of 30
Shares of mutual funds are Article 8 securities, whether the fund is organized as a corporation,
business trust, or other form of entity. See Sections 8-102(a)(15) and 8-103(b). Mutual funds
commonly do not issue certificates. Thus, mutual fund shares are typically uncertificated
securities under Article 8.
Although a mutual fund is, in a colloquial sense, holding the portfolio securities on behalf of the
fund's shareholders, the indirect holding system rules of Part 5 do not apply to the relationship
between the fund and its shareholders. The Part 5 rules apply to "security entitlements."
Section 8-501(e) provides that issuance of a security is not establishment of a security
entitlement. Thus, because mutual funds shares do fit within the Article 8 definition of security,
the relationship between the fund and its shareholders is automatically excluded from the Part
5 rules.
Of course, a person might hold shares in a mutual fund through a brokerage account. Because
mutual fund shares are securities, they automatically fall within the broader term "financial
asset," so the Part 5 indirect holding system rules apply to mutual fund shares that are held
through securities accounts. That is, a person who holds mutual fund shares through a
brokerage account could have a security entitlement to the mutual fund shares, just as the
person would have a security entitlement to any other security carried in the brokerage
account.
7. Stock of closely held corporations.
Ordinary corporate stock falls within the Article 8 definition of security, whether or not it is
publicly traded. See Sections 8-102(a)(15) and 8-103(a). There is nothing in the new indirect
holding system rules of Article 8 that would preclude their application to shares of companies
that are not publicly traded. The indirect holding system rules, however, would come into play
only if the shares were in fact held through a securities account with a securities intermediary.
Since that is typically not the case with respect to shares of closely held corporations,
transactions involving those shares will continue to be governed by the traditional rules, as
amended, that are set out in Parts 2, 3, and 4 of Article 8, and the corresponding provisions of
Article 9. The simplification of the Article 8 rules on uncertificated securities may, however,
make the alternative of dispensing with certificates more attractive for closely held corporations.
8. Partnership interests and limited liability company shares.
Interests in partnerships or shares of limited liability companies are not Article 8 securities
unless they are in fact dealt in or traded on securities exchanges or in securities markets. See
Section 8-103(c). The issuers, however, may if they wish explicitly "opt-in" by specifying that
the interests or shares are securities governed by Article 8. Even though interests in
partnerships or shares of limited liability companies do not generally fall within the category of
"security" in Article 8, they would fall within the broader term "financial asset." Accordingly, if
such interests are held through a securities account with a securities intermediary, the indirect
holding system rules of Part 5 apply, and the interest of a person who holds them through such
an account is a security entitlement.
9. Bankers' acceptances, commercial paper, and other money market instruments.
Money market instruments, such as commercial paper, bankers' acceptances, and certificates
of deposit, are good examples of a form of property that may fall within the definition of
"financial asset," even though they may not fall within the definition of "security." Section 8-
103(d) provides that a writing that meets the definition of security certificate under Section 8-
102(a)(15) is governed by Article 8, even though it also fits within the definition of "negotiable
instrument" in Article 3.
Some forms of short term money market instruments may meet the requirements of an Article 8
security, while others may not. For example, the Article 8 definition of security requires that the
obligation be in registered or bearer form. Bankers' acceptances are typically payable "to
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 14 of 30
order," and thus do not qualify as Article 8 securities. Thus, the obligations of the immediate
parties to a bankers' acceptance are governed by Article 3, rather than Article 8. That is an
entirely appropriate classification, even for those bankers' acceptance that are handled as
investment media in the securities markets, because Article 8, unlike Article 3, does not contain
rules specifying the standardized obligations of parties to instruments. For example, the Article
3 rules on the obligations of acceptors and drawers of drafts are necessary to specify the
obligations represented by bankers' acceptances, but Article 8 contains no provisions dealing
with these issues.
Immobilization through a depository system is, however, just as important for money market
instruments as for traditional securities. Under the prior version of Article 8, the rules on the
depository system, set out in Section 8-320, applied only to Article 8 securities. Although some
forms of money market instruments could be fitted within the language of the Article 8 definition
of "security," this is not true for bankers' acceptances. Accordingly, it was not thought feasible
to make bankers' acceptances eligible for deposit in clearing corporations under the prior
version of Article 8. Revised Article 8 solves this problem by separating the coverage of the
Part 5 rules from the definition of security. Even though a bankers' acceptance or other money
market instrument is an Article 3 negotiable instrument rather than an Article 8 security, it would
still fall within the definition of financial asset in Section 8-102(a)(9). Accordingly, if the
instrument is held through a clearing corporation or other securities intermediary, the rules of
Part 5 of Article 8 apply.
10. Repurchase agreement transactions.
Repurchase agreements are an important form of transaction in the securities business,
particularly in connection with government securities. Repos and reverse repos can be used for
a variety of purposes. The one that is of particular concern for purposes of commercial law
rules is the use of repurchase agreements as a form of financing transaction for government
securities dealers. Government securities dealers typically obtain intra-day financing from their
clearing banks, and then at the end of the trading day seek overnight financing from other
sources to repay that day's advances from the clearing bank. Repos are the principal source of
this financing. The dealer ("repo seller") sells securities to the financing source ("repo buyer")
for cash, and at the same time agrees to repurchase the same or like securities the following
day, or at some other brief interval. The sources of the financing include a variety of entities
seeking short term investments for surplus cash, such as pension funds, business
corporations, money market funds, and banks. The pricing may be computed in various ways,
but in essence the price at which the dealer agrees to repurchase the securities exceeds the
price paid to the dealer by an amount equivalent to interest on the funds.
The transfer of the securities from a securities dealer as repo seller to a provider of funds as
repo buyer can be effected in a variety of ways. The repo buyer might be willing to allow the
repo seller to keep the securities "in its hands," relying on the dealer's representation that it will
hold them on behalf of the repo buyer. In the jargon of the trade, these are known as "hold-incustody
repos" or "HIC repos." At the other extreme, the repo buyer might insist that the dealer
"hand over" the securities so that in the event that the dealer fails and is unable to perform its
obligation to repurchase them, the repo buyer will have the securities "in its hands." The jargon
for these is "delivered-out repos." A wide variety of arrangements between these two extremes
might be devised, in which the securities are "handed over" to a third party with powers
concerning their disposition allocated between the repo seller and repo buyer in a variety of
ways.
Specification of the rights of repo buyers is complicated by the fact that the transfer of the
interest in securities from the repo seller to the repo buyer might be characterized as an
outright sale or as the creation of a security interest. Article 8 does not attempt to specify any
categorical rules on that issue.
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 15 of 30
Article 8 sets out rules on the rights of parties who have implemented securities transactions in
certain ways. It does not, however, deal with the legal characterization of the transactions that
are implemented through the Article 8 mechanisms. Rather, the Article 8 rules apply without
regard to the characterization of transactions for other purposes. For example, the Article 8
rules for the direct holding system provide that a person who takes delivery of a duly indorsed
security certificate for value and without notice of adverse claims takes free from any adverse
claims. That rule applies without regard to the character of the transaction in which the security
certificate was delivered. It applies both to delivery upon original issue and to delivery upon
transfer. It applies to transfers in settlement of sales and to transfers in pledge. Similarly, the
Article 8 indirect holding system rules, such as the adverse claim cut-off rules in Sections 8-502
and 8-510, apply to the transactions that fall within their terms, whether those transactions were
sales, secured transactions, or something else.
Repos involve transfers of interests in securities. The Article 8 rules apply to transfers of
securities in repos, just as they apply to transfers of securities in any other form of transaction.
The transfer of the interest in securities from the repo seller to the repo buyer might be
characterized as an outright sale or as the creation of a security interest. Article 8 does not
determine that question. The rules of Revised Article 8 have, however, been drafted to
minimize the possibility that disputes over the characterization of the transfer in a repo would
affect substantive questions that are governed by Article 8. See, e.g., Section 8-510 and
Comment 4 thereto.
11. Securities lending transactions.
In a typical securities lending transaction, the owner of securities lends them to another person
who needs the securities to satisfy a delivery obligation. For example, when a customer of a
broker sells a security short, the broker executes an ordinary trade as seller and so must
deliver the securities at settlement. The customer is "short" against the broker because the
customer has an open obligation to deliver the securities to the broker, which the customer
hopes to be able to satisfy by buying in the securities at a lower price. If the short seller's
broker does not have the securities in its own inventory, the broker will borrow them from
someone else. The securities lender delivers the securities to the borrowing broker, and the
borrowing broker becomes contractually obligated to redeliver a like quantity of the same
security. Securities borrowers are required to provide collateral, usually government securities,
to assure performance of their redelivery obligation.
The securities lender does not retain any property interest in the securities that are delivered to
the borrower. The transaction is an outright transfer in which the borrower obtains full title. The
whole point of securities lending is that the borrower needs the securities to transfer them to
someone else. It would make no sense to say that the lender retains any property interest in
the securities it has lent. Accordingly, even if the securities borrower defaults on its redelivery
obligation, the securities lender has no property interest in the original securities that could be
asserted against any person to whom the securities borrower may have transferred them. One
need not look to adverse claim cut-off rules to reach that result; the securities lender never had
an adverse claim. The securities borrower's default is no different from any other breach of
contract. The securities lender's protection is its right to foreclose on the collateral given to
secure the borrower's redelivery obligation. Perhaps the best way to understand securities
lending is to note that the word "loan" in securities lending transactions is used in the sense it
carries in loans of money, as distinguished from loans of specific identifiable chattels. Someone
who lends money does not retain any property interest in the money that is handed over to the
borrower. To use civil law terminology, securities lending is mutuum, rather than commodatum.
See Story on Bailments, §§ 6 and 47.
12. Traded stock options.
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 16 of 30
Stock options issued and cleared through the Options Clearing Corporation ("OCC") are a good
example of a form of investment vehicle that is treated as a financial asset to which the Part 5
rules apply, but not as an Article 8 security to which Parts 2, 3, and 4 apply. OCC carries on its
books the options positions of the brokerage firms which are clearing members of OCC. The
clearing members in turn carry on their books the options positions of their customers. The
arrangements are structurally similar to the securities depository system. In the options
structure, however, there is no issuer separate from the clearing corporation. The financial
assets held through the system are standardized contracts entitling the holder to purchase or
sell a certain security at a set price. Rather than being an interest in or obligation of a separate
issuer, an option is a contractual right against the counter-party. In order to assure performance
of the options, OCC interposes itself as counter-party to each options trade. The rules of Parts
2, 3, and 4 of this Article, however, do not well describe the obligations and rights of OCC. On
the other hand, the rules of Part 5, and the related Article 9 rules on security interests and
priorities, do provide a workable legal framework for the commercial law analysis of the rights
of the participants in the options market. Accordingly, publicly traded securities options are
included within the definition of "financial asset," but not "security." See Section 8-103(e). Thus,
although OCC would not be an issuer of a security for purposes of this Article, it would be a
clearing corporation, against whom its clearing members have security entitlements to the
options positions. Similarly, the clearing members' customers have security entitlements
against the clearing members. Traded stock options are also a good illustration of the point that
the classification issues under Article 8 are very different from classification under other law,
such as the federal securities laws. See Section 8-102(d). Stock options are treated as
securities for purposes of federal securities laws, but not for purposes of Article 8.
13. Commodity futures.
Section 8-103(f) provides that a "commodity contract" is not a security or a financial asset.
Section 9-115 defines commodity contract to include commodity futures contracts, commodity
options, and options on commodity futures contracts that are traded on or subject to the rules
of a board of trade that has been designated as a contract market for that contract pursuant to
the federal commodities laws. Thus, commodity contracts themselves are not Article 8
securities to which the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4 apply, nor is the relationship between a
customer and a commodity futures commission merchant governed by the Part 5 rules of
Article 8. Commodity contracts, however, are included within the Article 9 definition of
"investment property." Thus security interests in commodity positions are governed by
essentially the same set of rules as security interests in security entitlements.
14. "Whatever else they have or may devise."
The classification question posed by the above-captioned category of investment products and
arrangements is among the most difficult -- and important -- issue raised by the Article 8
revision process. Rapid innovation is perhaps the only constant characteristic of the securities
and financial markets. The rules of Revised Article 8 are intended to be sufficiently flexible to
accommodate new developments.
A common mechanism by which new financial instruments are devised is that a financial
institution that holds some security, financial instrument, or pool thereof, creates interests in
that asset or pool which are sold to others. It is not possible to answer in the abstract the
question of how such interests are treated under Article 8, because the variety of such products
is limited only by human imagination and current regulatory structures. At this general level,
however, one can note that there are at least three possible treatments under Article 8 of the
relationship between the institution which creates the interests and the persons who hold them.
(Again, it must be borne in mind that the Article 8 classification issue may be different from the
classification question posed by federal securities law or other regulation.) First, creation of the
new interests in the underlying assets may constitute issuance of a new Article 8 security. In
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 17 of 30
that case the relationship between the institution that created the interest and the persons who
hold them is not governed by the Part 5 rules, but by the rules of Parts 2, 3, and 4. See Section
8-501(e). That, for example, is the structure of issuance of mutual fund shares. Second, the
relationship between the entity creating the interests and those holding them may fit within the
Part 5 rules, so that the persons are treating as having security entitlements against the
institution with respect to the underlying assets. That, for example, is the structure used for
stock options. Third, it may be that the creation of the new interests in the underlying assets
does not constitute issuance of a new Article 8 security, nor does the relationship between the
entity creating the interests and those holding them fit within the Part 5 rules. In that case, the
relationship is governed by other law, as in the case of ordinary trusts.
The first of these three possibilities -- that the creation of the new interest is issuance of a new
security for Article 8 purposes -- is a fairly common pattern. For example, an American
depositary receipt facility does not maintain securities accounts but issues securities called
ADRs in respect of foreign securities deposited in such facility. Similarly, custodians of
government securities which issue receipts, certificates, or the like representing direct interests
in those securities (sometimes interests split between principal and income) do not maintain
securities accounts but issue securities representing those interests. Trusts holding assets, in a
variety of structured and securitized transactions, which issue certificates or the like
representing "pass-through" or undivided beneficial interests in the trust assets, do not maintain
securities accounts but issue securities representing those interests.
In analyzing these classification questions, courts should take care to avoid mechanical
jurisprudence based solely upon exegesis of the wording of definitions in Article 8. The result of
classification questions is that different sets of rules come into play. In order to decide the
classification question it is necessary to understand fully the commercial setting and consider
which set of rules best fits the transaction. Rather than letting the choice of rules turn on
interpretation of the words of the definitions, the interpretation of the words of the definitions
should turn on the suitability of the application of the substantive rules.
IV. CHANGES FROM PRIOR (1978) VERSION OF ARTICLE 8
A. Table of Disposition of Sections in Prior Version
Article 8 (1978) Revised Articles 8 and 9
8-101 8-101
8-102(1)(a) 8-102(a)(4) & (15)
8-102(1)(b) 8-102(a)(15) & (18)
8-102(1)(c) 8-102(a)(15)
8-102(1)(d) 8-102(a)(13)
8-102(1)(e) 8-102(a)(2)
8-102(2) 8-202(b)(1)
8-102(3) 8-102(a)(5)
8-102(4) omitted, see Revision Note 1
8-102(5) 8-102(b)
8-102(6) 8-102(c)
8-103 8-209
8-104 8-210
8-105(1) omitted, see Revision Note 8
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 18 of 30
Article 8 (1978) Revised Articles 8 and 9
8-105(2) omitted, see Revision Note 4
8-105(3) 8-114
8-106 8-110
8-107 omitted, see Revision Note 8
8-108 omitted, see Revision Note 5
8-201 8-201
8-202 8-202; transaction statement
provisions omitted, see
Revision Note 4
8-203 8-203
8-204 8-204; transaction statement
provisions omitted, see
Revision Note 4
8-205 8-205; transaction statement
provisions omitted, see
Revision Note 4
8-206 8-206; transaction statement
provisions omitted, see
Revision Note 4
8-207 8-207; registered pledge provisions
omitted, see
Revision Note 5
8-208 8-208; transaction statement
provisions omitted, see
Revision Note 4
8-301 8-302(a) & (b)
8-302(1) 8-303(a)
8-302(2) 8-102(a)(1)
8-302(3) 8-303(b)
8-302(4) 8-302(c)
8-303 8-102(a)(3)
8-304(1) 8-105(d)
8-304(2) omitted, see Revision Note 4
8-304(3) 8-105(b)
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 19 of 30
Article 8 (1978) Revised Articles 8 and 9
8-305 8-105(c)
8-306(1) 8-108(f)
8-306(2) 8-108(a)
8-306(3) 8-108(g)
8-306(4) 8-108(h)
8-306(5) 8-108(e)
8-306(6) 8-306(h)
8-306(7) 8-108(b), 8-306(h)
8-306(8) omitted, see Revision Note 5
8-306(9) 8-108(c)
8-306(10) 8-108(i)
8-307 8-304(d)
8-308(1) 8-102(a)(11), 8-107
8-308(2) 8-304(a)
8-308(3) 8-304(b)
8-308(4) 8-102(a)(12)
8-308(5) 8-107 & 8-305(a)
8-308(6) 8-107
8-308(7) 8-107
8-308(8) 8-107
8-308(9) 8-304(f) & 8-305(b)
8-308(10) 8-107
8-308(11) 8-107
8-309 8-304(c)
8-310 8-304(e)
8-311(a) omitted, see 8-106(b)(2), 8-301(b)(1),
8-303
8-311(b) 8-404
8-312 8-306
8-313(1)(a) omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-301(a)(1)
& (2)
8-313(1)(b) omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-301(b)(1)
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 20 of 30
Article 8 (1978) Revised Articles 8 and 9
& (2)
8-313(1)(c) omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-301(a)(3)
8-313(1)(d) omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-501(b)
8-313(1)(e) omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-301(a)(2)
8-313(1)(f) omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 8-301(b)(2)
8-313(1)(g) omitted, see Revision Notes 1 & 2;
see also
8-501(b), 8-111
8-313(1)(h)-(j) omitted, see Revision Note 2; see
also 9-115
& 9-203
8-313(2) omitted, see Revision Note 2; see also
8-503
8-313(3) omitted, see Revision Note 2
8-313(4) 8-102(a)(14)
8-314 omitted, see Revision Note 8
8-315 omitted, see Revision Note 8
8-316 8-307
8-317 8-112
8-318 8-115
8-319 omitted, see 8-113 and Revision
Note 7
8-320 omitted, see Revision Note 1
8-321 omitted, see 9-115, 9-203
8-401 8-401
8-402 8-402, see Revision Note 6
8-403 8-403, see Revision Note 6
8-404 8-404
8-405(1) 8-406
8-405(2) 8-405(a)
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 21 of 30
Article 8 (1978) Revised Articles 8 and 9
8-405(3) 8-405(b)
8-406 8-407
8-407 omitted, see Revision Note 8
8-408 omitted, see Revision Note 4
B. Revision Notes
1. Provisions of former Article 8 on clearing corporations.
The keystone of the treatment of the indirect holding system in the prior version of
Article 8 was the special provision on clearing corporations in Section 8-320.
Section 8-320 was added to Article 8 in 1962, at the very end of the process that
culminated in promulgation and enactment of the original version of the Code. The
key concepts of the original version of Article 8 were "bona fide purchaser" and
"delivery." Under Section 8-302 (1962) one could qualify as a "bona fide
purchaser" only if one had taken delivery of a security, and Section 8-313 (1962)
specified what counted as a delivery.
Section 8-320 was added to take account of the development of the system in
which trades can be settled by netted book-entry movements at a depository
without physical deliveries of certificates. Rather than reworking the basic
concepts, however, Section 8-320 brought the depository system within Article 8 by
definitional fiat. Subsection (a) of Section 8-320 (1962) stated that a transfer or
pledge could be effected by entries on the books of a central depository, and
subsection (b) stated that such an entry "has the effect of a delivery of a security in
bearer form or duly indorsed in blank." In 1978, Section 8-320 was revised to
conform it to the general substitution of the concept of "transfer" for "delivery," but
the basic structure remained the same. Under the 1978 version of Article 8, the
only book-entry transfers that qualified the transferee for bona fide purchaser rights
were those made on the books of a clearing corporation. See Sections 8-302(1)(c),
8-313(1)(g), and 8-320. Thus, for practical purposes, the indirect holding system
rules of the prior version of Article 8 required that the securities be held by a
clearing corporation in accordance with the central depository rules of Section 8-
320.
Some of the definitional provisions concerning clearing corporation in the prior
version of Article 8 seem to have conflated the commercial law rules on the effect
of book-entry transactions with issues about the regulation of entities that are
acting as clearing corporations. For example, the Section 8-320 rules that gave
effect to book-entry transfers applied only if the security was "in the custody of the
clearing corporation, another clearing corporation, [or] a custodian bank."
"Custodian bank" was defined in Section 8-102(4) as "a bank or trust company that
is supervised and examined by state or federal authority having supervision over
banks and is acting as custodian for a clearing corporation." Although this was
probably inadvertent, these definitional provisions have operated as an obstacle to
the development of clearing arrangements for global trading, since they effectively
precluded clearing corporations from using foreign banks as custodians.
Revised Article 8 is based on the view that Article 8 is not the proper place for
regulatory decisions about whether certain sorts of financial institutions should or
should not be permitted to engage in a particular aspect of the securities business,
such as acting as a clearing corporation, or how they should be permitted to
conduct that business. Rather, Article 8 should deal only with the commercial law
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 22 of 30
questions of what duties and rights flow from doing business as a clearing
corporation, leaving it to other regulatory law to decide which entities should be
permitted to act as clearing corporations, and to regulate their activities. Federal
securities laws now establish a detailed regulatory structure for clearing
corporations; there is no need for Article 8 to duplicate parts of that structure.
Revised Article 8 deletes all provision of the prior version which had the effect of
specifying how clearing corporations should conduct their operations. For example,
Revised Article 8 deletes the definition of "custodian bank," which operated in the
prior version only as a regulatory restriction on how clearing corporations could
hold securities.
In general, the structure of Revised Article 8 is such that there is relatively little
need for special provisions on clearing corporations. Book-entry transactions
effected through clearing corporations are treated under the same rules in Part 5
as book-entry transactions effected through any other securities intermediary.
Accordingly, Revised Article 8 has no direct analog of the special provisions in
Section 8-320 on transfers on the books of clearing corporations.
2. Former Section 8-313 -- "Transfer."
Section 8-313 of the 1978 version of Article was extremely complicated, because it
attempted to cover many different issues. The following account of the evolution of
Section 8-313 may assist in understanding why a different approach is taken in
Revised Article 8. This explanation is, however, intended not as an actual account
of historical events, but as a conceptual reconstruction, devised from the
perspective of, and with the benefit of, hindsight.
The original objective of Article 8 was to ensure that certificates representing
investment securities would be "negotiable" in the sense that purchasers would be
protected by the bona fide purchaser rules. The requirements for bona fide
purchaser status were that the purchaser had to (i) take delivery of the security and
(ii) give value in good faith and without notice of adverse claims. Section 8-313
specified what counted as a "delivery," and Section 8-302 specified the other
requirements.
The 1978 amendments added provisions on uncertificated securities, but the basic
organizational pattern was retained. Section 8-302 continued to state the
requirements of value, good faith, and lack of notice for good faith purchase, and
Section 8-313 stated the mechanism by which the purchase had to be
implemented. Delivery as defined in the original version of Section 8-313 had a
meaning similar to the concept known in colloquial securities jargon as "good
delivery"; that is, physical delivery with any necessary indorsement. Although the
word "delivery" has now come to be used in securities parlance in a broader sense
than physical delivery, when the provisions for uncertificated securities were added
it was thought preferable to use another word. Thus, the word "transfer" was
substituted for "delivery" in Section 8-313.
The 1978 amendments also moved the rules governing security interests in
securities from Article 9 to Article 8, though the basic conceptual structure of the
common law of pledge was retained. Since a pledge required a delivery, and since
the term transfer had been substituted for delivery, the 1978 amendments provided
that in order to create a security interest there must be a "transfer," in the defined
Article 8 sense, from the debtor to the secured party. Accordingly, provisions had
to be added to Section 8-313 so that any of the steps that should suffice to create
a perfected security interest would be deemed to constitute a "transfer" within the
meaning of Section 8-313. Thus, the Section 8-313 rules on "transfer," which had
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 23 of 30
in the previous version dealt only with what counted as a delivery that qualified one
for bona fide purchaser status, became the statutory locus for all of the rules on
creation and perfection of security interests in securities. Accordingly the rather
elaborate rules of subsections (1)(h), (1)(i), and (1)(j) were added.
Having expanded Section 8-313 to the point that it served as the rule specifying
the formal requirements for transfer of all significant forms of interests in securities,
it must have seemed only logical to take the next step and make the Section 8-313
rules the exclusive means of transferring interests in securities. Thus, while the
prior version had stated that "Delivery to a purchaser occurs when ...", the 1978
version stated that "Transfer of a security or a limited interest (including a security
interest) therein to a purchaser occurs only … ." Having taken that step, however, it
then became necessary to ensure that anyone who should be regarded as having
an interest in a security would be covered by some provision of Section 8-313.
Thus, the provisions of subsection (1)(d)(ii) and (iii) were added to make it possible
to say that the customers of a securities intermediary who hold interests in
securities held by the intermediary in fungible bulk received "transfers."
Section 8-313(1)(d) was the key provision in the 1978 version dealing with the
indirect holding system at the level below securities depositories. It operated in
essentially the same fashion as Section 8-320; that is, it stated that when a broker
or bank holding securities in fungible bulk makes entries on its books identifying a
quantity of the fungible bulk as belonging to the customer, that action is treated as
a "transfer" -- in the special Section 8-313 sense -- of an interest in the security
from the intermediary to the customer.
Revised Article 8 has no direct analog of the 1978 version of Section 8-313. The
rules on secured transactions have been returned to Article 9, so subsections of
Section 8-313 (1978) dealing with security interests are deleted from Article 8.
Insofar as portions of Section 8-313 (1978) were designed to specify the formal
requirements for transferees to qualify for protection against adverse claims, their
place is taken by Revised Section 8-301, which defines "delivery," in a fashion
somewhat akin to the pre-1978 version of Section 8-313. The descendant of the
provisions of Section 8-313 (1978) dealing with the indirect holding system is
Revised Section 8-501 which specifies when a person acquires a security
entitlement. Section 8-501, however, is based on a different analysis of the
transaction in which a customer acquires a position in the indirect holding system.
The transaction is not described as a "transfer" of an interest in some portion of a
fungible bulk of securities held by the securities intermediary but as the creation of
a security entitlement. Accordingly, just as Revised Article 8 has no direct analog of
the Section 8-320 rules on clearing corporation transfers, it has no direct analog of
the Section 8-313(1) rules on "transfers" of interests in securities held in fungible
bulk.
3. Uncertificated securities provisions.
Given the way that securities holding practices have evolved, the sharp distinction
that the 1978 version of Article 8 drew between certificated securities and
uncertificated securities has become somewhat misleading. Since many provisions
of the 1978 version had separate subsections dealing first with certificated
securities and then with uncertificated securities, and since people intuitively
realize that the volume of trading in the modern securities markets could not
possibly be handled by pushing around certificates, it was only natural for a reader
of the statute to conclude that the uncertificated securities provisions of Article 8
were the basis of the book-entry system. That, however, is not the case. Although
physical delivery of certificates plays little role in the settlement system, most
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 24 of 30
publicly traded securities are still, in legal theory, certificated securities. To use
clearance and settlement jargon, the book-entry securities holding system has
used "immobilization" rather than "dematerialization."
The important legal and practical difference is between the direct holding system,
in which the beneficial owners have a direct relationship with the issuer, and the
indirect holding system, in which securities are held through tiers of securities
intermediaries. Accordingly, in Revised Article 8 the contrast between certificated
securities and uncertificated securities has been minimized or eliminated as much
as possible in stating the substantive provisions.
4. Transaction statements.
Although the 1978 provisions on uncertificated securities contemplated a system in
which there would be no definitive certificates as reifications of the underlying
interests or obligations, the 1978 amendments did not really dispense with all
requirements of paper evidence of securities holding. The 1978 amendments
required issuers of uncertificated securities to send paper "transaction statements"
upon registration of transfer. Section 8-408 regulated the content and format of
these transaction statements in considerable detail. The statements had to be in
writing, include specific information, and contain a conspicuous legend stating that
"This statement is merely a record of the rights of the addressee as of the time of
its issuance. Delivery of this statement, of itself, confers no rights on the recipient.
This statement is neither a negotiable instrument nor a security." Issuers were
required to send statements when any transfer was registered (known as "initial
transaction statements") and also were required to send periodic statements at
least annually and also upon any security holder's reasonable request. Fees were
regulated to some extent, in that Section 8-408(8) specified that if periodic
statements were sent at least quarterly, the issuer could charge for statements
requested by security holders at other times.
The detailed specification of reporting requirements for issuers of uncertificated
securities was quite different from the treatment of securities intermediaries.
Though the prior version of Article 8 did require non-clearing corporation securities
intermediaries to send confirmations of transfers -- a requirement deleted in
Revised Article 8 -- it did not regulate their content or format. Article 8 has never
imposed periodic reporting requirements on securities intermediaries. Thus,
reporting requirements for the indirect holding system were left to agreements and
regulatory authorities, while reporting requirements for a book-entry direct holding
system were imposed by statute.
Securities holding systems based on transaction statements of the sort
contemplated by the 1978 amendments have not yet evolved to any major extent --
indeed, the statutory specification of the details of the information system may itself
have acted as an impediment to the evolution of a book-entry direct system.
Accordingly, Revised Article 8 drops the statutory requirements concerning
transaction statements. The record keeping and reporting obligations of issuers of
uncertificated securities would be left to agreement and other law, as is the case
today for securities intermediaries.
In the 1978 version, the Part 2 rules concerning transfer restrictions, issuers'
defenses, and the like were based on the assumption that transaction statements
would be used in a fashion analogous to traditional security certificates. For
example, Sections 8-202 and 8-204 specified that the terms of a security, or any
restrictions on transfer imposed by the issuer, had to be noted on the transaction
statement. Revised Article 8 deletes all such references to transaction statements.
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 25 of 30
The terms of securities, or of restrictions of transfer, would be governed by
whatever law or agreement specifies these matters, just as is the case for various
other forms of business entities, such as partnerships, that have never issued
certificates representing interests. Other Part 2 rules, such as Sections 8-205, 8-
206, and 8-208, attempted to state rules on forgery and related matters for
transactions statements. Since Revised Article 8 does not specify the format for
information systems for uncertificated securities, there is no point in attempting to
state rules on the consequences of wrongful information transmission in the
particular format of written statements authenticated by signatures.
5. Deletion of provisions on registered pledges.
The 1978 version of Article 8 also added detailed provisions concerning "registered
pledges" of uncertificated securities. Revised Article 8 adopts a new system of
rules for security interests in securities, for both the direct and indirect holding
systems that make it unnecessary to have special statutory provisions for
registered pledges of uncertificated securities.
The reason that the 1978 version of Article 8 created this concept was that if the
only means of creating security interests was the pledge, it seemed necessary to
provide some substitute for the pledge in the absence of a certificate. The point of
the registered pledge was, presumably, that it permitted a debtor to grant a
perfected security interest in securities, yet still keep the securities in the debtor's
own name for purposes of dividends, voting, and the like. The concept of
registered pledge has, however, been thought troublesome by many legal
commentators and securities industry participants. For example, in Massachusetts
where many mutual funds have their headquarters, a non-uniform amendment was
enacted to permit the issuer of an uncertificated security to refuse to register a
pledge and instead issue a certificate to the owner that the owner could then
pledge by ordinary means.
Under the 1978 version of Article 8, if an issuer chose to issue securities in
uncertificated form, it was also required by statute to offer a registered pledge
program. Revised Articles 8 and 9 take a different approach. All of the provisions
dealing with registered pledges have been deleted. This does not mean, however,
that issuers cannot offer such a service. The control rules of Revised Section 8-106
and the related priority provisions in Article 9 establish a structure that permits
issuers to develop systems akin to the registered pledge device, without mandating
that they do so, or legislating the details of the system. In essence, the registered
pledge or control device amounts to a record keeping service. A debtor can always
transfer securities to its lender. In a registered pledge or control agreement
arrangement, the issuer keeps track of which securities the secured party holds for
its own account outright, and which securities it holds in pledge from its debtors.
Under the rules of Revised Articles 8 and 9, the registered pledge issue can easily
be left to resolution by the market. The concept of control is defined in such fashion
that if an issuer or securities intermediary wishes to offer a service akin to the
registered pledge device it can do so. The issuer or securities intermediary would
offer to enter into agreements with the debtor and secured party under which it
would hold the securities for the account of the debtor, but subject to instructions
from the secured party. The secured party would thereby obtain control assuring
perfection and priority of its lien.
Even if such arrangements are not offered by issuers, persons who hold
uncertificated securities will have several options for using them as collateral for
secured loans. Under the new rules, filing is a permissible method of perfection, for
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 26 of 30
debtors other than securities firms. A secured party who relies on filing is, of
course, exposed to the risk that the debtor will double finance and grant a later
secured lender a security interest under circumstances that give that lender control
and hence priority. If the lender is unwilling to run that risk, the debtor can transfer
the securities outright to the lender on the books of the issuer, though between the
parties the debtor would be the owner and the lender only a secured party. That, of
course, requires that the debtor trust the secured party not to dispose of the
collateral wrongfully, and the debtor may also need to make arrangements with the
secured party to exercise benefits of ownership such as voting and receiving
distributions.
It may well be that both lenders and borrowers would prefer to have some
arrangement, such as the registered pledge device of current law, that permits the
debtor to remain as the registered owner entitled to vote and receive dividends but
gives the lender exclusive power to order their disposition. The approach taken in
this revision is that if there is a genuine demand for such arrangements, it can be
met by the market. The difficulty with the approach of present Article 8 is that it
mandates that any issuer that wishes to issue securities in uncertificated form must
also offer this record keeping service. That obligation may well have acted as a
disincentive to the development of uncertificated securities. Thus, the deletion of
the mandated registered pledge provisions is consistent with the principle of
neutrality toward the evolution of securities holding practices.
6. Former Section 8-403 -- Issuer's Duty as to Adverse Claims.
Section 8-403 of the prior version of Article 8 dealt with the obligations of issuers
to adverse claimants. The starting point of American law on issuers' liability in such
circumstances is the old case of Lowry v. Commercial & Farmers' Bank, 15 F. Cas.
1040 (C.C.D. Md. 1848) (No. 8551), under which issuers could be held liable for
registering a transfer at the direction of a registered owner who was acting
wrongfully as against a third person in making the transfer. The Lowry principle
imposed onerous liability on issuers, particularly in the case of transfers by
fiduciaries, such as executors and trustees. To protect against risk of such liability,
issuers developed the practice of requiring extensive documentation for fiduciary
stock transfers to assure themselves that the fiduciaries were acting rightfully. As a
result, fiduciary stock transfers were cumbersome and time consuming.
In the present century, American law has gradually moved away from the Lowry
principle. Statutes such as the Uniform Fiduciaries Act, the Model Fiduciary Stock
Transfer Act, and the Uniform Act for the Simplification of Fiduciary Security
Transfers sought to avoid the delays in stock transfers that could result from
issuers' demands for documentation by limiting the issuer's responsibility for
transfers in breach of the registered owner's duty to others. Although these
statutes provided that issuers had no duty of inquiry to determine whether a
fiduciary was acting rightfully, they all provided that an issuer could be liable if the
issuer acted with notice of third party claims.
The prior version of Article 8 followed the same approach as the various fiduciary
transfer statutes. Issuers were not required to seek out information from which they
could determine whether a fiduciary was acting properly, but they were liable if they
registered a transfer with notice that the fiduciary was acting improperly. Former
Section 8-308(11) said that the failure of a fiduciary to comply with a controlling
instrument or failure to obtain a court approval required under local law did not
render the indorsement or instruction unauthorized. However, if a fiduciary was in
fact acting improperly, then the beneficiary would be treated as an adverse
claimant. See Section 8-302(2) (1978) and Comment 4. Former Section 8-403
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 27 of 30
specified that if written notice of an adverse claim had been sent to the issuer, the
issuer "shall inquire into the adverse claim" before registering a transfer on the
indorsement or instruction of the registered owner. The issuer could "discharge any
duty of inquiry by any reasonable means," including by notifying the adverse
claimant that the transfer would be registered unless the adverse claimant obtained
a court order or gave an indemnity bond.
Revised Article 8 rejects the Lowry principle altogether. It provides that an issuer is
not liable for wrongful registration if it acts on an effective indorsement or
instruction, even though the issuer may have notice of adverse claims, so long as
the issuer has not been served with legal process and is not acting in collusion with
the wrongdoer in registering the transfer. See Revised Section 8-404 and
Comments thereto. The provisions of prior Section 8-403 specifying that issuers
had a duty to investigate adverse claims of which they had notice are deleted.
Revised Article 8 also deletes the provisions set out in Section 8-403(3) of prior law
specifying that issuers did not have a duty to inquire into the rightfulness of
transfers by fiduciaries. The omission of the rules formerly in Section 8-403(3) does
not, of course, mean that issuers would be liable for acting on the instruction of
fiduciaries in the circumstances covered by former Section 8-403(3). Former
Section 8-403(3) assumed that issuers would be liable if they registered a transfer
with notice of an adverse claim. Former Section 8-403(3) was necessary only to
negate any inference that knowledge that a transfer was initiated by a fiduciary
might give constructive notice of adverse claims. Under Section 8-404 of Revised
Article 8, mere notice of adverse claims does not impose duties on the issuer.
Accordingly the provisions included in former Section 8-403(3) are unnecessary.
Although the prior version of Article 8 included provisions similar or identical to
those set out in the Uniform Act for the Simplification of Fiduciary Security
Transfers and similar statutes, most states retained these statutes at the time the
Uniform Commercial Code was adopted. These statutes are based on a premise
different from Revised Article 8. The fiduciary simplification acts are predicated on
the assumption that an issuer would be liable to an adverse claimant if the issuer
had notice. These statutes seek only to preclude any inference that issuers have
such notice when they register transfers on the instructions of a fiduciary. Revised
Article 8 is based on the view that a third party should not be able to interfere with
the relationship between an issuer and its registered shareholders unless the
claimant obtains legal process. Since notice of an adverse claim does not impose
duties on an issuer under Revised Article 8, the Uniform Act for the Simplification
of Fiduciary Security Transfers, or similar statutes, should be repealed upon
enactment of Revised Article 8.
7. Former Section 8-319 -- Statute of Frauds.
Revised Article 8 deletes the special statute of frauds provision for securities
contracts that was set out in former Section 8-319. See Revised Section 8-113.
Most of the litigation involving the statute of frauds rule of the prior version of
Article 8 involved informal transactions, rather than transactions on the organized
securities markets. Typical cases were those in which an employee or former
employee of a small enterprise sued to enforce an alleged promise that he or she
would receive an equity interest in the business. The usual commercial policies
relating to writings in contracts for the sale of personal property are at most
tangentially implicated in such cases. There was a rather large and complex body
of case law dealing with the applicability of Section 8-319 to cases of this sort. It
seems doubtful that the cost of litigating these issues was warranted by whatever
protections the statute of frauds offered against fraudulent claims.
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 28 of 30
Subsection (c) of former Section 8-319 provided that the statute of frauds bar did
not apply if a written confirmation was sent and the recipient did not seasonably
send an objection. That provision, however, presumably would not have had the
effect of binding a broker's customer to the terms of a trade for which confirmation
had been sent though the customer had not objected within 10 days. In the first
place, the relationship between a broker and customer is ordinarily that of agent
and principal; thus the broker is not seeking to enforce a contract for sale of a
security, but to bind its principal for action taken by the broker as agent. Former
Section 8-319 did not by its terms apply to the agency relationship. Moreover, even
if former Section 8-319(c) applied, it is doubtful that it, of its own force, had the
effect of precluding the customer from disputing whether there was a contract or
what the terms of the contract were. Former Section 8-319(c) only removed the
statute of frauds as a bar to enforcement; it did not say that there was a contract or
that the confirmation had the effect of excluding other evidence of its terms. Thus,
deletion of former Section 8-319 does not change the law one way or the other on
whether a customer who fails to object to a written confirmation is precluded from
denying the trade described in the confirmation, because that issue was never
governed by former Section 8-319(c).
8. Miscellaneous.
Prior Section 8-105. Revised Article 8 deletes the statement found in Section 8-
105(1) of the prior version that certificated securities "are negotiable instruments."
This provision was added very late in the drafting process of the original Uniform
Commercial Code. Apparently the thought was that it might be useful in dealing
with potential transition problems arising out of the fact that bonds were then
treated as negotiable instruments under the Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law.
During that era, many other statutes, such as those specifying permissible
categories of investments for regulated entities, might have used such phrases as
"negotiable securities" or "negotiable instruments." Section 8-105 seems to have
been included in the original version of Article 8 to avoid unfortunate interpretations
of those other statutes once securities were moved from the Uniform Negotiable
Instruments Law to UCC Article 8. Whether or not Section 8-105 was necessary at
that time, it has surely outlived its purpose. The statement that securities "are
negotiable instruments" is very confusing. As used in the Uniform Commercial
Code, the term "negotiable instrument" means an instrument that is governed by
Article 3; yet Article 8 securities are not governed by Article 3. Courts have
occasionally cited Section 8-105(1) of prior law for the proposition that the rules
that are generally thought of as characteristic of negotiability, such as the rule that
bona fide purchasers take free from adverse claims, apply to certificated securities.
Section 8-105(1), however, is unnecessary for that purpose, since the relevant
rules are set out in specific provisions of Article 8.
Prior Sections 8-107 and 8-314. Article 8 has never been, and should not be, a
comprehensive codification of the law of contracts for the purchase and sale of
securities. The prior version of Article 8 did contain, however, a number of
provisions dealing with miscellaneous aspects of the law of contracts as applied to
contracts for the sale of securities. Section 8-107 dealt with one remedy for
breach, and Section 8-314 dealt with certain aspects of performance. Revised
Article 8 deletes these on the theory that inclusion of a few sections on issues of
contract law is likely to cause more harm than good since inferences might be
drawn from the failure to cover related issues. The deletion of these sections is not,
however, intended as a rejection of the rules of contract law and interpretation that
they expressed.
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 29 of 30
Prior Section 8-315. It is not entirely clear what the function of Section 8-315 of
prior law was. The section specified that the owner of a security could recover it
from a person to whom it had been transferred, if the transferee did not qualify as a
bona fide purchaser. It seems to have been intended only to recognize that
securities, like any other form of personal property, are governed by the general
principle of property law that an owner can recover property from a person to
whom it has been transferred under circumstances that did not cut off the owner's
claim. Although many other Articles of the UCC deal with cut-off rules, Article 8
was the only one that included an affirmative statement of the rights of an owner to
recover her property. It seems wiser to adopt the same approach as in Articles 2,
3, 7, and 9, and leave this point to other law. Accordingly, Section 8-315 is deleted
in Revised Article 8, without, of course, implying rejection of the nearly self-evident
rule that it sought to express.
Prior Section 8-407. This section, entitled "Exchangeability of Securities," seemed
to say that holders of securities had the right to cause issuers to convert them back
and forth from certificated to uncertificated form. The provision, however, applied
only if the issuer "regularly maintains a system for issuing the class of securities
involved under which both certificated and uncertificated securities are regularly
issued to the category of owners, which includes the person in whose name the
new security is to be registered." The provision seems unnecessary, since it
applied only if the issuer decided that it should. The matter can be covered by
agreement or corporate charter or by-laws.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
On behalf of the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and the American Law
Institute, the Drafting Committee and the Reporter acknowledge with deep appreciation the dedicated
and helpful assistance of a great many individuals and organizations. Among the large number of
individuals who participated in the development of Revised Article 8, special mention should be made
of a few whose contributions were extraordinary.
Preceding the preparation of Revised Article 8, the topic was carefully studied by the Advisory
Committee on Settlement of Market Transactions of the American Bar Association Section of Business
Law, under the chairmanship of Robert Haydock, Jr., of Boston, MA. Martin Aronstein, of Philadelphia,
PA, reporter for the 1977 revision of Article 8, served on the Haydock Committee and continued to
advise the Drafting Committee. Robert C. Mendelson, New York, NY, who also served on the Haydock
Committee, is chair of the Market Transactions Advisory Committee set up by the Securities and
Exchange Commission; Bob Mendelson's considerable contribution to the preparation of Revised
Article 8 was most important. Other members of the Haydock Committee had continuing roles either as
members of the Drafting Committee or as sources of valuable advice to that committee.
The revision of Article 8 is the culmination of a successful federal-state collaboration among the
American Law Institute and the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws,
sponsors of the Uniform Commercial Code, and representatives of the United States Department of the
Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal Reserve System, and other federal
bodies. The product reflects the assistance of many people, and particularly of Jonathan Kallman and
Ari Burstein on behalf of the SEC, Calvin Ninomiya, Cynthia E. Reese, and Virginia S. Rutledge of
Treasury, Lawranne Stewart of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Debra W. Cook
and Mary Sue Fisher of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and George Wilder and Carla
Behnfeldt of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Representatives of organizations in the securities and banking industry and their counsel gave
generously of their time and knowledge. Special mention should be made of Norman R. Nelson, New
York Clearing House, R. May Lee, Public Securities Association, Robert J. Woldow and Karen
Saperstein, National Securities Clearing Corporation, Leopold S. Rassnick, Participants Trust
PREFATORY NOTE
Page 30 of 30
Company, Robert Wittie and Patricia Louie, Investment Company Institute, Thomas A. Williams,
Richard B. Nesson and Carl Urist, Depository Trust Company, Dennis A. Dutterer, Board of Trade
Clearing Corporation, Evalyn Lipton Fishbein, State Street Bank and Trust Company, Robert P.
DeGregorie, Chemical Bank, Gail M. Inaba, Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, Anthony J.
Leitner, Goldman, Sachs & Company, Robert M. MacAllister, The Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A., Kevin
J. Moynihan, Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Inc., Lois J. Radisch, J.P. Morgan & Co., James J.
Volpe, First Chicago Trust Company of New York, and Richard E. Smith, Securities Transfer
Association.
Many lawyers and law professors contributed to the work of the Drafting Committee. Special
appreciation is due to Sandra M. Rocks, New York, NY, who participated on behalf of the ABA UCC
Investment Securities Subcommittee and ABA Task Force on TRADES Regulations. Others who
participated included Steven Harris and James R. McDaniel, Chicago, IL, Kenneth B. Davis, Jr.,
Madison, WI, David M. Huggins and Bradley Y. Smith, New York, NY, David J. Schraa, Brussels,
Belgium, and Randall D. Guynn, London, England. The Reporter and Drafting Committee also received
assistance from the dedicated work of lawyers, not them selves experts in securities law, who reviewed
and commented upon drafts and participated in the revision process through meetings of the Members
Consultative Group of the American Law Institute and at various national, state, and local bar
association programs.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document