U.C.C. § 11-106
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)  >  ARTICLE 11. EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITION 
PROVISIONS
§ 11-106. Required Refilings.
(1)  If a security interest is perfected or has priority when this Act takes effect as to all persons or as to 
certain persons without any filing or recording, and if the filing of a financing statement would be required 
for the perfection or priority of the security interest against those persons under [new U.C.C.], the perfection 
and priority rights of the security interest continue until 3 years after the effective date of [new U.C.C.].  The 
perfection will then lapse unless a financing statement is filed as provided in subsection (4) or unless the 
security interest is perfected otherwise than by filing.
(2)  If a security interest is perfected when [new U.C.C.] takes effect under a law other than [U.C.C.] which 
requires no further filing, refiling or recording to continue its perfection, perfection continues until and will 
lapse 3 years after [new U.C.C.] takes effect, unless a financing statement is filed as provided in subsection 
(4) or unless the security interest is perfected otherwise than by filing, or unless under subsection (3) of 
Section 9-302 the other law continues to govern filing.
(3)  If a security interest is perfected by a filing, refiling or recording under a law repealed by this Act which 
required further filing, refiling or recording to continue its perfection, perfection continues and will lapse on 
the date provided by the law so repealed for such further filing, refiling or recording unless a financing 
statement is filed as provided in subsection (4) or unless the security interest is perfected otherwise than by 
filing.
(4)  A financing statement may be filed within six months before the perfection of a security interest would 
otherwise lapse.  Any such financing statement may be signed by either the debtor or the secured party.  It 
must identify the security agreement, statement or notice (however denominated in any statute or other law 
repealed or modified by this Act), state the office where and the date when the last filing, refiling or 
recording, if any, was made with respect thereto, and the filing number, if any, or book and page, if any, of 
recording and further state that the security agreement, statement or notice, however denominated, in 
another filing office under the [U.C.C.] or under any statute or other law repealed or modified by this Act is 
still effective.  Section 9-401 and Section 9-103 determine the proper place to file such a financing 
statement.  Except as specified in this subsection, the provisions of Section 9-403(3) for continuation 
statements apply to such a financing statement.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document