U.C.C. § 7-504
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)  >  ARTICLE 7. DOCUMENTS OF TITLE  >  PART 5. 
WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS AND BILLS OF LADING: NEGOTIATION AND TRANSFER
§ 7-504. RIGHTS ACQUIRED IN ABSENCE OF DUE NEGOTIATION; EFFECT 
OF DIVERSION; STOPPAGE OF DELIVERY
(a)  A transferee of a document of title, whether negotiable or nonnegotiable, to which the document has 
been delivered but not duly negotiated, acquires the title and rights that its transferor had or had actual 
authority to convey.
(b)  In the case of a transfer of a nonnegotiable document of title, until but not after the bailee receives 
notice of the transfer, the rights of the transferee may be defeated:
(1)  by those creditors of the transferor which could treat the transfer as void under Section 2-402 or 
2A-308;
(2)  by a buyer from the transferor in ordinary course of business if the bailee has delivered the goods 
to the buyer or received notification of the buyer's rights;
(3)  by a lessee from the transferor in ordinary course of business if the bailee has delivered the goods 
to the lessee or received notification of the lessee's rights; or
(4)  as against the bailee, by good-faith dealings of the bailee with the transferor.
(c)  A diversion or other change of shipping instructions by the consignor in a nonnegotiable bill of lading 
which causes the bailee not to deliver the goods to the consignee defeats the consignee's title to the goods 
if the goods have been delivered to a buyer in ordinary course of business or a lessee in ordinary course of 
business and, in any event, defeats the consignee's rights against the bailee.
(d)  Delivery of the goods pursuant to a nonnegotiable document of title may be stopped by a seller under 
Section 2-705 or a lessor under Section 2A-526, subject to the requirements of due notification in those 
sections. A bailee that honors the seller's or lessor's instructions is entitled to be indemnified by the seller or 
lessor against any resulting loss or expense.
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document