U.C.C. Art. 4A, Prefatory Note
Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.)  >  ARTICLE 4A. FUNDS TRANSFERS  >  PART 1. SUBJECT 
MATTER AND DEFINITIONS
Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
The National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State laws and The American Law Institute have approved 
a new Article 4A to the Uniform Commercial Code.  Comments that follow each of the sections of the statute are 
intended as official comments.  They explain in detail the purpose and meaning of the various sections and the 
policy considerations on which they are based.
Description of transaction covered by Article 4A.
There are a number of mechanisms for making payments through the banking system.  Most of these mechanisms 
are covered in whole or part by state or federal statutes.  In terms of number of transactions, payments made by 
check or credit card are the most common payment methods.  Payment by check is covered by Articles 3 and 4 of 
the UCC and some aspects of payment by credit card are covered by federal law.  In recent years electronic funds 
transfers have been increasingly common in consumer transactions.  For example, in some cases a retail customer 
can pay for purchases by use of an access or debit card inserted in a terminal at the retail store that allows the bank 
account of the customer to be instantly debited.  Some aspects of these point-of-sale transactions and other 
consumer payments that are effected electronically are covered by a federal statute, the Electronic Fund Transfer 
Act (EFTA).  If any part of a funds transfer is covered by EFTA, the entire funds transfer is excluded from Article 4A.
Another type of payment, commonly referred to as a wholesale wire transfer, is the primary focus of Article 4A.  
Payments that are covered by Article 4A are overwhelmingly between business or financial institutions.  The dollar 
volume of payments made by wire transfer far exceeds the dollar volume of payments made by other means.  The 
volume of payments by wire transfer over the two principal wire payment systems-the Federal Reserve wire transfer 
network (Fedwire) and the New York Clearing House Interbank Payments Systems (CHIPS)-exceeds one trillion 
dollars per day.  Most payments carried out by use of automated clearing houses are consumer payments covered 
by EFTA and therefore not covered by Article 4A.  There is, however, a significant volume of nonconsumer ACH 
payments that closely resemble wholesale wire transfers.  These payments are also covered by Article 4A.
There is some resemblance between payments made by wire transfer and payments made by other means such as 
paper-based checks and credit cards or electronically-based consumer payments, but there are also many 
differences.  Article 4A excludes from its coverage these other payment mechanisms.  Article 4A follows a policy of 
treating the transaction that it covers-a "funds transfer"-as a unique method of payment that is governed by unique 
principles of law that address the operational and policy issues presented by this kind of payment.
The funds transfer that is covered by Article 4A is not a complex transaction and can be illustrated by the following 
example which is used throughout the Prefatory Note as a basis for discussion.  X, a debtor, wants to pay an 
obligation owed to Y.  Instead of delivering to Y a negotiable instrument such as a check or some other writing such 
as a credit card slip that enables Y to obtain payment from a bank, X transmits an instruction to X's bank to credit a 
sum of money to the bank account of Y.  In most cases X's bank and Y's bank are different banks.  X's bank may 
carry out X's instruction by instructing Y's bank to credit Y's account in the amount that X requested.  The 
instruction that X issues to its bank is a "payment order." X is the "sender" of the payment order and X's bank is the 
"receiving bank" with respect to X's order.  Y is the "beneficiary" of X's order.  When X's bank issues an instruction 
to Y's bank to carry out X's payment order, X's bank "executes" X's order.  The instruction of X's bank to Y's bank is 
also a payment order.  With respect to that order, X's bank is the sender, Y's bank is the receiving bank, and Y is 
the beneficiary.  The entire series of transactions by which X pays Y is knows as the "funds transfer." With respect 
to the funds transfer, X is the "originator," X's bank is the "originator's bank," Y is the "beneficiary" and Y's bank is 

 Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
the "beneficiary's bank." In more complex transactions there are one or more additional banks known as 
"intermediary banks" between X's bank and Y's bank.  In the funds transfer the instruction contained in the payment 
order of X to its bank is carried out by a series of payment orders by each bank in the transmission chain to the next 
bank in the chain until Y's bank receives a payment order to make the credit to Y's account.  In most cases, the 
payment order of each bank to the next bank in the chain is transmitted electronically, and often the payment order 
of X to its bank is also transmitted electronically, but the means of transmission oes not have any legal significance.  
A payment order may be transmitted by any means, and in some cases the payment order is transmitted by a slow 
means such as first class mail.  To reflect this fact, the broader term "funds transfer" rather than the narrower term 
"wire transfer" is used in Article 4A to describe the overall payment transaction.
Funds transfers are divided into two categories determined by whether the instruction to pay is given by the person 
making payment or the person receiving payment.  If the instruction is given by the person making the payment, the 
transfer is commonly referred to as a "credit transfer." If the instruction is given by the person receiving payment, 
the transfer is commonly referred to as a "debit transfer." Article 4A governs credit transfers and excludes debit 
transfers.
Why is Article 4A needed?
There is no comprehensive body of law that defines the rights and obligations that arise from wire transfers.  Some 
aspects of wire transfers are governed by rules of the principal transfer systems.  Transfers made by Fedwire are 
governed by Federal Reserve Regulation J and transfers over CHIPS are governed by the CHIPS rules.  Transfers 
made by means of automated clearing houses are governed by uniform rules adopted by various associations of 
banks in various parts of the nation or by Federal Reserve rules or operating circulars.  But the various funds 
transfer system rules apply to only limited aspects of wire transfer transactions.  The resolution of the many issues 
that are not covered by funds transfer system rules depends on contracts of the parties, to the extent that they exist, 
or principles of law applicable to other payment mechanisms that might be applied by analogy.  The result is a great 
deal of uncertainty.  There is no consensus about the juridical nature of a wire transfer and consequently of the 
rights and obligations that are created.  Article 4A is intended to provide the comprehensive body of law that we do 
not have today.
Characteristics of a funds transfer.
There are a number of characteristics of funds transfers covered by Article 4A that have influenced the drafting of 
the statute.  The typical funds transfer involves a large amount of money.  Multimillion dollar transactions are 
commonplace.  The originator of the transfer and the beneficiary are typically sophisticated business or financial 
organizations.  High speed is another predominant characteristic.  Most funds transfers are completed on the same 
day, even in complex transactions in which there are several intermediary banks in the transmission chain.  A funds 
transfer is a highly efficient substitute for payments made by the delivery of paper instruments.  Another 
characteristic is extremely low cost.  A transfer that involves many millions of dollars can be made for a price of a 
few dollars.  Price does not normally vary very much or at all with the amount of the transfer.  This system of pricing 
may not be feasible if the bank is exposed to very large liabilities in connection with the transaction.  The pricing 
system assumes that the price reflects primarily the cost of the mechanical operation performed by the bank, but in 
fact, a bank may have more or less potential liability with respect to a funds transfer depending upon the amount of 
the transfer.  Risk of loss to banks carrying out a funds transfer may arise from a variety of causes.  In some funds 
transfers, there may be extensions of very large amounts of credit for short periods of time by the banks that carry 
out a funds transfer.  If a payment order is issued to the beneficiary's bank, it is normal for the bank to release funds 
to the beneficiary immediately.  Sometimes, payment to the beneficiary's bank by the bank that issued the order to 
the beneficiary's bank is delayed until the end of the day.  If that payment is not received because of the insolvency 
of the bank that is obliged to pay, the beneficiary's bank may suffer a loss.  There is also risk of loss if a bank fails 
to execute the payment order of a customer, or if the order is excuted late.  There also may be an error in the 
payment order issued by a bank that is executing the payment order of its customer.  For example, the error might 
relate to the amount to be paid or to the identity of the person to be paid.  Because the dollar amounts involved in 
funds transfers are so large, the risk of loss if something goes wrong in a transaction may also be very large.  A 

 Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
major policy issue in the drafting of Article 4A is that of determining how risk of loss is to be allocated given the price 
structure in the industry.
Concept of acceptance and effect of acceptance by the beneficiary's bank.
Rights and obligations under Article 4A arise as the result of "acceptance" of a payment order by the bank to which 
the order is addressed.  Section 4A-209.  The effect of acceptance varies depending upon whether the payment 
order is issued to the beneficiary's bank or to a bank other than the beneficiary's bank.  Acceptance by the 
beneficiary's bank is particularly important because it defines when the beneficiary's bank becomes obligated to the 
beneficiary to pay the amount of the payment order.  Although Article 4A follows convention in using the term "funds 
transfer" to identify the payment from X to Y that is described above, no money or property right of X is actually 
transferred to Y.  X pays Y by causing Y's bank to become indebted to Y in the amount of the payment.  This debt 
arises when Y's bank accepts the payment order that X's bank issued to Y's bank to execute X's order.  If the funds 
transfer was carried out by use of one or more intermediary banks between X's bank and Y's bank, Y's bank 
becomes indebted to Y when Y's bank accepts the payment order issued to it by an intermediary bank.  The funds 
transfer is completed when this debt is incurred.  Acceptance, the event that determines when the debt of Y's bank 
to Y arises, occurs (i) when Y's bank pays Y or notifies Y of receipt of the payment order, or (ii) when Y's bank 
receives payment from the bank that issued a payment order to Y's bank.
The only obligation of the beneficiary's bank that results from acceptance of a payment order is to pay the amount 
of the order to the beneficiary.  No obligation is owed to either the sender of the payment order accepted by the 
beneficiary's bank or to the originator of the funds transfer.  The obligation created by acceptance by the 
beneficiary's bank is for the benefit of the beneficiary.  The purpose of the sender's payment order is to effect 
payment by the originator to the beneficiary and that purpose is achieved when the beneficiary's bank accepts the 
payment order.  Section 4A-405 states rules for determining when the obligation of the beneficiary's bank to the 
beneficiary has been paid.
Acceptance by a bank other than the beneficiary's bank.
In the funds transfer described above, what is the obligation of X's bank when it receives X's payment order?  
Funds transfers by a bank on behalf of its customer are made pursuant to an agreement or arrangement that may 
or may not be reduced to a formal document signed by the parties.  It is probably true that in most cases there is 
either no express agreement or the agreement addresses only some aspects of the transaction.  Substantial risk is 
involved in funds transfers and a bank may not be willing to give this service to all customers, and may not be 
willing to offer it to any customer unless certain safeguards against loss such as security procedures are in effect.  
Funds transfers often involve the giving of credit by the receiving bank to the customer, and that also may involve 
an agreement.  These considerations are reflected in Article 4A by the principle that, in the absence of a contrary 
agreement, a receiving bank does not incur liability with respect to a payment order until it accepts it.  If X and X's 
bank in the hypothetical case had an agreement that obliged the bank to act on X's payment orders and the bank 
failed to comply with the agreement, the bank can be held liable for breach of the agreement.  But apart from any 
obligation arising by agreement, the bank does not incur any liability with respect to X's payment order until the 
bank accepts the order.  X's payment order is treated by Article 4A as a request by X to the bank to take action that 
will cause X's payment order to be carried out.  That request can be accepted by X's bank by "executing" X's 
payment order.  Execution occurs when X's bank sends a payment order to Y's bank intended by X's bank to carry 
out the payment order of X.  X's bank could also execute X's payment order by issuing a payment order to an 
intermediary bank instructing the intermediary bank to instruct Y's bank to make the credit to Y's account.  In that 
case execution and acceptance of X's order occur when the payment order of X's bank is sent to the intermediary 
ank.  When X's bank executes X's payment order the bank is entitled to receive payment from X and may debit an 
authorized account of X.  If X's bank does not execute X's order and the amount of the order is covered by a 
withdrawable credit balance in X's authorized account, the bank must pay X interest on the money represented by 
X's order unless X is given prompt notice of rejection of the order.  Section 4A-210(b).
Bank error in funds transfers.

 Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
If a bank, other than the beneficiary's bank, accepts a payment order, the obligations and liabilities are owed to the 
originator of the funds transfer.  Assume in the example stated above, that X's bank executes X's payment order by 
issuing a payment order to an intermediary bank that executes the order of X's bank by issuing a payment order to 
Y's bank.  The obligations of X's bank with respect to execution are owed to X.  The obligations of the intermediary 
bank with respect to execution are also owed to X.  Section 4A-302 states standards with respect to the time and 
manner of execution of payment orders.  Section 4A-305 states the measure of damages for improper execution.  It 
also states that a receiving bank is liable for damages if it fails to execute a payment order that it was obliged by 
express agreement to execute.  In each case consequential damages are not recoverable unless an express 
agreement of the receiving bank provides for them.  The policy basis for this limitation is discussed in Comment 2 to 
Section 4A-305.
Error in the consummation of a funds transfer is not uncommon.  There may be a discrepancy in the amount that 
the originator orders to be paid to the beneficiary and the amount that the beneficiary's bank is ordered to pay.  For 
example, if the originator's payment order instructs payment of $100,000 and the payment order of the originator's 
bank instructs payment of $1,000,000, the originator's bank is entitled to receive only $100,000 from the originator 
and has the burden of recovering the additional $900,000 paid to the beneficiary by mistake.  In some cases the 
originator's bank or an intermediary bank instructs payment to a beneficiary other than the beneficiary stated in the 
originator's payment order.  If the wrong beneficiary is paid the bank that issued the erroneous payment order is not 
entitled to receive payment of the payment order that it executed and has the burden of recovering the mistaken 
payment.  The originator is not obliged to pay its payment order.  Section 4A-303 and Section 4A-207 state rules for 
determining the rights and obligations of the various parties to the funds transfer in these cases and in other typical 
cases in which error is made.
Pursuant to Section 4A-402(c) the originator is excused from the obligation to pay the originator's bank if the funds 
transfer is not completed, i.e. payment by the originator to the beneficiary is not made.  Payment by the originator to 
the beneficiary occurs when the beneficiary's bank accepts a payment order for the benefit of the beneficiary of the 
originator's payment order.  Section 4A-406.  If for any reason that acceptance does not occur, the originator is not 
required to pay the payment order that it issued or, if it already paid, is entitled to refund of the payment with 
interest.  This "money-back guarantee" is an important protection of the originator of a funds transfer.  The same 
rule applies to any other sender in the funds transfer.  Each sender's obligation to pay is excused if the beneficiary's 
bank does not accept a payment order for the benefit of the beneficiary of that sender's order.  There is an 
important exception to this rule.  It is common practice for the originator of a funds transfer to designate the 
intermediary bank or banks through which the funds transfer is to be routed.  The originator's bank is required by 
Section 4A-302 to follow the instruction of the originator with respect to intermediary banks.  If the originator's bank 
sends a payment order to the intermediary bank designated in the originator's order and the intermediary bank 
causes the funds transfer to miscarry by failing to execute the payment order or by instructing payment to the wrong 
beneficiary, the originator's bank is not required to pay its payment order and if it has already paid it is entitled to 
recover payment from the intermediary bank.  This remedy is normally adequate, but if the originator's bank already 
paid its order and the intermediary bank has suspended payments or is not permitted by law to refund payment, the 
originator's bank will suffer a loss.  Since the originator required the originator's bank to use the failed intermediary 
bank, Section 4A-402(e) provides that in this case the originator is obliged to pay its payment order and has a claim 
against the intermediary bank for the amount of the order.  The same principle applies to any other sender that 
designates a subsequent intermediary bank.
Unauthorized payment orders.
An important issue addressed in Section 4A-202 and Section 4A-203 is how the risk of loss from unauthorized 
payment orders is to be allocated.  In a large percentage of cases, the payment order of the originator of the funds 
transfer is transmitted electronically to the originator's bank.  In these cases it may not be possible for the bank to 
know whether the electronic message has been authorized by its customer.  To ensure that no unauthorized person 
is transmitting messages to the bank, the normal practice is to establish security procedures that usually involve the 
use of codes or identifying numbers or words.  If the bank accepts a payment order that purports to be that of its 
customer after verifying its authenticity by complying with a security procedure agreed to by the customer and the 

 Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
bank, the customer is bound to pay the order even if it was not authorized.  But there is an important limitation on 
this rule.  The bank is entitled to payment in the case of an unauthorized order only if the court finds that the 
security procedure was a commercially reasonable method of providing security against unauthorized payment 
orders.  The customer can also avoid liability if it can prove that the unauthorized order was not initiated by an 
employee or other agent of the customer having access to confidential security information or by a person who 
obtained that information from a source controlled by the customer.  The policy issues are discussed in the 
comments following Section 4A-203.  If the bank accepts an unauthorized payment order without verifying it in 
compliance with a security procedure, the loss falls on the bank.
Security procedures are also important in cases of error in the transmission of payment orders.  There may be an 
error by the sender in the amount of the order, or a sender may transmit a payment order and then erroneously 
transmit a duplicate of the order.  Normally, the sender is bound by the payment order even if it is issued by 
mistake.  But in some cases an error of this kind can be detected by a security procedure.  Although the receiving 
bank is not obliged to provide a security procedure for the detection of error, if such a procedure is agreed to by the 
bank Section 4A-205 provides that if the error is not detected because the receiving bank does not comply with the 
procedure, any resulting loss is borne by the bank failing to comply with the security procedure.
Insolvency losses.
Some payment orders do not involve the granting of credit to the sender by the receiving bank.  In those cases, the 
receiving bank accepts the sender's order at the same time the bank receives payment of the order.  This is true of 
a transfer of funds by Fedwire or of cases in which the receiving bank can debit a funded account of the sender.  
But in some cases the granting of credit is the norm.  This is true of a payment order over CHIPS.  In a CHIPS 
transaction the receiving bank usually will accept the order before receiving payment from the sending bank.  
Payment is delayed until the end of the day when settlement is made through the Federal Reserve System.  If the 
receiving bank is an intermediary bank, it will accept by issuing a payment order to another bank and the 
intermediary bank is obliged to pay that payment order.  If the receiving bank is the beneficiary's bank, the bank 
usually will accept by releasing funds to the beneficiary before the bank has received payment.  If a sending bank 
suspends payments before settling its liabilities at the end of the day, the financial stability of banks that are net 
creditors of the insolvent bank may also be put into jeopardy, because the dollar volume of funds transfers between 
the banks may be extremely large.  With respect to two banks that are dealing with each other in a series of 
transactions in which each bank is sometimes a receiving bank and sometimes a sender, the risk of insolvency can 
be managed if amounts payable as a sender and amounts receivable as a receiving bank are roughly equal.  But if 
these amounts are significantly out of balance, a net creditor bank may have a very significant credit risk during the 
day before settlement occurs.  The Federal Reserve System and the banking community are greatly concerned with 
this risk, and various measures have been instituted to reduce this credit exposure.  Article 4A also addresses this 
problem.  A receiving bank can always avoid this risk by delaying acceptance of a payment order until after the 
bank as received payment.  For example, if the beneficiary's bank credits the beneficiary's account it can avoid 
acceptance by not notifying the beneficiary of the receipt of the order or by notifying the beneficiary that the credit 
may not be withdrawn until the beneficiary's bank receives payment.  But if the beneficiary's bank releases funds to 
the beneficiary before receiving settlement, the result in a funds transfer other than a transfer by means of an 
automated clearing house or similar provisional settlement system is that the beneficiary's bank may not recover 
the funds if it fails to receive settlement.  This rule encourages the banking system to impose credit limitations on 
banks that issue payment orders.  These limitations are already in effect.  CHIPS has also proposed a loss-sharing 
plan to be adopted for implementation in the second half of 1990 under which CHIPS participants will be required to 
provide funds necessary to complete settlement of the obligations of one or more participants that are unable to 
meet settlement obligations.  Under this plan, it will be a virtual certainty that there will be settlement on CHIPS in 
the event of failure by a single bank.  Section 4A-403(b) and (c) are also addressed to reducing risks of insolvency.  
Under these provisions the amount owed by a failed bank with respect to payment orders it issued is the net 
amount owing after setting off amounts owed to the failed bank with respect to payment orders it received.  This 
rule allows credit exposure to be managed by limitations on the net debit position of a bank.
International transfers.

 Art. 4A, PREFATORY NOTE
The major international legal document dealing with the subject of electronic funds transfers is the Model Law on 
International Credit Transfers adopted in 1992 by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.  It 
covers basically the same type of transaction as does Article 4A, although it requires the funds transferred to have 
an international component.  The Model Law and Article 4A basically live together in harmony, but to the extent 
there are differences they must be recognized and, to the extent possible, avoided or adjusted by agreement.  See 
PEB Commentary No. 13, dated February 16, 1994 [Appendix V, infra].
UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE
Copyright 2025, by The American Law Institute and National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
End of Document