CHAPTER 8
EXCULPATION
A. INTRODUCTION: THE CONCEPTS OF JUSTIFICATION AND EXCUSE
Three distinct sorts of defenses can be invoked to bar conviction for an alleged crime. The first asserts that the prosecution has failed to establish one or more required elements of the offense. Defendants may, for example, deny that
they were anywhere near the scene of the crime, or they may concede that they fired the fatal shots but deny that they acted intentionally. We have considered defenses of this sort throughout the first seven chapters of this book. They are simply
efforts to refute (or raise a reasonable doubt about) whatever the prosecution must prove. Of course, the prosecution always retains the burden of proving its own case — and disproving any such rebuttal efforts — beyond a reasonable doubt.
The present chapter deals with justifications and excuses, two groups of defenses that have a different character. Justifications and excuses do not seek to refute any required element of the prosecution's case; rather they suggest
considerations that negate liability even when all elements of the offense are present. For example, claims of self-defense and insanity offer reasons to bar conviction even when the defendant undoubtedly killed someone intentionally. It is cus-
tomary, moreover, to distinguish between justifications and excuses. Self-defense, for example, is traditionally considered a justification, while insanity is considered an excuse. Pragmatists sometimes argue that this distinction is not important —
whether labeled a justification or an excuse, the defense, once proved, requires acquittal. But as J.L. Austin explains in the excerpt below, the distinction is essential for clear thinking because it points to a fundamental difference in the reasons
why culpability is lacking.
J.L. Austin
A Plea for Excuses
57 Proceedings Aristotelian Soc'y 1, 2-3 (1956-1957)
One way of [defending conduct] is to admit flatly that he, X, did do that very thing, A, but to argue that it was a good thing, or the right or sensible thing, or a
p04
permissible thing to do, either in general or at least in the special circumstances of the occasion. To take this line is to justify the action, to give reasons for doing it... .

A different way of going about it is to admit that it wasn’t a good thing to have done, but to argue that it is not quite fair or correct to say baldly “X did A.” [Plerhaps he was under somebody's influence, or was nudged. [I]t may have been
partly accidental or an unintentional slip. . .. Naturally these arguments can be combined or overlap or run into each other.

In the one defence, briefly, we accept responsibility but deny that it was bad: in the other, we admit that it was bad but don’t accept full, or even any, responsibility.

By and large, justifications can be kept distinct from excuses. . . . But the two certainly can be confused, and can seem to go very near to each other, even if they do not perhaps actually do so. [W]hen we plead, say, provocation, there
is genuine uncertainty or ambiguity as to what we mean — is [the victim] partly responsible, because he roused a violent impulse or passion in me, so that it wasn’t truly or merely me acting “of my own accord” (excuse)? Or is it rather that, he hav-
ing done me such injury, | was entitled to retaliate (justification)? . . . But that the defences | have for convenience labelled “justification” and “excuse” are in principle distinct can scarcely be doubted.

B. PRINCIPLES OF JUSTIFICATION

1. Protection of Life and Person

United States v. Peterson
United States Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit
483 F.2d 1222 (1973)

RoBiNsoN, J. . . . Self-defense, as a doctrine legally exonerating the taking of human life, is as viable now as it was in Blackstone's time. . . . But “[t]he law of self-defense is a law of necessity”; the right of self-defense arises only when
the necessity begins, and equally ends with the necessity; and never must the necessity be greater than when the force employed defensively is deadly. The “necessity must bear all semblance of reality, and appear to admit of no other alternative,
before taking life will be justifiable as excusable.” Hinged on the exigencies of self-preservation, the doctrine of homicidal self-defense emerges from the body of the criminal law as a limited though important exception to legal outlawry of the
arena of self-help in the settlement of potentially fatal personal conflicts.

So it is that necessity is the pervasive theme of the well-defined conditions which the law imposes on the right to kill or maim in self-defense. There must have been a threat, actual or apparent, of the use of deadly force against the
defender. The threat must have been unlawful and immediate. The defender must have believed that he was in imminent peril of death or serious bodily harm, and that his response was necessary to save himself therefrom. These beliefs must not
only have been honestly entertained, but also objectively reasonable in light of the surrounding circumstances. It is clear that no less than a concurrence of these elements will suffice.

p. 804
p. 805
NOTE ON SELF-DEFENSE AS A JUSTIFICATION

When the use of defensive force against an aggressor is necessary to protect the actor from serious bodily harm, that action is justified — because it was the right thing to do. But the Peterson court, stating the widely accepted view,
does not require that the use of force be truly necessary; self-defense is available when the actor reasonably believes defensive force to be necessary. Yet if A’s reasonable belief turns out to be mistaken, A’s use of force arguably was not the
right thing to do; it therefore might be more precise to say that A’s action is not justified but merely excused — because A’s mistake was reasonable. From this perspective, we might say that self-defense can be either a justification or an excuse,
depending on whether the actor's reasonable belief is well founded. Nonetheless, courts and commentators conventionally refer to self-defense in both settings as a justification, and we follow that somewhat oversimplified convention in the orga-
nization of this book. Of course, regardless of the label used (justification or excuse), a defendant who meets the Peterson requirements is entitled to an acquittal.

People v. Goetz
New York Court of Appeals
497 N.E.2d 41 (N.Y. 1986)

WacuTLer, C.J. A Grand Jury has indicted defendant on attempted murder, assault, and other charges for having shot and wounded four youths on a New York City subway train after one or two of the youths approached him and
asked for $5. The lower courts, concluding that the prosecutor's charge to the Grand Jury on the defense of justification was erroneous, have dismissed the attempted murder, assault and weapons possession charges. We now reverse and rein-
state all counts of the indictment.

The precise circumstances of the incident giving rise to the charges against defendant are disputed, and ultimately it will be for a trial jury to determine what occurred. We feel it necessary, however, to provide some factual background
to properly frame the legal issues before us. Accordingly, we have summarized the facts as they appear from the evidence before the Grand Jury. . ..

On Saturday afternoon, December 22, 1984, Troy Canty, [Darrell] Cabey, James Ramseur, and Barry Allen boarded an IRT express subway train in The Bronx and headed south toward lower Manhattan. The four youths rode together in
the rear portion of the seventh car of the train. Two of the four, Ramseur and Cabey, had screwdrivers inside their coats, which they said were to be used to break into the coin boxes of video machines.

Defendant Bernhard Goetz boarded this subway train at 14th Street in Manhattan and sat down on a bench towards the rear section of the same car occupied by the four youths. Goetz was carrying an unlicensed .38 caliber pistol
loaded with

p. 605
p. 806
five rounds of ammunition in a waistband holster. The train left the 14th Street station and headed towards Chambers Street.

It appears from the evidence before the Grand Jury that Canty approached Goetz, possibly with Allen beside him, and stated “give me five dollars.” Neither Canty nor any of the other youths displayed a weapon. Goetz responded by
standing up, pulling out his handgun and firing four shots in rapid succession. The first shot hit Canty in the chest; the second struck Allen in the back; the third went through Ramseur’s arm and into his left side; the fourth was fired at Cabey, who
apparently was then standing in the comer of the car, but missed, deflecting instead off of a wall of the conductor's cab. After Goetz briefly surveyed the scene around him, he fired another shot at Cabey, who then was sitting on the end bench of
the car. The bullet entered the rear of Cabey’s side and severed his spinal cord.

All but two of the other passengers fled the car when, or immediately after, the shots were fired. The conductor, who had been in the next car, heard the shots and instructed the motorman to radio for emergency assistance. The
conductor then went into the car where the shooting occurred and saw Goetz sitting on a bench, the injured youths lying on the floor or slumped against a seat, and two women who had apparently taken cover, also lying on the floor. Goetz told the
conductor that the four youths had tried to rob him.

While the conductor was aiding the youths, Goetz headed towards the front of the car. The train had stopped just before the Chambers Street station and Goetz went between two of the cars, jumped onto the tracks and fled. Police and
ambulance crews arrived at the scene shortly thereafter. Ramseur and Canty, initially listed in critical condition, have fully recovered. Cabey remains paralyzed, and has suffered some degree of brain damage.°

On December 31, 1984, Goetz surrendered to police in Concord, New Hampshire. . .. [Alfter receiving Miranda warnings, he made two lengthy statements, both of which were tape recorded with his permission. In the statements . . .
Goetz admitted that he had been illegally carrying a handgun in New York City for three years. He stated that he had first purchased a gun in 1981 after he had been injured in a mugging. Goetz also revealed that twice between 1981 and 1984 he
had successfully warded off assailants simply by displaying the pistol.

According to Goetz’s statement, the first contact he had with the four youths came when Canty, sitting or lying on the bench across from him, asked “how are you,” to which he replied “fine.” Shortly thereafter, Canty, followed by one of
the other youths, walked over to the defendant and stood to his left, while the other two youths remained to his right, in the corner of the subway car. Canty then said “give me five dollars.” Goetz stated that he knew from the smile on Canty’s face
that they wanted to “play with me.” Although he was certain that none of the youths had a gun, he had a fear, based on prior experiences, of being “maimed.”

Goetz then established “a pattern of fire,” deciding specifically to fire from left to right. His stated intention at that point was to “murder [the four youths], to hurt them, to make them suffer as much as possible.” When Canty again

requested

p. 806

p.607
money, Goetz stood up, drew his weapon, and began firing, aiming for the center of the body of each of the four. Goetz recalled that the first two he shot “tried to run through the crowd [but] they had nowhere to run.” Goetz then turned to his right
to “go after the other two.” One of these two “tried to run through the wall of the train, but . .. he had nowhere to go.” The other youth (Cabey) “tried pretending that he wasn’t with [the others]” by standing still, holding on to one of the subway hand
straps, and not looking at Goetz. Goetz nonetheless fired his fourth shot at him. He then ran back to the first two youths to make sure they had been “taken care of.” Seeing that they had both been shot, he spun back to check on the latter two.
Goetz noticed that the youth who had been standing still was now sitting on a bench and seemed unhurt. As Goetz told the police, “I said ‘[y]ou seem to be all right, here's another,” and he then fired the shot which severed Cabey’s spinal cord.
Goetz added that “if | was a little more under self-control . . . | would have put the barrel against his forehead and fired.” He also admitted that “if | had had more [bullets], | would have shot them again, and again, and again.” . ..

Penal Law article 35 recognizes the defense of justification, which “permits the use of force under certain circumstances.” One such set of circumstances pertains to the use of force in defense of a person, encompassing both self-
defense and defense of a third person. Penal Law §35.15 (1) sets forth the general principles governing alll such uses of force: “[a] person may . . . use physical force upon another person when and to the extent he reasonably believes such to be
necessary to defend himself or a third person from what he reasonably believes to be the use or imminent use of unlawful physical force by such other person” (emphasis added).

Section 35.15 (2) sets forth further limitations on these general principles with respect to the use of “deadly physical force”: “A person may not use deadly physical force upon another person under circumstances specified in subdivi-
sion one unless (a) He reasonably believes that such other person is using or about to use deadly physical force . . . or (b) He reasonably believes that such other person is committing or attempting to commit a kidnapping, forcible rape, forcible
sodomy or robbery” (emphasis added). . . .

Because the evidence before the [Grand Jury] included statements by Goetz that he acted to protect himself from being maimed or to avert a robbery, the prosecutor correctly chose to charge the justification defense in section 35.15
to the Grand Jury . . . essentially by reading or paraphrasing the language in Penal Law §35.15. The defense does not contend that he committed any error in this portion of the charge.

When the prosecutor had completed his charge, one of the grand jurors asked for clarification of the term “reasonably believes.” The prosecutor responded by instructing the grand jurors that they were to consider the circumstances of
the incident and determine “whether the defendant's conduct was that of a reasonable man in the defendant's situation.” It is this response by the prosecutor — and specifically his use of “a reasonable man” — which is the basis for the dismissal
of the charges by the lower courts. As expressed repeatedly in the Appellate Division's plurality opinion, because section 35.15 uses the term “he reasonably believes,” the appropriate test, according to that court, is whether a defendant's beliefs
and reactions were “reasonable to him.” Under that reading of the statute, a jury which believed a defendant's testimony that he felt that his own actions were warranted and were reasonable would have to acquit him, regardless of what anyone
else in

p.607

p. 608
defendant's situation might have concluded. Such an interpretation defies the ordinary meaning and significance of the term “reasonably” in a statute, and misconstrues the clear intent of the Legislature, in enacting section 35.15, to retain an
objective element as part of any provision authorizing the use of deadly physical force. . ..

In 1961 the Legislature established a Commission to undertake a complete revision of the Penal Law. . . . The impetus for the decision to update the Penal Law came in part from the drafting of the Model Penal Code. . . . While using the
Model Penal Code provisions on justification as general guidelines . . . the drafters of the new Penal Law did not simply adopt them verbatim.

The provisions of the Model Penal Code with respect to the use of deadly force in self-defense reflect the position of its drafters that any culpability which arises from a mistaken belief in the need to use such force should be no greater
than the culpability such a mistake would give rise to if it were made with respect to an element of a crime. Accordingly, under Model Penal Code §3.04(2)(b), a defendant charged with murder (or attempted murder) need only show that he “be-
lieve[d] that [the use of deadly force] was necessary to protect himself against death, serious bodily injury, kidnapping or [forcible] sexual intercourse” to prevail on a self-defense claim (emphasis added). If the defendant's belief was wrong, and
was recklessly, or negligently formed, however, he may be convicted of the type of homicide charge requiring only a reckless or negligent, as the case may be, criminal intent (see Model Penal Code §3.09 . ..).

New York did not follow the Model Penal Code's equation of a mistake as to the need to use deadly force with a mistake negating an element of a crime, choosing instead to use a single statutory section which would provide either a
complete defense or no defense at all to a defendant charged with any crime involving the use of deadly force. The drafters of the new Penal Law adopted in large part the structure and content of Model Penal Code §3.04, but, crucially, inserted
the word “reasonably” before “believes.” . . . Had the drafters of section 35.15 wanted to adopt a subjective standard, they could have simply used the language of section 3.04. “Believes” by itself requires an honest or genuine belief by a defen-
dant as to the need to use deadly force. Interpreting the statute to require only that the defendant's belief was “reasonable to him,” as done by the plurality below, would hardly be different from requiring only a genuine belief; in either case, the
defendant's own perceptions could completely exonerate him from any criminal liability.

We cannot lightly impute to the Legislature an intent to fundamentally alter the principles of justification to allow the perpetrator of a serious crime to go free simply because that person believed his actions were reasonable and
necessary to prevent some perceived harm. To completely exonerate such an individual, no matter how aberrational or bizarre his thought patterns, would allow citizens to set their own standards for the permissible use of force. . .. We can only
conclude that the Legislature retained a reasonableness requirement to avoid giving license for such actions. . ..

Goetz also argues that the introduction of an objective element will preclude a jury from considering factors such as the prior experiences of a given actor and thus, require it to make a determination of “reasonableness” without regard
to the actual circumstances of a particular incident. This argument, however, falsely presupposes that an objective standard means that the background and other relevant

p. 608

p. 609
characteristics of a particular actor must be ignored. To the contrary, we have frequently noted that a determination of reasonableness must be based on the “circumstances” facing a defendant or his “situation.” Such terms encompass more than
the physical movements of the potential assailant. [T]hese terms include any relevant knowledge the defendant had about that person. They also necessarily bring in the physical attributes of all persons involved, including the defendant. Further-
more, the defendant's circumstances encompass any prior experiences he had which could provide a reasonable basis for a belief that another person's intentions were to injure or rob him or that the use of deadly force was necessary under the
circumstances. . . . The prosecutor's instruction . . . was thus essentially an accurate charge. ...

Accordingly, . . . the dismissed counts of the indictment [are] reinstated.

NOTES ON THE GOETZ CASE

The jury subsequently convicted Goetz on the charge of carrying an unlicensed concealed weapon, but acquitted him on all other counts. N.Y. Times, June 18, 1987, at B6. He was sentenced on the weapons count to one year in jail,
with the possibility of release after 60 days. N.Y. Times, Jan. 14, 1989, at 1. In a subsequent civil suit, the jury — applying the same test for the right to use deadly force in self-defense — found Goetz’s actions unjustified and awarded Darrell Cabey
$43 million in damages. See N.Y. Times, Sept. 10, 2000, at 39. But Cabey never collected any of the damage award.2

The Goetz case became a cause célébre. Two book-length studies appeared. George Fletcher, A Crime of Self-Defense: Bernhard Goetz and the Law on Trial (1988); Lilian Rubin, Quiet Rage: Bernie Goetz in a Time of Madness (1988).
Consider the following reactions.

JOSEPH BERGER, GOETZ CASE: COMMENTARY ON NATURE OF URBAN LIFE, N.Y. TIMES, JUNE 18, 1987, at B6: The acquittal of Mr. Goetz on charges of attempted murder broke no dramatic new legal ground, in the opinion of legal experts. But in the
context of the national debate on the balance between self-defense and social order, it appeared to widen the circumstances that justify the use of deadly force. .. .

There was almost no evidence presented that any of the four youths who approached Mr. Goetz had actually tried to rob him before he shot them. Thus the jury, by rejecting the charge of attempted murder, seemed to be saying that in
the nervousness that courses through much of urban experience, from riding the subway at night to walking a darkened street, such evidence may not matter all that much. Perceptions, the jury suggested, can attain the power of facts.

“The jury decided that no man is reasonable when he's surrounded by four thugs,” said Alan Dershowitz, professor of law at Harvard Law School. “It's hard to pay attention to lines drawn by academics in a classroom.”

p.609

p.610

Mr. Dershowitz, noting that jurors often nullify self-defense standards set by the law, said he believed that what Mr. Goetz did was by definition illegal in New York State and every other state. Itis illegal, he said, to shoot a person after
the immediate danger has passed. “It doesn’t change the law,” he said of the verdict. “It may show the law is somewhat out of line with people's passions today.”

The jury's decision also seemed to be a back-handed commentary on the effectiveness of the police and the courts. Burt Neuborne, a professor at New York University Law School, said, “The jurors had so little faith in the criminal
justice system, both to protect us and to bring the guilty to justice, that they were willing to tolerate a degree of vigilante behavior that I think rationally cannot be justified.” . . .

Crime has become such a daily feature of urban life that several of the jurors had themselves been victims. It is often on people's minds, determining where they live, how and when they travel, and how they spend their time.

The jury seemed to be saying that the fear of crime, in someone who has been a previous mugging victim like Mr. Goetz, can weigh so heavily on one’s emotions that it can lead to conduct that might normally be considered wrongful.
The jury in the Goetz case apparently believed there was not enough evidence to show that Mr. Goetz acted out of any motive other than fear... .

Underlying the issue of crime in this case was the issue of race. Scholars such as Dr. Kenneth B. Clark, professor emeritus of psychology at the City University of New York, have expressed doubt that Mr. Goetz would have shot four
white youths asking him for money.

However, Marvin E. Wolfgang, a criminologist at the University of Pennsylvania, said that perceptions about who is more likely to commit a crime have some statistical basis. The rates of crime for four violent offenses — homicide, rape,
robbery and aggravated assault — are at least ten times as high for blacks as they are for whites, he said. “The expectation that four young black males are going to do you harm is indeed greater than four young whites,” he said. “I can understand
the black position that this is a racist attitude, but it’s not unrealistic.”

Itis possible that jurors have absorbed such racially based perceptions about who is going to commit a crime. Elijah Anderson, a black sociologist at the University of Pennsylvania who spent three years studying street-cormer life in
a tough, black neighborhood in Philadelphia, said law-abiding people, black and white, have a distinctive way of relating “to people they assume to be members of the black underclass.” People, he said, “can be very intimidated by young black
males or people who seem to represent this so-called underclass by their dress or comportment, very intimidated.” . . .

Because it raises such issues, the jury verdict may pose some hard questions for the American public to deal with. Will some New Yorkers come to feel that they can now make hair-trigger assumptions about the character of people
who somehow threaten them, and if they have a gun, use it in self-defense? Will blacks have to fear that if they look at someone the wrong way or dress too casually they may be mistaken for criminals? . . .

STEPHEN L. CARTER, WHEN VICTIMS HAPPEN TO BE BLACK, 97 YALE L.J. 420, 425-426 (1988): Shortly after a New York jury acquitted Bernhard Goetz [a cartoon appeared of a] post-Goetz subway car: two elderly women seated side-by-side in a
car empty of other passengers, a screwdriver lying nearby, and outside, a crowd of people, eyes widened with fear, running away from the car. One of the women says to the other: “Heavens! . . . | was just reaching for my lipstick.”
p.610
pei

[M)he artist managed ... . to capture the shuddering tensions apparent in public reactions to the Goetz incident and the verdict in his trial, and much more besides. Mr. Goetz’s public — those who declared him a hero from the first — can
find in this cartoon a portrait of salvation of a sort. The people fleeing are thugs and toughs, the anonymous yet ubiquitous individuals who frequent New York's subway trains and cast terror with a glance. . . .

[T]he story of the subway car as perceived by Mr. Goetz’s public — the choice of transgressor, the choice of victim — might have been starkly different had Mr. Goetz been black and the others white, and had Mr. Goetz cried “self-
defense” while the others insisted that when he pulled the gun, they had been minding their own business. For in that event, a public with no real knowledge of the facts other than the stories told by the participants and the skin colors of the
shooter and his victims would not have raced at once to Mr. Goetz’s defense. . . .

Against this background, consider once more the cartoon [just described], this time from the point of view of Mr. Goetz’s critics, the ones who have condemned the verdict as opening the hunting season on young black men. Now the
people fleeing the car are frightened innocents, victims themselves, probably black or brown, who can no longer be certain which gesture of impatience or annoyance someone else will take as a threat, who are now loathe to ask directions or
change of a dollar for fear of a fatal misinterpretation. The elderly women left alone in the car are . . . aging, they are women, they are white. . .. And because in society's eyes they are the archetypal victims, were they to shoot and to testify to their
fear, their story would be readily believed; the tale told by their tormenters would surely be doubted. . . .

NOTES ON SELF-DEFENSE AND RACE
1. Trayvon Martin. In February 2012, a Black teenager, Trayvon Martin, was visiting his father in a gated community in Sanford, Florida. Walking back from a convenience store one evening, Martin, wearing a hooded sweatshirt,
attracted the attention of George Zimmerman, a volunteer with a neighborhood watch program. Zimmerman thought that Martin looked suspicious and called the Sanford Police Department to report his concerns. The dispatcher told Zimmerman
not to follow the teenager, but Zimmerman did so anyway and ultimately confronted Martin. What happened next was hotly disputed, but witnesses largely agreed that an altercation ensued, then gun fire. Martin, who was unarmed, had been Killed
by a single shot to the chest. Zimmerman had suffered some head injuries; he told police that he and Martin got into a fight and that he shot Martin in self-defense. After an initial police decision not to press charges and a subsequent national
uproar, Zimmerman was prosecuted for second-degree murder but was acquitted by the jury.2 The U.S. Department of Justice considered charging Zimmerman with a federal civil rights offense but eventually decided not to prosecute, citing “in-
sufficient evidence.”! The case raised numerous concerns growing out of Zimmerman’s
pet
pei
insistence on following Martin and the authorities’ subsequent handling of the case. But central to the controversy was the question of why Zimmerman’s suspicions were aroused in the first place. Would he have had similar unease about a white
teenager walking in the neighborhood?
2. Racial profiling? Consider the comments that follow:
AYA GRUBER, RACE TO INCARCERATE: PUNITIVE IMPULSE AND THE BID TO REPEAL STAND YOUR GROUND, 68 U. MIAMI L. REV. 961, 991-992 (2014): [T]he black-male-as-criminal stereotype is so utterly “entrenched and ubiquitous” that individ-
uals of all ethnicities, especially individuals particularly concerned about crime, internalize it to some extent. [A] popular anti-color-consciousness argument is that Zimmerman would have confronted Trayvon even if he had been white because he
was wearing “criminal clothes,” namely a hooded sweatshirt./4° But . . . to the extent that the hoodie was actually Zimmerman's basis for suspicion, . . . individuals tend to interpret the meaning of things like clothing through a racial prism (i.e. a
black man in ratty clothing is a drug dealer/criminal and a black man in fancy clothing is a drug dealet/criminal)..
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION, REPORT TO THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES (NATIONAL TASK FORCE ON STAND YOUR GROUND LAWS) 9-10 (FEB. 2015): [A comprehensive survey of social science literature] shows 1) that basic perceptual and brain
processes respond to group differences in ways that bias cognitive and affective judgments; [and] 2) the stereotypical association of Black males with aggression and crime interacts with these basic processes to predispose defendants to per-
ceive Blacks as potential threats. . . . [S]tereotypes linking members of particular social groups to threat can influence every stage of perception, from visual attention to the interpretation of behavior. Taken together, these studies show a consis-
tent pattern of results, demonstrating that Black targets come under increased scrutiny as sources of threat and are more likely to have their behavior construed as aggressive, particularly in situations that highlight self-protection as a relevant
goal. [T]he perception of Blacks as threats can translate to diminished empathetic responses, greater hostility, and a tendency to respond violently towards Black targets. . . . [Cultural misperceptions of racial minorities as “more violent” or “more
aggressive” [arise] even when [they are] exhibiting the same behaviors as Caucasians.
L. SONG RICHARDSON & PHILLIP ATIBA GOFF, SELF-DEFENSE AND THE SUSPICION HEURISTIC, 98 IOWA L. REV. 293, 296-298, 309-312, 314-315 (2012): Over four decades of research . . . reveals that many of our conscious thoughts, behaviors,
and judgments are affected by mental processes beyond our ability to control volitionally. . .. The “suspicion heuristic” can be understood as a mental shortcut that often leads to systematic errors in determining who is and is not suspicious. . . .
Importantly, these racially biased judgments do not require traditional bigotry. Rather,
pei
pets
[people can make these errors] even if they are committed anti-racists and even if they are Black themselves.
[Wie do not dispute the existence of bad actors. Yet, [t]he suspicion heuristic . . . is more troubling than one that relies upon the bad-actor model because it means that even well-intentioned people can make these erroneous judg-
ments. [T]he tendency for Black suspects to be over-represented in media portrayals of violent street crime makes the Black-as-criminal stereotype readily available [instinctively and subconsciously]. ... When the person being judged fits a crim-

inal stereotype, the suspicion heuristic can cause the actor more easily to believe honestly — but mistakenly — that the person poses a threat and that deadly force is necessary and appropriate to repel it. These erroneous judgments can occur
regardless of the actor's conscious racial attitudes and beliefs.

JODY D. ARMOUR, RACE IPSA LOQUITUR: OF REASONABLE RACISTS, INTELLIGENT BAYESIANS, AND INVOLUNTARY NEGROPHOBES, 46 STAN. L. REV. 781, 787-788, 790, 792, 794, 795 (1994): [E]ven if the “typical” American believes that blacks’
“propensity” toward violence justifies a quicker and more forceful response when a suspected assailant is black, this fact is legally significant only if the law defines reasonable beliefs as typical beliefs. The reasonableness inquiry, however, ex-
tends beyond typicality to consider the social interests implicated in a given situation. Hence not all “typical” beliefs are per se reasonable. . . . If we accept that racial discrimination violates contemporary social morality, then an actor’s failure to
‘overcome his racism for the sake of another's health, safety, and personal dignity is blameworthy and thus unreasonable, independent of whether or not it is “typical.” . . .

A second argument which a defendant may advance to justify acting on race-based assumptions is that, given statistics demonstrating blacks’ disproportionate involvement in crime, it is reasonable to perceive a greater threat from a
black person than a white person. . . . Although biases in the criminal justice system exaggerate the differences in rates of violent crime by race, it may, tragically, still be true that blacks commit a disproportionate number of crimes. Given that the
blight of institutional racism continues to disproportionately limit the life chances of African-Americans, and that desperate circumstances increase the likelihood that individuals caught in this web may turn to desperate undertakings, such a dis-
parity, if it exists, should sadden but not surprise us. . . .

To the extent that socioeconomic status explains the overinvolvement of blacks in robbery and assault (assuming that there is, in fact, such overinvolvement), race serves merely as a proxy for socioeconomic status. But if race is a
proxy for socioeconomic factors, then race loses its predictive value when one controls for those factors. . ..

RICHARDSON & GOFF, supra, at 311: [P]redicting the likelihood that a person is dangerous is extremely difficult. . . . The difficulty is compounded by the fact that people do not have the luxury of time to gather as much information as possible
about the person being assessed and to engage in the deliberate, systematic processing of the evidence since hesitating may create a risk of injury or death. Faced with a potentially life-threatening situation, people . . . will make their judgments
of criminality quickly, based upon only small slices of behavior, under highly stressful circumstances. In this context, it would not be surprising if people made their assessments of criminality using [mental short-cuts affected by racial bias].
pets
pei

3. Solutions? There seems little doubt that race-based generalizations can affect, consciously or unconsciously, the threat assessments of citizens on the street and jurors at trial. What steps could be taken in response to this
problem? With respect to dynamics in the courtroom, Professor Cynthia Lee suggests confronting the problem head-on, with a two-part jury instruction. First, jurors would be instructed that “racial stereotypes . . . may be considered to support
the honesty, but not the reasonableness, of the defendant's beliefs. Reliance on racial stereotypes to inform one’s beliefs in a self-defense situation is not reasonable as a matter of law.” Cynthia Kwei Yung Lee, Race and Self-Defense: Toward a
Normative Conception of Reasonableness, 81 Minn. L. Rev. 367, 479 (1996). Second, recognizing that this instruction may not be effective if jurors’ implicit or explicit biases affect their judgments, Professor Lee proposes what she calls a “race-
switching” jury instruction:

[Imagine] the same events, . .. but switching the races of the parties. . .. If your evaluation of the case before you is different after engaging in race-switching, this suggests a subconscious reliance on stereotypes. You may

then wish to reevaluate the case from a neutral, unbiased perspective.

An effort to screen out invidious racial stereotypes during testimony at trial poses formidable challenges. Consider this comment:

JONATHAN MARKOVITZ, “A SPECTACLE OF SLAVERY UNWILLING TO DIE”: CURBING RELIANCE ON RACIAL STEREOTYPING IN SELF-DEFENSE CASES, 5 U.C. IRVINE L. REV. 873, 927-931(2015): [Without using the language of race, . . . Goetz’s
legal team took full advantage of racially charged imagery and code words. Barry Slotnick, Goetz's attorney, regularly portrayed Goetz’s victims in animalistic terms, referring to them as “vultures” and “predators”. . . . Slotnick staged a reenact-
ment of the events leading up to the shooting [having] “four young black [men], fit and muscular, dressed in T-shirts” stand in for Goetz’s victims. . .. There was . . . no evidentiary reason that Slotnick needed . . . Black volunteers for the recreation.
[But] George Fletcher notes that . .. “Slotnick designed the dramatic scene so that the implicit message of menace and fear would be so strong that [explicit] testimony would not be needed.” The absence of any open discussion of race may have

made Slotnick’s theatrical display more effective, since . . . jurors who may have recoiled at explicit verbal invocations of racist stereotypes were instead quietly swayed by more covert and unacknowledged reliance upon the same types of racist
imagery that were ubiquitous outside the courtroom walls. . ..

[Similar dynamics were at play as defense attorney Mark O'Mara presented his closing arguments in the murder trial of George Zimmerman. In an attempt to portray Trayvon Martin as a powerful threat, O'Mara displayed a shirtless
photograph of Martin, directing the jury’s gaze toward Martin's physique. O’Mara explained that while the jury had already seen Martin's body in autopsy photographs, . . . “{in] autopsy photographs . . . there's no muscle tone because there's no
nerves, there’s no movement. . . . But here's him three months before that night. . .. This is the person who . . . attacked George Zimmerman, who broke his

pei

81s
nose or something close to it. . ..” [H]e in effect told the jury that [the] real Trayvon Martin [despite the autopsy photographs] was the muscular, apparently physically fit, and very much-alive young man represented in the shirtless photograph.
[NJothing about the use of the shirtless photograph of Trayvon Martin . . . is explicitly racialized. Certainly, O'Mara said nothing about race as he displayed the photograph. On the other hand, O’Mara’s decision to highlight and then cast away im-
ages of Martin's vulnerability while lingering on his musculature fits into a long history of racialized narratives and imagery that entail reducing Black men to nothing more than brute physicality. . ..

This kind of defense strategy hints at how daunting a task it would be to eliminate appeals to racial bias in self-defense trials... .

QUESTIONS: In light of the evidence that racial bias can operate subconsciously, even among well-intentioned people, and can affect judgments in the courtroom as well as on the street, what is to be done? Would it help to tighten the prerequi-
sites for using deadly force in self-defense? If so, how?
NOTES ON THE MEANING OF “DEADLY FORCE”

“Deadly force” plays a crucial role on both sides of the self-defense equation, because a defender can use deadly force in response to a threat of deadly force. But in the law, the two concepts are not identical.

1. When does defensive force qualify as “deadly”? Goetz obviously used deadly force, even though he did not kill any of his victims, because he shot directly at them, “aiming for the center of the body of each.” Could a person
in Goetz's position avoid the limits on using deadly force by aiming for the feet of the attackers? Under current law, that move would not work because people are deemed to use deadly force whenever they knowingly create a substantial risk of
inflicting great bodily harm, and shooting in the direction of another person always qualifies as a use of deadly force. See MPC §3.11(2). See also Hosnedl v. State, 126 So. 3d 400, 404 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2013): “[Fliring a firearm in the air, even as
so-called ‘warning shot,’ constitutes as a matter of law the use of deadly force . .. whenever it is fired in the vicinity of human beings . . . even if not aimed at anyone.” Force of this sort is therefore unjustified except when used to defend against
unlawful force that is itself potentially deadly, a requirement that the next Note explains.

2. Which threats are “deadly”? Goetz said he was “certain that none of the youths had a gun” but was afraid of being “maimed.” If reasonable, such a fear is ordinarily sufficient to justify the use of deadly force in response; the gen-
eral rule is that any threat to inflict great bodily harm (such as a threat to maim) qualifies, even if the harm might not be life-threatening. The New York formula, quoted in Goetz, also includes “kidnapping, forcible rape, forcible sodomy or robbery.”
Under the MPC, threats of kidnapping and rape are likewise included (§3.04(2)(b)), but the Code addresses the use of force to prevent robbery as a defense of property rather than self-defense, and in that setting it imposes stricter limits on the use
of deadly force. See §3.06(3)(d). We examine defense of property in the materials beginning at p. 861 infra.

pets
816
NOTES ON STANDARDS OF JUDGMENT

1. A subjective test? The prevailing American rule is that a self-defense claim can succeed only when the defendant's fear and use of defensive force were both reasonable. But if a defendant perceives a threat of imminent death or
great bodily harm, is it reasonable to require a “reasonable” response? Consider Justice Holmes’s oft-quoted epigram: “Detached reflection cannot be demanded in the presence of an uplifted knife.” Brown v. United States, 256 U.S. 335, 343
(1921). Professor Glanville Williams (quoted in Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §3.09 at 152, n.10 (1985)) advanced the following argument in support of a wholly subjective test:

The criminal law of negligence works best when it gives effect to the large number of rules of prudence which are commonly observed though not directly incorporated into the law. Such rules include the rule against pulling

out on a blind corner, . . . the rule against deliberately pointing a gun at another person, even in play, and so on. These rules are not part either of enacted or of common law, but as customary standards of behavior they

become binding via the law of negligence. Are there any similar rules of behavior applicable when a person acts in self-defense or in making an arrest? [T]he injury he inflicts on the other is in itself intentional, so that the usual

rules of prudence in respect to the handling of weapons are not in question. The only question is whether the defendant was negligent in arriving at the conclusion that the use of the force in question was called for. It is hard

to imagine what rules of prudence could normally serve in this situation. Either the defendant is capable of drawing the inferences that a reasonable man would draw or he is not. If he is not, and he is a peace officer, his ten-

dency to make miscalculations would certainly justify his dismissal from the police force. But there is no obvious case for the intervention of the criminal courts.

Consider the following critique of the reasonableness requirement. R. Restak, The Fiction of the “Reasonable Man,” Wash. Post, May 17, 1987, at C3:

On the basis of what | know [as a neurologist and neuropsychiatrist, I'm convinced that there are no reasonable people under conditions in which death or severe bodily harm are believed imminent.

Deep within the brain of every reasonable person resides the limbic system: an ancient interconnected network of structures that anatomically and chemically haven't changed much over hundreds of thousands
of years. [T]he limbic system is capable under conditions of extreme duress of overwhelming the cerebral cortex wherein are formulated many of the reasonable person’s most reasonable attributes, like interpretation, judg-
ment and restraint. ...

In view of what we now know of such cases, the logic of the “reasonable man” standard — in the Bernhard Goetz case or similar cases in the future — may be inherently flawed. . . . The firing of [shots] — after, as.
the prosecution has contended, the immediate threat was over — is crucial to the state's argument. . . . The prosecutor's logic is this: Once Goetz coolly

p.8t6
p.ei7
discerned that he was out of danger, he should have calmed down, put away his gun and awaited the arrival of the police.

[Sluch expectations are neurologically unrealistic. Once aroused, the limbic system can become a directive force for hours, sometimes days, and can rarely be shut off like flipping a switch. The heart keeps
pounding, the breathing — harsh and labored — burns in the throat; the thoughts keep churning as fear is replaced by anger and finally, murderous rage. . .

Consider Goetz’ response to the question “Did you just shoot each one of these people just once?”

Goetz: “Well, you see that’s why |, that's, that’s one of the things that puzzles me. . . . | was out of control. [MJaybe you should always be in control, but if you, if you put people in a situation where they're threat-
ened with mayhem, several times, and then if, then if something happens, and if a person acts, turns into a vicious animal. . . . That's not the end of the shooting. . . . | ran back to the first two, to make sure.”

Is that what a reasonable person would do under such circumstances? [S]uch questions [place] an overemphasis on empty intellectualization to the exclusion of those deep and powerful emotional currents of
fear, self-preservation or territoriality that can surface in any one of us and overpower the cogitations of reason. .. .

Isn't it preferable therefore to face up courageously to these sometimes frightening and unpleasant realities instead of pretending that questions such as those being asked about Bernhard Goetz can be an-
swered by courtroom speculations . . . ? To expect reasonable behavior in the face of perceived threat, terror and rage is itself a most unreasonable expectation.

QUESTIONS: What would it mean for the law “to face up courageously to these . . . realities”? Should the law allow a complete defense whenever the defendant honestly fears for his life, regardless of the circumstances?

2. Qualifications to the objective test. As in other instances in which the law employs an objective standard, there is always the question of just how objective the standard is to be — that is, which features of the defendant's
particular situation should be taken into account in determining whether the use of defensive force was reasonable? Compare the discussion of the reasonable-provocation standard, p. 501 supra, and the discussion of the definition of negligence,
pp. 514-524 supra. The MPC standard (§2.02) asks whether the defendant's conduct “involves a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would observe in the actor’s situation.” (Italics added.) Thus, the MPC partially
individualizes the objective standard. Likewise, “a majority of jurisdictions adopt some form of ‘hybrid’ standard: the jury must judge the defendant by the standards of the reasonable person . . . in the ‘situation.”” Victoria Nourse, After the Reason-
able Man: Getting over the Subjectivity/Objectivity Question, 11 New Crim. L. Rev. 33, 36 (2008).

3. Specifying the actor's situation. Which features of people's background, experiences, and personality should be taken into account in determining whether their assessment of a threat and response to it were “reasonable”? Sup-
pose that a person E, who is frail and elderly, is riding in a nearly empty subway car late at

p.si7

pete
night. E is approached by V, someone wearing torn, dirty clothes, who asks for $10. Believing that the request is a veiled threat, E says, “Back off.” When V hesitates, E shoots, killing V. A psychologist offers to testify that E suffers from acute
neurotic fears that lead E to misjudge situations and perceive mortal threats when none are present. Is the evidence admissible? Should the jury be instructed to determine the reaction of a reasonable person who is (1) elderly, or (2) frail, or (3) neu-
rotically fearful, or (4) all of the above?

The MPC solution is to have courts and juries determine in each case, on an ad hoc basis, what circumstances count as part of the defendant's “situation.” See p. 522, Note 4, supra. Under this test, which of E’s particular circumstances
are relevant? Does the MPC approach offer a good way to bring community intuitions of justice into the calculus, or does it open the door to political, racial, and cultural bias? See Michael Vitiello, Defining the Reasonable Person in the Criminal
Law: Fighting the Lernaean Hydra, 14 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 1435 (2010).

Consider these facets of the problem:

(@) Physical infirmity. V, walking three unleashed dogs along a hiking trail, crossed paths with D, and the two had a heated verbal argument when D insisted that the dogs be put on a leash. D claimed that after D told V to leash the
dogs, V charged toward D in a rage. D took out a gun for protection and yelled, “Stay away,” but instead, V grabbed D's walking stick and raised it up as if to strike D in the head with it. D then shot V, feeling that there was no other option. V
survived but suffered near-fatal injuries. On trial for attempted murder, D testified about a personal history of severe spinal problems and had been warned by doctors that the injuries could lead to paralysis if D ever took a hard fall. Should the rea-
sonableness of D's fear be judged from the perspective of a person who was physically at risk in that way? An appellate court faced with these facts answered in the affirmative. People v. Horn, 63 Cal. App. Sth 672 (2021).

Do you agree? Should it matter that V apparently had no way of knowing that the confrontation posed such a serious threat to D? Or is that fact irrelevant in assessing D's blameworthiness?

(b) Mental disability. In Moore v. McKune, 534 F. Appx. 712, 715 (10th Cir. 2013), M shot and killed a police officer who had forcibly entered M’s home while responding to a report that M's spouse was being violently abused. M
argued self-defense and offered expert testimony that because of alcoholism and drug abuse, M suffered from paranoid delusions and hallucinations, leading M to believe there was a need to use deadly force to prevent the officer entering the
home. The expert's testimony was held inadmissible. In accord, a California court held that evidence of a defendant's bipolar disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder was not admissible: Relevant evidence, the court said, “demonstrates a de-
fendant's ability to more accurately perceive actual threats. In contrast, the attributes [the defendant] relies upon ostensibly render him more likely to misperceive threats. [T]he reasonable person standard does not subsume a defendant's unique
personal susceptibility to inaccurate perception.” People v. Brady, 22 Cal. App. 5th 1008, 1010 (2018).

Is there good reason to treat physical disability (as in Horn) differently from mental disability (as in Moore and Brady)? If not, should the standard be individualized in both situations or neither?

pete
p.619

(c) Past experience. In the Goetz case, would it be proper to instruct the jury to determine the reaction of a reasonable person who, like Goetz, had been mugged in the past? If Goetz had previously been approached on the subway by
four youths who asked for money and then mugged and severely injured him, would it be proper to instruct the jury to determine the reaction of a reasonable person who had had that experience in the past? Or is that experience irrelevant when it
involves a suspected threat from a different group of people?

In People v. Sotelo-Urena, 4 Cal. App. 5th 732, 738 (2016), V approached D, who been living on the street for several years, and demanded a cigarette. When D refused, V allegedly became agitated and aggressive. D, thinking V was
reaching for a weapon, fatally stabbed V, intending to make sure V “didn't pose a threat.” D also claimed (erroneously) that V had assaulted D on a prior occasion. D was convicted of first-degree murder after the trial court excluded expert testi-
mony about the persistent fear of violence among people who lack stable living arrangements. The appellate court reversed the conviction, holding that the jury should have been allowed to consider the expert testimony in assessing the reason-
ableness of D's belief that D was facing an imminent threat and needed to use lethal force.

Do you agree? If so, should Goetz have been allowed to present a similar argument with respect to his having experienced a prior mugging? Should it matter, in either situation, whether the defendant had prior experience with the
particular person who allegedly posed a threat?

(d) Culture. People v. Romero, 69 Cal. App. 4th 846, 848 (1999), involved a heated street confrontation in which the defendant fatally stabbed a person who allegedly endangered his younger brother. On trial for murder, the defendant
offered expert testimony concerning “the role of honor, paternalism, and street fighters in the Hispanic culture,” in order to support a claim that he believed he was in imminent danger of great bodily harm and that his belief was reasonable. The
trial judge ruled the evidence irrelevant to both claims, and the defendant was convicted of second-degree murder. The appellate court affirmed.

Would you reach the same result? Is the culture that shapes a defendant's perceptions relevant to that person’s “situation”? For an in-depth analysis, see Eugene R. Milhizer, Group Status and Criminal Defenses, 71 Mo. L. Rev. 547
(2006).

4, Grading the offense. Where reasonableness is required for total exculpation, how should the law deal with a person who holds an honest but unreasonable belief in the need to use lethal force? Assume that Dylan kills, believing it is
the only way to avert a deadly threat, but Dylan reaches that conclusion on grossly unreasonable grounds. Dylan has killed intentionally and, under the prevailing objective test, has no defense of self-defense. Thus, Dylan would be guilty of murder,
just like the person who kills for revenge or financial gain. This appears to be the generally prevailing view.£ But several states avoid this result through various doctrines of mitigation. One, known as the doctrine of “imperfect self-defense,” classi-
fies the crime as voluntary manslaughter, on the theory that “malice” is lacking and that the culpability in a killing of this sort is similar to that in a killing in

p.ei9

p.620
aheat of passion.Z A less common approach is to classify the killing as involuntary manslaughter.® A problem for that theory is that involuntary manslaughter presupposes an unintentional killing, while a killing in self-defense is ordinarily intentional.
The rationale, nonetheless, is that the actor's culpability most closely approximates that of a person whose criminal negligence causes death.

The MPC is similar to this last approach: A person who kills in the honest but unreasonable belief in the need to kill would be guilty of negligent homicide. The Code achieves this result through the interaction of two distinct provisions.
First, in the various justification provisions, the Code states that the justification is available whenever the actor subjectively believes that the necessary circumstances are present. See, e.g., §3.04(1): The use of force for self-protection “is justifi-
able when the actor believes that such force is immediately necessary. . . .” Second, to deal with situations involving mistaken beliefs, the Code provides in §3.09(2):

When the actor believes that the use of force upon or toward the person of another is necessary for any of the purposes for which such belief would establish a justification under §§3.03 to 3.08 but the actor is reckless or

negligent in having such belief or acquiring or failing to acquire any knowledge or belief which is material to the justifiability of [the] use of force, the justification afforded by those Sections is unavailable in a prosecution for

an offense for which recklessness or negligence, as the case may be, suffices to establish culpability.

The MPC approach has not been influential in state statutory reform. See Note, Justification: The Impact of the Model Penal Code on State Law Reform, 75 Colum. L. Rev. 914, 920 (1975). What disadvantages of the MPC approach
might have persuaded jurisdictions not to accept it?

5. Problem. As we have seen, the MPC and the New York self-defense formulations differ in the way they deal with the actor whose belief in the need to use deadly force is unreasonable. How should the following situation be analyzed
under each approach: Defendant D shoots to kill V in the honest but unreasonable belief that it is necessary to do so to save D's life. D misses, and V escapes unharmed. Is D guilty of attempted murder? Of attempt to commit manslaughter?
State v. Kelly

‘Supreme Court of New Jersey
478 A.2d 364 (N.J. 1984)
Witenrz, C.J. . .. Gladys Kelly, stabbed her husband, Ernest, with a pair of scissors. He died shortly thereafter. . . .
Ms. Kelly was indicted for murder. At trial, she did not deny stabbing her husband, but asserted that her action was in self-defense. To establish the requisite state of mind for her self-defense claim, Ms. Kelly called Dr. Lois Veronen as
p.820
pee
an expert witness to testify about the battered-woman’s syndrome. After hearing a lengthy voir dire examination of Dr. Veronen, the trial court ruled that expert testimony concerning the syndrome was inadmissible on the self-defense issue. . . .
Ms. Kelly was convicted of reckless manslaughter. [We] reverse.

The Kellys had a stormy marriage. Some of the details of their relationship, especially the stabbing, are disputed. The following is Ms. Kelly's version of what happened — a version that the jury could have accepted and, if they had, a
version that would make the proffered expert testimony not only relevant, but critical.

The day after the marriage, Mr. Kelly got drunk and knocked Ms. Kelly down. Although a period of calm followed the initial attack, the next seven years were accompanied by periodic and frequent beatings, sometimes as often as once
a week. During the attacks, which generally occurred when Mr. Kelly was drunk, he threatened to kill Ms. Kelly and to cut off parts of her body if she tried to leave him. Mr. Kelly often moved out of the house after an attack, later returning with a
promise that he would change his ways. Until the day of the homicide, only one of the attacks had taken place in public.

The day [of] the stabbing, [Ernest] left for work. Ms. Kelly next saw her husband late that afternoon at a friend’s house. She had gone there with her daughter, Annette, to ask Ernest for money to buy food. He told her to wait until they
got home, and shortly thereafter the Kellys left. After walking past several houses, Mr. Kelly, who was drunk, angrily asked “What the hell did you come around here for?” He then grabbed the collar of her dress, and the two fell to the ground. He
choked her by pushing his fingers against her throat, punched or hit her face, and bit her leg.

crowd gathered on the street. Two men from the crowd separated them, just as Gladys felt that she was “passing out” from being choked. Fearing that Annette had been pushed around in the crowd, Gladys then left to look for her. . ..

After finding her daughter, Ms. Kelly then observed Mr. Kelly running toward her with his hands raised. Within seconds he was right next to her. Unsure of whether he had armed himself while she was looking for their daughter, and
thinking that he had come back to kill her, she grabbed a pair of scissors from her pocketbook. She tried to scare him away, but instead stabbed him.1

The central question in this case is whether the trial court erred in its exclusion of expert testimony on the battered-woman’s syndrome. That testimony was intended to explain defendant's state of mind and bolster her claim of self-
defense. We shall first examine the nature of the battered-woman’s syndrome and then consider the expert testimony proffered in this case and its relevance. . .

As the problem of battered women has begun to receive more attention, sociologists and psychologists have begun to focus on the effects a sustained pattern of physical and psychological abuse can have on a woman. The effects of
such abuse

peer
p.622

are what some scientific observers have termed “the battered-woman’s syndrome,” a series of common characteristics that appear in women who are abused physically and psychologically over an extended period of time by the dominant male
figure in their lives. Dr. Lenore Walker, a prominent writer on the battered-woman’s syndrome, defines the battered woman as one

who is repeatedly subjected to any forceful physical or psychological behavior by a man in order to coerce her to do something he wants her to do without concern for her rights. Battered women include wives or women in

any form of intimate relationships with men. Furthermore, in order to be classified as a battered woman, the couple must go through the battering cycle at least twice. Any woman may find herself in an abusive relationship

with a man once. If it occurs a second time, and she remains in the situation, she is defined as a battered woman.

[L. Walker, The Battered Woman (1979) at xv.]

According to Dr. Walker, relationships characterized by physical abuse tend to develop battering cycles. Violent behavior directed at the woman occurs in three distinct and repetitive stages that vary both in duration and intensity
depending on the individuals involved. [As summarized by the court, the expert testimony maintained that phase one of the battering cycle, the “tension-building stage,” involves minor battering incidents and verbal abuse during which the woman,
beset by fear, attempts to be placating in order to stave off more serious violence. Phase two involves an “acute battering incident” typically triggered by an event in the life of the battering male, although the testimony also suggested that provo-
cation for more severe violence is sometimes provided by the woman, who can no longer control her phase-one anger and anxiety. Phase three of the cycle is characterized by extreme contrition and loving behavior on the part of the battering
male, who will often mix pleas for forgiveness with promises to stop drinking and seek professional help. Dr. Walker testified that for some couples, this period of relative calm may last as long as several months, but that the contrition of the man
will eventually fade and phase one of the cycle will start anew.]

The cyclical nature of battering behavior helps explain why more women simply do not leave their abusers. The loving behavior demonstrated . . . during phase three reinforces whatever hopes these women might have for their mate's
reform and keeps them bound to the relationship. Some women may even perceive the battering cycle as normal, especially if they grew up in a violent household. . . . Other women, however, become so demoralized and degraded by the fact that
they cannot predict or control the violence that they sink into a state of psychological paralysis and become unable to take any action at all to improve or alter the situation. There is a tendency in battered women to believe in the omnipotence or
strength of their battering husbands and thus to feel that any attempt to resist them is hopeless.

In addition . . ., lack of material and social resources] often make[s] it difficult for some women to extricate themselves from battering relationships. [T]here may be no place [for them] to go. Moreover, the stigma that attaches to a
woman who leaves the family unit without her children undoubtedly acts as a further deterrent to moving out. [BJattered women, when they want to leave the relationship, are typically unwilling to reach out and confide in their friends, family, or

p.622
p. 623
the police, either out of shame and humiliation, fear of reprisal by their husband, or the feeling they will not be believed.

Dr. Walker and other commentators have identified several common personality traits of the battered woman: low self-esteem, traditional beliefs about the home, the family, and the female sex role, tremendous feelings of guilt that their
marriages are failing, and the tendency to accept responsibility for the batterer's actions.

Finally, battered women are often hesitant to leave a battering relationship because . . . they harbor a deep concern about the possible response leaving might provoke in their mates. They literally become trapped by their own fear.
Case histories are replete with instances in which a battered wife left her husband only to have him pursue her and subject her to an even more brutal attack.

The combination of all these symptoms — resulting from sustained psychological and physical trauma compounded by aggravating social and economic factors — constitutes the battered-woman’s syndrome. Only by understanding
these unique pressures that force battered women to remain with their mates, despite their long-standing and reasonable fear of severe bodily harm and the isolation that being a battered woman creates, can a battered woman's state of mind be
accurately and fairly understood.

The voir dire testimony of Dr. Veronen, sought to be introduced by defendant Gladys Kelly, conformed essentially to this outline of the battered-woman’s syndrome. . . . In addition, Dr. Veronen was prepared to testify as to how, as a
battered woman, Gladys Kelly perceived her situation . . ., and why, in her opinion, defendant did not leave her husband despite the constant beatings she endured.

Whether expert testimony on the battered-woman's syndrome should be admitted in this case depends on whether it is relevant to defendant's claim of self-defense. . . . The use of force against another in self-defense is justifiable
“when the actor reasonably believes that such force is immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting himself against the use of unlawful force by such other person on the present occasion.” N.J.S.A. 20:3-4(a). Further limitations exist when
deadly force is used in self-defense. The use of such deadly force is not justifiable

unless the actor reasonably believes that such force is necessary to protect himself against death or serious bodily harm. . . . [N.J.S.A. 2C:3-4(b)(2).]

Gladys Kelly claims that she stabbed her husband in self-defense, believing he was about to kill her. The gist of the State’s case was that Gladys Kelly was the aggressor, that she consciously intended to kill her husband, and that she
certainly was not acting in self-defense.

The credibility of Gladys Kelly is a critical issue in this case. If the jury does not believe Gladys Kelly's account, it cannot find she acted in self-defense. The expert testimony offered was directly relevant to one of the critical elements of
that account, namely, what Gladys Kelly believed at the time of the stabbing, and was thus material to establish the honesty of her stated belief that she was in imminent danger of death. . . . Specifically, by showing that her experience, although
concededly difficult to comprehend, was common to that of other women who had been in similarly abusive relationships, Dr. Veronen would have helped the jury understand that Gladys Kelly could have honestly feared that she would suffer se-
rious bodily harm from her husband's attacks, yet still remain with him... . On the facts

p.623
p.624
of this case, we find that the expert testimony . .. was admissible to show she honestly believed she was in imminent danger of death... .

We also find the expert testimony relevant to the reasonableness of defendant's belief that she was in imminent danger of death or serious injury. We do not mean that the expert's testimony could be used to show that it was under-
standable that a battered woman might believe that her life was in danger when indeed it was not and when a reasonable person would not have so believed. . . . Expert testimony in that direction would be relevant solely to the honesty of defen-
dant's belief, not its objective reasonableness. Rather, our conclusion is that the expert's testimony, if accepted by the jury, would have aided it in determining whether, under the circumstances, a reasonable person would have believed there was
imminent danger to her life.

At the heart of the claim of self-defense was defendant's story that she had been repeatedly subjected to “beatings” over the course of her marriage. . .. When that regular pattern of serious physical abuse is combined with defendant's
claim that the decedent sometimes threatened to kill her, defendant's statement that on this occasion she thought she might be killed when she saw Mr. Kelly running toward her could be found to reflect a reasonable fear; that is, it could so be
found if the jury believed Gladys Kelly's story. . ..

The crucial issue of fact on which this expert's testimony would bear is why, given such allegedly severe and constant beatings, combined with threats to kill, defendant had not long ago left decedent. Whether raised by the prosecutor
as a factual issue or not, our own common knowledge tells us that most of us, including the ordinary juror, would ask himself or herself just such a question. [O]ne of the common myths, apparently believed by most people, is that battered wives
are free to leave. To some, this misconception is followed by the observation that the battered wife is masochistic, proven by her refusal to leave despite the severe beatings; to others, however, the fact that the battered wife stays on unquestion-
ably suggests that the “beatings” could not have been too bad for if they had been, she certainly would have left. The expert could clear up these myths, by explaining that one of the common characteristics of a battered wife is her inability to
leave despite such constant beatings; her “learned helplessness”; her lack of anywhere to go; her feeling that if she tried to leave, she would be subjected to even more merciless treatment; her belief in the omnipotence of her battering husband;
and sometimes her hope that her husband will change his ways. . . .

The difficulty with the expert's testimony is that it sounds as if an expert is giving knowledge to a jury about something the jury knows as well as anyone else, namely, the reasonableness of a person’s fear of imminent serious danger.
That is not at all, however, what this testimony is directly aimed at. It is aimed at an area where the purported common knowledge of the jury may be very much mistaken, an area where jurors’ logic, drawn from their own experience, may lead to
a wholly incorrect conclusion. .. . After hearing the expert, instead of saying Gladys Kelly could not have been beaten up so badly for if she had, she certainly would have left, the jury could conclude that her failure to leave was very much part and
parcel of her life as a battered wife. The jury could conclude that instead of casting doubt on the accuracy of her testimony about the severity and frequency of prior beatings, her failure to leave actually reinforced her credibility.

p.624

p. 626

Since a retrial is necessary, we think it advisable to indicate the limit of the expert's testimony on this issue of reasonableness. It would not be proper for the expert to express the opinion that defendant's belief on that day was reason-
able, not because this is the ultimate issue, but because the area of expert knowledge relates, in this regard, to the reasons for defendant's failure to leave her husband. Either the jury accepts or rejects that explanation and, based on that, credits
defendant's stories about the beatings she suffered. No expert is needed, however, once the jury has made up its mind on those issues, to tell the jury the logical conclusion, namely, that a person who has in fact been severely and continuously
beaten might very well reasonably fear that the imminent beating she was about to suffer could be either life-threatening or pose a risk of serious injury. What the expert could state was that defendant had the battered-woman’s syndrome, and
could explain that syndrome in detail, relating its characteristics to defendant, but only to enable the jury better to determine the honesty and reasonableness of defendant's belief. Depending on its content, the expert's testimony might also enable
the jury to find that the battered wife, because of the prior beatings, numerous beatings, as often as once a week, for seven years, from the day they were married to the day he died, is particularly able to predict accurately the likely extent of vio-
lence in any attack on her. That conclusion could significantly affect the jury's evaluation of the reasonableness of defendant's fear for her life. .. .

[The court remanded for a new trial.2]

NOTES ON BATTERING AND ITS EFFECTS

1. The problem of intimate partner violence. Justice Department surveys indicate that the incidence of violence by an intimate partner has declined significantly since the time of the Kelly case.2 The problem nonetheless continues
to affect large numbers of people. Over the period 2014-2019, an average of more than 700,000 people annually were severely beaten by their intimate partners.1° There is also a substantial overlap between battering and intimate partner rape;
some surveys suggest that sexual assault and forcible rape are involved in 40-45 percent of battering relationships. See Emily J. Sack, Is Domestic Violence a Crime? Intimate Partner Rape as Allegory, 24 St. John’s J. Legal Comment. 535, 547
(2010). Preliminary reports suggest that Covid-19 has increased the incidence of intimate partner

p. 826
p. 626
violence because pandemic-related restrictions led to more people being confined at home, without even the previous, limited, options for victims to remove themselves from abusive situations.11

Because early research and legal debates focused on “battered woman's syndrome,” intimate partner violence was long equated with men who beat their wives. But violence in intimate relationships is by no means confined to that
situation. Victims and perpetrators are not exclusively of any one gender identity or sexual orientation. For that reason, the term “battered woman's syndrome” can evoke a misleading picture. It is now widely regarded as “inartful (and likely out-
dated).” State v. Curley, 250 So. 3d 236, 244-245 (La. 2018). But many advocates consider it important to retain the “battered woman” frame, arguing that much of society holds distinctly inaccurate stereotypes with respect to women in battering
relationships. See Gena Rachel Hatcher, Note, The Gendered Nature of the Battered Woman Syndrome: Why Gender Neutrality Does Not Mean Equality, 59 N.Y.U. Ann. Surv. Am. L. 21, 23-24 (2003).12

The available data do not provide reliable demographic detail except for men and women. In Justice Department surveys, women represent 85 percent of the victims of intimate partner violence." And in a single year, 1,181 women and
329 men were killed by their intimate partners.14 Although the debate about “battered woman's syndrome” has focused attention on women who kill their spouses, men are three times more likely than women to kill their intimate partners. See Kit
Kinports, The Myth of Battered Woman Syndrome, 24 Temp. Pol. & C.R. L. Rev. 313, 313-314 (2015).

Because the battering of women by men is by far the most frequent and most frequently studied configuration, the Notes that follow examine that situation first and then turn to other aspects of the battering problem.

2. When women are battered by men. Wife beating has a long, ignominious history; at one time the common law explicitly granted the husband a legal privilege to chastise and punish his wife.15 This prerogative disappeared in the
nineteenth century, but police and prosecutors continued to ignore or tolerate the practice (and more severe physical abuses) until very recent times. Until the 1980s, many police departments had rules expressly discouraging officers from making
an arrest in response to a woman's complaint about an assault by her husband. The battered woman's perception that legal authorities offered no recourse often was well grounded in fact.1°

p. 826

p.827

This picture began to change in the 1980s.17 Many police departments began to encourage or even mandate an arrest in cases of intimate partner violence. Advocates for battered women urged the adoption of mandatory-arrest and
“no-drop” prosecution policies to prevent inattention to such cases. An initial empirical study strongly supported the hypothesis that mandatory arrest would deter battering, but subsequent studies found countervailing effects. Because battered
women often are economically dependent on, and fearful of, their male partners, mandatory-arrest policies in some instances seemed to deter calls for help by women, more than they deterred violence by men. There was also evidence that
mandatory-arrest policies sometimes prompted the arrested men to be more violent toward their spouses afterward. One scholar who initially supported mandatory arrest cautioned that, in light of later studies, the mandatory-arrest approach to
intimate partner violence “may make as much sense as fighting a fire with gasoline.”12

The jury is still out on this issue, but many advocates for battered women have joined in questioning mandatory-arrest and no-drop policies, because they argue that these approaches give too little weight to the victim's own sense of
what kind of official intervention would be best for her! and “preclude the legal system from being able to respond contextually to the needs of individual women.” Leigh Goodmark, Reframing Domestic Violence Law and Policy: An Anti-Essential-
ist Proposal, 31 Wash. U. J.L. & Pol'y 39, 52 (2009).22 Margaret E. Johnson argues (Changing Course in the Anti-Domestic Violence Legal Movement: From Safety to Security, 60 Vill. L. Rev. 145, 146-147 (2015)) that in this area “law and practice
‘overemphasize women's short-term safety in ways that deprive women of dignity and agency, and, counterintuitively, make women less safe.”

In some jurisdictions, those problems are aggravated when prosecutors, in an effort to keep victims safe, seek to combine criminal sanctions with orders of protection that bar the abuser from returning home or going near the victim.
The result can be “state-imposed de facto divorce,” often against the wishes of the victim herself. See Jeannie Suk, At Home in the Law 35 (2009).

p.827
p.628

Few professionals in this field believe that prosecution and punishment of batterers can suffice by themselves. And women's advocates note another dilemma (Deborah Epstein, Procedural Justice: Tempering the State’s Response to
Domestic Violence, 43 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1843, 1846-1847 (2002):

[Dliscretionless policies [reduce] the likelihood that defendants will .. . feel that state authorities are attempting to be fair [and the resulting likelihood that they will comply with court orders]. [Because] reformers . . . have paid

little attention to the potentially close connection between victim safety and abusers’ sense of fair treatment] . . . a new focus is necessary for victims’ long-term protection.

Reflecting these concerns, current proposals often seek to coordinate criminal law responses with improved shelter systems, restraining orders,21 and better social and economic support for battered women and their children.22 Most
major cities have established specialized domestic violence courts to avoid contradictory court rulings by consolidating before a single judge all legal matters affecting a single family.2° Another important initiative has been to require social/psy-
chological treatment for batterers. But the effectiveness of such programs is unclear and, like prosecution, these programs can sometimes backfire. One victim, for example, reported that she had been beaten every Monday night when her hus-
band “would come home madder than hell because he had to go to [court-ordered counseling]. | told the judge, ‘I don’t care what you do to him, but don’t send him to counseling,” which she called “the worst help ever."24

Approaches like these and the resources devoted to them vary widely from community to community. The lowa Supreme Court recently noted (Linn v. State, 929 N.W.2d 717, 734 (Iowa 2019)):

[Although] American policing and prosecution of domestic abuse began to change in the 1970s[]. . . the problem [nationally] has not gone away. . . . The situation in lowa is similar and in some respects worse. . . . In

2010, . .. [domestic] abuse victims in lowa made approximately 72,000 crisis calls and spent almost 100,000 nights in a domestic violence shelter. [Yet flunding cuts have resulted in the closure of eleven victim service pro-

grams in lowa. lowa has one of the lowest funding rates for victim services nationwide.

Awareness of what help is available can vary among abused women as well. Although substantial progress has been made, the problems of intimate partner violence are still a long way from being solved. Thus, as in the past, women at times may
in some sense be trapped in abusive relationships, or have reasons to believe they are.
628

p.629

3. Intimate partner violence in other settings. The battering of men by their female partners and violence in same-sex relationships is less well studied, but there is little doubt that the problem is significant. Men in relationships with
women are frequently slapped, kicked, or beaten by their partners but are much less likely than women to be victims of the most serious assaults.25 In same sex-relationships, some of the evidence suggests that intimate partner violence “occurs
with equal prevalence [as in] their opposite-sex counterparts, taking place in approximately twenty-five to thirty-three percent of relationships.”25 Methodological problems in measurement are daunting, but one relatively careful study found that
39 percent of “American sexual minority men” had experienced same-gender intimate partner violence in the previous five years. See Adam Messinger, LGBTQ Intimate Partner Violence: Lessons for Policy, Practice, and Research 28 (2017).

Some authorities conclude that “patterns, modes, and effects of same-sex domestic violence appear to be virtually identical to heterosexual domestic violence.”27 Others, however, see distinctive features in different contexts, including
differential risks of exposure to HIV infection, the increased sense of isolation from family and others felt by victims in same-sex relationships, and greater difficulty obtaining police intervention and other official help.2° When called to intervene in
same-sex context, for example, police often classify the assault as a fight between “roommates,” making it less likely that police will arrest the abusive partner, and victims may lose access to programs that focus specifically on intimate partner
violence, such as court-mandated treatment for the abuser. Messinger, supra, at 179. Moreover, men and trans people have fewer options for leaving an abusive relationship. Orders of protection can be more difficult to obtain.22 Shelters for vic-
tims are typically for women only or in any case will not accept people who are male or trans; many are not receptive to an LGBTQ+ clientele.22

p.629
630

4, When the battering victim kills. In recent empirical research, legal analysis, and clinical work with battering victims, the concept of a distinctive “battered woman's syndrome” (BWS) and the term itself have been displaced by
more encompassing models of intimate partner violence (IVP). And although discussion of intimate partner violence deliberately focuses attention on the dynamic in sexual relationships, IVP is itself a subset of the broader problem of domestic
violence, which includes the battering of children, the elderly, and others in family situations. The discussion that follows addresses IVP in all its settings, as well as other aspects of violence in the family, but retains the term BWS when necessary
to refer accurately to research and legal decisions cast in that frame.

As in many other areas throughout the criminal law, observers question whether defenses tied to battering are administered even-handedly. The problems of systemic bias are compounded in this context because a defense tied to
some sort of battering syndrome is closely linked to stereotyped expectations about victim behavior. Some scholars find, for example, that although Black women and trans people face especially high rates of intimate partner violence, they sel-
dom succeed with a claim of self-defense because of resistance to seeing Black women and trans people as victims. Samone ljoma, False Promises of Protection: Black Women, Trans People & the Struggle for Visibility as Victims of Intimate Part-
ner and Gendered Violence, 18 U. Md. LJ. Race, Religion, Gender & Class 255, 267-268 (2018).

We focus here on the issues that arise when testimony about the effects of battering is invoked in connection with a claim of justified self-defense. But we should note that such testimony may also be used in an effort to establish a
partial or complete excuse. See p. 480 supra, discussing heat-of-passion manslaughter, p. 906 infra, discussing duress, and p. 982 infra, discussing diminished capacity.

5. The issue of reasonableness. Is evidence of BWS relevant to whether a defendant's response to the situation was reasonable? The Kelly court appears to say yes, but not because the standard is that of the reasonable battered
woman. Most courts agree that BWS evidence is relevant to reasonableness, but only in a limited way. Explaining the appropriate standard, the California Supreme Court has said (People v. Humphrey, 13 Cal. 4th 1073, 1086-1087 (1996):

[)he jury, in determining objective reasonableness, must view the situation from the defendant's perspective. . .. As violence increases over time, and threats gain credibility, a battered person might become sensitized and

thus able reasonably to discern when danger is real and when it is not... .

The Attorney General . . . distinguishes between evidence of [the decedent’s|behavior — which the trial court fully admitted — and expert testimony about its effects on defendant. The distinction is untenable. “To
effectively present the situation as perceived by the defendant, and the reasonableness of her fear, the defense has the option to explain her feelings to enable the jury to overcome stereotyped impressions about women
who remain in abusive relationships. It is appropriate that the jury be given a professional explanation of the battering syndrome and its effects on the woman through the use of expert testimony.”

[Wie are not changing the standard from objective to subjective, or replacing the reasonable “person” standard with a reasonable “battered

p. 630

pest

woman” standard. . .. The jury must consider defendant's situation and knowledge, which makes the evidence relevant, but the ultimate question is whether a reasonable person, not a reasonable battered woman, would

believe in the need to kill to prevent imminent harm. Moreover, it is the jury, not the expert, that determines whether defendant's belief and, ultimately, her actions, were objectively reasonable.

See also People v. Romero, 149 Cal. App. 4th 29 (2007). The defendant, who claimed he had been repeatedly threatened in an abusive same-sex relationship, killed his male partner. He requested the following instruction on self-defense (id. at 43):

A person who suffers from battered person's syndrome has a greater sensitivity to danger than does the ordinary person. . . . Evidence has been received in this case that the defendant suffers from battered person's

syndrome and has a greater sensitivity to danger. If you believe that the defendant has a greater sensitivity to danger, and because of such sensitivity, had reasonable cause to fear greater peril in the event of an altercation

with [the deceased], you are to consider such sensitivity in determining whether the defendant acted reasonably in protecting his life or bodily safety.

The trial judge refused this instruction, and the defendant was convicted of involuntary manslaughter. The appellate court affirmed, holding that the instruction above was properly rejected and that “the ultimate question is whether a
reasonable person, not a reasonable battered [person], would believe in the need to kill to prevent imminent harm.” Id. at 44.

A few courts have moved closer to a fully subjective standard. In State v. Leidholm, 334 N.W.2d 811, 818 (N.D. 1983), the court said that the jury should be told that the “defendant's conduct is not to be judged by what a reasonably
cautious person might or might not do.” Instead, the court held, juries should “assume the physical and psychological properties peculiar to the accused . . . and then decide whether or not the particular circumstances . . . were sufficient to create
[al reasonable belief that the use of force was necessary . . .” (emphasis added). This approach, the court said, “allows the jury to judge the reasonableness of the accused's actions against the accused's subjective impressions of the need to use
force rather than against those impressions . . . that a hypothetical reasonably cautious person would have.”

Is it appropriate to individualize the standard to this extent? Professor Stephen Morse thinks not (The “New Syndrome Excuse” Syndrome, 14 Crim. Just. Ethics, 3, 12-13 (Winter/Spring 1996)):

[lIt is almost impossible to assert sensibly that [barriers to escape] always exist when the syndrome sufferer is in no immediate danger. . . . In response, advocates [for battered women who kill] argue that the battered victim

syndrome affects the sufferer’s cognitive and volitional functioning, making it difficult or impossible for [her] to recognize or to utilize the alternatives. [I}f these assertions are true, and | believe that they often are, the defen-

dant is really claiming an excuse based on impaired rationality or volition. [PJartial excuses, such as “extreme emotional disturbance” or

pest
p. 632

“imperfect self-defense” [can be] employ[ed]. [But killing] was not the right thing to do, and it should not be justified. . . .

To avoid this logic, [advocates for battered women] sometimes argue that the reasonable person standard should be subjectivized to “the reasonable battered victim syndrome sufferer.” . . . But this claim makes

amockery of objective standards. . . . Talk of the “the reasonable battered victim syndrome sufferer” is akin to talk of the “reasonable person suffering from paranoia.” . .. Such relativization of ethical standards is . ..impos-

sible for the law to adopt if it is to maintain its moral basis.

Do you agree? Consider the following views on the issue:

ELIZABETH SCHNEIDER, DESCRIBING AND CHANGING: WOMEN’S SELF-DEFENSE WORK AND THE PROBLEM OF EXPERT TESTIMONY ON BATTERING, 9 WOMEN’S RTS. L. REP. 195, 211-212 (1986): Expert testimony . . . does not address the basic
defense problem that the battered woman faces. [If it] is limited, or perceived as limited to the issue of why the woman does not leave, it highlights a contradiction implicit in the message of battered woman syndrome — if the battered woman was
so helpless and passive, why did she kill the batterer? [Yet the Kelly court holds] that the expert testimony is not relevant to the jury's determination of the reasonableness of a person's fear of imminent severe danger because this is “something the
jury knows as well as anyone else.” ...

The reasonableness of the woman's fear and the reasonableness of her act are not issues which the jury knows as well as anyone else. The jury needs expert testimony on reasonableness precisely because the jury may not understand
that the battered woman’s prediction of the likely extent and imminence of violence is particularly acute and accurate.

SUSAN ESTRICH, DEFENDING WOMEN (BOOK REVIEW, CYNTHIA GILLESPIE, JUSTIFIABLE HOMICIDE: BATTERED WOMEN, SELF-DEFENSE AND THE LAW (1989)), 88 MICH. L. REV. 1430, 1434-1437 (1990): To apply a purely objective standard is
unduly harsh because it ignores the characteristics which inevitably and justifiably shape the defender’s perspective, thus holding him (or her) to a standard he simply cannot meet. If the defender is young or crippled or blind, we should not expect
him to behave like a strapping, sighted adult. On the other hand, if the reasonable person has all of the defender's characteristics, the standard loses any normative component and . . . would give free rein to the short-tempered, the pugnacious,
and the foolhardy who see threats of harm where the rest of us would not and who blind themselves to opportunities for escape that seem plainly available. These unreasonable people may not be as wicked as (although perhaps more dangerous
than) cold-blooded murderers . . . but neither are they, in practical or legal terms, justified in causing death. .. .

In this context, “reasonableness” can have two possible meanings. First, . . . her experience as a battered woman, and the syndrome from which she suffers, [may make] her a better judge than us of the seriousness of the situation she
actually faces. . .. But what of the woman who shoots her husband while he is sound asleep, and not, by anyone’s account, about to do anything? What of the woman who faces a beating, but not — even within her own or her expert's description
of the cycles of violence — serious bodily harm? Put aside the woman who has tried to escape in

p. 632

p. 639
the past and been beaten for it, or who has called the police and been rebuffed, or who would be leaving her young children defenseless if she lef. In these cases, properly applied, the retreat requirement cannot be met with the necessary “com-
plete safety.” But what of the woman who has never tried any of these alternatives? What of the woman who could walk out the back door and into a neighbor's house?

In such cases, the “reasonableness” inquiry, and the evidence of battered woman's syndrome, does not really go to the rightness of the woman's belief in the need for deadly force. It is, instead, a request to abandon the limits on self-
defense out of empathy for the circumstances of the defender and disgust for the acts of her abuser. We can find her belief in the imminence of danger “reasonable” only by deciding that these standards mean less in the home than outside it,
mean less when applied to cruel husbands who torment defenseless wives than to others.

On its face, that is a very uncomfortable request — at least for those of us who see in the rules of self-defense a laudable recognition of the value of human life and a desirable effort to articulate a normative standard which protects even
aggressors and wrongdoers from instant execution or vigilante justice.

6. The issue of scientific reliability.

(@) The law. At the time Kelly was decided, courts were divided over whether expert testimony on BWS was sufficiently reliable to allow it to go to the jury. Today its admissibility is overwhelmingly accepted by courts and legislatures.
See State v. Townsend, 897 A.2d 316 (N.J. 2006); Rogers v. State, 616 So. 2d 1098, 1100 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1993). In some jurisdictions the issue is resolved by statute. See, e.g., Cal. Evid. Code §1107(b) (2021) (“Expert opinion testimony on inti-
mate partner battering and its effects shall not be considered a new scientific technique whose reliability is unproven”).

(b) The science. Concems about the methodology of BWS research were raised from the start. In a prescient student note, the author pointed to several problems, observing that the pivotal research of Lenore Walker left unclear the
nature of the “loving contrition” phase in the “cycle of violence” and did not indicate whether battered women felt unable to leave during the periods when intimidation was in abeyance. See Note (David L. Faigman), The Battered Woman Syndrome
and Self-Defense: A Legal and Empirical Dissent, 72 Va. L. Rev. 619 (1986). Similarly, the Walker research did not specify which groups of women experienced which phases of the cycle of violence, and her data implied that at most only 58 percent
of those considered battered women experienced all three phases. As a result, the Note argued, the claim that becomes central in self-defense cases — that battered women develop “learned helplessness” and think they are unable to flee —
lacked verifiable empirical support.

Subsequent studies reinforce these misgivings. See David L. Faigman & Amy J. Wright, The Battered Woman in the Age of Science, 39 Ariz. L. Rev. 67 (1997). Professor Leigh Goodmark observes that “[e]xperts in the field have largely
abandoned the theory of learned helplessness and its conception of women who experience violence as passive non-actors.” Goodmark, supra p. 827, at 44. See also Robert F. Schopp, Barbara J. Sturgis & Megan Sullivan, Battered Woman Syn-
drome, Expert Testimony, and the Distinction Between Justification and Excuse, 1994 U. Ill. L. Rev. 45, 63-64:

The complete body of [research] provides neither any clear conception of learned helplessness nor any good reason to believe that it regularly occurs in battered women. . . . Collectively, the data reviewed supports
p. 639
p. 634
the proposition that battered women do not suffer learned helplessness, at least as well as it supports the claim that they do. Finally, it would be more consistent with the theoretical and empirical foundations of learned help-
lessness to contend that battered women who kill their batterers differ from those who remain in the battering relationships without killing their batterers precisely because those who kill do not manifest learned helplessness.
Despite these developments, statutes and case law largely continue to look favorably on expert testimony about BWS.
From a different direction, data suggests that battering, especially when it causes a concussion, can alter the victim's brain chemistry, prompting increased aggressiveness and enhancing fears of future battering. See Jozsef Meszaros,
Achieving Peace of Mind: The Benefits of Neurobiological Evidence for Battered Women Defendants, 23 Yale J.L. & Feminism 117, 151-152 (2011). And there is substantial evidence that exposure to repeated concussions (studied extensively for
former NFL football players) affects the brain and over time sharply increases the prevalence of depression, anxiety, and cognitive impairment, including difficulty processing and understanding basic information.
QUESTIONS: If corroborated by additional research, should such evidence be admissible to support a self-defense claim by a battering victim? In what way would such evidence be relevant? If relevant, is this theory limited to people who suffer
concussions from battering, or should it be available to anyone who suffered concussions with neurobiological effects, even when the concussions were not caused by the person who was killed?
7. Feminist perspectives. Some of the criticism of efforts to use BWS evidence has come from an avowedly feminist perspective. See, e.g., Anne M. Coughlin, Excusing Women, 82 Cal. L. Rev. 1 (1994):
[The battered woman syndrome defense .. . institutionalizes within the criminal law negative stereotypes of women. [lIt relieves the accused woman of the stigma and pain of criminal punishment only if she embraces an-
other kind of stigma and pain: she must advance an interpretation of her own activity that labels it the irrational product of a “mental health disorder.”
. .. None of those who advocate, or, for that matter, criticize, adoption of the battered woman syndrome defense has noticed that, for many centuries, the criminal law has been content to excuse women for
criminal misconduct on the ground that they cannot be expected to, and, indeed, should not, resist the influence exerted by their husbands. No similar excuse has ever been afforded to men; to the contrary, the criminal law
consistently has demanded that men withstand any pressures in their lives.
p. 634
p. 635
that compel them to commit crimes, including pressures exerted by their spouses. In this way, the theory of criminal responsibility has participated in the construction of marriage and, indeed, of gender, as a hierarchical
relationship. By construing wives as incapable of choosing lawful conduct when faced with unlawful influence from their spouses, the theory invests men with the authority to govern both themselves and their irresponsible
wives. The battered woman syndrome defense rests on and reaffirms this invidious understanding of women’s incapacity for rational self-control.
QUESTIONS: Does the partial excuse of provocation (available most classically when a man discovers sexual infidelity by his spouse, see p. 491 supra) contradict Coughlin’s claim that men have never been afforded an excuse for inability to
withstand pressures in their lives? Or is the BWS defense qualitatively different?
8. Other syndrome evidence. Many states accept evidence similar to BWS in cases involving a battered or abused child who kills an abusive parent.°2 Some, however, do not. See Bautista v. Small, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 141158
(C.D. Cal. Dec. 16, 2010). And courts have generally been unreceptive to evidence of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) offered by military veterans seeking to bolster their claims of self-defense. See Thomas L. Hafemeister & Nicole A. Stockey,
Last Stand? The Criminal Responsibility of War Veterans Returning from Iraq and Afghanistan with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, 85 Ind. L.J. 87 (2010).

In the PTSD cases, unlike the battered spouse cases, the defendant's self-defensive action typically is not directed toward an unsympathetic victim who has committed abusive acts in the past. Should that difference be significant? If
people in the defendant's “situation” would reasonably believe it was necessary to use deadly force to save their own lives, shouldn't a self-defense claim be viable regardless of whether, unbeknownst to them, the person killed was innocent of
wrongdoing? See Robert P. Mosteller, Syndromes and Politics in Criminal Trials and Evidence Law, 46 Duke LJ. 461 (1996).

How far should the logic of such “syndrome” defenses be extended? In Werner v. State, 711 S.W.2d 639 (Tex. Crim. App. 1986), the defendant appealed his conviction of murder, complaining that the trial court erred in refusing to.
permit the jury to hear the testimony of his expert witness. The witness would have testified on the issue of self-defense that the defendant, the son of a Nazi concentration camp survivor, was a victim of the so-called Holocaust syndrome, which
causes people to be unusually assertive in confrontational settings, as a reaction to the memory of Jewish concentration camp victims who did not fight back. The court rejected the argument, stating: “The evidence excluded only tended to show
that possibly appellant was not an ordinary and prudent man with respect to self-defense. This did not entitle appellant to an enlargement of the statutory defense on account of his psychological peculiarities” (id. at 646). The dissent observed:

p. 635
p. 636
Dr. Roden's testimony . . . would have aided the jury .. . in better deciding . . . how his suffering from “The Holocaust Syndrome” affected the condition of his mind. . . .
When a relatively large number of persons, having the same symptoms, exhibit a combination or variation of functional psychiatric disorders, . . . the psychiatrists put those persons under one or more labels.
Today, we have . . .: “The Battered Wife Syndrome”; “The Battered Child Syndrome”; “The Battered Husband Syndrome”; . . . and “The Holocaust Syndrome.” Tomorrow, there will probably be additions to the list, such as
“The Appellate Court Judge Syndrome.” . . .
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to better understand the evidence or determine a fact in issue, a witness . . . qualified as an expert. . . should be able to testify. . .
[T]he subject “The Holocaust Syndrome” was beyond the ken of the average lay person. The jury was entitled to know that when the appellant fired the fatal shot [his] state of mind . . . was affected, not only by
that which he visually saw on the night in question, but also [by] his belief that it was necessary for him to defend himself because he comes from a family who did not defend themselves, thus causing them to perish in the
Holocaust.
NOTE ON NONPSYCHOLOGICAL DEFENSES

In part because of the problems canvassed in the preceding Notes, defense strategies for battered women have undergone significant change over the years. Professor Alafair Burke notes (Rational Actors, Self-Defense, and Duress:
Making Sense, Not Syndromes, Out of the Battered Woman, 81 N.C. L. Rev. 211, 266-267 (2002)) that “a domestic violence victim's decision to remain in a battering relationship . .. may in fact demonstrate that the woman is a rational actor making
areasoned decision based upon an evaluation of her viable escape options.” See Sue Ostroff & Holly Maguigan, Explaining Without Pathologizing: Testimony on Battering and Its Effects, in D.R. Loseke et al., Current Controversies on Family Vio-
lence 225, 227, 229-232 (2005):

In the overwhelming majority of [battered woman] cases where expert testimony is used, this testimony . . . does not focus on the woman's incapacity or lack of reason. . . . Over the years, experiences in criminal courts

persuaded advocates, lawyers, and researchers . . . that BWS fails to capture the full experience of battered women, and that it risks subjecting women who are battered to labels . . . that portray them as helpless and inca-

pacitated. [E]xpert testimony couched only in terms of battered woman syndrome stigmatizes . . . battered women because the terminology implies a mental illness. . . . The phrase “testimony on battering and its effects”

more accurately describes the expert evidence because it focuses on battered women's experiences [and] moves their social context to the foreground.

QUESTIONS: Evidence focused on the social context seems most useful when it shows that a self-defensive killing was necessary and that the defendant made no mistake. But when a defendant errs in assessing the need to use deadly force (as
the
p. 636

697
jury ultimately concluded in Kelly, p. 825, supra note a), doesn’t psychological evidence remain crucial for an effective defense? And if so, should such psychological evidence affect the judgment about reasonableness?
State v. Norman
Supreme Court of North Carolina
378 S.E.2d 8 (N.C. 1989)

MircHeLL, J. The defendant was tried [for] the first degree murder of her husband. The jury found the defendant guilty of voluntary manslaughter. The defendant appealed from the trial court's judgment sentencing her to six years impris-
onment. The Court of Appeals granted a new trial, citing as error the trial court's refusal to submit a possible verdict of acquittal by reason of perfect self-defense.

[The defendant's evidence tended to show the following: The 39-year-old defendant was badly abused by her husband during most of their 25-year marriage. He frequently punched and kicked her, threw beer bottles and other objects
at her, and bummed her with cigarettes or hot coffee. He forced her into prostitution at a local truck stop and then humiliated her in public and at home by calling her “dog,” “bitch,” or “whore” and forcing her to eat pet food from a bowl on the floor.
For years he threatened to maim her and to kill her.

[The day before she killed him, defendant's husband beat her so badly that she called the police. When they arrived, however, they would not arrest him unless she filed a complaint, which she was afraid to do. An hour later she tried to
kill herself. When paramedics came to assist her, her husband tried to interfere, insisting that they let her die. He was chased back into the house by a sheriff's deputy but was not arrested.

[The next morning she went to the local mental health center to talk about filing charges and possibly having her husband committed. When she confronted him with this possibility, he threatened to cut her throat before he was taken
away. Later, defendant went to the social services office to sign up for welfare so that she would no longer have to prostitute herself to feed her children. Her husband followed her to the office and dragged her from the interview, forcing her to
return home. There he beat her and burned her with cigarettes. He refused to let her eat and forced her to sleep on the floor. When her grandchild began to cry, defendant crept out of the house, and took the baby to her mother’s home so that it
would not wake up defendant's husband. She returned with a pistol, went to the bedroom, and tried to shoot her husband in the back of the head. The gun jammed, but she fixed it and shot him. After she determined that he was still moving, she
fired two more shots into the back of his head.]

Based on the evidence that the defendant exhibited battered wife syndrome, that she believed she could not escape her husband nor expect help from others, that her husband had threatened her, and that her husband's abuse of her
had worsened in the two days preceding his death, the Court of Appeals concluded that a jury reasonably could have found that . . . the defendant killed her husband lawfully in perfect self-defense, even though he was asleep when she killed him.
We disagree. . ..

697
p. 638

In North Carolina, a defendant is entitled to have the jury consider acquittal by reason of perfect self-defense when the evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the defendant, tends to show that at the time of the killing it
appeared to the defendant and she believed it to be necessary to kill the decedent to save herself from imminent death or great bodily harm. That belief must be reasonable, however, in that the circumstances as they appeared to the defendant
would create such a belief in the mind of a person of ordinary firmness. . . . A killing in the proper exercise of the right of perfect self-defense is always completely justified in law and constitutes no legal wrong.

Our law also recognizes an imperfect right of self-defense in certain circumstances, including, for example, when the defendant is the initial aggressor, but without intent to kill or to seriously injure the decedent, and the decedent
escalates the confrontation to a point where it reasonably appears to the defendant to be necessary to kill the decedent to save herself from imminent death or great bodily harm.* Although the culpability of a defendant who kills in the exercise of
imperfect self-defense is reduced, such a defendant is not justified in the killing so as to be entitled to acquittal, but is guilty at least of voluntary manslaughter.

The defendant in the present case was not entitled to a jury instruction on either perfect or imperfect self-defense. . . .

The killing of another human being is the most extreme recourse to our inherent right of self-preservation and can be justified in law only by the utmost real or apparent necessity brought about by the decedent. . . . Only [where defen-

dant] killed due to a reasonable belief that death or great bodily harm was imminent can the justification for homicide remain clearly and firmly rooted in necessity. . .

The term “imminent,” as used to describe such perceived threats . . ., has been defined as “immediate danger, such as must be instantly met, such as cannot be guarded against by calling for the assistance of others or the protection
of the law.” Black's Law Dictionary 676 (Sth ed. 1979)... .

The evidence in this case did not tend to show that the defendant reasonably believed that she was confronted by a threat of imminent death or great bodily harm. [HJer husband had been asleep for some time when she [shot him] three
times in the back of the head. [All of the evidence tended to show that the defendant had ample time and opportunity to resort to other means of preventing further abuse by her husband. There was no action underway by the decedent from which
the jury could have found that the defendant had reasonable grounds to believe . . . that a felonious assault was imminent. . ..

[The lack of any belief by the defendant — reasonable or otherwise — that she faced a threat of imminent death or great bodily harm from the drunk and sleeping victim in the present case was illustrated by the defendant and her own
expert witnesses. . ..

Dr. Tyson . . . testified that the defendant “believed herself to be doomed . . . to a life of the worst kind of torture and abuse, degradation that she had experienced over the years in a progressive way; that it would only get worse, and
that death was

p. 638

p. 639
inevitable.” [A] defendant's subjective belief of what might be “inevitable” at some indefinite point in the future does not equate to what she believes to be “imminent.” Dr. Tyson's opinion that the defendant believed it was necessary to kill her
husband for “the protection of herself and her family” was similarly indefinite and devoid of time frame. . . .

The defendant testified that, “I knowed when he woke up, it was going to be the same thing, and I was scared when he took me to the truck stop that night it was going to be worse than he had ever been.” She also testified, when asked
if she believed her husband's threats: “Yes. . . . [HJe would kill me if he got a chance. If he thought he wouldn't a had to went to jail, he would a done it.” Testimony about such indefinite fears concerning what her sleeping husband might do at some
time in the future did not tend to establish a fear — reasonable or otherwise — of imminent death or great bodily harm at the time of the killing.

We are not persuaded by the reasoning of our Court of Appeals in this case that when there is evidence of battered wife syndrome, neither an actual attack nor threat of attack by the husband at the moment the wife uses deadly force
is required to justify the wife's killing of him in perfect self-defense. The Court of Appeals concluded that to impose such requirements would ignore the “learned helplessness,” meekness and other realities of battered wife syndrome and would ef-
fectively preclude such women from exercising their right of self-defense. .. .

The reasoning of our Court of Appeals in this case proposes to change the established law of self-defense by giving the term “imminent” a meaning substantially more indefinite and all-encompassing than its present meaning. This
would result in a substantial relaxation of the requirement of real or apparent necessity to justify homicide. Such reasoning proposes justifying the taking of human life not upon the reasonable belief it is necessary to prevent death or great bodily
harm — which the imminence requirement ensures — but upon purely subjective speculation that the decedent probably would present a threat to life at a future time and that the defendant would not be able to avoid the predicted threat.

The Court of Appeals suggests that such speculation would have been particularly reliable in the present case because the jury, based on the evidence of the decedent's intensified abuse during the thirty-six hours preceding his death,
could have found that the decedent's passive state at the time of his death was “but a momentary hiatus in a continuous reign of terror by the decedent [and] the defendant merely took advantage of her first opportunity to protect herself.” Requir-
ing jury instructions on perfect self-defense in such situations, however, would still tend to make opportune homicide lawful as a result of mere subjective predictions of indefinite future assaults and circumstances. Such predictions . . . would be
entirely speculative, because there was no evidence that her husband had ever inflicted any harm upon her that approached life-threatening injury, even during the “reign of terror.” It is far from clear in the defendant's poignant evidence that any
abuse by the decedent had ever involved the degree of physical threat required to justify the defendant in using deadly force, even when those threats were imminent. The use of deadly force in self-defense to prevent harm other than death or
great bodily harm is excessive as a matter of law.

[The court also ruled that the defendant was not entitled to instructions on imperfect self-defense because there was no evidence that she actually believed the use of deadly force against her was imminent. The court also noted,
however,

p. 699

p. 840
that the failure to instruct on imperfect self-defense, even if error, was harmless because the defendant was convicted only of voluntary manslaughter; an instruction on imperfect self-defense would have given her nothing more, because in North
Carolina killings in cases of imperfect self-defense are treated as voluntary manslaughter.]

[Wie conclude that the defendant's conviction for voluntary manslaughter and the trial court's judgment sentencing her to a six-year term of imprisonment were without error. Therefore, we must reverse the decision of the Court of
Appeals which awarded the defendant a new trial.

Maariv, J., dissenting. . . . Defendant does not seek to expand or relax the requirements of self-defense and thereby “legalize the opportune killing of allegedly abusive husbands by their wives,” as the majority overstates. Rather, defen-
dant contends that the evidence as gauged by the existing laws of self-defense is sufficient to require the submission of a self-defense instruction to the jury. .. .

Evidence presented by defendant described a twenty-year history of beatings and other dehumanizing and degrading treatment by her husband. In his expert testimony a clinical psychologist . . . described the defendant as a woman
incarcerated by abuse, by fear, and by her conviction that her husband was invincible and inescapable:

Mrs. Norman didn’t leave because she believed, fully believed that escape was totally impossible. There was no place to go. [She] had left before; he had come and gotten her. She had gone to the Department of Social Ser-

vices. He had come and gotten her. The law, she believed the law could not protect her; no one could protect her, and | must admit, looking over the records, that there was nothing done that would contradict that belief. ...

Evidence presented in the case sub judice revealed no letup of tension or fear, no moment in which the defendant felt released from impending serious harm, even while the decedent slept. . . . For the battered wife, if there is no escape,
if there is no window of relief or momentary sense of safety, then the next attack, which could be the fatal one, is imminent. . . . Properly stated, the . . . [question] is not whether the threat was in fact imminent, but whether defendant's belief in the
impending nature of the threat, given the circumstances as she saw them, was reasonable in the mind of a person of ordinary firmness.

Defendant's intense fear, based on her belief that her husband intended not only to maim or deface her, as he had in the past, but to kill her, was evident in the testimony of witnesses who recounted events of the last three days of the
decedent's life. This testimony could have led a juror to conclude that defendant reasonably perceived a threat to her life as “imminent,” even while her husband slept. . .. And from this evidence a juror could find defendant's belief in the necessity
to kill her husband not merely reasonable but compelling.

RICHARD A. ROSEN, ON SELF-DEFENSE, IMMINENCE, AND WOMEN WHO KILL THEIR BATTERERS, 71 N.C. L. REV. 371, 375-376 (1993): On one level, the view of the [Vorman court] is unassailable — the threat of death or great bodily harm was not
imminent when Ms. Norman shot her husband, not, at least, by any reasonable interpretation of the word imminent. [T]o the extent the court was simply

p. 840

peat
applying the settled law of North Carolina, its decision was surely correct [and was] consistent with the law of self-defense as it. . . is most commonly applied throughout the country today. . . .

At a deeper level, however, the decision is disturbing. [The court] never answered the question whether it was necessary for Ms. Norman to kill her husband to avoid great bodily harm or death. And is not this the proper question . .. 2
Ifitis true. . . that either a call to the police or an attempt to run away would have resulted in a risk of death or further torture, then is it proper for society to brand Ms. Norman, and others similarly situated, as criminals?

DAVID MCCORD & SANDRA K. LYONS, MORAL REASONING AND THE CRIMINAL LAW: THE EXAMPLE OF SELF-DEFENSE, 30 AM. CRIM. L. REV. 97, 110(1992): There are at least ten significant facts which our common sense and life experience tell
us are highly significant in this case but which seem not to be considered by the traditional law. In no particular order these ten are: (1) J.T. and Judy [Norman] were not equally matched in terms of physical prowess . . . ; (2) Judy was distraught
because of the actions of J.T.; (3) Judy's mental state was colored not merely by one single incident of abuse, but by the culmination of twenty years of abuse; (4) Because J.T. lived in the same house as Judy, he had virtually constant access to
her to inflict abuse on her; (5) Having Judy at his disposal in this manner, J.T. thus was able to decide when, where, and how to inflict the abuse — he took advantage of the option which the law apparently ceded to him to launch nondeadly attacks
on her at his whim, without fear of a justifiable deadly response; (6) Judy's future was bleak — there was no basis for her to believe that J.T. would be content to live without her or that he had any intent to stop abusing her; (7) Judy apparently had

no viable alternative but to stay in the vicinity — she had no job skills to support herself elsewhere, and her support network was in that community; (8) Judy had no reasonable prospect of being able to stay in that community outside the pres-
ence of J.T., since he would find her anywhere in the vicinity; (9) The governmental authorities failed to take any action to protect Judy .. . ; and (10) J.T.’s actions prevented Judy from doing anything further to invoke the help of the governmental
authorities.

These ignored facts have no place in the moral reasoning mandated by the traditional law of self-defense, yet they cause us to suffer moral disquiet with the result.

QUESTIONS: How could the law of self-defense take account of these morally relevant factors? Would it be desirable to allow self-defense not only in the traditionally designated circumstances but also “in any other circumstance in which the
defendant's killing of the victim was morally justified”? Compare Jahnke v. State, 682 P.2d 991 (Wyo. 1984). A badly abused 16-year-old boy killed his father after lying in wait for him and shooting him without warning. The boy, prosecuted as an
adult, was convicted of voluntary manslaughter after the trial judge excluded evidence of battered child syndrome that the defendant had sought to introduce in support of his claim of self-defense. The appellate court, upholding the exclusion of
the evidence, observed:

It is difficult enough to justify capital punishment as an appropriate response of society to criminal acts even after the circumstances have been carefully evaluated by a number of people. To permit capital punishment

peat
p. 842

to be imposed upon the subjective conclusion of the individual that prior acts and conduct of the deceased justified the killing would amount to a leap into the abyss of anarchy. [If battered person] evidence has any role at

all it is in assisting the jury to evaluate the reasonableness of the defendant's fear in a case involving the recognized circumstances of self-defense which include a confrontation or conflict with the deceased not of the defen-

dant's instigation.

A concurring judge commented:

This is a textbook case of first-degree murder. . . . In his defense, appellant employed the oldest, most common and most successful tactic in homicide cases. He put the deceased on trial. . . . There was no one to speak for

the deceased. . . . [But by] no stretch of the imagination was this a case of self-defense.

Results like those illustrated in the Norman and Jahnke decisions have been widely criticized, but many courts continue to follow their approach to the imminence issue. In Commonwealth v. Sands, 553 S.E.2d 733 (Va. 2001), the
defendant suffered increasingly severe beatings, which had become a daily occurrence, with her husband threatening that, if she left, “I'll kill you and your whole family. . . .” After one particularly severe attack, the defendant got a gun, went to the
bedroom, and fatally shot her husband while he was lying in bed, watching television. She was convicted of first-degree murder after a trial in which the judge refused to instruct the jury on self-defense. On appeal, the Virginia Supreme Court af-
firmed the conviction. The court acknowledged that “the defendant reasonably believed that she was in danger of serious bodily harm or death,” but nonetheless concluded:

While we do not doubt the defendant's genuine fear for her life or minimize the atrocities inflicted upon her, we cannot point to any evidence of an overt act indicating imminent danger . .. when she shot him five times while

he reclined on the bed. . . . Thus, the defendant was not entitled to an instruction on self-defense.

NOTES ON THE IMMINENT DANGER REQUIREMENT

1. Nonconfrontational self-defense. The great majority of battered-spouse prosecutions involve women who kill their abusers in the course of a direct confrontation that they perceive as involving a threat of immediate harm. In one
study, only 20 percent of the cases involved abusers killed in noncontrontational settings — 8 percent while they slept, 8 percent caught unawares during a lull in the violence, and 4 percent killed by a third party at the abused woman’s behest. See
Holly Maguigan, Battered Women and Self-Defense: Myths and Misconceptions in Current Reform Proposals, 140 U. Pa. L. Rev. 379, 397 (1991).

The nonconfrontational cases nonetheless pose the greatest challenge to traditional conceptions of self-defense. In cases like Norman, where the abuser is killed in his sleep, most courts remain unwilling to admit battered-spouse
evidence or to
p. 842
p. 843
permit jury instructions on the possibility of legitimate self-defense.2° A few decisions are more flexible. In State v. Nemeth, 694 N.E.2d 1332, 1137 (Ohio 1998), the court noted that “expert testimony is . . . necessary to dispel the misconception
that a nonconfrontational killing cannot satisfy the elements of self-defense.” Do you agree? Should such cases go to the jury on the self-defense issue, when escape appears impossible to the battered woman but is possible in fact? What are the
dangers of that approach?

In a comprehensive survey of imminence cases decided over a 20-year period, Professor Victoria Nourse discovered that contrary to the conventional assumption, nonconfrontational cases were only a small minority of the cases in
which imminence issues affected the result. Instead, 84 percent of the cases involving an alleged lack of imminence were cases in which the parties were fighting, the defendant allegedly saw a weapon, or the defendant claimed that the victim was
advancing toward her. Victoria F. Nourse, Self-Defense and Subjectivity, 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1235, 1253 (2001). As a result, she concludes (id. at 1236), “imminence often operates as a proxy for any number of other self-defense factors — for exam-
ple, strength of the threat, [the opportunity to] retreat, proportionality, and aggression.”

QUESTION: Would the law of self-defense produce better results if juries were instructed to more explicitly consider the totality of such circumstances?

2. When the battered woman turns to a third person. A small but significant number of battered-spouse prosecutions (4 percent in Professor Maguigan’s study) involve women who hire or persuade a third party to commit the
killing. Should such a killing be considered a clear case of premeditated murder, with no right to claim self-defense? Or — if a battered victim D is permitted to argue self-defense for killing the abuser V while V sleeps — does the same necessity
rationale apply if D pays someone to do the job? If a person can reasonably believe it necessary to shoot a battering partner who is sleeping (because going to the police or leaving the relationship aren't realistic options), shouldn't it be equally
reasonable for the battering victim to enlist the help of a third party in catching the batterer unawares? Courts are divided on the issue.°4 How should it be analyzed? Consider Stephen J. Schulhofer, The Gender Question in Criminal Law, 7 Soc.
Phil. & Pol'y 105, 119-120 (1990):

[In] non-controntational cases . . . the [Lenore] Walker approach [see Kelly, p. 822 supra] turns traditional intuitions inside out. In traditional terms, the strongest . . . of the nonconfrontational cases [is] that of the woman who

filed for divorce, fled, and sought outside help. But such behavior does not fit the typical pattern of learned helplessness.

p. 843
p. 844
[M)he contract killing [however] begins to look like the strongest case of all. The . . . inability to act even when the abuser is sleeping, the apparent dependence on the intervention of a male support figure, all rein-

force a diagnosis of battered wife syndrome. In fact, Lenore Walker is very explicit in challenging traditional assumptions about contract killing. She writes with irritation that under the traditional approach, “hiring someone

else to kill an abusive mate is seen as evidence of premeditation, even though many women, because of sex role conditioning or other factors, cannot use sufficient force to protect themselves.”7 Walker concludes that this

traditional view is just evidence of the criminal law's “[bliases . . . against women.”

Does this argument imply that self-defense should be available both to the battering victim who commits the killing personally and to the one who hires another person to do it? Or does the argument imply that, in the absence of an
imminent threat of great bodily harm, the defense should be available to neither?

3. Defense of another. The previous Note considers whether the battering victim D should have a defense if prosecuted as an accomplice in a killing that a hired killer K committed to protect D. What about the liability of K, the
principal in the killing? Suppose that Judy Norman had persuaded a neighbor to help her kill her husband or hired someone to do the job. Should the person who comes to her aid have a valid defense if prosecuted for the killing they committed
personally?

The widely accepted rule is that someone who comes to the aid of an individual in peril can use deadly force to prevent the attack, under the same circumstances that would justify the use of deadly force by the endangered individual
personally. See MPC §3.05 in the Appendix in this book.°5 On the facts of Norman, how should we assess the liability of a third-party helper? Would a belief in the need to kill J.T. Norman, though reasonable for Judy, be unreasonable for some-
‘one observing the situation from outside? Or would such a belief be equally reasonable for both?

4, Imminence in other contexts. Is the imminence requirement subject to special criticism in the context of battering cases, or is it flawed in a more general way? Consider these situations:

(a) In State v. Schroeder, 261 N.W.2d 759 (Neb. 1978), a 19-year-old incarcerated person stabbed his older cellmate at 1 a.m. while the latter was asleep. He was convicted of assault with intent to inflict great bodily harm. The deceased

p. 844

p. 846
had a reputation for sex and violence, the defendant had incurred a large gambling debt to the deceased who threatened to make a “punk” out of him by selling his debt to another prisoner, and before going to bed the morning of the incident the
deceased said he might walk in his sleep and “collect” some of the money owed.

The majority found no error in the trial court's failure to give any instruction on self-defense (id. at 761):

[]here was no evidence to sustain a finding that the defendant could believe an assault was imminent except the threat that Riggs had made before he went to bed. . .. There is a very real danger in a rule which would legal-

ize preventive assaults involving the use of deadly force where there has been nothing more than threats.

The dissent stated (id. at 761-762):

The defendant could not be expected to remain awake all night, every night, waiting for the attack that Riggs had threatened to make. The defendant's evidence here was such that the jury could have found the defendant

was justified in believing the use of force was necessary to protect himself against an attack by Riggs “on the present occasion.”

(b) In Ha v. State, 892 P.2d 184 (Alaska Ct. App. 1995), the victim, Buu, beat Ha (the defendant) severely, but was pulled away by bystanders. Buu left, returned with a hammer, and tried to strike Ha, but again a bystander intervened.
Before leaving, Buu shouted several times that he would kill Ha, who then spent a sleepless night thinking about Buu's “violent criminal clan” and their reputation for carrying out their threats. He concluded that Buu or the relatives would someday
carry out the threat and that “because of his cultural background and poor command of English, . . . it would be useless to go to the police for help” (id. at 191, 195). He then got a rifle, caught Buu unawares, and shot him from behind, killing him.
At trial the judge withheld the self-defense issue from the jury, and Ha was convicted of murder.

On appeal, the court concluded that “a reasonable person in Ha’s position would have feared death or serious physical injury from Buu,” and that the evidence could support a conclusion that “there was no escape. . . . Buu comes
from .. . a family of thugs who have a reputation for violence and extortion. . . . Today or tomorrow they would stalk him down” (id. at 191). Nonetheless, the court upheld the conviction, stressing that “inevitable harm’ is not the same as ‘imminent’
harm. [A] reasonable fear of future harm does not authorize a person to hunt down and kill an enemy” (id.).

Is the result sound? If so, does the same principle bar a self-defense claim on the facts of Norman and Schroeder, or are the situations distinguishable?

5. The Model Penal Code. The MPC modestly relaxes the imminence requirement, providing that self-defense can be available if the actor reasonably believed that the use of defensive force was “immediately necessary.” §3.04(1).
Thus, in a case like Schroeder, Note 4(a), supra, the defendant might have a defense under the MPC, though not under the common-law approach, because his use of defensive force arguably was “immediately necessary” under the circum-
stances, even though

p. 846

p. 846
the cellmate's threatened assault was not imminent. Several states have adopted language similar to that of the MPC. E.g., N.J. Stat. Ann. §2C:3-4a (2021). Some courts have loosened the imminence requirement on their own authority.2°
QUESTION: Would a self-defense instruction have been required in Norman if North Carolina had adopted the MPC formulation rather than a requirement of strict imminence?

6. Assessing the imminence requirement. (a) Self-defense without imminence? Will a strict imminence requirement invariably defeat a self-defense claim in nonconfrontational settings? Professor Joan Krause notes that “[u]n-
less actually comatose,” a sleeping abuser could wake up at any moment. Joan H. Krause, Distorted Reflections of Battered Women Who Kill: A Response to Professor Dressler, 4 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 555, 563 (2007). Even with this recognition,
however, the strict imminence requirement precludes a successful self-defense claim in other nonconfrontational settings, such as the situation in Ha or when the battering victim seeks help from a third party. Does it make sense to require strict
imminence in those settings?

One answer is that in the absence of imminence, the killing was not strictly necessary. Imminence, in other words, serves as a proxy for necessity. See Fritz Allhoff, Self-Defense Without Imminence, 56 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1527 (2019). But
if this is the rationale for requiring imminence, why should imminence and necessity be independent requirements? One could say that lack of imminence serves only to create a rebuttable presumption that the killing was unnecessary. The MPC
standard (“immediately necessary”) in effect adopts this approach. But most courts treat this presumption (no necessity absent imminence) as irrebuttable.

Shouldn't a defendant in cases like Norman, Sands, Schroeder, and Ha be permitted to argue that the killing was justifiable if necessary, even in the absence of imminence? Professor Kimberly Kessler Ferzan thinks not. She argues that
without imminence, necessity alone is not sufficient to justify killing another person (Kimberly Kessler Ferzan, Defending Imminence: From Battered Women to Iraq, 46 Ariz. L. Rev. 213, 255-256, 260-262 (2004)):

[M)he critical question is not when the defender needs to act but what kind of threat triggers the right to self-defense. [I]f two people are stuck in a cave with limited oxygen, each poses a “threat” to the other simply because

one individual's survival is dependent on limiting the chances of the other's. [Yet] the right to self-defense cannot be this broad. . . . Jettisoning imminence in the name of necessity leaves [no] standard for the type of conduct

sufficient to warrant defensive force.

. .. Self-defense is uniquely justified by the fact that the defender is responding to aggression. Imminence, far from simply establishing necessity, is conceptually tied to self-defense by staking out the type of

threats that constitute aggression. We cannot simply discard imminence in the name of necessity.

On Professor Ferzan’s analysis, someone trapped in a cave where oxygen is limited cannot kill another person also trapped there, even when imminently necessary for the first person's survival, and a person cast adrift with a limited
food

p. 846

p.847
supply cannot kill another occupant of the boat, even when imminently necessary for the first person to avoid starvation. See Dudley and Stephens, p. 9 supra, and the material on taking innocent life to save life, p. 891 infra. An aggressor, in con-
trast, forfeits the right to that protection. On this approach, how should the law classify a person like Schroeder's cellmate — someone who threatens to kill or rape in the future but is not yet an aggressor?

(b) Self-defense without necessity? Some argue that in a case like Norman, a number of morally relevant factors, taken together, call for exoneration not only when an attack was not imminent, but also when lethal self-defense was
not strictly necessary because the defendant did have alternatives. See the comments of McCord & Lyons, p. 841 supra. If that approach is intuitively appealing, how would such an exception to a strict necessity requirement be formulated?

(c) Alegislative solution? In a suggestion for adjusting the doctrines that have precluded successful claims of self-defense in cases like Norman, Professors Hava Dayan and Emanuel Gross propose to relax the limits on the use of
deadly force as follows (Between the Hammer and the Anvil: Battered Women Claiming Self-Defense and a Legislative Proposal to Amend Section 3.04(2)(b) of the U.S. Model Penal Code, 52 Harv. J. on Legis. 17, 28, 34-35 (2015)):

The use of deadly force is not justifiable . .. unless the actor believes that such force is necessary to protect himself or herself against death, serious bodily injury, kidnapping, sexual intercourse compelled by force or threat,

or circumstances of a severe and prolonged pattern of domestic violence. . . . “Domestic violence” [includes p]lacing a family or household member in fear of physical or mental harm... .

QUESTIONS: Does this proposal go far enough in relaxing current law's restrictions on self-defense in the context of battering by an intimate partner? Does it go too far?
NOTES AND QUESTIONS ON OTHER ISSUES OF SELF-DEFENSE

1. The requirement of a deadly threat. As we have seen, p. 815 supra, a defender can use deadly force only in response to a threat of “death, serious bodily harm, kidnapping or sexual intercourse compelled by force or threat.” MPC
§3.04(2)(b). In John Q. La Fond, The Case for Liberalizing the Use of Deadly Force in Self-Defense, 6 U. Puget Sound L. Rev. 237 (1983), the author criticizes this limitation because it leaves many law-abiding citizens (including most female victims)
without a practically effective means of defense against a nondeadly assault by a stronger attacker. The author proposes instead that resort to deadly force be permissible whenever “necessary to protect [the defendant] effectively” against unlaw-
ful physical violence (id. at 280).

Note the significance of this issue for the battered woman's defense. In Norman, the court said “there was no evidence that her husband had ever inflicted any harm upon her that approached life-threatening injury,” and accordingly
that “it is far from clear . . . that [his abuse] ever involved the degree of physical threat required to justify the defendant in using deadly force, even when those threats were imminent” (emphasis added). Do you agree about the facts? Did any of
J.T.’s abuse

p.847
nnn 88
meet the MPC standard for using deadly force in self-defense? If not, could Judy Norman have reasonably feared more serious assaults in the future? And apart from the specific facts of Norman, is the legal rule sound in requiring a reasonable
fear of great bodily harm? If a batterer uses only nondeadly force against a spouse who cannot readily escape the relationship, what are the victim's options?

2. The risk of injury to others. Is a person who is privileged to use deadly force criminally responsible if the defensive actions injure innocent third parties? In People v. Adams, 291 N.E.2d 54, 55-56 (Ill. App. Ct. 1972), the defendant,
acting in self-defense, shot and killed an assailant, Robinson, who was threatening his life. One of the defendant's bullets passed through Robinson's body and struck and killed Mary Davis, who was sitting nearby. The defendant was convicted of
manslaughter for killing Davis. The appellate court reversed the conviction, stating:

[llf the circumstances are such that they would excuse the killing of an assailant in self-defense, the emergency will be held to excuse the person assailed from culpability, if in attempting to defend himself he unintentionally

kills or injures a third person.

[M)he above rule is not absolute and . . . may be subject to modification depending on the circumstances. . . . But we do not believe such circumstances present themselves in the case before us. [I]t was dark and

defendant was being fired on at close range. . . . He had to act immediately to protect himself from a man . . . who was not just threatening him but was shooting at him. Even under such circumstances defendant did not

shoot wildly or carelessly. [H]e hit his assailant with every shot and ... . the innocent victim was killed only as a result of a bullet passing through the body of the assailant. We conclude that under the circumstances of this

case the killing of Mary Davis constituted no crime.

What actions should the law allow if a person facing a lethal threat, unlike the defendant in Adams, knows that defensive measures pose a grave threat to innocent bystanders? Some courts permit self-defense in that situation, by
invoking the doctrine of “transferred intent.” As we have seen (p. 582 supra), if a defendant shoots, intending to kill A, and the bullet accidentally strikes and kills bystander B, the defendant can be convicted of murdering B, because the intent to kill
Ais “transferred” to B. Applying the same logic, some courts hold that the justification transfers too, so that if A, acting in justified self-defense, shoots at assailant A and accidentally kills B, the killing of B is considered intentional but justified. E.g.,
Rogers v. State, 994 So. 2d 792, 802 (Miss. Ct. App. 2008).

Does this approach leave too much room for reckless measures by persons acting in self-defense? Consider Commonwealth v. Fowlin, 710 A.2d 1130 (Pa. 1998). Fowlin, a nightclub patron, was approached by three men, one of whom
sprayed pepper gas in his eyes while a second pulled a gun. Thinking that he was about to be killed, Fowlin drew his own handgun and fired more than seven times in the general direction of his attackers. Though nearly blinded by pepper spray,

he managed to kill one of his assailants and wound another, but 200 other people were present in the club, and Fowlin also wounded one of these bystanders. No charges were pressed with respect to the shooting of the two assailants, but Fowlin
was charged with aggravated assault and reckless endangerment for shooting the bystander. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court dismissed the charges. The court held
p. 848
p. 849
that a defendant who reasonably believes that deadly force is necessary to avoid death or serious bodily harm cannot be deemed reckless, regardless of the extent to which innocent bystanders are endangered. A dissenting judge argued that the
question whether Fowlin had acted recklessly toward the bystanders was a matter for the jury to determine under all the circumstances, adding (id. at 1136):
[T]he majority effectively allows an actor to respond in any manner and with whatever amount of force he chooses no matter [whom] he injures, so long as he is justified in acting in self-defense. [SJuch blanket authority for
the use of self-defense defies logic, especially in contemporary society where possession of lethal weapons and confrontations involving them have become all too commonplace. Under the majority's reasoning, one would
be justified [in] detonating a hand-grenade in a crowded shopping mall in order to defend himself against an attacker.
The MPC approach is in accord with that of the dissenting judge in Fowlin — the defendant could conceivably be convicted of reckless endangerment, and if the bystander died, the defendant could be convicted of homicide. See
§3.09(8). Which approach makes more sense? If the defendant in Fowlin knew his desperate acts of self-defense might injure or kill several innocent people, should a lawyer standing at his side advise him to do nothing? If not — if the defendant
had a right to use the only defensive measures available to save his life — how can we convict him of a serious felony for doing so? See the material on choice of evils and taking life to save life, p. 891 infra, and Sanford H. Kadish, Blame and Pun-
ishment 122-126 (1987).
3. Burden of proof. Once there is evidence raising the issue of self-defense, most jurisdictions place the burden on the prosecution to disprove the defense beyond a reasonable doubt. E.g., Commonwealth v. Holland, 73 N.E.3d 276
(Mass. 2017). Ohio, however, requires the defendant to prove self-defense by a preponderance of the evidence. State v. Hale, 2019-Ohio-3276 (Ct. App. 2019). In Martin v. Ohio, 480 U.S. 228 (1987), the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality
of this practice, on the ground that the absence of the conditions of self-defense was not among the elements of the crime charged (aggravated murder) as defined by the Ohio statute.
Does this mean that a state could abolish the plea of self-defense completely? Would it be constitutional to punish as a murderer a defendant who had killed when it was immediately necessary to save the defendant's life from an un-
lawful aggressor?
4, Exceptions to the right of self-defense. In a number of situations, the law prohibits the use of defensive force, even though the defendant faces an imminent threat of death from the unlawful action of another. These situations are
explored in the cases that follow.
State v. Abbott
‘Supreme Court of New Jersey
174 A.2d 881 (N.J. 1961)
Weintraus, C.J... . Abbott shared a common driveway with his neighbors, Michael and Mary Scarano. The Scaranos engaged a contractor to pave their portion. Abbott obtained some asphalt from the contractor and made a doorstop
to
p.849
p. 850
keep his garage door from swinging onto the Scaranos’ property. Nicholas Scarano, who was visiting with the Scaranos, his parents, objected to Abbott's innovation. After some words between them a fist fight ensued.

Although Abbott managed to land the first punch, with which he sent Nicholas to the ground, a jury could find Nicholas was the aggressor. At this point Michael Scarano came at Abbott with a hatchet. Michael... denied he meant
to use it as a weapon. According to Abbott, Mary Scarano followed, armed with a carving knife and large fork. The actors gave varying versions of what happened, but the end result was that all of the Scaranos were hit by the hatchet. Nicholas
received severe head injuries. Abbott claimed he too suffered a laceration. Abbott admitted he finally wrested the hatchet from Michael but denied he wielded it at all. Rather he insisted that the Scaranos were injured during a common struggle for
the instrument. A jury could, however, find Abbott intentionally inflicted the blows.

Abbott was separately indicted for atrocious assault and battery upon each of the Scaranos. . . . The jury acquitted Abbott of the charges relating to Michael and Mary, but found him guilty as to Nicholas. The principal question is
whether the trial court properly instructed the jury upon . . . the subject of retreat. ...

The question whether one who is neither the aggressor nor a party to a mutual combat must retreat has divided the authorities. [O]ne could readily say there was no necessity to kill in self-defense if the use of deadly force could have
been avoided by retreat. The critics of the retreat rule do not quarrel with the theoretical validity of this conclusion, but rather condemn it as unrealistic. The law of course should not denounce conduct as criminal when it accords with the behavior
of reasonable men. [A]dvocates of no-retreat say the manly thing is to hold one’s ground and hence society should not demand what smacks of cowardice. Adherents of the retreat rule reply itis better that the assailed shall retreat than that the life
of another be needlessly spent. They add that not only do right-thinking men agree, but further a rule so requiring may well induce others to adhere to that worthy standard of behavior. . .

Other jurisdictions are closely divided upon the retreat doctrine. .. . The Model Penal Code embraces the retreat rule while acknowledging that on numerical balance a majority of the precedents oppose it.

We are not persuaded to depart from the principle of retreat. We think it salutary if reasonably limited. Much of the criticism goes not to its inherent validity but rather to unwarranted applications of the rule. For example, it is correctly
observed that one can hardly retreat from a rifle shot at close range. But if the weapon were a knife, a lead of a city block might well be enough. . . . Such considerations, however, do not demand that a man should have the absolute right to stand
his ground and kill in any and all situations. . . .

We believe the following principles are sound:

1. The issue of retreat arises only if the defendant resorted to a deadly force. . . . Model Penal Code §3.04(2)(b)(i). As defined in §3.11(2) a deadly force means “force which the actor uses with the purpose of causing or which he knows
to create a substantial risk of causing death or serious bodily harm.”

Hence it is not the nature of the force defended against which raises the issue of retreat, but rather the nature of the force which the accused employed in his defense. If he does not resort to a deadly force, one who is assailed may hold
his ground whether the attack upon him be of a deadly or some lesser character. Although it

850

past
might be argued that a safe retreat should be taken if thereby the use of any force could be avoided, yet, as the comment in the Model Penal Code observes, “The logic of this position never has been accepted when moderate force is used in self-
defense; here all agree that the actor may stand his ground and estimate necessity upon that basis.” . . . Hence, in a case like the present one, the jury should be instructed that Abbott could hold his ground when Nicholas came at him with his
fists, and also when Michael and Mary came at him with the several instruments mentioned, and that the question of retreat could arise only if Abbott intended to use a deadly force.

2. What constitutes an opportunity to retreat which will defeat the right of self-defense? As §3.04(2)(b)\il) of the Model Penal Code states, deadly force is not justifiable “if the actor knows that he can avoid the necessity of using such
force with complete safety by retreating” (emphasis added). One who is wrongfully attacked need not risk injury by retreating, even though he could escape with something less than serious bodily injury. It would be unreal to require nice calcula-
tions as to the amount of hurt, o to ask him to endure any at all. And the issue is not whether in retrospect it can be found the defendant could have retreated unharmed. Rather the question is whether he knew the opportunity was there, and of
course in that inquiry the total circumstances including the attendant excitement must be considered. . ..

[The court reversed the conviction because it found that the trial court's instructions on retreat were ambiguous and confusing]

NOTES ON THE DUTY TO RETREAT

1. The traditional view. The English common law imposed a strict duty to retreat; a person could use deadly force in self-defense only after exhausting every chance to flee, when the person's “back [was] to the wall.”37 In the nine-
teenth century, American courts began rejecting the English doctrine as unsuited to American values. In a widely quoted decision, Erwin v. State, 29 Ohio St. 186, 199 (1876), the Ohio Supreme Court said that the law “will not permit the taking of
[human life] to repel mere trespass, . .. but a true man who is without fault is not obliged to fly from an assailant.” Disagreeing, Professor Beale wrote in 1903 that despite the “apparent cowardice, [a] really honorable man . . . would regret ten times
more, after the excitement of the contest was past, the thought that he had the blood of a fellow-being on his hands.”22 Many states, especially those on the East Coast, retained a retreat requirement, but by the late nineteenth or early twentieth
century, the majority had adopted the “true man” or no-retreat rule. Historian Richard Maxwell Brown describes the result: “The centuries-long English legal severity against homicide was replaced in our country by a proud new tolerance for killing
in situations where it might have been avoided.”22

2. The current case law. At the time of the Abbott decision, most states followed the no-retreat approach. Since then, the law on retreat has been in flux. Ohio, where the “true man” concept originated, rejected that approach in
1979.20

past

p. 852
Tennessee, which had long rejected the no-retreat rule, adopted it by legislation in 1989, and as recently as 2006, its courts approvingly referred to that approach as “the ‘true man’ doctrine.”41 See Jeannie Suk, The True Woman: Scenes from the
Law of Self-Defense, 31 Harv. J.L. & Gender 237 (2008).

Although contemporary cases and commentators sometimes identify no-retreat as the majority rule, the situation is more complex. In decisions based on common-law principles, there has been a distinct tendency to favor a require-
ment of retreat in settings outside the home, with many decisions requiring retreat when possible and courts in half a dozen additional states treating the possibility of retreat as a factor to be considered in judging necessity.42 Among the courts
that still choose a no-retreat rule under common-law principles, e.g., People v. Monroe, 468 P.3d 1273 (Colo. 2020), many expressly reject the old justification for it — that the law should not require what looks like cowardice. Rather, these courts
argue that a rule requiring retreat tends to confuse the jury because it is so difficult to determine whether the defendant knew he could retreat with complete safety.“° Recently, however, many judicial decisions reaffirming the retreat requirement
have been nullified by legislation.

3. “Stand your ground” laws. In roughly 30 states, statutes confer a right to meet force with force, including deadly force, even in public spaces when a safe avenue of retreat is readily available.44 These controversial “stand your
ground” (SYG) laws are widely regarded as a major new development, but many of them simply codify the no-retreat rule that has long been embedded in the self-defense laws of many states.¢5 Even so, the publicity that accompanies these laws
may in itself seem to legitimate and encourage decisions to meet violence with violence, independent of the statutory details. And many of these statutes add strong additional protections for people who defend themselves by using deadly force
rather than retreating. In Florida, for example, a prosecution against someone who claims to have used force in justifiable self-defense cannot go forward until after a special pretrial “immunity” hearing where the prosecution must establish by clear
and convincing evidence that the use of force was unjustified. Fla. Stat. §776.032(4) (2021); Little v. State, 302 So. 3d 396 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2020).

Explaining the rationale for such statutes, a spokesman for the National Rifle Association, one of the organizations lobbying for them, said they send a needed message to law-abiding citizens: “If they make a decision to save their lives
in the

p.852

p. 659
split second they are being attacked, the law is on their side. ... Good people make good decisions. That's why they're good people. If you're going to empower someone, empower the crime victim.” See Adam Liptak, 15 States Expand Right to
Shoot in Self-Defense, N.Y. Times, Aug. 7, 2006.

(a) Protecting rights or saving lives? In assessing the moral and practical implications of a retreat requirement, consider State v. Smiley, 927 So. 2d 1000 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2006). The defendant Smiley, a cab driver, was paid in
advance to drive an intoxicated man home from a bar.4° When they arrived at their destination the man got out of the cab, but then he allegedly started an argument, pulled a knife, and began advancing toward Smiley. Smiley apparently could
have driven away in complete safety, but he chose to stand his ground, drew his gun, and shot his customer dead. At the time of the shooting, Florida's common-law decisions required retreat, and Smiley was convicted of first-degree murder. But
he might have a strong defense under the SYG statute enacted shortly after the shooting, which currently provides (Fla. Stat. §776.012(2) (2021):

A person is justified in using or threatening to use deadly force if he or she reasonably believes that using or threatening to use such force is necessary to prevent imminent death or great bodily harm to himself or herself or

another or to prevent the imminent commission of a forcible felony. A person who uses or threatens to use deadly force in accordance with this subsection does not have a duty to retreat and has the right to stand his or her

ground if [he or she] is not engaged in a criminal activity and is in a place where he or she has a right to be.

QUESTION: Should the law require retreat in a situation like the Smiley case? Or does the Florida statute set a better standard for determining the scope of the privilege to use deadly force in self-defense?

(b) Unintended consequences. SYG laws are typically debated in terms of the moral wisdom of preferring the rights of “good people” over the lives of those they believe (correctly or otherwise) to be committing a serious offense. But
it is important to consider possible indirect effects: Will deterrence be enhanced by the prospect that crime victims can more readily resort to self-help? Or will the homicide rate increase because unnecessary killings occur more often in circum-
stances that are excusable under permissive SYG standards? Will SYG laws increase vigilantism and the danger of fatal mistakes prompted by unfounded racial suspicion?

Recall the Trayvon Martin case, p. 811 supra, where a lethal confrontation occurred because George Zimmerman disregarded police advice and followed an unarmed Black teenager whom he considered dangerous. Although Zimmer-
man’s defense team did not expressly invoke Florida's SYG law (preferring to argue that Martin had pinned Zimmerman down, so that retreat was not an option), SYG played a significant role in the unfolding of that tragedy. Observers suggested
that “the sense of legal entitlement to kill at will . .. contributed to the incident even

p. 859

p. 854
occurring in the first place.” Moreover, the trial judge's jury instructions mentioned Zimmerman’s “right to stand his ground and meet force with force,” and a juror said after the trial that a homicide verdict was precluded “because of the heat of the
moment and the ‘stand your ground.’"47

How should such outcomes be weighed against the perceived benefits of SYG?

With respect to racially discriminatory effects, systematic empirical data are thin, but the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights reported:¢®

[Available studies] do not show a disproportionate increase in the deaths of protected classes as a result of SYG laws. The vast majority of concealed weapon permit holders are white, [and] the largest increases in firearms-

related [homicides have both perpetrators and victims who] are white. As a matter of impact on death rates, there does not appear to be any statistically significant disparity that would imply that Stand Your Ground results

in more deaths of African Americans.

Racial bias may play out in other ways, however. There is some evidence that white people who invoke SYG laws after shooting Black people are much more likely to succeed in their self-defense claims than Black people who invoke
SYG laws after shooting white people.42 The dynamics of implicit bias and the suspicion heuristic (see pp. 812-815 supra) also increase the likelihood of mistakes when people assess whether someone else poses a potentially lethal threat. The
choice between “standing your ground” or retreating may therefore be a choice between killing or not killing a person who is entirely innocent. Particularly concerning is the risk that SYG laws contribute to maintaining residential segregation, be-
cause suspicion is often triggered by whether a person looks “out of place” in the neighborhood, “making a Black person in a White neighborhood even more likely to [be] the object of fear.” Addie C. Rolnick, Defending White Space, 40 Cardozo
L. Rev. 1639, 1640 (2019).

A separate concern is whether SYG laws increase or decrease violence overall. For their supporters, SYG laws serve to help civilians protect themselves and reduce violence. On this issue, there is extensive empirical evidence, and it
largely refutes this expectation. A RAND Corporation survey of the studies found strong evidence that SYG laws are associated with increases in firearm homicides and moderate evidence that they increase homicides overall; Florida's SYG law
was associated with a 32 percent increase in firearm homicide rates and a 24 percent increase in overall

854
p. 855

homicide rates.52 Consistent with these findings, an earlier American Bar Association report concluded (American Bar Association, p. 812 supra, at 2):

Stand Your Ground laws have no deterrent effect on violent crimes, specifically burglary, robbery, and aggravated assault[, and empirical studies find] an increase in homicides in states with Stand Your Ground laws. [T]he

data fails to bear out the crime deterrent/crime-reduction rationale espoused by proponents of Stand Your Ground laws. Rather, the evidence tells a story of mounting problems with the implementation of these laws and un-

intended, negative implications for racial and ethnic minorities, law enforcement, the criminal justice system and public safety.

On the basis of this report, the ABA in 2015 adopted a resolution urging states to “[repeal and] refrain from enacting Stand Your Ground Laws that eliminate the duty to retreat before using force in self-defense in public spaces.”51

4. The castle exception. (a) Intruders. In jurisdictions requiring retreat before deadly force may be used, an exception is invariably made when defendants are attacked in their own homes by an intruder. Thus, in People v. Tomlins,
107 N.E. 496, 497 (N.Y. 1914), Judge Cardozo stated:

Itis not now and never has been the law that a man assailed in his own dwelling is bound to retreat. If assailed there, he may stand his ground and resist the attack. He is under no duty to take to the fields and the highways, a

fugitive from his own home. . . . Flight is for sanctuary and shelter, and shelter, if not sanctuary, is in the home. That there is, in such a situation, no duty to retreat is, we think, the settled law in the United States as in England.

Is the castle exception sound in principle, or is it just a concession to human instinct? Suppose that a distraught teenager pushes past the door into the home of a teacher, pulls a knife, cuts the phone lines, and threatens to kill the
teacher. If the teacher can easily get to a car and go for help, should the teacher be entitled to ignore that option, pull a gun, and kill the teenager on the spot? All American jurisdictions hold in the affirmative. What is the justification for that result?

(b) Guests. Should the castle exception also be available (so that retreat is not required) when the homeowner kills a guest? For example, suppose that the owner and a friend are drinking heavily and get into an argument over dinner;
the guest grabs a kitchen knife and advances in a menacing way. Should a homeowner who can easily escape and get help nonetheless be entitled to draw a gun and kill the guest? Only a few states would require the homeowner to retreat in this
situation; the great majority permit the homeowner to kill in self-defense. Do you agree? See Catherine L. Carpenter, Of the Enemy Within, the Castle Doctrine, and Self-Defense, 86 Marq. L. Rev. 653 (2003).

p. 855
p. 856

(c) Co-occupants. The greatest disagreement arises in situations in which one occupant kills another, such as a spouse or child. In Tomlins, supra, Judge Cardozo held that a father being threatened by his son could kill the son rather
than retreat. MPC §3.04(2)(b)\(Ii(1) endorses this view, as do most of the recent decisions on the issue. E.g., State v. Jones, 786 S.E.2d 132, 140-141 (S.C. 2016). But some courts require the homeowner to flee if possible when the attacker is a co-
occupant. In State v. Shaw, 441 A.2d 561 (Conn, 1981), the applicable self-defense statute, patterned on the MPC, stated: “[T]he actor shall not be required to retreat if he is in his dwelling . . . and was not the initial aggressor. . ..” Nevertheless,
the court, noting the overriding policy favoring human life and stressing that, in the great majority of homicides the killer and victim are relatives or close acquaintances, chose to read into the statute a requirement of retreat from co-occupants. The
court stated: “We cannot conclude that the Connecticut legislature intended to sanction the reenactment of the climactic scene from ‘High Noon’ in the familial kitchens of this state.”

Minnesota once took the same approach, requiring retreat in cases of attack by a co-occupant, but not in cases of attack by an intruder or guest. What, then, should be the rule when a homeowner is attacked by an intimate partner who
visits and sleeps over several nights a week? The difficulty of distinguishing between a co-occupant and a mere guest ultimately led the Minnesota Supreme Court to hold that a homeowner need not retreat and can use deadly force even against
a full-fledged co-resident. State v. Glowacki, 630 N.W.2d 392 (Minn. 2001).

An additional concern for courts that follow this approach is fear that a duty to retreat would adversely affect victims of domestic violence, because for a battering victim “separation or retreat can be the most dangerous time in the
relationship.” Weiand v. State, 732 So. 2d 1044, 1053 (Fla. 1999). See Brandi Jackson, No Ground on Which to Stand: Revise Stand Your Ground Laws So Survivors of Domestic Violence Are No Longer Incarcerated for Defending Their Lives, 30
Berkeley J. Gender L. & Just. 154 (2015).

QUESTIONS: In jurisdictions that require retreat from one’s home when the aggressor is also a lawful occupant, can a battered woman's defense succeed? Could the defendant show that the retreat duty is inapplicable in her situation? See Mary
Anne Franks, Real Men Advance, Real Women Retreat: Stand Your Ground, Battered Women’s Syndrome, and Violence as Male Privilege, 68 U. Miami L. Rev. 1099 (2014).

United States v. Peterson
United States Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit
483 F.2d 1222 (1973)

Rosinson, J. Indicted for second-degree murder, and convicted by a jury of manslaughter as a lesser included offense, Bennie L. Peterson [complains] that the judge . . . erred in the instructions given the jury in relation to his claim [of]
self-defense. [WJe affirm Peterson's conviction.

The events immediately preceding the homicide are not seriously in dispute. . . . Charles Keitt, the deceased, and two friends drove in Keitt’s car to the alley in the rear of Peterson's house to remove the windshield wipers from the
latter's

p. 856

p.857
wrecked car. While Keitt was doing so, Peterson came out of the house . . . to protest. After a verbal exchange, Peterson went back into the house, obtained a pistol, and returned to the yard. In the meantime, Keitt had reseated himself in his car,
and he and his companions were about to leave.

Upon his reappearance in the yard, Peterson paused briefly to load the pistol. “If you move,” he shouted to Keitt, “I will shoot.” He walked to a point in the yard slightly inside a gate in the rear fence and, pistol in hand, said [to Keitt], “If
you come in here | will kill you.” Keitt alighted from his car, took a few steps toward Peterson and exclaimed, “What the hell do you think you are going to do with that?” Keitt then made an about-face, walked back to his car and got a lug wrench.
With the wrench in a raised position, Keitt advanced toward Peterson, who stood with the pistol pointed toward him. Peterson warned Keitt not to “take another step” and, when Keitt continued onward shot him in the face from a distance of about
ten feet. Death was apparently instantaneous. . . .

Peterson's complaint centers upon an instruction that the right to use deadly force in self-defense is not ordinarily available to one who provokes a conflict or is the aggressor in it. . .. Peterson contends that there was no evidence that
he either caused or contributed to the conflict, and that the instructions on the topic could only [have] misled the jury.

It has long been accepted that one cannot support a claim of self-defense by a self-generated necessity to kill. The right of homicidal self-defense is granted only to those free from fault in the difficulty; it is denied to slayers who incite
the fatal attack, encourage the fatal quarrel or otherwise promote the necessitous occasion for taking life. The fact that the deceased struck the first blow, fired the first shot or made the first menacing gesture does not legalize the self-defense
claim if in fact the claimant was the actual provoker. In sum, one who is the aggressor in a conflict culminating in death cannot invoke the necessities of self-preservation. Only in the event that he communicates to his adversary his intent to with-
draw and in good faith attempts to do so is he restored to his right of self-defense.

This body of doctrine traces its origin to the fundamental principle that a killing in self-defense is excusable only as a matter of genuine necessity. Quite obviously, a defensive killing is unnecessary if the occasion for it could have been
averted.

[T]he trial judge's charge fully comported with these governing principles. The remaining question, then, is whether there was evidence to make them applicable to the case... .

The evidence is uncontradicted that when Peterson reappeared in the yard with his pistol, Keitt was about to depart the scene. . .. The uncontroverted fact that Keitt was leaving shows plainly that so far as he was concerned the con-
frontation was ended. [E]ven if he had previously been the aggressor, he no longer was.

Not so with Peterson, however. . .. Emerging from the house with the pistol, he paused in the yard to load it, and to command Keitt not to move. He then walked through the yard to the rear gate and, displaying his pistol, dared Keitt
to come in, and threatened to kill him if he did. While there appears to be no fixed rule on the subject, the cases hold, and we agree, that an affirmative unlawful act reasonably calculated to produce an affray foreboding injurious or fatal conse-
quences is an aggression which, unless renounced, nullifies the right of homicidal self-defense. We cannot escape the abiding conviction that the jury could readily find Peterson’s challenge to be a transgression of that character.

p.857

p. 658
The situation at bar is not unlike that presented in Laney [294 Fed. 412 (1923)]. There the accused, chased along the street by a mob threatening his life, managed to escape through an areaway between two houses . . . and then
returned to the areaway. The mob beset him again, and during an exchange of shots one of its members was killed by a bullet from the accused's gun. In affirming a conviction of manslaughter, the court reasoned: “It is clearly apparent . .. that,
when defendant escaped from the mob into the back yard . . . he was in a place of comparative safety, from which, if he desired to go home, he could have gone by the back way. [WJhen he adjusted his gun and stepped out into the areaway, he
had every reason to believe that his presence there would provoke trouble. We think his conduct in adjusting his revolver and going into the areaway was such as to deprive him of any right to invoke the plea of self-defense.” . . .
We are brought much the readier to the same conclusion here. We think the evidence plainly presented an issue of fact as to whether Peterson's conduct was an invitation to and provocation of the encounter which ended in the fatal
shot. We sustain the trial judge's action in remitting that issue for the jury's determination.
NOTES AND QUESTIONS
1. Can the nonlethal aggressor respond? In Peterson, the defendant became the initial aggressor when he obtained a pistol, reentered his yard, and threatened to shoot. Keitt’s response (getting the lug wrench) was arguably a
legitimate act of self-protection under these circumstances; if so, it is easy to see why Peterson should not have a right to use deadly force in return. But suppose that Peterson had threatened only nonlethal force and then was met by Keitt’s ex-
cessive, potentially lethal response. Should initial aggressors still be denied any right to defend their lives, when their initial aggression may have consisted only of provocative words, a shove, or a punch?
In a few states, nonlethal aggressors can regain the right to self-defense if met by an excessive, life-threatening response, provided that they then “exhaust[s] every reasonable means to escape such danger other than the use of
[deadly] force.”52 But most jurisdictions tend to deny the initial aggressor even this limited means of escape. On the ground that self-defense is available only to the person who is “free from fault,” most states hold that initial aggressors have no
self-defense privilege even when their minor provocation is met by a grossly excessive response.®° Apparently, the initial aggressor’s only choices are to run (if possible), to forgo self-defense (and be killed), or to fight back unlawfully (and face
homicide charges if forced to kill the attacker). Does this make sense?
Consider Allen v. State, 871 P.2d 79, 92-93 (Okla. Crim. App. 1994). After the defendant, Allen, and her intimate partner quarreled, the partner, Gloria Leathers, collected her possessions and prepared to move out. As Leathers went to.
her car, Allen pursued her, asking her to stay, but Leathers grabbed a multiple-pronged garden rake and struck Allen in the face, causing extensive bleeding. Leathers drove off, and Allen
p. 858
p. 659
got in her own car to pursue Leathers. When Allen caught up, she parked her car and walked toward Leathers’s vehicle, hoping (she claimed) to persuade Leathers to reconsider. At that point Allen saw Leathers coming toward her holding the
rake. She returned to her car and retrieved a gun from the glove compartment; when she turned around and saw Leathers standing very near her, holding the rake, she fired. Leathers died from a single gunshot wound to the abdomen. Allen was
convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to death. The appellate court noted that in Oklahoma, ‘a party has no obligation to retreat from a confrontation; she can stand her ground and defend herself”; nonetheless the court affirmed the
conviction and the sentence, after finding the no-retreat privilege unavailable to Allen:
Ifa person by provocative behavior initiates a confrontation, even with no intention of killing the other person, she loses the right of self-defense. Here, even assuming Appellant did not intend to provoke an argument when
she pursued the decedent . . ., she re-initiated the encounter... . She knew the decedent was upset, yet she pursued her anyway, knowing the possibility of a confrontation was strong. [Elven limiting review to Appellant's
version of events, we find the Appellant was not entitled to instructions on self-defense.
QUESTIONS: Did Allen commit a punishable offense in pursuing Leathers in order to persuade her to reconsider her decision to move out? Even if Allen had thrown the first punch, what should be the appropriate punishment for that offense?
2. What kinds of fault suffice? How far should courts extend the doctrine that fault forfeits the privilege of self-defense? In Andrews v. United States, 125 A.3d 316 (D.C. 2015), the defendant went to Bigelow's home to see Bigelow's

sister, after Bigelow warned him to keep away and implicitly threatened to kill him if he did not. When defendant showed up anyway, Bigelow charged at him with a knife, and defendant shot and killed Bigelow. At his trial for murder, defendant
argued that he went to see the sister for peaceful purposes, had every right to be where he was, and had no choice but to shoot Bigelow to save himself from a deadly attack. Defendant was convicted after the trial judge instructed the jury that one
who “provokes conflict upon himself” cannot claim self-defense. The appellate court affirmed the conviction, explaining (id. at 321-322):

[Slelf-defense is not available to a defendant who voluntarily — knowingly and unnecessarily — placed himself in a position where he had reason to believe his presence would provoke [violence]. Forfeiture [of the right to

self-defense] ensues . . . even if the defendant's “purpose in putting himself in that position . . . was benign,” and even if the area of confrontation was a public street or other place where the defendant had a right to be

present. . . . The rationale underlying this stern doctrine lies in “the fundamental principle that a killing in self-defense is excusable only as a matter of genuine necessity. Quite obviously, a defensive killing is unnecessary if

the occasion for it could have been averted[.]”

Do you agree? Compare Margaret Raymond, Looking for Trouble: Framing and the Dignitary Interest in the Law of Self-Defense, 71 Ohio St. LJ. 287, 289 (2010), arguing that a person like Andrews should not have to rely on police protection in
order to pursue perfectly lawful activities. Similarly, Kimberly Kessler Ferzan argues
p. 659
p. 660
(Provocateurs, 7 Crim. L. & Phil. 597 (2013)) that people should “forfeit their defensive rights [only] when they . . . subjectively appreciate that they are running the risk of causing force to be used against them and they engage in this behavior with-
out justification or excuse.” Do you agree, or is it preferable to minimize the use of lethal force to settle private conflicts, no matter who is in the wrong?

Most courts deny the right to defend with lethal force when the person claiming self-defense has wrongfully provoked the conflict. But what sort of wrongdoing will suffice? Suppose that Finley catches Ryan in bed with Finley's spouse.
Finley, enraged, tries to kill Ryan. Can Ryan defend with deadly force, or does Ryan become the aggressor, and therefore lose the right to self-defense, by committing adultery with Finley's spouse? What should be the result under Allen v. State,
Note 1, supra?

Some courts hold that Ryan cannot defend with deadly force in this situation. See Dabney v. State, 21 So. 211 (Ala. 1897). More modern cases addressing the issue tend to reject this approach. See Atkins v. State, 339 S.E.2d 782 (Ga.
1986). Which is the better view? Is it wrong to permit Ryan to have an affair and then kill the spouse who is understandably enraged by that provocative conduct? Or is it worse to make Ryan, whose most serious offense is adultery, either face a
homicide conviction (for having used deadly force in self-defense) or die (for having lost the privilege of self-defense)?

Some courts take this “free from fault” requirement even further, holding that commission of any crime causally related to the fatal result will forfeit the privilege of self-defense, even when the crime itself does not provoke the victim's
threatening conduct. Consider Mayes v. State, 744 N.E.2d 390 (Ind. 2001). The defendant and his girlfriend Mary were having a bitter argument. Mary left the house, and the defendant pursued her into the street. When she reached for her purse,
the defendant, who claimed she was about to pull a gun, drew his own weapon and fired, killing her. Whether the circumstances would support a claim of self-defense was hotly disputed. But the prosecution argued that because the defendant
had committed a misdemeanor by carrying a handgun without a license, he had, in any event, forfeited his right to self-defense. The trial judge instructed the jury that, as specified in the applicable Indiana statute, the defendant was not entitled to
use force in self-defense if he was “committing [or] escaping after the commission [of] a crime.” The jury convicted Mayes of murder, and the Indiana Supreme Court affirmed. The court acknowledged that a literal application of the statute would
produce absurd results and stressed that there must be “an immediate causal connection between the crime and the confrontation.” Id. at 394. But, the court held, “the jury could have concluded that but for Mayes’ possession of the unlicensed
handgun, Mary would still be alive because Mayes’ unlicensed handgun [which he had carried into the street] was required, by law, to be kept at his dwelling.” Id.

Is the result sound? Recall the felony-murder doctrine, under which the commission of certain felonies can sometimes be a basis for murder liability when death results. If Mayes’s possession of the handgun was a felony, would he be
guilty of murder under the felony-murder rule? If not, is there good reason to attach murder penalties when death is proximately caused by the commission of a misdemeanor?

3. The Model Penal Code. The traditional common-law rule reflected in Peterson and Allen differs from MPC §3.04. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §3.04 at 49-51 (1985):

p. 660
p66

Subsection (2)(b)(i) denies justification for the use of deadly force if the actor, with the purpose of causing death or serious bodily harm, provoked the use of force against himself in the same encounter. This is a narrower

forfeiture of the privilege of self-defense than commonly obtains. [However]] it is sufficient to resolve the problem, in view of the adoption in Subsection (2)(b)(ii) of a general duty to retreat before resorting to deadly force.
The typical case to be imagined is this: A attacks B with his fists; B defends himself, and manages to subdue A to the extent of pinning him to the floor. B then starts to batter A’s head savagely against the floor.

A manages to rise, and since B is still attacking him and A now fears that if he is thrown again to the floor he will be killed, A uses a knife. B is killed or seriously wounded.

[Under] this section . . . B is entitled to defend himself against A’s attack, but only to the extent of using moderate, nondeadly force. . . . B exceeds the bounds of “necessary” force . . . , however, when, after

reducing A to helplessness, he batters A’s head on the floor. Since this excessive force is, in its turn, unlawful, under Subsection (1) A is entitled to defend himself against it and, if he believes that he is then in danger of death

or serious bodily harm without apparent opportunity for safe retreat, A is also entitled to use his knife in self-protection. A of course is criminally liable for his initial battery on B, but would have a justifying defense that he

could raise against prosecution for the ultimate homicide or wounding. Subsection (2)(b)(i), depriving A of his justification on the ground of initial aggression, would not become operative unless A entered the encounter with

the purpose of causing death or serious bodily harm. . . .

2. Protection of Property
People v. Ceballos

‘Supreme Court of California

526 P.2d 241 (Cal. 1974)

Burke, J. Don Ceballos was found guilty by a jury of assault with a deadly weapon (Pen. Code, §245). Imposition of sentence was suspended and he was placed on probation. . . .

Defendant lived alone in a home in San Anselmo. The regular living quarters were above the garage, but defendant sometimes slept in the garage and had about $2,000 worth of property there.

In March 1970 some tools were stolen from defendant's home. On May 12, 1970, he noticed the lock on his garage doors was bent and pry marks were on one of the doors. The next day he mounted a loaded .22 caliber pistol in the
garage. The pistol was aimed at the center of the garage doors and was connected by a wire to one of the doors so that the pistol would discharge if the door was opened several inches.

p. 861
p. 862

The damage to defendant’s lock had been done by a 16-year-old boy named Stephen and a 15-year-old boy named Robert. On the afternoon of May 15, 1970, the boys returned to defendant’s house while he was away. Neither boy
was armed with a gun or knife. After looking in the windows and seeing no one, Stephen succeeded in removing the lock on the garage doors with a crowbar, and, as he pulled the door outward, he was hit in the face with a bullet from the pistol.

Stephen testified: He intended to go into the garage “[flor musical equipment” because he had a debt to pay to a friend. His “way of paying that debt would be to take [defendant’s] property and sell it” and use the proceeds to pay the
debt. He “wasn’t going to do it [i.e., steal] for sure, necessarily.” He was there “to look around,” and “getting in, | don’t know if | would have actually stolen.”

Defendant, testifying in his own behalf, admitted having set up the trap gun. He stated that after noticing the pry marks on his garage door on May 12, he felt he should “set up some kind of a trap, something to keep the burglar out of
my home.” When asked why he was trying to keep the burglar out, he replied, “ . . . Because somebody was trying to steal my property . . . and | don’t want to come home some night and have the thief in there . . . usually a thief is pretty desper-
ate... and... they just pick up a weapon . .. if they don’t have one . . . and do the best they can.” [D]efendant [also] stated that “he didn’t have much and he wanted to protect what he did have.”

[The jury found defendant guilty of assault with a deadly weapon. An assault is “an unlawful attempt, coupled with a present ability, to commit a violent injury on the person of another.” (Pen. Code, §240.)

Defendant contends that had he been present he would have been justified in shooting Stephen since Stephen was attempting to commit burglary, that under cases such as United States v. Gilliam, 25 Fed. Cas. p. 1319, defendant had
a right to do indirectly what he could have done directly, and that therefore any attempt by him to commit a violent injury upon Stephen was not “unlawful” and hence not an assault. The People argue that the rule in Gilliam is unsound, that as a
matter of law a trap gun constitutes excessive force, and that in any event the circumstances were not in fact such as to warrant the use of deadly force. .. .

In the United States, courts have concluded that a person may be held criminally liable . . . or civilly liable, if he sets upon his premises a deadly mechanical device and that device kills or injures another. . . . However, an exception to the
rule that there may be criminal and civil liability for death or injuries caused by such a device has been recognized where the intrusion is, in fact, such that the person, were he present, would be justified in taking the life or inflicting the bodily harm
with his own hands. . .

Allowing persons, at their own risk, to employ deadly mechanical devices imperils the lives of children, firemen and policemen acting within the scope of their employment, and others. Where the actor is present, there is always the
possibility he will realize that deadly force is not necessary, but deadly mechanical devices are without mercy or discretion. Such devices “are silent instrumentalities of death. They deal death and destruction to the innocent as well as the criminal
intruder without the slightest warning. The taking of human life [or infliction of great bodily injury] by such means is brutally savage and inhuman.” (See State v. Plumlee, . .. 149 So. 425, 430).

p. 862
p. 869

[T]he use of such devices should not be encouraged. Moreover, whatever may be thought in torts, the foregoing rule setting forth an exception to liability for death or injuries inflicted by such devices “is inappropriate in penal law for it
is obvious that it does not prescribe a workable standard of conduct; liability depends upon fortuitous results.” (See Model Penal Code (Tent. Draft No. 8), §3.06, com. 15.) We therefore decline to adopt that rule in criminal cases.

Furthermore, even if that rule were applied here, as we shall see, defendant was not justified in shooting Stephen. Penal Code section 197 provides:

Homicide is . . . justifiable . . . 1. When resisting any attempt to murder any person, or to commit a felony, or to do some great bodily injury upon any person; or, 2. When committed in defense of habitation, property, or per-

son, against one who manifestly intends or endeavors, by violence or surprise, to commit a felony...

By its terms subdivision 1 of Penal Code section 197 appears to permit killing to prevent any “felony,” but in view of the large number of felonies today and the inclusion of many that do not involve a danger of serious bodily harm, a
literal reading of the section is undesirable. People v. Jones, 191 Cal. App. 2d 478, 481, . . . read into section 197, subdivision 1, the limitation that the felony be “some atrocious crime attempted to be committed by force. [When] the character of
the crime and the manner of its perpetration . . . do not reasonably create a fear of great bodily harm, . . . there is no cause for the exaction of a human life.” (italics added . . .).

Jones involved subdivision 1 of Penal Code section 197, but subdivision 2 of that section is likewise so limited. The term “violence or surprise” in subdivision 2 is found in common law authorities . . . and, whatever may have been the
very early common law . . . the rule developed at common law that killing or use of deadly force to prevent a felony was justified only if the offense was a forcible and atrocious crime. . . . “Surprise” means an unexpected attack — which includes
force and violence .. . and the word thus appears redundant. Examples of forcible and atrocious crimes are murder, mayhem, rape and robbery. . . . In such crimes “from their atrocity and violence human life [or personal safety from great harm] ei-
ther is, or is presumed to be, in peril” (see United States v. Gilliam, supra, 25 Fed. Cas. pp. 1319, 1320. ..).

Burglary has been included in the list of such crimes. . . . However, in view of the wide scope of burglary under Penal Code section 459, as compared with the common law definition of that offense, in our opinion it cannot be said that
under all circumstances burglary under section 459 constitutes a forcible and atrocious crime.2 Where the character and manner of the burglary do not reasonably create a fear of great bodily harm, there is no cause for exaction of human life...
or for the use of deadly force. .. . In the instant case the asserted burglary did not

p. 869

p. 664
threaten death or serious bodily harm, since no one but Stephen and Robert was then on the premises. A defendant is not protected from liability merely by the fact that the intruders conduct is such as would justify the defendant, were he
present, in believing that the intrusion threatened death or serious bodily injury... . We thus conclude that defendant was not justified under Penal Code section 197, subdivisions 1 or 2, in shooting Stephen to prevent him from committing bur-

glary. [I]n view of the supreme value of human life, we do not believe deadly force can be justified to prevent all [burglaries of a dwelling], including ones in which no person is, or is reasonably believed to be, on the premises except the would-be
burglar.

. .. We conclude that as a matter of law the exception to the rule of liability for injuries inflicted by a deadly mechanical device does not apply under the circumstances here appearing. . . . [Affirmed].

NOTES ON DEFENSE OF HABITATION

1. Variations on Ceballos. Suppose that instead of using a spring gun, Ceballos had put a curtain over the window to prevent anyone from looking in, had then seated himself inside the garage, facing the door, and had fired at the
boys as they raised the door. On these facts would the California court still consider his actions unjustified? Would it matter whether Ceballos knew that the boys were unarmed?

2. Other statutory approaches. (a) MPC §3.06(3)(d), like the Ceballos court, strictly limits the use of deadly force against an intruder in the home. But §3.06(3)(d)(i)(2) nonetheless permits the use of deadly force when “the use of force
other than deadly force to prevent the commission or the consummation of the crime would expose the actor . . . to substantial danger of serious bodily harm.” Would Ceballos have a defense under this provision? Aside from the tactic he actually
employed, how else could Ceballos have prevented the burglary?

(b) In 1984, ten years after the decision in Ceballos, California enacted a “Home Protection Bill of Rights,” which provides (Cal. Penal Code §198.5 (2021)):

Any person using [deadly] force . . . within his or her residence shall be presumed to have held a reasonable fear of imminent peril of death or great bodily injury. .. when that force is used against another person, not a mem-

ber of the family or household, who unlawfully and forcibly enters . . . and the person using the force knew or had reason to believe that an unlawful and forcible entry occurred.

Would Ceballos have had a defense under this provision? Would he have a defense under this provision if he had been present in the hypothetical circumstances posited in Note 1, supra?

(c) Many states have gone further than the California statute. Some permit deadly force to prevent or terminate any felonious entry or even any unlawful entry. See Sarah A. Pohiman, Shooting from the Hip: Missouri's New Approach to
Defense of Habitation, 56 St. Louis U. L.J. 857, 857-858 (2012); Stuart P. Green, Castles and Carjackers: Proportionality and the Use of Deadly Force in Defense of Dwellings and Vehicles, 1999 U. Ill. L. Rev. 1. The Colorado “Make-My-Day” law de-
clares that “the citizens of Colorado have a right to expect absolute safety within their own homes” and provides (Colo. Rev. Stat. §18-1-704.5 (2021)):

p. 864
p. 865

[Alny occupant of a dwelling is justified in using any degree of physical force, including deadly physical force, against another person when that other person has made an unlawful entry into the dwelling, and when the

‘occupant has a reasonable belief that such other person has committed [or intends to commit] a crime in the dwelling in addition to the uninvited entry, . .. and when the occupant reasonably believes that such other person

might use any physical force, no matter how slight, against any occupant.

Some “stand your ground” laws apply to the defense of property and are in some respects even broader than the Colorado law. Although they often apply only when an intruder enters “forcibly,” they apply to vehicles as well as
dwellings and to attempted as well as completed entries.°4 In some states the definition of “the home” includes “[a] building or conveyance of any kind, to include its curtilage.” N.C. Gen. Stat. §14-51.2(a)(1). Thus, in State v. Kuhns, 817 S.E.2d 828,
832 (N.C. Ct. App. 2018), the defendant was entitled to a jury instruction on defense of habitation where the victim was “standing beside the porch on the ground, within the curtilage of defendant's property when defendant fired the fatal shot.”

In Florida, the person using defensive force need not believe that the suspected intruder is about to commit any other crime and “is presumed to have held a reasonable fear of imminent peril of death or great bodily harm to himself
or herself or another [if] the person against whom the defensive force was used or threatened was in the process of unlawfully and forcefully entering, or had unlawfully and forcibly entered, a dwelling, residence, or occupied vehicle.” Fla. Stat.
§776.013(2) (2021). And a defendant charged with using deadly force is entitled to a jury instruction on that reasonable-fear presumption whenever “there [is] some evidence — even if weak or flimsy — to support the defense that the victim had un-
lawfully and forcibly entered [the defendant's] vehicle.” Elder v. State, 296 So. 3d 440, 445 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2020).

Compare these broad privileges to defend property with the more limited privilege to use deadly force in defense of one’s life (see pp. 805-861 supra). Suppose that an uninvited guest (a drunken student) crashes a fraternity party,
refuses to leave, and takes a beer from the refrigerator. Under Colorado law, could a resident of the fraternity house shoot the unwelcome student and kill him? Some argue that in the event of an unlawful intrusion, the danger of serious injury is so
high that it is reasonable to presume such a threat in all cases. Is this convincing? The possible justifications for laws like these are summarized and criticized in Green, supra, at 18-41; Elizabeth Megale, A Call for Change: A Contextual-Configura-
tive Analysis of Florida’s “Stand Your Ground” Laws, 68 U. Miami L. Rev. 1051 (2014). For a more positive assessment, see Cynthia V. Ward, “Stand Your Ground” and Self Defense, 42 Am. J. Crim. L. 89 (2015).

3. Problem. On the night of October 17, 1992, Yoshihiro Hattori, a 16-year-old Japanese exchange student, was with a friend looking for a Halloween party, and he was dressed in a “Saturday Night Fever” costume. He mistakenly rang
Mr. Peairs's doorbell, and when Mrs. Peairs came to the door and saw them, she became frightened and screamed. Apparently, neither Hattori nor his friend could

p. 865

p. 666
speak enough English to reassure her. At this point Peairs grabbed his laser-scoped .44-magnum handgun from his bedroom and went to the carport door. The two boys had retreated to the sidewalk, but when the carport door opened, Hattori
began walking toward Peairs, waving his arms as he often did when trying to communicate. Peairs yelled “freeze,” but Hattori did not understand him. Hattori continued forward; he had recently lost a contact lens and presumably did not see the
gun. When Hattori was less than five feet away, Mr. Peairs fired one shot into his chest, killing him.

Rodney Peairs was indicted for manslaughter. He claimed that the shooting, though mistaken, was justified under La. Rev. Stat. Ann. §14:20(3), which allows the use of deadly force based on a reasonable belief that an intruder is “likely
to use any unlawful force against a person [in the dwelling] while committing . . . a burglary of that dwelling. . ..” Peairs’s lawyer argued that Peairs saw an intruder who kept advancing “with absolutely no respect for [Peairs’s] home, his gun, or his
warning.” During closing arguments, Peairs’s lawyer proclaimed “You have the absolute legal right in this country to answer your door with a gun. In your house, if you want to do it, you have the legal right to answer everybody that comes to your
door with a gun.” The prosecutor emphasized the fact that Peairs acted without investigating why his wife screamed; Peairs’s alleged negligence was “his conduct in going to the closet and getting the biggest handgun made by human beings and
never ever asking what it’s for.” After a seven-day trial and three hours of deliberation, Peairs was acquitted. The acquittal sparked outrage in Japan where owning a handgun is illegal (with minor exceptions), but many people in Peairs's commu-
nity supported his actions. See N.Y. Times, May 23, 1993, at A1; May 20, 1993, at A10.

Subsequently, a judge in a civil case found “no justification whatsoever” for the shooting and awarded the estate of Mr. Hattori $650,000 in damages against Mr. Peairs. N.Y. Times, Sept. 16, 1994, at A7.

For close analysis of the role of cultural misunderstanding and language barriers in determining reasonableness in the context of the Peairs cases, see Caroline Forell, What's Reasonable?: Self-Defense and Mistake in Criminal and Tort
Law, 14 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 1401 (2010).

QUESTIONS: Was the result of the criminal prosecution justified under Louisiana law? Would the defendant's case be stronger if it arose in Florida or in Colorado? If so, does that argue for or against such statutes?
NOTE ON DEFENSE OF OTHER TYPES OF PROPERTY

In Sydnor v. State, 776 A.2d 669, 671 (Md. 2001), the defendant was sitting on a stoop when Anthony Jackson approached, pulled a gun, and told him to hand over a gold chain he was wearing. After hitting Sydnor on the head and
threatening to kill him, Jackson took $30 and was about to take the gold chain when Sydnor, assisted by friends, grabbed the gun and took it away. Jackson then attempted to flee, but Sydnor fired five shots, hitting him four times. Jackson col-
lapsed and died 40 to 50 yards from where the robbery occurred. At Sydnor's trial for murder and manslaughter, the judge instructed the jury that before using deadly force, the defendant was required to retreat unless “at the moment that the
shots were fired the defendant was being robbed,” and the prosecution contended that the jury was

p. 666
p. 667

entitled to view the robbery and the shooting as separate incidents. Sydnor was convicted of voluntary manslaughter. The Maryland Court of Appeals affirmed, rejecting the defense argument that the robbery was “a continuous transaction that is
not complete until the perpetrator reaches a place of temporary safety.” Id. at 676. Acknowledging that under felony-murder precedents, a robbery does not end until the robber has made good his escape, the court said (id. at 676-677):
That principle does not, however, expand or trump the rule that limits the right to use deadly force to the time and circumstance that such force is necessary. The issue . . . is not whether the criminal enterprise is still in
operation, but whether deadly force is then and there necessary to avoid imminent danger of death or serious bodily harm to the victim of the offense. If it is not, deadly force may not be used because its use . . . would be ex-
cessive and not required by the exigency of the moment... .
A dissenting judge commented (id. at 681-682):
lam a believer in the rule of law. But | do not believe that it requires victims of violent crimes to submit to being robbed and beaten at gunpoint, without the right to respond with all necessary force during the act. .. . The law
should not . . . require complacent and compliant victims. . . .
This is not a case where Mr. Sydnor saw Mr. Jackson on the street a week after the robbery, and shot him in order to get his money back. In the present case, Mr. Jackson . . . was still attempting to complete the
robbery, by carrying the stolen money away... .. The majority does not sufficiently address the fact that robbery is not only a taking of property by force, but it is a forcible taking and carrying away of property. At the time he
was shot, Mr. Jackson was carrying away property he had, just seconds before, taken by force and at gunpoint.
QUESTIONS: (a) Which is the better approach to a case like Sydnor? The MPC position is closer to that of the dissenting judge. See §3.06(3)(d)(ii). But if people are required to retreat, when possible, in the face of a deadly threat to life, why
should they be entitled to pursue and kill their assailants in order to recover $30?
(b) Putting aside Sydnor’s desire to recover his property, should his use of deadly force be justifiable as a means of apprehending a dangerous felon? Consider the material that follows.
3. The Use of Force in Law Enforcement
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
In addition to the defenses we have considered so far, which are typically invoked by private citizens (self-defense, defense of others, and defense of property), an overlapping but doctrinally distinct set of defenses applies when force
is used to prevent crime or effect an arrest. These defenses and their limits are most centrally directed to law enforcement officers, but private citizens may also claim these defenses, especially when they are assisting the police.
p. 867
p. 868
The basic principles applicable to arrests and crime prevention are comparable to those we have seen in connection with the defense of persons and property: In general terms, force must never be excessive in relation to the harm it
seeks to prevent. As we shall see, however, the doctrinal specifics are somewhat different. And the social context is distinct: In urban areas, police are ubiquitous, they almost always carry firearms, and of great importance, police — unlike civilians
— usually do not have the option to steer clear of dangerous situations. To the contrary, the potential for citizen misconduct and violence is ever-present in their working environment, and their duty is not to avoid danger but to intervene. Indeed,
the capacity and authority to deploy non-negotiable force, and to do so quickly, 24/7, is what most centrally defines the police function and distinguishes it from other government agencies with responsibility for public health and safety (like Emer-
gency Medical Services or the courts).55 The ability to defuse conflict and prevent trouble on the spot, by force if necessary, is at the heart of what people expect when they “call the cops.”

The value of a police officer's ability to deploy needed force quickly is matched, however, by its unique capacity to inflict unwarranted injury, inflame racial tension, and undermine the bonds of community when it is not carefully con-
strained. News reports of fatal police shootings and uses of excessive force against unarmed individuals, often minority youth, are tragically frequent. Victims like Sandra Bland, Michael Brown, Philando Castile, Eric Garner, Freddie Gray, Tamir
Rice, Breonna Taylor, and many others now have widely recognized names,°° prompting a national movement — “Black Lives Matter” — devoted in part to insisting that police exercise greater restraint in their use of force.57

In May 2020 George Floyd was murdered by a police officer who, after arresting and handcuffing him, held him on the ground with a knee to his neck for roughly nine minutes while Floyd complained of being unable to breathe. Floyd's
killing sparked national and world-wide protests in support of the Black Lives Matter movement.®2 The officer, Derek Chauvin, was ultimately convicted of second-degree murder and sentenced to 22.5 years in prison.°2 The George Floyd Justice
in Policing Act was passed by the U.S. House of Representatives in March 2021 but at this writing has not yet been acted upon in the Senate. It contains provisions intended to curb the use of force in law enforcement, for example, prohibiting the
use of chokeholds and other neck restraints, requiring officers to attempt to de-escalate confrontations, and permitting the use of

p. 668
p. 669
deadly force only as a last resort.©° Many local police departments have voluntarily adopted similar policies, though usually in vague terms or subject to flexible exceptions.°

Beneath the headlines, police shootings — sometimes justified and sometimes not — are even more frequent than these notorious incidents might suggest. An incomplete federal database includes details on 1,217 deadly police
shootings from 2010 to 2012,°2 and the best current estimate suggests that there are around 1,000 killings by police in the United States each year, nearly three every day.£° Professor Frank Zimring notes that “each of the nation’s more than half a
million police officers will have hundreds if not thousands of interactions with citizens. So even the very high rate of fatalities from police use of force in the United States is a needle-in-the-haystack phenomenon when compared to the hundreds of
millions of contacts between police and citizens.” Even so, the racial disparities are stark: In the federal data, Black males aged 15 to 19 were killed at a rate of 31.17 per million, compared to 1.47 per million for white males in that age range;®° in
other words, the risk of being shot and killed by a police officer was 21 times higher for Black youth than for white youth. Although Black police officers accounted for only about 10 percent of these fatal police shootings, 78 percent of those they
killed were also Black.°° And in one data set, 11 percent of the shooting victims had no weapon of any kind.°7

These data underscore the importance of both the rules and the underlying “facts” — the standards that govern the use of force and the social, cultural, and perhaps racial presuppositions that shape whether a police officer has a
“reasonable belief” that a suspect poses a serious threat. To be sure, criminal prosecutions in this area are rare, and convictions are rarer stil; jurors are said to be “very reluctant to punish police officers, tending to view them as guardians of
order.”®8 Nonetheless, the occasional prosecution has high visibility significance, and the legal standard is crucial in police training, civil-rights litigation, and damage suits brought by injured victims or their surviving relatives. Keep these concerns
in mind as you review the material that follows.

p. 869
p.670
NOTES ON THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

1. Misdemeanors. At common law, deadly force was never permissible simply to prevent a misdemeanor or to effect a misdemeanor arrest. For example, deadly force would not be justified simply to arrest a motorist for a traffic viola
tion. But in practice things become more complicated because a mere traffic stop can quickly evolve into something more.

(a) When the misdemeanant flees. The law has long been clear that an officer may not use deadly force to arrest a misdemeanor suspect who flees without resisting.©2 But what if a suspect stopped for drunk driving flees at high
speed, endangering other motorists? Now can the police shoot, on the theory that their purpose is not simply to make the arrest but to stop the drunk driver from killing innocent bystanders? In principle, the answer is yes — they can try to shoot
out the tires and even shoot at the driver if the car's flight threatens others with death or great bodily harm. In Plumhoff v. Rickard, 572 U.S. 765 (2014), a driver sped away from a traffic stop, swerving through traffic at high speed. Pursuing officers
fired three shots into the car, and when the driver continued to flee, they fired 12 more times, killing the driver and his passenger. The Supreme Court held their actions permissible: “Rickard’s flight posed a grave public safety risk, and. . . the
police acted reasonably in using deadly force to end that risk. . . . We reject the argument [that they acted unreasonably in firing 15 shots]. It stands to reason that, if police officers are justified in firing at a suspect in order to end a severe threat to

public safety, the officers need not stop shooting until the threat has ended.” Id. at 777. The Court did not consider whether shooting at the tires was an option and if so whether shooting directly into the car instead was an unreasonable way to use
the deadly force that was otherwise permissible.

Compare Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372 (2007). When a deputy sheriff signaled Harris to pull over for speeding, Harris sped away at speeds exceeding 85 miles per hour. After a chase of nearly ten miles, one of the pursuing deputies
sought to terminate it by ramming Harris's car from the rear. Harris lost control of his vehicle, which overturned and crashed, leaving Harris badly injured and permanently quadriplegic. In a civil damage suit against the officer for having used ex-
cessive force, the officer largely conceded that his maneuver exposed Harris to a substantial risk of serious injury or death, thus amounting to “deadly force.” But the Court held that the tactic was unambiguously justified — and that the officer was
therefore entitled to summary judgment dismissing the case — because the chase (which had been recorded on video) created great danger to innocent bystanders. The Court described Harris as “racing down narrow, two-lane roads in the dead
of night at speeds that [were] shockingly fast” and “swerv[ing] around more than a dozen other cars”; his driving resembled “a Hollywood-style car chase of the most frightening sort.” Id. at 379-380. But Justice Stevens in dissent saw the chase
quite differently, describing it as

anighttime chase on a lightly traveled road . . . where no pedestrians or other “bystanders” were present. [Harris,] though speeding, retained full control of his vehicle. . . . At no point [did he] pull into the opposite lane other

than to pass a car in front of him; . .. at one point, .. . he slowed

p.670
pert

and waited for the cars traveling in the other direction to pass before overtaking the car in front of him. . . . This is hardly the stuff of Hollywood. To the contrary, the video does not reveal any incidents that could even be

remotely characterized as “close calls.” [Harris's] refusal to stop and subsequent flight was a serious offense. . . . It was not, however, a capital offense, or even an offense that justified the use of deadly force rather than an

abandonment of the chase. [Officers] could have apprehended [Harris] later because they had his license plate number.

Aresearch team subsequently showed the Scott v. Harris video to a large, diverse sample of observers. Overall, a strong majority agreed with the Court majority's perception of the issues, but there were sharp differences along cultural
and ideological lines. Politically conservative, affluent white males were likely to feel strongly that Harris was much more at fault than the police, that he posed a lethal threat to the public, and that the use of deadly force to terminate the chase was
justified. In contrast, politically liberal and well-educated but less affluent individuals, especially African Americans and women, were much more likely to believe that Harris and the police were about equally at fault, that he did not pose a signifi-
cant danger to the public, and that the police acted unreasonably in using deadly force to stop him.72

You can view the six-minute tape for yourself.7! What do you think?

(b) When the misdemeanant resists. What rules should apply in a traffic stop if the motorist pulls a lawfully carried gun from the glove compartment and tells the officer to back off without issuing a ticket? Must the officer comply and
let the motorist drive away? Or should the officer be entitled to call for back-up and use deadly force to effectuate the arrest? In practice such situations are less rare than we might suppose, partly because traffic stops sometimes involve mentally
unstable motorists and partly because the officer may perceive a lethal threat in actions that are in fact innocent (for example, taking from the glove compartment a leather folder that holds the car registration). And bear in mind that the officer must
make the decision quickly, sometimes in conditions of poor visibility. Should the officer be permitted to use deadly force if that reasonably seems the only way to make a successful arrest?

The basic rule for these situations is that when a suspect resists, officers may meet force with force, and if threatened with deadly force, they can respond in kind, not simply to make the arrest, but to protect themselves from the threat
of death or great bodily harm. Note that the officer's privilege here is “a different thing from self-defense, for it is [the officer's] duty to push forward and make the arrest and to secure and retain custody of the prisoner.”72 The practical effect of this
rule, therefore, is that an officer can use lethal force in the context of a mere traffic stop or other minor misdemeanor offense (such as Eric Garner's arrest on the charge of selling loose cigarettes”) whenever the suspect's behavior gives the offi-
cera “reasonable” fear of death or great bodily harm. Importantly, the fact that

pert
p.672

deadly force is legally permissible does not mean that the officer, in the sound exercise of discretion, should use deadly force. Often the wiser course is to seek ways to de-escalate the situation.

QUESTIONS: Does this framework strike the right balance? Or is it better to prohibit deadly force in some minor-offense situations that become threatening (or seem threatening to the officer)? If so, when should deadly force be permissible in
misdemeanor enforcement? For discussion of possible approaches and the need for more careful examination of less intrusive ways to accomplish police objectives, see Lauryn P. Gouldin, Redefining Reasonable Seizures, 93 Denv. U. L. Rev. 53
(2015).

2. Felonies. At common law, a peace officer was allowed to use deadly force to prevent any felony and to make any felony arrest. But over time the felony category expanded to include a wide range of less serious offenses, many
of them nonviolent, and most felonies were no longer subject to the death penalty even after a formal trial and conviction. Under these circumstances, the use of deadly force to make any felony arrest became less and less tolerable. Eventually,
common-law courts restricted deadly force to situations involving “forcible and atrocious crime.” See Ceballos, p. 861 supra. Similarly, the MPC stipulates that deadly force can be used to prevent a crime or effect an arrest only when “the crime for
which the arrest is made involved conduct including the use or threatened use of deadly force; or . . . there is a substantial risk that the person to be arrested will cause death or serious bodily harm if his apprehension is delayed.” See Model Penal
Code §§3.07(2\(b)(iv), 3.07(5)(a)() & (i).

Constitutional limits also come into play because the Fourth Amendment prohibits “unreasonable searches and seizures,” and an arrest — the quintessential seizure of the person — becomes unreasonable when effectuated by exces-
sive force. In Tennessee v. Garner, 471 U.S. 1 (1985), a Memphis police officer responding to a nighttime burglary chased the 15-year-old suspect to a fence, which the teenager started to climb, with every chance of getting away. To prevent the
suspect's escape, the officer shot and killed him. The common law had always authorized apprehension by deadly force for a traditional felony like burglary, but the Court held that shooting the suspect under these circumstances was “unreason-
able,” in violation of the Fourth Amendment. Constitutionalizing a standard similar to that of MPC §3.07(2)(b), the Court declared that, in order to use deadly force to prevent a felon's escape, an officer must have “probable cause to believe that the
suspect poses a threat of serious physical harm, either to the officer or to others.” Id. at 11.

Several factors limit the practical impact of the Garner standard, however. One is the doctrine of “qualified immunity,” which precludes liability unless the officer's conduct violates “clearly established statutory or constitutional
rights,”74 a standard that plaintiffs find almost impossible to meet because the facts of each new case seldom exactly mirror those of an earlier precedent “clearly establish[ing]” the unconstitutionality of that earlier police misconduct. Another is
the fluidity and spontaneity of the circumstances that can give rise to an officer's claimed perception that a suspect (even a motorist fleeing from a traffic stop) poses a threat of serious physical harm.

p.e72
p.673
QUESTIONS: Do the principles proposed in the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act, p. 868 supra, provide a promising path toward solving these problems? Should legislation and constitutional limits go further?

3. Intermediate measures? In situations that do not warrant the use of “deadly” force, what means can the police deploy to stop a suspect from getting away? If a drunk driver flees from an attempted traffic stop, can pursuing officers
radio ahead, asking colleagues to set up a roadblock to prevent the escape? Or is the roadblock itself a form of deadly force, because the speeding, intoxicated driver may be unable to stop in time and may be killed crashing into it at high speed?

Are choke holds, electric cattle prods, night sticks, and pepper spray included in “deadly” force? A California police officer pursuing a suspect threatened to unleash his K-9 companion unless the suspect stopped. When the suspect
refused to do so, the officer released the dog, who effected the arrest by catching up to the suspect, biting onto his right arm, and holding him until the officer ordered the dog to release its grip. The suspect sustained severe wounds to his upper
arm, requiring surgery and eight days of hospitalization. Was this a use of “deadly force”? Was it permissible under Garner? See Vera Cruz v. City of Escondido, 139 F.3d 659 (Sth Cir. 1997). Compare the definition of deadly force in Model Penal
Code §3.11(2).

4. Tasers. As an option to reduce the need to rely on firearms, many police departments use electric stun devices (“Tasers”) to subdue uncooperative arrestees. But is the Taser itself a form of deadly force? In Rodriguez v. Panarello,
119 F. Supp. 3d 331 (E.D. Pa. 2015), a suspect subdued by a Taser suffered a fall resulting in a spinal injury and paraplegia. Consider this description (Bryan v. MacPherson, 608 F.3d 614, 620-622 (9th Cir. 2010)):

A Taser X26 . . . uses compressed nitrogen to propel a pair of “probes” — aluminum darts tipped with stainless steel barbs connected to the X26 by insulated wires — toward the target at a rate of over 160 feet per second.

Upon striking a person, the X26 delivers a 1200 volt, low ampere electrical charge through the wires and probes and into his muscles. The impact is as powerful as it is swift. The electrical impulse instantly overrides the vic-

tim’s central nervous system, paralyzing the muscles throughout the body, rendering the target limp and helpless. The tasered person also experiences an excruciating pain that radiates throughout the body. [Tasers result

in “immobilization, disorientation, loss of balance, and weakness,” even after the electrical current has ended. Moreover, tasering a person may result in serious injuries when intense pain and loss of muscle control cause a

sudden and uncontrolled fall.

Despite these consequences, courts generally conclude that a Taser does not constitute “deadly” force. E.g., Rodriguez, supra. Still is its use inappropriate, even unconstitutional, against nonviolent individuals suspected only of minor
offenses? In a number of traffic-stop cases, officers have used Tasers against motorists who refuse to get out of their vehicles as ordered or otherwise fail to comply with officer instructions. In Odom v. Matteo, 772 F. Supp. 2d 377 (D. Conn. 2011),
an officer making a stop for minor traffic infractions ordered the driver to leave her car; when she hesitated to do so, wanting to wait until other officers arrived (because she was not sure the officer was in fact a police officer), he allegedly tasered
her

p.679

p.674
without warning. The courts agree that such actions, even when falling short of “deadly force,” are constitutionally excessive and that “[w]hether [the officer] reasonably interpreted [the driver's] refusal as a realistic threat to his personal safety or
whether it constituted nothing more than an affront to his command authority is a matter for a jury to decide.” Brown v. City of Golden Valley, 574 F.3d 491, 497 (8th Cir. 2009).

What if a suspect does act aggressively or resist arrest for a minor offense? Then should Taser use be permissible? In Bryan v. MacPherson, supra, a motorist (Bryan), stopped for a seat belt infraction, began to shout expletives and
bang on his steering wheel. Though ordered to remain in his vehicle, he got out while still shouting expletives and “yelling gibberish.” Dressed only in boxer shorts, he was obviously unarmed, but when he continued to behave erratically, the officer
used his Taser X26 to subdue him. Bryan fell to the ground, fracturing four teeth and suffering facial contusions. In a suit against the officer, Bryan described his own behavior as erratic but nonviolent; he emphasized that he was disturbed and
upset but not immediately threatening and that none of the offenses of which he was suspected was inherently dangerous. The officer claimed that he reasonably believed Bryan had committed three misdemeanors in addition to the seat belt vio-
lation — resisting a police officer, failure to comply with a lawful order, and using or being under the influence of a controlled substance — and that he believed Bryan may have been mentally ill and thus subject to detention.

QUESTIONS: Was this use of the Taser a legitimate way to protect the officer and bystanders by defusing a potentially dangerous situation and making more severe force unnecessary? The Ninth Circuit did not think so, noting that “if Officer
MacPherson believed Bryan was mentally disturbed he should have made greater effort to take control of the situation through less intrusive means. . . . A mentally ill individual is in need of a doctor, not a jail cell” (id. at 625). Accordingly, the court
held that the Taser constituted excessive, constitutionally impermissible force in these circumstances. Do you agree? If so, does the court’s result in effect subject Tasers to virtually the same limits that apply to police use of their firearms? What
devices short of the Taser should be available for dealing with situations like that in the Bryan case? See Loan K. Le & Maitria Moua, Civilian Oversight and Developments in Less Lethal Technologies: Weighing Risks and Prioritizing Accountability
in Domestic Law Enforcement, 14 Seattle J. Soc. Just. 101 (2015).

5. What is a “reasonable” fear? Are judgments tainted by consideration of race? As we saw in connection with the use of deadly force in ordinary self-defense, rules on the books are often less important than whether intangible
factors arouse perceptions of danger and whether such perceptions are “reasonable.” See pp. 811-815 supra. The same issues become crucial in law enforcement, with the added complication that police officers confront potential danger far
more often, and their duty requires them to intervene. The possibility for tragic mistakes is multiplied, and there is heightened concern about the potential for racial bias in on-the-spot contextual judgments. There are strongly suggestive indications
of racial profiling in police assessments of the need to use lethal force, but the empirical evidence is mixed. In one well-designed study, officers were far more likely to see a need to use deadly force when the suspect was Black, but another sim-
ilarly designed

p.674
p.676
study found no such effect with respect to deadly force (but did find racial bias with respect to the use of nondeadly force).75 Consider the comment that follows:

SENDHIL MULLAINATHAN, POLICE KILLINGS OF BLACKS: HERE IS WHAT THE DATA SAY, NY. TIMES, OCT. 18, 2015, at BU6: There is ample statistical evidence of large and persistent racial bias in other areas — from labor markets to online retail
markets. So | expected that police prejudice would be a major factor in accounting for the killings of African-Americans. But when | looked at the numbers, that’s not exactly what | found. . . . Police bias may well be a significant problem, but in ac-
counting for why some of these encounters turn into killings, it is swamped by other, bigger problems that plague our society, our economy and our criminal justice system.

. .. African-Americans are being killed disproportionately and by a wide margin. And police bias may be responsible. But . . . there is another possibility. It is simply that — for reasons that may well include police bias — African-Ameri-
cans have a very large number of encounters with police officers. Every police encounter contains a risk: The officer might be poorly trained, might act with malice or simply make a mistake, and civilians might do something that is perceived as a
threat. The omnipresence of guns exaggerates all these risks. [And] having more encounters with police officers, even with officers entirely free of racial bias, can create a greater risk of a fatal shooting.

Arrest data lets us measure this possibility. For the entire country, 28.9 percent of arrestees were African-American. This number is not very different from the 31.8 percent of police-shooting victims who were African-Americans. . . .
This in turn suggests that removing police racial bias [once the encounter occurs] will have little effect on the killing rate. [W]ith the current arrest rate, 28.9 percent of all those killed by police officers would still be African-American. This is only
slightly smaller than the 31.8 percent of killings we actually see, and it is much greater than the 13.2 percent level of African-Americans in the overall population.

If the major problem is then that African-Americans have so many more encounters with police, we must ask why. Of course, with this as well, police prejudice may be playing a role. After all, police officers decide whom to stop or
arrest. But this is too large a problem to pin on individual officers.

[Plolice officers tend to be most active in poor neighborhoods, and African-Americans disproportionately live in poverty. [T]he deeper you look, the more it appears that the race problem revealed by the statistics reflects a larger prob-
lem: the structure of our society, our laws and policies.

The war on drugs illustrates this kind of racial bias. . . . Laws and policies need not explicitly discriminate to effectively discriminate. As Anatole France wrote centuries ago, “In its majestic equality, the law forbids rich and poor alike to
sleep under bridges, beg in the streets and steal loaves of bread.” . . . Poverty plays an essential role in all of this. . . . “Living in a high-poverty neighborhood increases risk of violent-crime involvement, and in the most poor neighborhoods of the
country, fully four out of five residents are black or Hispanic.”

We will not sharply reduce police killings of African-Americans unless we understand the social institutions that intimately tie race and crime. . .. We should

p.875

p.876
eliminate police prejudice because it is wrong and because it undermines our democracy. It blights — and all too often destroys — lives. But there are also structural problems underpinning these killings. We are all responsible for those.
QUESTIONS: (a) Does Mullainathan too quickly dismiss the role of police bias (including implicit and subconscious bias) in explaining why there are so many more encounters between African Americans and the police? A wealth of studies
establish that bias in the decisions of individual police officers accounts for much of the heavily disproportionate rates at which African Americans are stopped and arrested in other contexts, such as highway traffic stops.7° And we have seen how
racial profiling, the suspicion heuristic, and other racially tainted dynamics affect decision making by individual officials and private persons.” To what extent is it accurate to lay the blame for the disproportionate killing of African Americans on in-
stitutional structures and broad societal policy decisions, rather than on explicit or implicit bias in low-level individual decisions?

(b) If Mullainathan is right about the importance of structural problems, what is to be done about them? Should we seek to radically reduce the footprint of the police in communities of color? Radically reduce the role of penal law as a
response to antisocial behavior? Or will those steps cause more problems than they will solve for people who live in underserved communities? See the discussion of defunding the police and abolition, pp. 53-63 supra.

4. Choice of the Lesser Evil
People v. Unger

‘Supreme Court of Illinois
362 N.E.2d 319 (lll. 1977)

Ryan, J. Defendant, Francis Unger, was [convicted of] the crime of escape and was . . . sentenced to a term of three to nine years to be served consecutively to the remainder of the sentence for which he was imprisoned at the time of
the escape. The conviction was reversed upon appeal and the cause was remanded for a new trial. . .. We granted leave to appeal and now affirm the judgment of the appellate court.

p.676
p.e77

At the time of the present offense, the defendant was confined at the Illinois State Penitentiary in Joliet, Illinois. Defendant was serving a one- to three-year term as a consequence of a conviction for auto theft. ... On February 23, 1972,
the defendant was transferred to the prison's minimum security, honor farm. It is undisputed that on March 7, 1972, the defendant walked off the honor farm. Defendant was apprehended two days later in a motel room in St. Charles, Illinois.

At trial, defendant testified that prior to his transfer to the honor farm he had been threatened by a fellow inmate. This inmate allegedly brandished a six-inch knife in an attempt to force defendant to engage in [sexual] activities. Defen-
dant was 22 years old and weighed approximately 155 pounds. He testified that he did not report the incident to the proper authorities due to fear of retaliation. Defendant also testified that he is not a particularly good fighter.

Defendant stated that after his transfer to the honor farm he was assaulted and sexually molested by three inmates, and he named the assailants at trial. The attack allegedly occurred on March 2, 1972, and from that date until his
escape defendant received additional threats from inmates he did not know. On March 7, 1972, the date of the escape, defendant testified that he received a call on an institution telephone. Defendant testified that the caller, whose voice he did not
recognize, threatened him with death because the caller had heard that defendant had reported the assault to prison authorities. Defendant said that he left the honor farm to save his life and that he planned to return once he found someone who
could help him. None of these incidents were reported to the prison officials. As mentioned, defendant was apprehended two days later still dressed in his prison clothes. . . .

The following instruction (People’s Instruction No. 9) was given by the trial court over defendant's objection. “The reasons, if any, given for the alleged escape are immaterial and not to be considered by you as in any way justifying or
excusing, if there were in fact such reasons.” . . . The principal issue in the present appeal is whether it was error for the court to instruct the jury that it must disregard the reasons given for defendant's escape and to conversely refuse to instruct
the jury on the statutory defenses of compulsion and necessity... .

Traditionally, the courts have been reluctant to permit the defenses of compulsion and necessity to be relied upon by escapees. This reluctance appears to have been primarily grounded upon considerations of public policy. Several
recent decisions, however, have recognized the applicability of the compulsion and necessity defenses to prison escapes. In People v. Harmon (1974), 220 N.W.2d 212, the defense of duress was held to apply in a case where the defendant alleged
that he escaped in order to avoid repeated homosexual attacks from fellow inmates. In People v. Lovercamp (1974), 43 Cal. App. 3d 823, a limited defense of necessity was held to be available to two defendants whose escapes were allegedly mo-
tivated by fear of homosexual attacks.

As illustrated by Harmon and Lovercamp, different courts have reached similar results in escape cases involving sexual abuse, though the question was analyzed under different defense theories. A certain degree of confusion has
resulted from the recurring practice on the part of the courts to use the terms “compulsion” (duress) and “necessity” interchangeably, though the defenses are theoretically distinct. .. .

p.e77
p.e7e

In our view, the defense of necessity . . . is the appropriate defense in the present case. [T]he defendant here was not deprived of his free will by the threat of imminent physical harm which, according to the Committee Comments,
appears to be the intended interpretation of the defense of compulsion as set out in section 7-11 of the Criminal Code. . . . Rather, if defendant's testimony is believed, he was forced to choose between two admitted evils by the situation which
arose from actual and threatened homosexual assaults and fears of reprisal. Though the defense of compulsion would be applicable in the unlikely event that a prisoner was coerced by the threat of imminent physical harm to perform the specific
act of escape, no such situation is involved in the present appeal... .

The defendant's testimony was clearly sufficient to raise the affirmative defense of necessity [as] defined by statute (lll. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 38, par. 7-13):

Conduct which would otherwise be an offense is justifiable by reason of necessity if the accused was without blame in occasioning or developing the situation and reasonably believed such conduct was necessary to avoid

a public or private injury greater than the injury which might reasonably result from his own conduct.

Defendant testified that he was subjected to threats of forced homosexual activity and that, on one occasion, the threatened abuse was carried out. He also testified that he was physically incapable of defending himself and that he
feared greater harm would result from a report to the authorities. Defendant further testified that just prior to his escape he was told that he was going to be killed, and that he therefore fled the honor farm in order to save his life. Though the
State's evidence cast a doubt upon the defendant's motives for escape and upon the reasonableness of defendant's assertion that such conduct was necessary, the defendant was entitled to have the jury consider the defense on the basis of his
testimony... .

The State, however, would have us apply a more stringent test to prison escape situations. The State refers to the Lovercamp decision, where . . . it was held that the defense of necessity need be submitted to the jury only where five
conditions had been met. Those conditions are: “(1) The prisoner is faced with a specific threat of death, forcible sexual attack or substantial bodily injury in the immediate future; (2) There is no time for a complaint to the authorities or there exists
ahistory of futile complaints . . . ; (3) There is no time or opportunity to resort to the courts; (4) There is no evidence of force or violence used towards prison personnel or other ‘innocent’ persons in the escape; and (5) The prisoner immediately re-
ports to the proper authorities when he has attained a position of safety from the immediate threat.”

The State correctly points out that the defendant never informed the authorities of his situation and failed to report immediately after securing a position of safety. Therefore, it is contended that, under the authority of Lovercamp,
defendant is not entitled to a necessity instruction. We agree . . . that the above conditions are relevant factors to be used in assessing claims of necessity. We cannot say, however, that the existence of each condition is, as a matter of law, nec-
essary to establish a meritorious necessity defense.

The preconditions set forth in Lovercamp are, in our view, matters which go to the weight and credibility of the defendant's testimony. . . . The absence of one or more of the elements listed in Lovercamp would not necessarily mandate
a finding that the defendant could not assert the defense of necessity.

p.e7e
p.679

[lIn the present case . . . defendant never voluntarily turned himself in to the proper officials. However, defendant testified that he intended to return to the prison upon obtaining legal advice from an attorney and claimed that he was
attempting to get money from friends to pay for such counsel. Regardless of our opinion as to the believability of defendant's tale, this testimony, if accepted by the jury, would have negated any negative inference which would arise from defen-
dant's failure to report to proper authorities after the escape. The absence of one of the Lovercamp preconditions does not alone disprove the claim of necessity and should not, therefore, automatically preclude an instruction on the defense. We
therefore reject the contention that the availability of the necessity defense be expressly conditioned upon the elements set forth in Lovercamp.

[U]nder the facts and circumstances of the present case the defendant was entitled to submit his defense of necessity to the jury. It was, therefore, reversible error to give People’s Instruction No. 9 to the jury and to refuse to give an
appropriate instruction defining the defense of necessity, such as the instruction tendered by the defendant. . . .

UNDERWOOD, J., dissenting: My disagreement with my colleagues stems from an uneasy feeling that their unconditional recognition of necessity as a defense to the charge of escape carries with it the seeds of future troubles. Unless
narrowly circumscribed, the availability of that defense could encourage potential escapes, disrupt prison discipline, and could even result in injury to prison guards, police or private citizens. . ..

| am not totally insensitive to the sometimes brutal and unwholesome problems faced by prison inmates, and the frequency of sexually motivated assaults. Prisoner complaints to unconcerned or understaffed prison administrations
may produce little real help to a prisoner or may actually increase the hazard from fellow inmates of whose conduct complaint has been made. Consequently, and until adequate prison personnel and facilities are realities, | agree that a necessity
defense should be recognized. The interests of society are better served, however, if the use of that defense in prison-escape cases is confined within well-defined boundaries such as those in Lovercamp. In that form it will be available, but with
limitations precluding its wholesale use.

Itis undisputed that defendant here did not meet those conditions. . . . Rather, he stole a truck some nine hours after his escape, drove to Chicago, and later drove to St. Charles, using the telephone to call friends in Canada. This con-
duct, coupled with his admitted intent to leave in order to gain publicity for what he considered an unfair sentence, severely strain the credibility of his testimony regarding his intention to return to the prison.

Model Penal Code
§3.02. Justification Generally: Choice of Evils
[See the Appendix in this book.]

MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT TO $3.02 at 9-14(1985): This section accepts the view that a principle of necessity, properly conceived, affords a general justification for conduct that would otherwise constitute
p.679
p. 860

an offense. . . . Under this section, property may be destroyed to prevent the spread of a fire. . .. An ambulance may pass a traffic light. Mountain climbers lost in a storm may take refuge in a house or may appropriate provisions. . . . A developed

legal system must have better ways of dealing with such problems than to refer only to the letter of particular prohibitions, framed without reference to cases of this kind... .

The Code’s principle of necessity is subject to a number of limitations. . . . It is not enough that the actor believes that his behavior possibly may be conducive to ameliorating certain evils; he must believe it is “necessary” to

avoid the evils. [Moreover] the balancing of evils is not committed to the private judgment of the actor. . . . Subsection (1)(a) . . . requires that the harm or evil sought to be avoided be greater than that which would be caused

by the commission of the offense, not that the defendant believe it to be so. What is involved may be described as an interpretation of the law of the offense, in light of the submission that the special situation calls for an

exception to the criminal prohibition that the legislature could not reasonably have intended to exclude, given the competing values to be weighed. The Code does not resolve the question of how far the balancing of values

should be determined by the court as a matter of law or submitted to the jury. ..

NOTES ON PRISON ESCAPE

1. The Supreme Court's view. In United States v. Bailey, 444 U.S. 394 (1980), the Supreme Court held, contrary to Unger but in accord with Lovercamp, that a prerequisite for invoking the necessity defense in a federal prosecution for
prison escape is that the defendant make a bona fide effort to surrender or return “as soon as the duress or necessity had lost its coercive force.”

2. What are the potential harms of escape? In Roark v. State, 2020 Tex. App. LEXIS 7857 (Oct. 1, 2020), two uniformed officers tried to arrest the defendant for unruly behavior at a political rally. He broke free and ran away but was
eventually apprehended and convicted for resisting arrest. At trial, he unsuccessfully sought to raise a necessity defense on the ground (supported by several witnesses) that before he broke away, the police had been beating him and that he
feared they would break his neck. The appellate court reversed the conviction, holding that the necessity defense could be available because a jury could find that it was reasonable for him to believe he faced imminent harm that outweighed the
harm of fleeing arrest. Does this represent a promising way to curb police use of excessive force, or will it more likely aggravate that problem? Compare the following comment on the balance of evils in a prison escape case (Model Penal Code and
Commentaries, Comments to §3.02 at 12 n.5 (1985)): “The harm sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense may be viewed broadly. . . . For example, a court could consider whether recognition of the defense when a prisoner has es-
caped to avoid assault would have the effect of substantially encouraging unjustified escapes.”

QUESTION: Under the MPC approach, could a court deny a necessity defense in an otherwise justified circumstance, on the ground that other defendants might abuse the defense by invoking it when their conduct was not justified?
p. 860
p66

3. The legality principle. What perils are created by the elasticity of the necessity defense? We saw earlier, in the section on the principle of legality, p. 190 supra, that vagueness is regarded as a serious evil in the criminal law. See
especially pp. 216-233 supra. Is vagueness less offensive when it affects defenses to, rather than definitions of, criminal conduct?
NOTES ON THE BOUNDARIES OF THE NECESSITY DEFENSE

1. Which harms count? (a) Natural events only? Notice that both the Illinois and MPC formulations do not restrict the perils that can trigger a necessity defense. In some jurisdictions, however, the defense is available only when the
threatened harm results from natural events (such as a snowstorm or flood). See, e.g., Wis. Stat. §939.47 (2021) (limiting the defense to “[p]ressure of natural physical forces’). In these jurisdictions, perils due to the wrongful acts of others (as in
Unger) can only support a defense of “duress,” which is subject to different limitations. See pp. 906-924 infra.

(b) Animminence requirement? Recall that Unger's necessity claim was based on a death threat he had received over the prison telephone. But at the time he escaped, the caller was not about to strike; if Unger had identified the
potential assailant and approached him from behind, he would not have been entitled to kill in self-defense because the execution of the threat was not “imminent.” See p. 842 supra. Instead, however, Unger took a less extreme self-protective
measure — in a sense, he simply chose to “retreat.”

The Illinois and MPC formulations do not restrict the necessity defense to situations where harm to the defendant was imminent. Some jurisdictions, however, allow the defense only where the defendant faced “clear and imminent
danger.” Commonwealth v. Brugmann, 433 N.E.2d 457, 461 (Mass. App. Ct. 1982). See also N.Y. Penal Law §35.05(2) (2021), limiting the defense to situations in which the defendant's conduct was “necessary as an emergency measure to avoid
an imminent public or private injury which is about to occur. . . through no fault of the actor. . ..”

Which approach is preferable? Consider Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §3.02 at 17, 19-21 (1985):

[The New York requirement that conduct be an emergency measure to avoid imminent harm] unduly emphasizes one ingredient in the judgment that is called for. [GJenuine necessity rests on the unavailability of alternatives

that would avoid both evils, [and] typically when the evil is not imminent some such alternative will be available; but it is a mistake to erect imminence as an absolute requirement, since there may be situations in which an

otherwise illegal act is necessary to avoid an evil that may occur in the future... .

2. Statutes that preempt the balancing of evils. In most states, as under the MPC, “the general choice of evils defense cannot succeed if the issue of competing values has been previously foreclosed by a deliberate legislative
choice, as when some provision of the law deals explicitly with the specific

p86

p. 662
situation . . . or a legislative purpose to exclude the claimed justification otherwise appears.”75 Consider Commonwealth v. Leno, 616 N.E.2d 453 (Mass. 1993), which arose at a time when Massachusetts prohibited the distribution of hypodermic
needles without a prescription (it no longer does?2). Referring to the statutory prohibition then in effect, the court said:

In the face of those statutes the defendants operated a needle exchange program in an effort to combat the spread of acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome (AIDS). [They were] convicted of . . . unlawful distribution of an

instrument to administer controlled substances. . . . On appeal, [they] challenge the judge's refusal to instruct the jury on the defense of necessity. . . . We affirm. . .. That some States prohibit the distribution of hypodermic

needles without a prescription, and others do not, merely indicates that the best course to take to address the long-term hazard of the spread of AIDS remains a matter of debate. .. . Whether a statute is wise or effective

is not within the province of courts. . . . The defendants argue that the increasing number of AIDS cases constitutes a societal problem of great proportions, and that their actions were an effective means of reducing the

magnitude of that problem [because] distribution of hypodermic needles eventually will produce an over-all reduction in the spread of HIV and in the future incidence of AIDS. The defendants’ argument raises the issue of jury

nullification, not the defense of necessity. ..

3. Necessity and clean hands. Suppose that the person who threatened to kill Unger had done so because Unger had (a) accused the other person of being a “sexual pervert”; or (b) assaulted the other person. Note that Unger would
then have no necessity defense in Illinois, because its provision (p. 878 supra) requires that the “accused [be] without blame in occasioning or developing the situation.” Does that requirement make sense? If it is permissible in an unforeseen emer-
gency to commit an offense in order to avert more serious harm, shouldn't the law permit someone to take similar steps (and thus make society better off) even if that person has “unclean hands”? Consider Model Penal Code and Commentaries,
supra:

[Under statutes that restrict the defense to situations that develop through no fault of the actor,] an actor who negligently starts a fire is deprived of any defense for destroying property or breaking traffic regulations in an

effort to prevent its spread or to notify the proper authorities. . . . By contrast, [under] the Code . . . the actor [could] be prosecuted for offenses for which negligence would suffice, but would not be deprived of the choice of

evils defense for offenses committed in the attempt to put out the fire that require a higher culpability level. . ..

p. 662
p. 663

4, Necessity and mens rea. Lawrence Tiffany & Carl Anderson, Legislating the Necessity Defense in Criminal Law, 52 Denv. LJ. 839, 861-862 (1975), write:

A question which needs to be clarified is posed by LaFave and Scott: “A, driving a car, suddenly finds himself in a predicament where he must either run down B or hit C’s house and he reasonably chooses the latter, unfor-

tunately killing two people in the house who by bad luck happened to be just at that place inside the house where 4's car struck. . . .”

Of course, the defendant [charged with reckless or negligent homicide] is guilty of no crime to begin with. . . . Defendant needs no general justification defense when charged with a crime based on recklessness or

negligence since it is implicit in the charge itself that the defendant's conduct was not [culpable]; [the culpability of the conduct — taking a risk with awareness (or negligent failure to be aware) of an unjustifiable risk — ] be-

comes an element of the charge itself and must be proved by the state.

Consider Axelberg v. Commr. of Pub. Safety, 848 N.W.2d 206 (Minn. 2014). After defendant Jennifer Axelberg and her husband Jason Axelberg had spent an evening drinking, they got into a violent argument. Jennifer fled to her car and
locked the doors, but Jason continued to yell at her and hit the car several times, eventually breaking the windshield. Fearing for her safety, Jennifer drove away, with Jason pursuing her on foot, while a witness called 911. When officers arrived
at the scene, they arrested Jason and then arrested Jennifer for “driving while impaired”; her blood-alcohol level tested at double the legal limit. As Tiffany & Anderson explain, supra, if Jennifer had hit and killed another driver while fleeing from
Jason, the circumstances presumably could be considered in determining whether she was guilty of involuntary manslaughter or negligent homicide. But if she is prosecuted for “driving while impaired,” does she have a mens rea defense? The
peril posed by Jason does not seem relevant to whether she knew (or should have known) that she was alcohol-impaired. Should she nonetheless have a necessity defense? How does the peril she was fleeing compare to the peril she posed to
other drivers on the road?

Compare State v. Rasmussen, 524 N.W.2d 843 (N.D. 1994). The defendant's license to drive had been suspended. On a bitterly cold night, he found himself stranded on the highway after the person driving him had left to get help.
When the driver did not return, Rasmussen started the car and drove away. He was caught and prosecuted for driving while suspended — a strict liability offense. Should he be able to assert a necessity defense when the underlying crime does not
require mens rea? If necessity is an excuse — if it identifies cases in which blame for a wrongful act should not be imposed — then the defense should not be available, because a strict liability offense, by definition, permits conviction even in the
absence of fault. But if necessity is a justification — if it identifies cases in which the defendant’s conduct was not wrongful at all — then the defense should be considered, because it claims that the defendant's conduct was not wrongful. Which
is it?

p. 669
p. 664
NOTES ON MEDICAL NECESSITY

1. Slippery slope harms? Consider Commonwealth v. Hutchins, 575 N.E.2d 741 (Mass. 1991). Defendant was charged with illegal cultivation of marijuana, an act that the state prohibited at the time.©° At trial he offered to prove that he
was a victim of progressive systemic sclerosis, a serious and sometimes fatal disease with frightful symptoms for which no cure exists, and that ingestion of marijuana had produced a remarkable remission. The judge denied the offer of proof on
the ground that it would not support a necessity defense, and the defendant was convicted. On appeal, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court affirmed, stating:

In our view, the alleviation of the defendant's medical symptoms, the importance to the defendant of which we do not underestimate, would not clearly and significantly outweigh the potential harm to the public were we to

declare that the defendant's cultivation of marihuana and its use for his medicinal purposes may not be punishable. We cannot dismiss the reasonably possible negative impact of such a judicial declaration on the enforce-

ment of our drug laws, including but not limited to those dealing with marihuana, nor can we ignore the government's overriding interest in the regulation of such substances.

Chief Justice Liacos, dissenting, protested:

[T]he common law defense of necessity . . . is based on the recognition that, under very limited circumstances, “the value protected by the law is. . . eclipsed by a superseding value which makes it inappropriate and unjust

to apply the usual criminal rule.” The superseding value in a case such as the present one is the humanitarian and compassionate value in allowing an individual to seek relief from agonizing symptoms caused by a progres-

sive and incurable illness in circumstances which risk no harm to any other individual. In my view, the harm to an individual in having to endure such symptoms may well outweigh society's generalized interest in prohibiting

him or her from using the marihuana in such circumstances.

The dissent added in a footnote:

There is no reason to believe, as the court suggests, that allowing a defendant to present evidence of medical necessity to a jury will have a negative impact on the enforcement of drug laws. | am confident that juries would

apply their wisdom and common sense in making sure that the necessity defense is not successfully utilized by defendants who use marihuana for purposes other than to alleviate agonizing and painful medical symptoms.

2. Judicial disagreement. In the states (roughly 14 at this writing)®! where possession and use of marijuana remains illegal for both recreational and medicinal purposes, courts sometimes deny a necessity defense for medical uses of
marijuana

p. 664
p. 665
to alleviate the symptoms of severe illness. E.g., State v. Bonjour, 694 N.W.2d 511 (lowa 2005).

In states that permit medical use, individuals are potentially subject to federal prosecution. Federal law prohibits distribution of any “controlled substance,” 28 U.S.C. §841(a)(1) (2021), and posits that, as a matter of federal law, mar-
ijuana is a controlled substance for which there is “[no] currently accepted medical use.” As a result, the Supreme Court has held that Congress intended to preclude any medical necessity defense to a prosecution under §841(a)(1) and that the
federal prohibition takes precedence over any more permissive standards under state law. United States v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers’ Cooperative, 532 U.S. 483 (2001). Three concurring justices stressed, however, that the decision to preclude
anecessity defense applies only to prosecutions under §841(a)(1) for drug distribution; accordingly, the defense may remain available in other contexts, such as the prosecution of individual users. But if a cancer patient is justified in buying and
using marijuana to alleviate extreme pain, how can the seller not be justified in selling the drug for that purpose?

NOTES ON ECONOMIC NECESSITY

1. People who lack stable housing. Consider Borough of Southwark v. Williams, [1971] 2 All E.R. 175. Defendants were families in London who had no place to live at a time when the city suffered an extreme housing shortage.
Obtaining no help from local government, they made an orderly entry into some empty houses belonging to the Borough and made their homes there. The Borough brought an action to oust them. They resisted by raising the defense of necessity.
The court rejected the defense:

[lln case of great and imminent danger, in order to preserve life, the law will permit of an encroachment on private property. . .. The doctrine so enunciated must, however, be carefully circumscribed. . . . If homelessness

were once admitted as a defence to trespass, no one’s house could be safe. Necessity would open a door which no man could shut. It would not only be those in extreme need who would enter. . . . There would be others

who would imagine that they were in need, or would invent a need, so as to gain entry. Each man would say his need was greater than the next man’s. The plea would be an excuse for all sorts of wrongdoing. So the courts

must, for the sake of law and order, . . . refuse to admit the plea of necessity to the hungry and the homeless; and trust that their distress will be relieved by the charitable and the good. . . . We can sympathise with the plight

in which [these families] find themselves. [But] must make their appeal for help to others. . . . [WJe must, in the interest of law and order itself, . . . order the defendants to go out.

QUESTIONS: Are these concerns persuasive, or are they overstated? Isn't the balance of harms different when unhoused families occupy vacant buildings than if they were to trespass and enter occupied dwellings? Are there better ways to deal
with people “who would imagine that they were in need, or would invent a need, so as to gain entry”?
p. 685
p. 666

In Commonwealth v. Magadini, 52 N.E.3d 1041 (Mass. 2016), the court held that the defendant must be allowed to present a necessity defense to trespass when he had no lawful alternatives to protect himself when weather conditions
constituted an imminent danger. Compare City of Eugene v. Adams, 313 Or. App. 67 (2021), where the court upheld the denial of a necessity defense to trespass by a person who lacked stable living arrangements, on the ground that the defen-
dant's testimony did not sufficiently establish the absence of any alternative to avoid an imminent threat of harm. Is this discriminating approach a workable way to address the problem?

2. Starving children. Many American courts are hostile to claims of economic necessity even in the face of plausible claims that young children may be facing starvation. In People v. Fontes, 89 P.3d 484 (Colo. Ct. App. 2003), a
defendant was convicted of attempting to cash a forged check for $454.75, after the trial court rejected his offer to prove that he intended to use the money to buy food for his three young children, who suffered from severe health problems; that
they had not eaten for more than 24 hours; that three different food banks had turned down his requests for food; and that he feared that with continued lack of food, his children faced “malnutrition and death.” The appellate court affirmed the con-
viction, holding that his effort to raise a necessity defense was properly rejected:

While we are not without sympathy for the downtrodden, the law is clear that economic necessity alone cannot support a choice of crime. Although economic necessity may be an important issue in sentencing, a choice of

evils defense cannot be based upon economic necessity.

QUESTIONS: Would this result be correct under the MPC or New York formulations of the necessity defense? Is it correct as a matter of principle?

3. Direct needs versus speculative harms. In the wake of Hurricane Katrina, with many New Orleans businesses shuttered and with supplies short, some residents broke into stores to take food, water, and medications needed for
themselves or their children. If prosecuted for theft or “looting,”®2 should they be able to raise a necessity defense? How should we compare the benefits of their conduct to the harm caused? Professor Stuart P. Green argues (Looting, Law, and
Lawlessness, 81 Tul. L. Rev. 1129, 1152-1153 (2007)) that assessing the harm of looting is quite complicated, in part precisely because the offense, by definition, occurs under emergency conditions:

Although the most direct harms . . . are those suffered by the person or entity whose premises are looted, less direct harms accrue to the community generally, including the loss of civil order and the sense of fear that such

loss is likely to cause. We must also consider the possibility that looting tends to be contagious: others in the community might be encouraged . . . to

p. 686
p. 667

engage in similar, perhaps less clearly justified, conduct. And such looting might also cause more remote, but still significant, harms. [T]he store whose goods were looted might . . . even close for good; the premises might

remain vacant and boarded up; the incident might mark the beginning of the community's slide into decline. . . . It is easy to see that, other things being equal, it should be permissible to cause ten dollars in property damage

in order to prevent a million dollars of damage. But by what yardstick are we to compare . . . on the one hand, the hunger that is alleviated by the looter's stealing food, and, on the other, the disorder in the community to

which her looting might contribute?

United States v. Schoon
United States Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit
971 F.2d 193 (1992)

Boociever, J.: Gregory Schoon, Raymond Kennon, Jr., and Patricia Manning appeal their convictions for obstructing activities of the Internal Revenue Service Office in Tucson, Arizona. [The] charges stem from their activities in protest
of United States involvement in El Salvador. They claim the district court improperly denied them a necessity defense. Because we hold the necessity defense inapplicable in cases like this, we affirm.

On December 4, 1989, thirty people, including appellants, gained admittance to the IRS office in Tucson, where they chanted “keep America’s tax dollars out of El Salvador,” splashed simulated blood on the counters, walls, and carpet-
ing, and generally obstructed the office's operation. After a federal police officer ordered the group, on several occasions, to disperse or face arrest, appellants were arrested.

Ata bench trial, appellants proffered testimony about conditions in El Salvador as the motivation for their conduct. They attempted to assert a necessity defense, essentially contending that their acts in protest of American involvement
in El Salvador were necessary to avoid further bloodshed in that country. While finding appellants motivated solely by humanitarian concerns, the court nonetheless precluded the defense as a matter of law... .

To invoke the necessity defense . . . the defendants colorably must have shown that: (1) they were faced with a choice of evils and chose the lesser evil; (2) they acted to prevent imminent harm; (3) they reasonably anticipated a direct
causal relationship between their conduct and the harm to be averted; and (4) they had no legal alternatives to violating the law. The district court denied the necessity defense on the grounds that (1) the requisite immediacy was lacking; (2) the
actions taken would not abate the evil; and (3) other legal alternatives existed. Because the threshold test for admissibility of a necessity defense is a conjunctive one, a court may preclude invocation of the defense if “proof is deficient with regard
to any of the four elements.”

While we could affirm substantially on those grounds relied upon by the district court, we find a deeper, systemic reason for the complete absence of federal case law recognizing a necessity defense in an indirect civil disobedience
case. As used in this opinion, “civil disobedience” is the wilful violation of a law, undertaken

667

p. 668
for the purpose of social or political protest. Indirect civil disobedience involves violating a law or interfering with a government policy that is not, itself, the object of protest. Direct civil disobedience, on the other hand, involves protesting the exis-
tence of a law by breaking that law or by preventing the execution of that law in a specific instance in which a particularized harm would otherwise follow. This case involves indirect civil disobedience because these protestors were not challenging
the laws under which they were charged. In contrast, the civil rights lunch counter sit-ins, for example, constituted direct civil disobedience because the protestors were challenging the rule that prevented them from sitting at lunch counters. . . .
Today, we conclude, for the reasons stated below, that the necessity defense is inapplicable to cases involving indirect civil disobedience.

Necessity is, essentially, a utilitarian defense . .. , maximizing social welfare by allowing a crime to be committed where the social benefits of the crime outweigh the social costs of failing to commit the crime. . . . What all the traditional
necessity cases have in common is that the commission of the “crime” averted the occurrence of an even greater “harm.” In some sense, the necessity defense allows us to act as individual legislatures, amending a particular criminal provision or
crafting a one-time exception to it, subject to court review, when a real legislature would formally do the same under those circumstances. For example, by allowing prisoners who escape a burning jail to claim the justification of necessity, we as-
sume the lawmaker, confronting this problem, would have allowed for an exception to the law proscribing prison escapes.

Because the necessity doctrine is utilitarian, however, strict requirements contain its exercise so as to prevent nonbeneficial criminal conduct. ..

Analysis of three of the necessity defense’s four elements leads us to the conclusion that necessity can never be proved in a case of indirect civil disobedience. We do not rely upon the imminent harm prong of the defense because we
believe there can be indirect civil disobedience cases in which the protested harm is imminent.

. . . Indirect civil disobedience seeks first and foremost to bring about the repeal of a law or a change of governmental policy, attempting to mobilize public opinion through typically symbolic action. These protestors violate a law, not
because it is unconstitutional or otherwise improper, but because doing so calls public attention to their objectives. . . . However, the mere existence of a constitutional law or governmental policy cannot constitute a legally cognizable harm.

[A] court [must also] judge the likelihood that an alleged harm will be abated by the taking of illegal action. . . . In the traditional cases, a prisoner flees a burning cell and averts death, or someone demolishes a home to create a firebreak
and prevents the conflagration of an entire community. The nexus between the act undertaken and the result sought is a close one. . . .

In political necessity cases involving indirect civil disobedience against congressional acts, however, the act alone is unlikely to abate the evil precisely because the action is indirect. Here, the IRS obstruction [is] unlikely to abate the
killings in El Salvador, or immediately change Congress's policy; instead, it takes another volitional actor not controlled by the protestor to take a further step; Congress must change its mind.

A final reason the necessity defense does not apply to these indirect civil disobedience cases is that . . . the harm indirect civil disobedience aims to prevent is the continued existence of a law or policy. [T]he “possibility” that Congress
will

p. 668
p. 669

change its mind is sufficient in the context of the democratic process to make lawful political action a reasonable alternative to indirect civil disobedience. [Pletitioning Congress to change a policy is always a legal alternative in such cases, regard-
less of the likelihood of the plea’s success. . ..

Thus, we see the failure of any federal court to recognize a defense of necessity in a case like ours not as coincidental, but rather as the natural consequence of the historic limitation of the doctrine. Indirect protests of congressional
policies can never meet all the requirements of the necessity doctrine. Therefore, we hold that the necessity defense is not available in such cases.

Affirmed.
NOTE

The necessity defense has been raised in many sit-in, vandalism, trespass, and related prosecutions. The causes have ranged from nuclear power protests to anti-abortion protests. Though the defense has sometimes prevailed with
juries and magistrates, appellate courts generally refuse necessity instructions or bar defendants from introducing evidence on the issue in civil disobedience situations. E.g., State v. Higgins, 458 P.3d 1036 (Mont. 2020). Courts seem especially
reluctant to countenance necessity defenses in cases that implicate climate science or other relatively technical issues. See Lance N. Long & Ted Hamilton, The Climate Necessity Defense: Proof and Judicial Error in Climate Protest Cases, 38
Stan. Envtl. L.J. 57 (2018). But there are occasional exceptions. In State ex rel. Haskell v. Spokane Cnty. Dist. Court, 2021 Wash. LEXIS 385 (July 15, 2021), and State v. Ward, 438 P.3d 588 (Wash. Ct. App. 2019), the courts reversed the trespass
convictions of climate activists, holding in each case that the defendant was entitled to raise the necessity defense because he gave evidence of previous, ineffective efforts to pursue legal alternatives.
QUESTIONS: Should the necessity defense be available in cases like these? Or does that possibility open a Pandora's box of legal loopholes to crimes that activists of one stripe or another consider unjustified? How should courts assess the
unresponsiveness of the political process to the concerns of defendants like these? Does the lack of political action indicate that lawful avenues of protest are unavailable, or that the activists’ concerns lack sufficient political support?
Regina v. Dudley and Stephens

Queen's Bench Division
14 Q.B.D. 273 (1884)

[For the opinion in this case, see p. 9 supra.]
NOTES

1. What, precisely, is the holding? Consider James Fitzjames Stephen, Digest of the Criminal Law 25 n.1 (6th ed. 1894):

p. 669
. 890

I can discover no principle in the judgment in R. v. Dudley. It depends entirely on its peculiar facts. The boy was deliberately put to death with a knife in order that his body might be used for food. This is quite different from

any of the following cases — (1) The two men on a plank. [The plank cannot keep both of them afloat, so one of them pushes the other off.] Here the successful man does no direct bodily harm to the other. He leaves him

the chance of getting another plank. (2) Several men are roped together on the Alps. They slip, and the weight of the whole party is thrown on one, who cuts the rope in order to save himself. Here the question is not whether

some shall die, but whether one shall live. (3) The choice of evils. The captain of a ship runs down a boat, as the only means of avoiding shipwreck. A surgeon kills a child in the act of birth, as the only way to save the mother.

A boat being too full of passengers to float, some are thrown overboard. Such cases are best decided as they arise.

QUESTIONS: Is Judge Stephen correct that “[sluch cases are best decided as they arise”? Isn't that the worst possible way to decide what to do in situations of great temptation and dire emergency?

2. Asequel. A modem variant on Dudley and Stephens occurred in a 1987 tragedy at Zeebrugge, Belgium. The ferry Herald of Free Enterprise, lacking an adequate system to signal when its doors were properly shut, suddenly sank as
it left port, trapping dozens of passengers inside. The safety problems were attributed to “tough competition” and “the reluctance of the ferry operators . . . to incur extra costs.”®2 Almost 200 passengers drowned, but before the ship went down,
many of them attempted to escape by climbing a rope ladder to the deck. At one point a passenger climbing the ladder froze in panic and refused repeated commands to move. Those below him then pulled him off the ladder, and he drowned. A
coroner mentioned the possibility of murder charges but concluded that the actions taken were “a reasonable act of what is known as self-preservation.” See Neil Hanson, The Custom of the Sea 301 (2000).

Would Judge Stephen (Note 1, supra) agree? What legal advice would he have given if passengers, seeing their escape route blocked, had asked whether they had the right to pull the fearful man out of the way? Were those passengers
legally (or morally) in the wrong?

3. An overloaded boat. The American case referred to in Lord Coleridge's opinion was United States v. Holmes, 26 F. Cas. 360 (C.C.E.D. Pa. 1842). Following a shipwreck, the first mate, eight seamen, and 32 passengers were cast
adrift on a life boat. The boat was grossly overcrowded and sprang a leak, making it necessary to bail constantly in order to stay afloat. Rough seas made bailing difficult, and after a day and half, the boat was in danger of sinking. To lighten the
boat, the first mate ordered all male passengers whose wives were not in the boat to be thrown overboard. Eighteen passengers were jettisoned before a rescue ship arrived. Subsequently, Holmes, one of the crew who assisted in ejecting the pas-
sengers, was charged with manslaughter, after the grand jury declined to indict for

p.890

p69
murder. The trial judge charged the jury that if two persons face a situation in which only one can survive “neither is bound to save the other’s life by sacrificing his own, nor would either commit a crime in saving his own life for the only means of
safety”; that while this principle prevailed between sailor and sailor it did not prevail between sailor and passenger because of the special duty owed the latter by the former; that absent this special relationship the choice of who should be sacri-
ficed must be made by lot, since “[i]n no other way than this or some like way are those having equal rights put on an equal footing, and in no other way is it possible to guard against partiality and oppression, violence and conflict. . ..” Holmes was
convicted and sentenced to six months’ imprisonment and a fine of $20. Shortly thereafter the penalty was remitted.

4, When the stakes are not in doubt. In his opinion in Dudley and Stephens, Lord Coleridge argues that it was not certain the defendants had to kill Parker, and that “they might possibly have been picked up next day by a passing
ship; they might possibly not have been picked up at all; in either case it is obvious that the killing of the boy would have been an unnecessary and profitless act.” But suppose there had been certainty on the key points? Professor Glanville
Williams puts the following case (Textbook of Criminal Law 606 (2d ed. 1983):

[Sluppose that the boat was equipped with [a] radio transmitter. . . . The crew were able to make contact with Whitehall, which arranged for a ship to go to the rescue, but it could not arrive for seven days. . . . The crew had

reached such a stage of exhaustion that very soon none of them would be able to wield a knife. In these circumstances they asked .. . the Home Secretary . . . : should they all accept death, or may they draw lots, kill the one

with the unlucky number, and live on his body? In this way all but one will be saved. What should the Home Secretary reply?

For a tour de force of hypothetical opinions in a fictional case involving a similar scenario, see Lon Fuller, The Case of the Speluncean Explorers, 62 Harv. L. Rev. 616 (1949).

NOTE ON TAKING LIFE TO SAVE LIFE

May the choice-of-evils principle ever justify the acts that knowingly kill an innocent person who is not an aggressor? The Model Penal Code anticipates an affirmative answer (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §3.02
at 14-15 (1985):

[Rlecognizing that the sanctity of life has a supreme place in the hierarchy of values, [nonetheless] conduct that results in taking life may promote the very value sought to be protected by the law of homicide. Suppose, for

example, that the actor makes a breach in a dike, knowing that this will inundate a farm, but taking the only course available to save a whole town. If he is charged with homicide of the inhabitants of the farm house, he can

rightly point out that the object of the law of homicide is to save life, and that by his conduct he has effected a net saving of innocent lives. The life of every individual must be taken in such a case to be of equal value and the

numerical preponderance in the lives saved compared to

pao
p.692

those sacrificed surely should establish legal justification for the act. So too, a mountaineer, roped to a companion who has fallen over a precipice, who holds on as long as possible but eventually cuts the rope, must

certainly be granted the defense that he accelerated one death slightly but avoided the only alternative, the certain death of both. Although the view is not universally held that it is ethically preferable to take one innocent life

than to have many lives lost, most persons probably think a net saving of lives is ethically warranted if the choice among lives to be saved is not unfair. Certainly the law should permit such a choice.

How sound is the use of a numerical calculus to justify the intentional killing of an innocent, nonthreatening person? Many statutes and commentators explicitly reject that idea.®4 One scholar observes that “[elven though many lives
could be saved by the sacrifice of one, [it] would conflict with the general attitude toward the inviolability of human life to interfere in this way with the course of events.”®5 But if it is better, when accidents happen, that fewer lives be lost, why is it
wrong for a person to bring this about by his action? How can it be wrong to make things better? Consider the Note that follows.

NOTE ON RIGHTS VERSUS LIVES®

The reasoning of the MPC Commentary — that killing an innocent, nonthreatening bystander is a lesser evil than the death of several — can be applied to the famous “trolley problem”: D, a trolley car driver, sees five workers repairing

the track in front of D, who applies the brakes. But the brakes fail and the trolley appears certain to crush all five. Luckily, D can divert the trolley onto a spur and save the five, but then a sixth worker, repairing the spur, is certain to be crushed. If D

does nothing, D knows that five people will die. If D diverts the trolley, those five will be saved, but in that case D will knowingly kill the lone worker on the spur. Is D morally or legally entitled to divert the trolley?®Z If D makes that choice, the MPC
choice-of-evils principle apparently would provide a justification defense to a charge of homicide. Should we applaud that result or be troubled by it?

Consider whether the issues change in the following variation. Suppose that the trolley driver faints when the brakes fail, but a bystander who sees what is happening is standing at a switching point on the tracks and can throw the
switch to divert the trolley onto the spur.°8 We might think that in the first version of the problem, the driver's refusal to divert the trolley would be an omission in circumstances

p.692

p. 699
that impose a duty to act — to run the trolley in the safest possible way. If so, the failure to divert the trolley would be culpable, making D responsible for five killings, and that fact may color intuitions about whether it is permissible — or obligatory
— for D, as the person in charge, to divert the trolley. But if the driver faints, the dilemma is perhaps different because the bystander who can throw the switch has no duty to act. In that situation, is it permissible for the bystander to actively kill the
worker on the spur, when the bystander has no legal duty to protect the first five or otherwise intervene in the natural unfolding of the events?

Regardless of our analysis of cases like these, in which an innocent person is killed, the maximizing-lives principle clearly does not limit the use of defensive force when several assailants wrongfully threaten a single person's life. The
privilege of self-defense justifies the person attacked in taking the lives of the attackers, no matter how many attackers there are. So maximizing lives here yields to the person's right to resist aggression. Moreover, that right exists even if the
assailants are not morally culpable: Even when the attackers have a defense of mental incapacity, duress, or youth, the person attacked is permitted to kill these “innocent aggressors” if necessary to save the person's own life. See Model Penal
Code §3.11(1).52

But hypotheticals, even farfetched ones, cast doubt on these propositions. Suppose an assailant and the assailant’s two eight-year-old children are operating a machine gun from an apartment building. They are about to shoot down a
government official. The official's only chance is to throw a hand grenade through the window of the assailant’s apartment. Under the MPC and American law, the official will be legally justified in doing so. The right to resist the aggressors’ threat
is determinative. The lives of the assailant and the children carry no weight because all of them are aggressors who threaten the official's right to life.

What if the assailant's target knows there is someone in an adjoining apartment who will surely be killed by the grenade blast? Now under the MPC necessity principle, the official arguably is not justified in throwing the grenade because
that action would not result in a net saving of nonaggressor lives — the official's life would be saved but the innocent person in the adjoining apartment would be killed.2°

Finally, what if the assailant is directing the machine gun against two government officials? Now, the MPC’s lesser-evil doctrine does allow one of the officials to throw the grenade: The right of the innocent person in the adjoining apart-
ment is the same, but that person’s right to life would yield to the maximizing-life principle — the lives of the two innocent officials outweigh the life of the single individual in the adjoining apartment.

p. 699
p. 894

This last case reveals an anomaly in the MPC approach: Rights prevail over lives (even multiple innocent lives) in the aggression cases, but lives prevail over rights in the bystander cases like this last one or the flood-deflection and
trolley cases. To the extent this is the law, a bystander’s right against aggression sometimes yields to a utilitarian assessment in terms of net saving of lives. Yet, this is not always so, because we can be sure courts would not permit some killings
that result in a net saving of lives — for example, killing an innocent person to obtain that person's organs, even when that step might be necessary to save the lives of several other people. Indeed, courts presumably would not permit removing just
one of a patient's kidneys against that patient's will, even though that action could save someone without killing anyone. This evidences an acute moral unease with reliance on a utilitarian calculus for assessing the justification of intended killings,
even to achieve a net savings of lives.

QUESTION: Should it matter whether the net savings of life is achieved by steps designed to kill innocent bystanders, rather than just by steps that the actor knows will kill them as an undesired but inevitable side effect? In Dudley and Stephens,
the defendants maximized their chances of survival by cutting Parker's throat. Many condemn this action but nonetheless think it is not necessarily wrong for a ship's passenger who falls overboard to grasp the only plank in sight and push another
person off of it, hoping that the other person will be rescued but knowing that the other person will almost certainly drown. Similarly, in armed conflict, it is unquestionably a war crime to shoot civilians in order to coerce an opposing army to sur-

render, but it is often permissible to bomb a vital ammunition dump, even when doing so will inevitably kill just as many civilians.

Does it make sense to view these two cases (killing on purpose and killing knowingly but not on purpose) so differently? There is a large literature on whether the distinction is sound and if so, what the moral basis for it is.°1 But there
is no doubt that many moral intuitions — not to mention the entire structure of rules governing lethal force in warfare — lead to sharp differences in how the two situations are treated. For discussion of these issues, see George C. Christie, The De-
fense of Necessity Considered from the Legal and Moral Points of View, 48 Duke L.J. 975 (1999).

PROBLEMS

1. Can innocent victims of a lesser-evil action use force to protect themselves? For example, A’s house stands just outside the main village. A storm threatens to break the levee protecting the village from flooding by a nearby river. B,
seeking to avert the danger to the village residents, prepares to explode a hole in the levee at a point calculated to cause the flood to miss the town but to inundate 4’s house, which has been evacuated. A holds B off with a loaded gun, prevent-
ing B from setting the

p. 894

p. 695
explosion. The village is flooded, with loss of life and property. Is A guilty of assault with a deadly weapon? Of murder or manslaughter of the dead villagers? Consider 2 James Fitzjames Stephen, History of the Criminal Law of England 108-109
(1883):

In an American case in which sailors threw passengers overboard to lighten a boat it was held that the sailors ought to have been thrown overboard first unless they were required to work the boat, and that at all events the

particular persons to be sacrificed ought to have been decided on by ballot [sic]. Such a view appears to me to be over refined. Self-sacrifice may or may not be a moral duty, but it seems hard to make it a legal duty, and

it is impossible to state its limits or the principle on which they can be determined. Suppose one of the party in the boat had a revolver and was able to use it, and refused either to draw lots or to allow himself or his wife or

daughter to be made to do so or to be thrown overboard, could any one deny that he was acting in self-defence and the defence of his nearest relations, and would he violate any legal duty in so doing?

2. The case of Re A (children), [2000] 9 BHRC 261 (Ct. App. Civil Div.), involved conjoined twins, connected at the lower abdomen. Each had alll her own vital organs, but they shared a common artery that enabled the stronger twin
(Jodie) to circulate blood to both of them. If they were separated, the weaker twin (Mary) would die almost immediately, but if they were not separated, both would die within three to six months, because the strain of supporting both bodies would
eventually cause Jodie's heart to fail. The parents refused to consent to the operation because “as devout Roman Catholics they sincerely believe that their children . . . must be left in God's hands.” Id. at 268. Convinced that the parents’ decision
was not in the best interest of the children, doctors petitioned for a court order permitting them to perform surgery in order to save Jodie’s life. The English Court of Appeal acknowledged that “the operation will be an active invasion of Mary's body
and by that act the doctors will kill her” (id. at 312). But the court nonetheless authorized the procedure as the lesser evil, and the parents chose not to seek review in the House of Lords. Doctors then carried out the operation, and Mary died a few
moments later.

QUESTIONS: Does the court of appeal decision in effect overrule Dudley and Stephens, or are the situations distinguishable? Either way, how should the dilemma of Jodie and Mary be resolved?

3. Should the necessity defense be available to an interrogator who uses torture against a suspected terrorist, in hopes of locating a “ticking time bomb”? If such means fail to elicit the needed information, would the logic of the
necessity defense permit the use of even more brutal methods in order to avert the death of many hundreds of individuals? Either way, would the logic of the cost-benefit calculus in a necessity defense also permit the use of torture to avert other
potential acts of terrorism, even in the absence of a “ticking time bomb"? Should the case for permitting torture change if the person under interrogation is merely a suspected terrorist — for example, a villager accused by two of his neighbors?
Shouldn't the possible innocence of the person under interrogation make the resort to torture absolutely unacceptable? But why should it, if the logic of ordinary cost-benefit calculus is sound in this context? Should interrogators be permitted, on
necessity

p. 695

p. 896
grounds, to torture a terrorist’s six-year-old child, on the plausible assumption that this is the most likely means, and perhaps the only means, of getting the terrorist to talk and thus avert the potentially catastrophic attack? If not, does that conclu-
sion suggest there is something fundamentally flawed in the logic of cost-benefit calculation in this context?

5. Euthanasia
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

In the material on omissions, p. 280 supra, we considered the question whether a physician who withdraws life-sustaining treatment from a terminally ill or permanently comatose patient can avoid criminal liability by arguing that
this conduct is not an “act” but merely an omission where there is no duty to act. And in Chapter 6, we examined offenses that impose liability for actively taking the life of a consenting person or helping that person to do so. See especially the
Kevorkian case, p. 585 supra. Here we revisit the subject of what may loosely be called “euthanasia” to consider the availability of an affirmative defense when an act or culpable omission would otherwise constitute homicide or aiding a suicide.
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Dept. of Health

‘Supreme Court of the United States
497 U.S. 261 (1989)

CuieF Justice REHNQUIST delivered the opinion of the Court.

On the night of January 11, 1983, Nancy Cruzan lost control of her car as she traveled down Elm Road in Jasper County, Missouri. The vehicle overturned, and Cruzan was discovered lying face down in a ditch without detectable
respiratory or cardiac function. . . . She now lies in a Missouri state hospital in what is commonly referred to as a persistent vegetative state: generally, a condition in which a person exhibits motor reflexes but evinces no indications of significant
cognitive function. The State of Missouri is bearing the cost of her care.

After it had become apparent that Nancy Cruzan had virtually no chance of regaining her mental faculties, her parents asked hospital employees to terminate the artificial nutrition and hydration procedures. All agree that such a removal
would cause her death. The employees refused to honor the request without court approval. The parents then sought and received authorization from the state trial court for termination. The court . . . found that Nancy's “expressed thoughts at age
twenty-five in somewhat serious conversation with a housemate friend that if sick or injured she would not wish to continue her life unless she could live at least halfway normally suggests that given her present condition she would not wish to con-
tinue on with her nutrition and hydration.”

The Supreme Court of Missouri reversed by a divided vote. . . . The court found that Cruzan’s statements to her roommate regarding her desire to live or die under certain conditions were “unreliable for the purpose of determining her

p. 896

p.897
intent,” “and thus insufficient to support the co-guardians[’] claim to exercise substituted judgment on Nancy's behalf.” . . .

We granted certiorari to consider the question whether Cruzan has a right under the United States Constitution which would require the hospital to withdraw life-sustaining treatment from her under these circumstances.

. .. Before the turn of the century, this Court observed that “[nJo right is held more sacred, or is more carefully guarded, by the common law, than the right of every individual to the possession and control of his own person, free from
all restraint or interference of others, unless by clear and unquestionable authority of law.” Union Pacific R. Co. v. Botsford, 141 U.S. 250, 251 (1891). This notion of bodily integrity has been embodied in the requirement that informed consent is

generally required for medical treatment. Justice Cardozo, while on the Court of Appeals of New York, aptly described this doctrine: “Every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what shall be done with his own body;
and a surgeon who performs an operation without his patient's consent commits an assault, for which he is liable in damages.” Schloendorff v. Society of New York Hospital, 105 N.E. 92, 93 (N.Y. 1914). The informed consent doctrine has become
firmly entrenched in American tort law. . . .

[he common-law doctrine of informed consent is viewed as generally encompassing the right of a competent individual to refuse medical treatment. . . . This is the first case in which we have been squarely presented with the issue
whether the United States Constitution grants what is in common parlance referred to as a “right to die.” ..

The Fourteenth Amendment provides that no State shall “deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law.” The principle that a competent person has a constitutionally protected liberty interest in refusing
unwanted medical treatment may be inferred from our prior decisions. . . . But determining that a person has a ‘liberty interest” under the Due Process Clause does not end the inquiry; “whether respondent's constitutional rights have been violated
must be determined by balancing his liberty interests against the relevant state interests.” Youngberg v. Romeo, 457 U.S. 307, 321 (1982).

[Flor purposes of this case, we assume that the United States Constitution would grant a competent person a constitutionally protected right to refuse lifesaving hydration and nutrition. Petitioners go on to assert that an incompetent
person should possess the same right in this respect as is possessed by a competent person... .

The difficulty with petitioners’ claim is that in a sense it begs the question: An incompetent person is not able to make an informed and voluntary choice to exercise a hypothetical right to refuse treatment or any other right. Such a “right”
must be exercised for her, if at all, by some sort of surrogate. Here, Missouri has in effect recognized that under certain circumstances a surrogate may act for the patient in electing to have hydration and nutrition withdrawn in such a way as to
cause death, but it has established a procedural safeguard to assure that the action of the surrogate conforms as best it may to the wishes expressed by the patient while competent. Missouri requires that evidence of the incompetent’s wishes as
to the withdrawal of treatment be proved by clear and convincing evidence. The question, then, is whether the United States Constitution forbids the establishment of this procedural requirement by the State.

p.697
p. 698

[This question] depends in part on what interests the State may properly seek to protect in this situation. Missouri relies on its interest in the protection and preservation of human life, and there can be no gainsaying this interest. ... We
cannot say that the Supreme Court of Missouri committed constitutional error in reaching the conclusion that it did.

The judgment of the Supreme Court of Missouri is affirmed.

Washington v. Glucksberg
Supreme Court of the United States
521 U.S. 702 (1997)

Cher Justice REHNaUIST delivered the opinion of the Court.

[Several terminally ill patients and their physicians sued the state of Washington for a declaratory judgment that the state’s ban on assisted suicide, Wash. Rev. Code §9A.36.060(1) (1994), violated a fundamental right protected by the
Due Process Clause. The courts below agreed that it did. The Supreme Court reversed.]

We begin, as we do in all due-process cases, by examining our Nation's history, legal traditions, and practices. . . . In almost every State — indeed, in almost every western democracy — it is a crime to assist a suicide. The States’ as-
sisted-suicide bans are . . . longstanding expressions of the States’ commitment to the protection and preservation of all human life. .. .

Though deeply rooted, the States’ assisted-suicide bans have in recent years been reexamined and, generally, reaffirmed. . .. The Washington statute at issue in this case . .. was enacted in 1975. . .. In 1991, Washington voters
rejected a ballot initiative which . . . would have permitted a form of physician-assisted suicide. . ..On the other hand, in 1994, voters in Oregon enacted, also through ballot initiative, that State's “Death With Dignity Act,” which legalized physician-

assisted suicide for competent, terminally ill adults. Since the Oregon vote, many proposals to legalize assisted-suicide have been and continue to be introduced in the States’ legislatures. . . . Against this backdrop of history, tradition, and prac-
tice, we now tun to respondents’ constitutional claim.

. .. Ina long line of cases, we have held that, in addition to the specific freedoms protected by the Bill of Rights, the “liberty” specially protected by the Due Process Clause includes the rights to marry, to have children, to direct the
education and upbringing of one’s children, to marital privacy, to use contraception, to bodily integrity, and to abortion, Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833 (1992). We have also assumed, and strongly suggested, that the Due Process
Clause protects the traditional right to refuse unwanted lifesaving medical treatment. Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health, 497 U.S. 261 (1990).

But we “halve] always been reluctant to expand the concept of substantive due process because guideposts for responsible decision making in this uncharted area are scarce and open-ended.” Collins v. City of Harker Heights, 503
U.S. 115 (1992). By extending constitutional protection to an asserted right or liberty interest, we, to a great extent, place the matter outside the arena of public debate and legislative action. . . .

p. 698
p. 699

[The question before us is whether the “liberty” specially protected by the Due Process Clause includes a right to commit suicide which itself includes a right to assistance in doing so. . . . To hold for respondents, we would have to
reverse centuries of legal doctrine and practice, and strike down the considered policy choice of almost every State. [However, plointing to Casey and Cruzan, respondents read our jurisprudence in this area as reflecting a general tradition of “self-
sovereignty,” . . . and as teaching that the “liberty” protected by the Due Process Clause includes “basic and intimate exercises of personal autonomy.” .. .

Respondents contend that . . . “the patient's liberty to direct the withdrawal of artificial life support applies at least as strongly to the choice to hasten impending death by consuming lethal medication.” . . . The right assumed in Cruzan,
however, was not simply deduced from abstract concepts of personal autonomy. Given the common-law rule that forced medication was a battery, and the long legal tradition protecting the decision to refuse unwanted medical treatment, our
assumption was entirely consistent with this Nation's history and constitutional traditions. The decision to commit suicide with the assistance of another . . . has never enjoyed similar legal protection. Indeed, the two acts are widely and reasonably
regarded as quite distinct. . .. That many of the rights and liberties protected by the Due Process Clause sound in personal autonomy does not warrant the sweeping conclusion that any and all important, intimate, and personal decisions are so
protected.

[We] conclude that the asserted “right” to assistance in committing suicide is not a fundamental liberty interest protected by the Due Process Clause. The Constitution also requires, however, that Washington's assisted-suicide ban be
rationally related to legitimate government interests. This requirement is unquestionably met here. . . . Washington's assisted-suicide ban implicates a number of state interests.

First, Washington has an “unqualified interest in the preservation of human life.” . .. This interest is symbolic and aspirational as well as practical. . .. Relatedly, . .. many people who request physician-assisted suicide withdraw that
request if their depression and pain are treated.

The State also has an interest in protecting the integrity and ethics of the medical profession. . . . [Tlhe American Medical Association, like many other medical and physicians’ groups, has concluded that “[p]hysician-assisted suicide
is fundamentally incompatible with the physician's role as healer.” . . . And physician-assisted suicide could, it is argued, undermine the trust that is essential to the doctor-patient relationship by blurring the time-honored line between healing and
harming.

Next, the State has an interest in protecting vulnerable groups — including the poor, the elderly, and disabled persons — from abuse, neglect, and mistakes. [T]he New York Task Force warned that “ . .. [t]he risk of harm is greatest for
the many individuals in our society whose autonomy and well-being are already compromised by poverty, lack of access to good medical care, advanced age, or membership in a stigmatized social group.” [New York State Task Force on Life and
the Law, When Death is Sought: Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia in the Medical Context (1994) at] 120... . . If physician-assisted suicide were permitted, many might resort to it to spare their families the substantial financial burden of end-of-life
health-care costs... .

Finally, the State may fear that permitting assisted suicide will start it down the path to voluntary and perhaps even involuntary euthanasia. . .. The Court of Appeals’ decision [below] noted, for example, that . . . not only physicians, but

p.699
. 900

also family members and loved ones, will inevitably participate in assisting suicide. Thus, . . . what is couched as a limited right to “physician-assisted suicide” is likely, in effect, a much broader license, which could prove extremely difficult to
police and contain. .. .

We need not weigh exactingly the relative strengths of these various interests. They are unquestionably important and legitimate, and Washington's ban on assisted suicide is at least reasonably related to their promotion and protec-
tion. We therefore hold that Wash. Rev. Code §9A.36.060(1) (1994) does not violate the Fourteenth Amendment, either on its face or “as applied to competent, terminally ill adults who wish to hasten their deaths by obtaining medication prescribed
by their doctors.”

NOTES

1. The Oregon approach. Oregon's “Death with Dignity Act” (DWDA), referred to in Glucksberg, was the first such legislation in the United States. Under the Act, an informed and competent adult resident in Oregon, who is terminally ill
and within six months of death, can request a prescription for a lethal dose of medication. A physician is permitted to prescribe such medication when the physician determines that the patient is terminally ill, is capable of making health care deci-
sions, and has made the request voluntarily. The physician also must:

* Explain the patient's diagnosis and prognosis; the risks and results of taking the medication; and alternatives, including comfort care, hospice care, and pain control;
* Ask the patient to notify next of kin;

* Refer the patient for counseling, if appropriate; and

* Refer the patient to a consulting physician, who must then confirm the diagnosis and determine that the patient is capable and acting voluntarily.

If either of the two physicians believes that the patient might be suffering from a psychiatric or psychological disorder, or from depression causing impaired judgment, the physician must refer the patient to a licensed psychiatrist or
psychologist for counseling. The psychiatrist or psychologist must determine that the patient does not suffer from such a disorder before medication may be prescribed. Forty-eight hours must pass from the time of the patient's written request
before the prescription may be written, and at that time the attending physician must verify that the patient's request is voluntary and offer the patient the opportunity to rescind the request. The Act does not authorize lethal injection, mercy killing,
or active euthanasia; the patient must personally take the prescribed medication.

The U.S. Department of Justice attempted to block implementation of the Oregon measure, ruling that under federal laws regulating prescription drugs, there was no “legitimate medical purpose” for prescriptions written to assist
suicide under to the Oregon DWDA. As a result, any physician writing such a prescription would face prosecution under the Controlled Substances Act (CSA). Subsequently, however, the Supreme Court held that the CSA was intended to preserve
states’ traditional powers to regulate the medical profession and that the Justice Department ruling was invalid. Gonzales v. Oregon, 546 U.S. 243 (2006).

p. 900
p.901

From the 1994 enactment of Oregon's DWDA through 2020, the number of prescriptions for lethal medication has increased each year (with the exception of 2016); doctors gave a total of 2,895 people such written prescriptions, and
1,905 patients have died from taking them. In 2020, 370 people received prescriptions under the DWDA, and 245 people died from using them.22

One concern about measures like Oregon's has been that they could reduce incentives for physicians to treat patients’ pain, and that assisted suicide would simply become an easy alternative to effective pain management. There is
some evidence, however, that the opposite may have occurred. Pethaps surprisingly, patients’ ability to consider the assisted suicide option apparently stimulated greater effort to treat pain. See Kathryn L. Tucker, In the Laboratory of the States:
The Progress of Glucksberg’s Invitation to States to Address End of Life Choice, 106 Mich. L. Rev. 1593 (2008).°5 The most recent available evidence shows that only 32.7 percent of patients who were prescribed medication under the DWDA in
2020 expressed end-of-life concern about inadequate pain management. More common concerns were being less able to engage in activities making life enjoyable (94.3%), losing autonomy (93.1%), and losing dignity (71.8%).24

2. Subsequent American developments. Although the Glucksberg decision upheld Washington's prohibition of assisted suicide, a 2008 ballot initiative in that state approved assisted suicide on terms virtually identical to those of the
Oregon legislation. See Wash. Rev. Code Ann. §70.245 (2021). With the passage of New Mexico's “End-of-Life Options Act” in April 2021, at least nine states and the District of Columbia now authorize some form of assisted suicide.25 See also
Golan Luzon, The Practice of Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide Meets the Concept of Legalization, 13 Crim. L. & Phil. 329 (2019).
3. Legislation abroad. Canada, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg allow physician-assisted suicide,2° and France and Germany also authorize the practice under some circumstances. All these nations restrict the practice
to patients who are residents. Switzerland, however, has allowed assisted suicide since 1937,
p.901
p.902
and it is apparently the only jurisdiction in the world that permits non-residents to travel there for this purpose. This feature of Swiss law has given rise to a phenomenon known as “suicide tourism.”
(@) Suicide tourism. A Zurich clinic has become a destination of choice for individuals who desire physician-assisted suicide. From 1998 through the end of 2020, more than 3,000 non-Swiss patients chose to end their lives at the
Dignitas clinic, including 134 Americans, 475 Britons, and more than 1,400 Germans. In 2020, a total of 221 people elected physician-assisted suicide at the Dignitas clinic. Of those, only 13 were Swiss; the others included 84 Germans, 18 Britons,
and 15 Americans.28
(b) The British response. Concerns about suicide tourism prompted British authorities to threaten prosecution of citizens who helped a family member obtain a physician-assisted suicide in Switzerland, especially after several
prominent Britons had done so in widely publicized fashion. That policy, however, was challenged by someone suffering from multiple sclerosis who hoped to take advantage of the Swiss clinic. Ina landmark decision, the House of Lords ruled
that uncertainty about the risk of prosecution unacceptably interfered with the person's right to privacy, and accordingly it ordered the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) to publicly identify the factors it would consider in deciding
whether to prosecute in such a case. Regina (Purdy) v. Director of Public Prosecutions, [2009] UKHL 45. In response, the DPP promulgated a draft policy, took extensive public comment, and announced final guidelines that largely limit prosecution
to cases involving underage or incompetent people seeking physician-assisted suicide and cases in which a person exerts pressure or persuasion for someone else to choose physician-assisted suicide or benefits from that person's death.22
Although assisted suicide remains a crime in England (and is punishable by up to 14 years’ imprisonment), the DPP guidelines effectively decriminalize the practice when someone helps arrange travel to Switzerland and acts out of compassion for
a terminally ill patient who has a “clear, settled and informed wish to die.” See Haroon Siddique, DPP Releases Assisted Suicide Guidelines, The Guardian, Feb. 25, 2010.
4, Assessing the issue. Consider these comments:
NEW YORK STATE TASK FORCE ON LIFE AND THE LAW, WHEN DEATH IS SOUGHT — ASSISTED SUICIDE IN THE MEDICAL CONTEXT ix, xiii-xiv (1994): In light of the pervasive failure of our health care system to treat pain and diagnose and treat
depression, legalizing assisted suicide and euthanasia would be profoundly dangerous for many individuals who are ill and vulnerable. . . . No matter how carefully any guidelines are framed, assisted suicide and euthanasia will be practiced
through the prism of social inequality and bias that characterizes the delivery of services in all segments of our society, including health care. The practices will pose the greatest risks to those who are poor, elderly, members of a minority group, or
without access to good medical care. The growing concern about health care costs increases the risks presented by legalizing assisted suicide and euthanasia. . . .
p.902
p. 903
The clinical safeguards that have been proposed to prevent abuse and errors would not be realized in many cases. For example, most doctors do not have a long-standing relationship with their patients or information about the com-
plex personal factors relevant to evaluating a request for suicide assistance or a lethal injection. . .
The Task Force members feel deep compassion for patients in those rare cases when pain cannot be alleviated even with aggressive palliative care. They also recognize that the desire for control at life's end is widely shared and deeply
felt. As a society, however, we have better ways to give people greater control and relief from suffering than by legalizing assisted suicide and euthanasia.
Depression accompanied by feelings of hopelessness is the strongest predictor of suicide for both individuals who are terminally ill and those who are not. Most doctors, however, are not trained to diagnose depression, especially in
complex cases such as patients who are terminally ill. Even if diagnosed, depression is often not treated. In elderly patients as well as the terminally and chronically ill, depression is grossly underdiagnosed and undertreated.

The presence of unrelieved pain also increases susceptibility to suicide. The undertreatment of pain is a widespread failure of current medical practice, with far-reaching implications for proposals to legalize assisted suicide and
euthanasia.

If assisted suicide and euthanasia are legalized [and those] practices are incorporated into the standard arsenal of medical treatments, the sense of gravity about the practices would dissipate. . . . Policies limiting suicide to the
terminally ill, for example, would be inconsistent with the notion that suicide is a compassionate choice for patients who are in pain or suffering. As long as the policies hinge on notions of pain or suffering, they are uncontainable; neither pain nor
suffering can be gauged objectively. . . .

JOEL FEINBERG, OVERLOOKING THE MERITS OF THE INDIVIDUAL CASE: AN UNPROMISING APPROACH TO THE RIGHT TO DIE, 4 RATIO JURIS 131, 150-151 (1991): [Some] of the arguments against the legalization of voluntary euthanasia . . .
candidly concede that judged on the merits, many individual cases do deserve euthanasia. Rather, these arguments favour deliberately overlooking the merits of individual cases, and [maintain that] the inevitability of honest mistakes and not-so-
honest abuses will create evils that outweigh the evils of sustaining the comatose and the pain-wracked against their presumed wills. Convincing as [that] argument . . . may be in some contexts, [it] errs in minimizing the evils of human suffering
and overrating the value of merely biological life in the absence of a human person, or in the presence of a human person whose sufferings are too severe . . . to have a human life, even though [the] heart beats on.
SANFORD H. KADISH, LETTING PATIENTS DIE: LEGAL AND MORAL REFLECTIONS, 80 CAL. L. REV. 857, 867-868 (1992): [The] distinction between intentionally killing oneself and intentionally submitting to an avoidable death [by refusing treatment]
is suspect. [The] basic argument [for] the right to refuse treatment . . . is that the choice between medical treatment and death is so fundamental that it is protected against state control by a constitutional right of autonomy. That being the case,
however, there is no principled basis for denying the same freedom of choice to those not dependent on medical treatment for survival. The failure of efforts to
p. 903
p.904
distinguish suicide from refusal of treatment is attributable not simply to usage and definition, but to the equivalence between the two. The moral case for autonomy extends to both if it extends to one.
C. PRINCIPLES OF EXCUSE
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Unlike justifications, excuses do not assert that what the accused did was a good thing, or that society is better off, on balance, because of the actions of the accused. Instead, an excuse seeks to show that although the acts of the
accused were harmful, it would be unfair to expect the accused to have acted differently. The materials in this section focus on the three most important excuses — duress, intoxication, and mental disorder. Then, in a final subsection, we turn to
the ongoing efforts to test the boundaries of the traditional excuses and extend them to include such problems as drug addiction, childhood abuse, and economic deprivation. But first, we focus on the underlying puzzle of why excuses are ever
accepted as a defense to harmful conduct and what underlying rationales are common to this group of criminal law doctrines.

1. Introduction: What Are Excuses and Why Do We Have Them?

EUGENE R. MILHIZER, JUSTIFICATION AND EXCUSE: WHAT THEY WERE, WHAT THEY ARE, AND WHAT THEY OUGHT TO BE, 78 ST. JOHN'S L. REV. 725, 816-818 (2004): Excuse defenses focus on the actor and not the act. A defendant is excused
when he is judged to be not blameworthy for his conduct, even though the conduct itself is improper and harmful... .

The diversity among excuse defenses — procedurally, substantively, and philosophically — is in many respects far greater than that found among justification defenses. [But] several general observations can be made about the struc-
ture and content of excuse defenses. All excuse defenses are predicated upon the presence of some disability or disabling condition affecting the actor claiming the defense. The disability can arise from a number of sources, both internal and
external to the actor, and may be temporary or permanent. ...

Excuse defenses can be organized into three categories: involuntary actions, actions related to cognitive deficiencies, and actions related to volitional deficiencies. Involuntary actions are those acts, i.e., bodily movements, that are not
willed by the actor.2 When used in this narrow sense, the term “involuntary” does not include behavior that is a consequence of exerted will that has been overborne. . . . Reflex actions and convulsions are examples of involuntary actions, while ac-
tions performed in response to a threat are not. . ..

p. 908
p. 905

The second group of excusing conditions involves conduct relating to a cognitive impairment or deficiency. “Cognition” concerns an actor's ability to know certain things, which, in a broad sense, includes both facts and law.2 ® When
used in connection with a criminal defense based on excuse, cognitive impairment is concerned with an actor's knowledge of the nature of his conduct and whether it is right or wrong, and legal or illegal.

The third group of excusing conditions involves impairments or deficiencies in volition, which concer an actor's ability to make unencumbered choices [free from external threats] or to meaningfully control his behavior. A volitionally
deficient actor is a voluntary actor, at least insofar as his behavior is a product of his effort or determination. Since a volitionally deficient actor's cognition need not be impaired, he also may be fully aware of the nature of his conduct and whether
it is right or wrong, and legal or illegal. Put differently, because most defenses based on a volitional deficiency require only some impairment of an actor's will, the actor’s conduct remains voluntary in a strict sense and is usually informed by some
degree of awareness.

SANFORD H. KADISH, EXCUSING CRIME, 75 CAL. L. REV. 257, 263-265 (1987): Why we have excuses is less obvious than why we have other defenses. [Jeremy Bentham] saw the point of excuses to be that they identified situations in which
conduct is nondeterrable, so that punishment would be so much unnecessary evil. [SJince only the nondeterrable are excused, withholding punishment offers no comfort to those who are deterrable. The trouble is . . . that this [conclusion] does not
follow, for punishing all, whether or not they happen to be deterrable, closes off any hope a deterrable offender might otherwise harbor that he could convince a jury that he was among the nondeterrable. Moreover, without excuses, prosecutions
would be faster and cheaper, convictions more reliable, and the deterrent threat more credible. Indeed, strict liability offenses [dispense] with mens rea requirements on just these grounds. [Yet, doesn’t the effectiveness of strict liability give up]
something of value . . ., something that is not captured in Bentham's rationale?

Professor [H.L.A|] Hart . . . offered a different account of excuses. He argued that by confining liability to cases in which persons have freely chosen, excuses serve to maximize the effect of a person's choices within the framework of
coercive law, thereby furthering the satisfaction people derive in knowing that they can avoid the sanction of the law if they choose.

This rationale is an improvement over Bentham, inasmuch as Hart gives us a reason why we might want to put up with the loss of deterrence caused by excuses. But does this account capture the full force of a system of excuses?
Suppose we preferred the risk of accidentally being victims of law enforcement to the increased risk of being victims of crime. That would be a plausible choice, particularly for a public obsessed with rising crime rates. Would we then feel there
was nothing more problematic in giving up excuses than that we would be trading one kind of satisfaction for another? | think not. Something is missing in this account.

p. 905
. 906

Hart's account focuses on the interests and satisfactions of the great majority of us who never become targets of law enforcement — our security in knowing we will not be punished if we do not choose to break the law. What is missing
is an account of the concer for the innocent person who is the object of a criminal prosecution. . . . To blame a person is to express a moral criticism, and if the person's action does not deserve criticism, blaming him is a kind of falsehood and is,
to the extent the person is injured by being blamed, unjust to him. It is this feature of our everyday moral practices that lies behind the law's excuses. Excuses . . . represent no sentimental compromise with the demands of a moral code; they are,
on the contrary, of the essence of a moral code. .. .

Of course, one might escape excuses altogether by withdrawing the element of blame from a finding of criminality. Indeed, [some people] would prefer that the criminal law reject all backward-looking judgments of punishment, blame,
and responsibility, and concem itself exclusively with identifying and treating those who constitute a social danger. Whether it would be desirable to loosen [official coercion] from its mooring in blame is a large and much discussed question. | will
confine myself here to two observations. First, such a dissociation would not likely succeed. People would continue to see state coercion as punishment, notwithstanding official declarations that the state’s only interest is the individual's welfare
and social protection. Second, it is very doubtful that we should want it to succeed, since blame and punishment give expression to the concept of personal responsibility which is a central feature of our moral culture.
2. Duress

State v. Toscano
‘Supreme Court of New Jersey
378 A.2d 755 (NJ. 1977)

PasHMan, J. [Dr. Joseph Toscano, a chiropractor, was charged with conspiring to obtain money by false pretenses from the Kemper Insurance Company. The charges were part of a larger indictment alleging that 11 named defendants
and two unindicted co-conspirators had participated in a scheme to defraud various insurance companies by staging accidents in public places and obtaining payments in settlement of fictitious injuries. William Leonardo, the alleged architect of
the conspiracy and the organizer of each of the separate incidents, pleaded guilty, as did several other defendants. Toscano went to trial, admitting that he had aided in the preparation of a fraudulent insurance claim by making out a false medical
report, but arguing that he had acted under duress. The trial judge ruled that the threatened harm was not sufficiently imminent to justify charging the jury on the defense of duress. The jury convicted, and Toscano was fined $500. His conviction
was affirmed on appeal, and the New Jersey Supreme Court granted certification to consider the status of duress as an affirmative defense.]

906
p.907

The State attempted to show that Toscano agreed to fill out the false medical report because he owed money to Richard Leonardo [William's brother] for gambling debts. It also suggested that Toscano subsequently sought to cover
up the crime by fabricating office records of non-existent office visits by Hanaway.* Defendant sharply disputed these assertions and maintained that he capitulated to William Leonardo’s demands only because he was fearful for his wife’s and his
own bodily safety. Since it is not our function here to assess these conflicting versions, we shall summarize only those facts which, if believed by the jury, would support defendant's claim of duress. . . .

[The court recited a number of overtures made by William Leonardo to defendant, which defendant refused, to prepare a false medical report for submission to a claims adjuster.]

The third and final call occurred on Friday evening. Leonardo was “boisterous and loud” repeating, “You're going to make this bill out for me.” Then he said: “Remember, you just moved into a place that has a very dark entrance and
you leave there with your wife. . .. You and your wife are going to jump at shadows when you leave that dark entrance.” Leonardo sounded “vicious” and “desperate” and defendant felt that he “just had to do it” to protect himself and his wife. He
thought about calling the police, but failed to do so in the hope that “it would go away and wouldn’t bother me any more.”

In accordance with Leonardo's instructions, defendant left a form in his mailbox on Saturday morning for Leonardo to fill in with the necessary information about the fictitious injuries. It was returned that evening and defendant com-
pleted it. On Sunday morning he met Hanaway at a prearranged spot and delivered a medical bill and the completed medical report. He received no compensation for his services, either in the form of cash from William Leonardo or forgiven gam-
bling debts from Richard Leonardo. He heard nothing more from Leonardo after that Sunday.

Shortly thereafter, still frightened by the entire episode, defendant moved to a new address and had his telephone number changed to an unlisted number in an effort to avoid future contacts with Leonardo. He also applied for a gun
permit but was unsuccessful. His superior at his daytime job with the Newark Housing Authority confirmed that the quality of defendant’s work dropped so markedly that he was forced to question defendant about his attitude. [DJefendant ex-
plained that he had been upset by threats against him and his wife. He also revealed the threats to a co-worker at the Newark Housing Authority.

After defendant testified, the trial judge granted the State’s motion to exclude any further testimony in connection with defendant's claim of duress, and announced his decision not to charge the jury on that defense. . . .

After stating that the defense of duress is applicable only where there is an allegation that an act was committed in response to a threat of present, imminent and impending death or serious bodily harm, the trial judge charged the jury:

Now, one who is standing and receiving instructions from someone at the point of a gun is, of course, in such peril. .. .

p.907
p. 908

Now, where the peril is not imminent, present and pending to the extent that the defendant has the opportunity to seek police assistance for himself and his wife as well, the law places upon such a person the duty not to acquiesce in
the unlawful demand and any criminal conduct in which he may thereafter engage may not be excused. Now, this principle prevails regardless of the subjective estimate he may have made as to the degree of danger with which he or his wife may
have been confronted. Under the facts of this case, | instruct you, as members of the jury, that the circumstances described by Dr. Toscano leading to his implication in whatever criminal activities in which you may find he participated are not suf-
ficient to constitute the defense of duress.

. .. Since New Jersey has no applicable statute defining the defense of duress,” we are guided only by common law principles which conform to the purposes of our criminal justice system and reflect contemporary notions of justice
and fairness.

At common law the defense of duress was recognized only when the alleged coercion involved a use or threat of harm which is “present, imminent and pending” and “of such a nature as to induce a well grounded apprehension of
death or serious bodily harm if the act is not done.”

It was commonly said that duress does not excuse the killing of an innocent person even if the accused acted in response to immediate threats. Aside from this exception, however, duress was permitted as a defense to prosecution for
arange of serious offenses. . . .

To excuse a crime, the threatened injury must induce “such a fear as a man of ordinary fortitude and courage might justly yield to.” Although there are scattered suggestions in early cases that only a fear of death meets this test, ... ©
an apprehension of immediate serious bodily harm has been considered sufficient to excuse capitulation to threats. Thus, the courts have assumed as a matter of law that neither threats of slight injury nor threats of destruction to property are
coercive enough to overcome the will of a person of ordinary courage. [The court then referred to cases in which threats of loss of job, denial of food rations, economic need, and prospect of financial ruin were held inadequate] .. . When the al-
leged source of coercion is a threat of “future” harm, courts have generally found that the defendant had a duty to escape from the control of the threatening person or to seek assistance from law enforcement authorities.

Assuming a “present, imminent and impending” danger, however, there is no requirement that the threatened person be the accused. [Concern for the well-being of another, particularly a near relative, can support a defense of duress
if the other requirements are satisfied. . ..

The insistence under the common law on a danger of immediate force causing death or serious bodily injury may be ascribed to . . . judicial fears of perjury and fabrication of baseless defenses. We do not discount [this] concern as a
reason

p. 908

p. 909
for caution in modifying this accepted rule, but we are concerned by its obvious shortcomings and potential for injustice. Under some circumstances, the commission of a minor criminal offense should be excusable even if the coercive agent does
not use or threaten force which is likely to result in death or “serious” bodily injury. Similarly, it is possible that authorities might not be able to prevent a threat of future harm from eventually being carried out... .

[S]ome commentators have advocated a flexible rule [focusing] on the weaknesses and strengths of a particular defendant, and his subjective reaction to unlawful demands. [But the] drafters of the Model Penal Code and the [proposed]
New Jersey Penal Code . . . focus[ed instead] on whether the standard imposed upon the accused was one with which “normal members of the community will be able to comply.” . .

They substantially departed from the existing statutory and common law limitations requiring that the result be death or serious bodily harm, that the threat be immediate and aimed at the accused, or that the crime committed be a non-
capital offense. While these factors would be given evidential weight, the failure to satisfy one or more of these conditions would not justify the trial judge's withholding the defense from the jury... .

Although they are not entirely identical, under both model codes defendant would have had his claim of duress submitted to the jury.!2 Defendant's testimony provided a factual basis for a finding that Leonardo threatened him and his
wife with physical violence if he refused to assist in the fraudulent scheme. Moreover, a jury might have found from other testimony adduced at trial that Leonardo's threats induced a reasonable fear in the defendant. Since he asserted that he
agreed to complete the false documents only because of this apprehension, the requisite elements of the defense were established. Under the model code provisions, it would have been solely for the jury to determine whether a “person of reason-
able firmness in his situation” would have failed to seek police assistance or refused to cooperate, or whether such a person would have been, unlike defendant, able to resist.

Exercising our authority to revise the common law, we have decided to adopt this approach as the law of New Jersey. Henceforth, duress shall be a defense to a crime other than murder if the defendant engaged in conduct because he
was coerced to do so by the use of, or threat to use, unlawful force against his person or the person of another, which a person of reasonable firmness in his situation would have been unable to resist. . . .

Defendant's conviction of conspiracy to obtain money by false pretenses is hereby reversed and remanded for a new trial.

p. 909
p.910
Model Penal Code
§2.09. Duress

[See the Appendix for text of this section.]

MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT TO §2.09 at 372-375 (1985): The problem of how far duress should exculpate conduct that otherwise would constitute a crime is much debated. . . . [Sir James] Stephen argued, for example,
that “compulsion by threats ought in no case whatever to be admitted as an excuse for crime, though it may and ought to operate in mitigation of punishment in most though not in all cases.” His reason was, in substance, that “it is at the moment
when temptation to crime is strongest that the law should speak most clearly and emphatically to the contrary.”22 Jerome Hall is less hostile to allowing the defense, but he would limit it with rigor to the situation where the actor rightly chose the
lesser of two evils; and even then he gives such weight to the moral duty to resist the evil-doing author of the duress that he does not commit himself beyond the proposition that “coercion should not exculpate in the most serious crimes but. . .
should be a defense where, e.g., it is a question of imminent death or the commission of relatively minor harm.”20

Much of the issue posed by these competing views is resolved . . . in Section 3.02, which provides a general defense in cases where the actor believed his conduct necessary to avoid an evil to himself or to another and the evil sought
to be avoided is greater than that sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense charged. The Institute saw no reason why this principle should be denied full application when the evil apprehended has its source in the action or the threat-
ened action of another person, rather than the forces and perils of the physical world. . . .

The problem of Section 2.09, then, reduces to the question of whether there are cases where the actor cannot justify his conduct under Section 3.02, as when his choice involves an equal or greater evil than that threatened, but where
he nonetheless should be excused because he was subjected to coercion. If he is so far overwhelmed by force that his behavior is involuntary, as when his arm is physically moved by someone else, Section 2.01(1) stands as a barrier to liability. ...
The case of concern here is that in which the actor makes a choice, but claims in his defense that he was so intimidated that he was unable to choose otherwise. . .

In favor of allowing the defense, it may be argued that the legal sanction cannot be effective in the case supposed and that the actor may not properly be blamed for doing what he had to choose to do. It seems clear, however, that the
argument in its full force must be rejected. The crucial reason is the same as that which elsewhere leads to an unwillingness to vary legal norms with the individual's capacity to meet the standards they prescribe, absent a disability that is both
gross and verifiable, such as the mental disease or defect that may establish irresponsibility. The most that it is feasible to do with lesser disabilities is to accord them proper weight in sentencing. To make liability depend upon the fortitude of any
given actor would be no less impractical or otherwise impolitic than to permit it to depend upon such other variables as intelligence or clarity of judgment, suggestibility or moral insight.

Moreover, the legal standard may gain in its effectiveness by being unconditional in this respect. It cannot be known what choices might be different if the actor

p.910
poi

thought he had a chance of exculpation on the ground of his peculiar disabilities instead of knowing that he does not. No less important, legal norms and sanctions operate not only at the moment of climactic choice, but also in the fashioning of
values and of character.

Though, for the foregoing reasons, the submission that the actor lacked the fortitude to make the moral choice should not be entertained as a defense, a different situation is presented if the claimed excuse is based upon the incapacity
of men in general to resist the coercive pressures to which the individual succumbed. . . . [Llaw is ineffective in the deepest sense, indeed ... . it is hypocritical, if it imposes on the actor who has the misfortune to confront a dilemmatic choice, a
standard that his judges are not prepared to affirm that they should and could comply with if their turn to face the problem should arise. Condemnation in such a case is bound to be an ineffective threat; what is, however, more significant is that it
is divorced from any moral base and is unjust. . . .

The Model Code accordingly provides for the defense in cases where the actor was coerced by force or threats of force “that a person of reasonable firmness in his situation would have been unable to resist.” The standard is not,
however, wholly external in its reference; account is taken of the actor’s “situation,” a term that should here be given the same scope it is accorded in appraising recklessness and negligence. Stark, tangible factors that differentiate the actor from
another, like his size, strength, age, or health, would be considered in making the exculpatory judgment. Matters of temperament would not.

NOTES ON THE MODEL PENAL CODE

1. Partial versus complete excuse. In a homicide case, the common law denies the defense of duress entirely, see p. 921 infra, while under the MPC, sufficient duress excuses homicide altogether. The New Jersey statute, enacted
after the decision in Toscano (see p. 908, supra note b and p. 909, supra note 12), takes an intermediate position — a successful claim of duress (like a successful claim of provocation) only reduces murder to manslaughter. If the MPC rationale
for the duress defense is sound, should it apply as well to the defense of provocation, so that a successful claim of provocation (or “extreme emotional disturbance”) would be a complete defense to a homicide charge? Alternatively, if the MPC
is sound in its treatment of provocation as a partial excuse, why shouldn't the same approach apply to duress? Are there differences in the rationales for the two defenses that justify the different treatment that they usually receive? See Anders
Kaye, Excuses in Exile, 48 U. Mich. J.L. Reform 437 (2015); Kyron Huigens, The Continuity of Justification Defenses, 2009 U. Ill. L. Rev. 62.

2. The objective standard. MPC §2.09(1) requires a defendant claiming duress to meet an objective standard of “a person of reasonable firmness in his situation.” But as in other areas where a norm of reasonableness is set (for
example, in the law defining criminal negligence and adequate provocation), it remains necessary to determine how the norm should be tailored to the particular actor's “situation.” As we have seen, the MPC drafters deliberately chose a term that
was undefined and ambiguous, in order “to leave the issue to the courts.”122 But courts sometimes duck

psi

p.912
the issue as well. In State v. Helmedach, 8 A.3d 514 (Conn. App. Ct. 2010), the jury sent the trial judge a note asking for “[a] further explanation in [layman's] terms” of the “situation” standard, but the judge merely replied that he “could only provide
you with the instruction on duress that you already had.” Id. at 518. The appellate court held that this was a proper response: “Because the term situation does not have a statutory definition .. ., itis taken that the jury, as a matter of common
knowledge, comprehends the term.” Id. at 520. Is this a plausible response? How can the court posit that “the jury, as a matter of common knowledge, comprehends the term” when the jury itself expressly indicates otherwise? If the judge was
wrong to avoid the issue, what explanation should he have given? Helmedach claimed to be under duress from an intimate partner who had subjected her to years of abuse. Was this experience relevant to her situation? Courts are divided on the
issue (see Note 2(b), infra). Under these circumstances, is it better for the trial judge to leave the issue unexplained, on the ground that the jury knows the answer “as a matter of common knowledge”? Consider these aspects of the problem:

(a) Immaturity and intellectual disability. In State v. Heinemann, 920 A.2d 278, 295-297 (Conn. 2007), the court rejected the 16-year-old defendant's effort to have the jury instructed that differences in maturity “make it more
difficult for adolescents to resist pressures [which included death threats] because of their limited decision-making capacity and their susceptibility to outside influences.” The court acknowledged that adolescents are “more vulnerable to all sorts
of pressure, including .. . duress,” but concluded that the defendant's argument was precluded by “[t]he legislature's determination to treat sixteen year olds as adults for purposes of [eligibility for trial in adult rather than juvenile court” In United
States v. Johnson, 416 F.3d 464, 469 (6th Cir. 2005), the court held that evidence of low IQ, even if sufficient to establish intellectual disability, should not be admitted to modify the “reasonable person” standard for the purposes of a duress de-

fense: “Unlike . . . non-mental physical disabilities, mental deficiency or retardation is difficult to identify, more difficult to quantify, and more easily feigned. For these reasons and others, it was the common law rule going back at least to 1616, and
still is, that an adult suffering from a mental deficiency is nevertheless held to a reasonable person standard.”

In contrast, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court held that intellectual disability should be considered as part of an actor's “situation” for the purposes of duress: “While the trier of fact must consider whether an objective person of reason-
able firmness would have been able to resist the threat, it must ultimately base its decision on whether that person would have been able to resist the threat if he was subjectively placed in the defendant's situation. . . . [T]he fact that a defendant
suffers from ‘a gross and verifiable’ mental disability . . . is a relevant consideration.” Commonwealth v. DeMarco, 570 Pa. 263, 273 (2002). Should individualization of standards for duress extend even beyond “gross and verifiable” mental disabil-
ities? The English Law Commission has argued that it should:121

ps2
p.919

Threats directed against a weak, immature or disabled person may well be much more compelling than the same threats directed against a normal healthy person. .. . Relative timidity, for example, may be an inseparable

aspect of a total personality that is in turn part cause and part product of its possessor’s life situation; and thus may itself be one of the “circumstances” in the light of which . . . the duress is to be assessed.

Compare John Gardner, The Gist of Excuses, 2 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 1 (1997), questioning a highly individualized standard. Which approach is more in accord with basic principles of just punishment?

(b) Intimate partner violence. Courts now uniformly hold that evidence of intimate partner violence (IPV) is admissible to support a claim of self-defense when people facing an immediate threat kill their abusers (see pp. 820-837
supra). But courts do not agree about whether IPV evidence is admissible when the victim of that violence claims duress as an excuse for participating in a robbery or drug deal under pressure from an abuser. Is there a valid basis for this distinc-
tion?

One commentator suggests that in claims of duress, the standard of reasonableness should not take into account that a person has been abused, in part because “[i]n self-defense, the woman avoids the imminent danger by respond-
ing in kind against its source — her batterer. In duress, however, the woman avoids her abusers threat by misconduct directed against an innocent third party.” Laurie Kratky Doré, Downward Adjustment and the Slippery Slope: The Use of Duress
in Defense of Battered Offenders, 56 Ohio St. L.J. 665, 749 (1995). Do you agree that the innocence of the victim should be a relevant consideration? Does the defendant's degree of culpability change with the identity of the victim?

If IPV evidence is admissible in cases of duress at all, to which factual issues is it relevant? The reasonableness of the defendant's fear? The recklessness or negligence of defendants in placing themselves in positions where they
might be subjected to duress? The degree of firmness that the defendant should be expected to exhibit in resisting the duress? See Alafair S. Burke, Rational Actors, Self-Defense, and Duress: Making Sense, Not Syndromes, Out of the Battered
Women, 81 N.C. L. Rev. 211 (2002). Most courts have not distinguished among these issues. In State v. Richter, 424 P.3d 402, 410 (Ariz. 2018), the court excluded expert testimony about abuse of the defendant because it was relevant only to the
defendant's subjective state of mind and was not relevant to the objective standard that governs the defense of duress. Compare United States v. Lopez, 913 F.3d 807 (9th Cir. 2019), holding that evidence of battered woman's syndrome (BWS) is
admissible and relevant to all aspects of the duress defense.

At least one court has held that the requirement of “reasonable firmness” should be treated differently from the other requirements of a duress defense. In State v. B.H., 183 N.J. 171 (2008), the defendant admitted to engaging in sexual
activity with her seven-year-old stepson while S.H., her husband and father of the child, watched. The defendant raised a defense of duress, claiming that S.H. had often physically and sexually assaulted her in the past, and that he held his hand to
her throat during her sexual activity with the boy and said that if she refused he would make her pay and she would never see her daughter again. The trial court allowed the defendant to present BWS evidence, but instructed the jury that the evi-
dence was not relevant to whether “a person of reasonable firmness in the

p.919

p94
defendant's situation would have been unable to resist” the threat, but rather was relevant only to the issue of whether the defendant had “recklessly placed herself in a situation that it was probable that she would be subjected to duress.” Id. at
181. The New Jersey Supreme Court affirmed, stating: “Because N.J.S.A. 2C:2-9a embodies an objective standard for the evaluation of a defendant's conduct in response to a threat by another, we can discern no place for battered woman syn-

drome evidence in that assessment. In applying the statute's objective measure, it is a person of reasonable firmness that the jury must consider. . . . The evidence is relevant, however, to a defendant's subjective perception of a threat from her
abuser, and in that respect, can be relevant to her credibility. It also helps in explaining why she would remain with her abuser and, therefore, why such a defendant ought not to be perceived as acting recklessly.” Id. at 199-201.
QUESTION: Should evidence of intimate partner violence be considered relevant when assessing whether people acted with “reasonable firmness” in responding to their abusers’ threats?

(c) Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In United States v. Dixon, 901 F.3d 1170 (10th Cir. 2018), a woman convicted of embezzlement wanted to raise the defense of duress based on the PTSD she suffered from having been
sexually assaulted by her stepfather. She argued that she took the money to be able to support her family and to avoid having an abusive stepfather move back in with them to help with expenses. The court denied the defense because “under our
pattern instruction, the touchstone is still what is objectively reasonable — not what is reasonable only through the PTSD distorted lens.” Id. at 1182. The court observed that its duress standard did not include the “in his situation” language of the
MPC, and that distinction was meaningful to the court in excluding the duress defense. Id.

QUESTION: Would the result in Dixon be different if the MPC standard applied?
NOTE: NECESSITY AND DURESS COMPARED

The relationship between the defenses of necessity and duress can be confusing. Partly, the reason is terminological: Courts and commentators don’t always use the terms the same way. But, more significantly, the confusion is analyt-
ical. See Vera Bergelson, Duress Is No Excuse, 15 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 395 (2018); Peter Westen & James Mangiafico, The Criminal Defense of Duress: A Justification, Not an Excuse — And Why It Matters, 6 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 833 (2003); Claire O.
Finkelstein, Duress: A Philosophical Account of the Defense in Law, 37 Ariz. L. Rev. 251 (1995).

Two separate concepts are at work here. What is usually called necessity refers to a defense resting on the rationale of justification. One can see this most clearly in the MPC defense of the choice of evils (§3.02), which we explored
in the preceding section: The defendant violated a criminal prohibition, but in the circumstances the action was beneficial for society, because it was the lesser evil. The other concept rests on the rationale of excuse. The defendant is accorded a
defense not because it was beneficial to violate the law under the particular circumstances, but because those circumstances were so compelling that normally law-abiding people might well have done the same. This is the spirit behind the MPC
defense of duress.

p91
p.916

But the lines between these two distinguishable concepts are often blurred in the way the law is formulated and discussed. For example, Wayne R. LaFave, Criminal Law 467 (8d ed. 2000), summarizes the law of duress as requiring not
only that the defendant be threatened by another with imminent serious unlawful harm, but that the defendant's choice to break the law was the lesser evil in the circumstances.

In those jurisdictions where the law of duress is as LaFave summarizes it, duress becomes a species of justification. But why is it needed? Wouldn't the choice-of-evils defense (necessity) cover all the cases duress covers? The answer
might be no, because the law in some jurisdictions accords significance to the source of the peril. Under this view, if the source of the peril was the “do-it-or-else” command of another person, the only possible defense is duress, not necessity; but
if the source of the peril is something else (for example, a natural disaster), the only possible defense may be necessity, not duress. Recall, for example, the dictum in People v. Unger, p. 878 supra, that the defense of compulsion (duress) would be
available only if someone commanded the prisoner to escape by threatening him with serious harm if he did not.

These ways of formulating the defenses of duress and necessity — that both are justification defenses, but that only a do-it-or-else command of another can establish duress — are problematic in that they preclude the possibility of a
defense when conduct is harmful on balance and therefore not justifiable. MPC §2.09 addresses this difficulty by defining duress purely as an excuse. The defense is established when the defendant acted under a threat that a person of reason-
able firmness would have been unable to resist. If the circumstances would also make the defendant's act the lesser evil, the MPC permits the justification defense (§3.02) as well, but he can claim duress even if he did not choose the lesser evil.

Even when a defendant's duress claim can plausibly be framed in terms of either justification or excuse, the difference between the two can have significant practical consequences. Consider United States v. Lopez, 662 F. Supp. 1083
(N.D. Cal. 1987). Defendant Mcintosh landed a helicopter in the recreation yard of a federal prison and then flew off with Lopez, who had been an inmate there. Prosecuted for escape, Lopez asserted the defenses of duress and necessity, on the

basis of her fear that she faced threats of death or serious injury at the hands of other inmates. Mcintosh was charged with aiding and abetting Lopez's escape. Does he have a good justification defense if Lopez does? Does he have a good duress
defense if Lopez does?

The difference between choice-of-evils justification and the duress excuse can be important for another reason, because the MPC allows the justification defense regardless of the source of the peril, but it makes the duress excuse
available only when the peril arises from the threat of another person. The MPC thus adheres to the tradition of attributing importance to the source of the peril. The following Notes explore this issue and other major issues in the law of duress.
NOTES ON DURESS

1. Source of the threat. What is the basis for the MPC distinction depending on the source of the threat? If the peril is great enough that a person of reasonable firmness would be unable to resist, why should it matter whether the peril
is from another person or from some natural event? Consider the following cases.

p96
p.916

(@) X is under the command of Y, who is armed and trying to escape capture after having just committed a felony. X is unwillingly driving a car along a narrow and precipitous mountain road that drops off sharply on both sides. The
headlights pick out two intoxicated people lying across the road in such a position as to make passage impossible without running over them. X does not stop because ¥ threatens to shoot X dead if X does not drive straight on. If X kills the peo-
ple in the road, X would not be justified under the lesser-evil principle of §3.02, but would be excused under §2.09 if the jury found that “a person of reasonable firmness in his situation would have been unable to resist.”

(b) The same situation as above except that X is driving alone and is prevented from stopping by suddenly inoperative brakes. The alternatives are either to run down the two intoxicated people in the road or to run off the road and down
the mountainside. If X chooses the first alternative and kills the people in the road, X would not be excused under §2.09 even if a jury decided that a person of reasonable firmness would have been unable to do otherwise.

Can the difference between these two cases be defended? Shouldn't actors have an excuse whenever they commit a criminal act that most people would lack the fortitude to resist? But if so, could such a defense be too easily abused?
One way to avoid that danger would be to limit the defense to situations in which the peril (whether from an unlawful threat or natural causes) posed a risk of death or great bodily harm. But the MPC does not permit a duress defense for any natu-
rally arising peril, no matter how severe. The Commentary justifies this position as follows (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.09 at 378-379 (1985)):

[M)here is a significant difference between the situations in which an actor makes the choice of an equal or greater evil under the threat of unlawful human force and when he does so because of a natural event. In the former

situation, the basic interests of the law may be satisfied by prosecution of the agent of unlawful force; in the latter circumstance, if the actor is excused, no one is subject to the law's application.

What “basic interests of the law” does the MPC Commentary have in mind? If in principle the defendant in the latter case should be excused, why should it matter that there is no one else to prosecute?

2. Nature of the threat. At common law only a threat of death or serious bodily harm could give rise to a duress defense. The MPC is broader, but its duress defense still is available only for threats of unlawful force against the person.
Why should other coercive threats be categorically excluded? Consider the comment of Lord Simon dissenting in D.P.P. for Northern Ireland v. Lynch, [1975] A.C. 653, 686:

[A] threat to property may, in certain circumstances, be as potent in overbearing the actor's [will] as a threat of physical harm. For example, the threat may be to burn down his house unless the householder merely keeps

watch against interruption while a crime is committed. Or a fugitive from justice may say, “I have it in my power to make your son bankrupt. You can avoid that merely by driving me to the airport.” Would not many ordinary

people yield to such threats... ?

p.916
p.si7

3. Imminence. Both Toscano and MPC §2.09 treat the imminence of the threatened harm as one factor to be weighed in determining whether the defendant's conduct was that of “a person of reasonable firmness in his situation.” In
contrast, many common-law decisions treat imminence as an absolute prerequisite to a duress defense, and some statutes limit the defense to situations involving threats of “instant” death. Many statutory revisions also rejected the MPC’s flexible
approach and preserved some requirement that the threatened harm be “immediate,” “imminent,” or “instant.” See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comments to §2.09 at 369, 382 (1985). Many recent judicial decisions likewise insist on
strict temporal imminence. E.g., United States v. Sharron, 986 F.3d 810 (8th Cir. 2021); State v. Rafferty, 2015-Ohio-1629 (Ct. App. 2015). Even where imminence is required, however, courts may take a flexible approach, such as finding it satisfied
in cases where there is an ongoing threat of abuse. See State v. Richter, 245 Ariz. 1, 424 P.3d 402 (2018).

What is the justification for a strict imminence requirement? Consider the following cases:

UNITED STATES v. FLEMING, 23 C.M.R.7(1957): [Defendant, an army officer, was court-martialed for violating the Uniform Code of Military Justice while a prisoner of war in Korea. The charges against him rested on his having collaborated with

the enemy by helping prepare propaganda designed to promote disaffection among U.S. troops, and by making numerous English-language broadcasts criticizing American war objectives and calling upon U.S. authorities to withdraw or surren-
der. In describing the circumstances leading up to the acts of collaboration, the court noted that after being captured, defendant suffered numerous interrogations, forced marches, and physical abuse. It characterized the prison camp conditions
as “extremely bad.” The court then described specific threats that occurred in response to defendant's initial refusals to cooperate (id. at 15-16)

[The accused testified that he was constantly harangued and pressured by Colonel Kim. According to Kim, there were two kinds of people: those for peace and those against peace. Those against peace were war criminals and not
fit to live. If the accused fitted into that category he would be put in a “hole” and would never come out. But if he were for peace, he was a friend. . .. When the accused initially refused to do the acts to prove his “friendliness,” he was asked if he
wanted to return to the previous camp up north. The accused replied in the affirmative and Kim informed him that he could start walking the 150-200 mile distance. It was midwinter, the accused's shoes had been stolen, and he was wearing rags
wrapped around his feet. These factors, plus his greatly weakened physical condition, led the accused to the conclusion that he would never reach the north camp alive. Thereafter, on each occasion when the accused objected to Kim's propa-
ganda efforts, he was threatened with the walk north... .

Kim's subsequent threat of the caves . . . undoubtedly affected prisoner cooperation. [The caves] were recesses in the hillside. They were wet and muddy with little or no heating facilities. The prisoners lived in the muck and mire like
animals. . . . The mortality rate in the indescribable filth and privation of these holes in the ground was extremely high. The prisoners felt that a sentence to the caves was almost tantamount to a sentence of death. .. . According to the accused,
whenever

p.si7
p98
he balked on the propaganda, Kim reminded him of the Americans in the caves and again took him to see them.

[At the court-martial, the trier of fact was instructed that defendant's acts could be excused on grounds of duress only if he had “a well-grounded apprehension of immediate and impending death or of immediate, serious, bodily harm.”
Defense counsel argued that the insistence on a fear of immediate death was error under the circumstances, that fear of “a delayed, or a wasting death from starvation, deprivation or other like conditions can just as well spell coercion and com-
pulsion as the fear of immediate death.” Rejecting this argument, the court upheld the conviction (id. at 24-25):]

We are not unmindful of the hardships or the pressures to which the accused and his fellow prisoners were subjected prior to the time of his collaboration with the enemy, [but] we cannot overlook the fact that accused cooperated with
his captors upon the mere assertion of the threats. . . . It was not at all certain at the time the threat was made that walking north to Pyoktong would cause death at all, much less immediately. By way of comparison, if, for example, accused's cap-
tors had actually made him start on foot for Camp Five, and it then became evident that he could not survive the march, a valid defense of duress might have arisen for capitulation at that point. . . . Here the danger of death was problematical and
remote. . . . As the court stated in D’Aquino v. United States, “The person claiming the defense of coercion and duress must be a person whose resistance has brought him to the last ditch” (182 F.2d at 359). Accused’s resistance had not “brought
him to the last ditch”; the danger of death or great bodily harm was not immediate. Accused can not now avail himself of the defense of duress.

UNITED STATES v. CONTENTO-PACHON, 723 F.2d 691 (9th Cir. 1984): [Defendant, a native of Bogota, Colombia, was employed there as a taxicab driver. One of his passengers, Jorge, proposed] that Contento-Pachon swallow cocaine-filled
balloons and transport them to the United States. Contento-Pachon agreed to consider the proposition. He was told not to mention the proposition to anyone, otherwise he would “get into serious trouble.” Contento-Pachon testified that he did

not contact the police because he believes that the Bogota police are corrupt and that they are paid off by drug traffickers. Approximately one week later, Contento-Pachon told Jorge that he would not carry the cocaine. In response, . . . Jorge told
Contento-Pachon that his failure to cooperate would result in the death of his wife and three-year-old child.

The following day the pair met again. Contento-Pachon's life and the lives of his family were again threatened. At this point, Contento-Pachon agreed to take the cocaine into the United States. The pair met two more times. At the last
meeting, Contento-Pachon swallowed 129 balloons of cocaine. He was informed that he would be watched at all times during the trip, and that if he failed to follow Jorge's instruction he and his family would be killed.

After leaving Bogota, Contento-Pachon’s plane landed in Panama. Contento-Pachon asserts that he did not notify the authorities there because he felt that the Panamanian police were as corrupt as those in Bogota. Also, he felt that
any such action on his part would place his family in jeopardy. When he arrived at the customs inspection point in Los Angeles, Contento-Pachon consented to have his stomach x-rayed, which led to the discovery of the cocaine.

ps8
p.919

[At trial, the government's motion to exclude the duress defense was granted. The District Court held that two necessary elements of the defense are the immediacy and the inescapability of the threat. It concluded that neither element
was satisfied. The court of appeals reversed’] [T]he defendant was dealing with a man who was deeply involved in the exportation of illegal substances. Large sums of money were at stake and, consequently, Contento-Pachon had reason to be-
lieve that Jorge would carry out his threats. . .. These were not vague threats of possible future harm. According to the defendant, if he had refused to cooperate, the consequences would have been immediate and harsh. . . . Contento-Pachon’s
contention that he was operating under the threat of immediate harm was supported by sufficient evidence to present a triable issue of fact.

The defendant must show that he had no reasonable opportunity to escape. . . . The trier of fact should decide whether one in Contento-Pachon’s position might believe that some of the Bogota police were paid informants for drug
traffickers and that reporting the matter to the police did not represent a reasonable opportunity of escape.

Ifhe chose not to go to the police, Contento-Pachon’s alternative was to flee. We reiterate that the opportunity to escape must be reasonable. To flee, Contento-Pachon, along with his wife and three year-old child, would have been
forced to pack his possessions, leave his job, and travel to a place beyond the reaches of the drug traffickers. A juror might find that this was not a reasonable avenue of escape. Thus, Contento-Pachon presented a triable issue on the element of
escapabilty.

REGINA v. RUZIC, [1998] D.L.R.4th 358: The defendant was a 21-year-old woman who had traveled from Belgrade, Yugoslavia, to Toronto with two kilos of heroin strapped to her body. At trial she admitted bringing the heroin into Canada but
argued duress. She claimed that a man named Mirkovic, a known killer, had stabbed and burned her arm and had threatened to “do something” to her mother if she would not carry heroin to Canada. She claimed she did not tell the police because
she no longer trusted the Yugoslav authorities. A defense expert testified that in Yugoslavia large paramilitary groups engaged in mafia-like coercive activities and that people perceived the police to have lost control.

Section 17 of the Canadian Criminal Code provides:

A person who commits an offence under compulsion by threats of immediate death or bodily injury from a person who is present when the offense is committed is excused for committing the offense if the person believes

that the threats will be carried out.

The trial court instructed the jury on compulsion as a defense but, contrary to the Canadian statute, refused to specify that the threat had to be immediate, had to be made against the defendant herself, and had to be made by a person
who was present when the offense was committed. The jury acquitted, and the prosecution appealed. The Ontario Court of Appeal upheld the acquittal on the ground that the restrictive conditions in the duress statute violated Section 7 of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, a general provision stating:

Everyone has the right to life, liberty, and security of the person, and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.

p.919
p.920

The court reasoned that if the defendant's story were believed, the threat left her no realistic choice, even though the threat was not immediate and the threatener was not present when she committed the offense. To convict her in such
a situation would amount to convicting the innocent in violation of the principles of fundamental justice. She would be innocent because her actions were in effect involuntary — not physically, but morally — because she had no realistic choice but
to comply.

QUESTIONS: Should a U.S. court reject the immediacy requirement and similar restrictions on the duress defense, on the ground that a defendant like Ruzic is morally innocent? Or are such restrictions explained by practical concerns? How do

such practical concerns (if any) justify the conviction of a person who is morally innocent?

4, Duress and mens rea. Because cases of imminent duress involve a lack of moral culpability, it makes sense for duress to be a defense to crimes like assault or damage to property, which require a culpable mens rea (for example,
an intent to cause harm). But does the same logic suggest that duress should not be available as a defense to strict liability crimes? For example, in many states, driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) is a strict liability offense; it is no defense
that the defendant was unaware of being intoxicated. What should be the result if defendants who know they are intoxicated are forced at gunpoint to drive a fleeing felon away from the scene of a crime? Since a DUI conviction does not require
moral culpability, should the defendants’ claims of duress be considered irrelevant for the same reasons that a mistake of fact would be considered irrelevant? Or conversely, if a duress defense is permitted in this situation (as it apparently is in
most states), does that willingness suggest that the refusal to permit a mistake-of-fact defense is fundamentally unsound? What could account for the differential treatment of the two situations? For careful analyses, see David O. Brink, The Nature
and Significance of Culpability, 13 Crim. L. & Phil. 347 (2019); Vera Bergelson, A Fair Punishment for Humbert Humbert: Strict Liability and Affirmative Defenses, 14 New Crim. L. Rev. 55 (2011).

5. Contributory fault. Should it matter whether the defendant is in some way to blame for being in a position that leads to duress? MPC §2.09(2) rules out a duress defense where the defendant “recklessly placed himself in a situation
in which it is probable that he would be subjected to duress.” The defense is also unavailable if a defendant “was negligent in placing himself in such a situation, whenever negligence suffices to establish culpability.” In United States v. Hernandez,
894 F.3d 496 (2d Cir. 2018), the defendant joined MS-13, an international gang notorious for its violence, and shot and killed a member of a rival gang. He put forth a duress defense, arguing he joined the gang to protect himself and his daughter
and only killed to avoid being subject to a beating or death by his fellow gang members. He was convicted after the jury was instructed that, if they found the “defendant recklessly or negligently placed himself in a situation in which it was proba-
ble that he would be subject to duress,” the duress defense would fail. Id. at 501. The appellate court affirmed the conviction.

QUESTIONS: Is the MPC approach too restrictive in precluding the defense to any crime whenever people expose themselves to the likelihood of facing duress to commit very different crimes? For example, suppose that defendants know that in
p.920
p92

joining a gang, they are likely to be pressured to participate in various crimes, primarily ones connected to the sale of marijuana. If the defendants are later threatened with death if they do not help in a bank robbery, is it fair to deny them the duress

defense to that much more serious, specific intent crime? Even if defendants are aware a gang is likely to involve violent activity, what if the choice to join the gang was itself coerced? See David Rutkowski, Note, A Coercion Defense for the Street

Gang Criminal: Plugging the Moral Gap in Existing Law, 10 Notre Dame J.L. Ethics & Pub. Pol'y 137 (1999).

6. Duress as a defense to murder. Prior to the MPC, most jurisdictions held the duress defense inapplicable in prosecutions for murder (and sometimes for other very serious crimes) even when the stringent requirements of an
imminent, inescapable lethal threat were satisfied. The MPC rejected this exclusion of murder cases, as have a few states that adopted duress provisions derived from the MPC. E.g., Commonwealth v. Markman, 916 A.2d 586, 606 (Pa. 2007);
N.Y. Penal Law §40.00 (2021). See also Kenneth J. Arenson, The Paradox of Disallowing Duress as a Defence to Murder, 78 J. Crim. L. 65 (2014), suggesting a framework for allowing duress defenses in homicide cases. But most recent cases and
statutory revisions continue to exclude the defense in murder prosecutions. E.g., State v. Sexton, 159 A.3d 335, 341 n.8 (Me. 2017); Commonwealth v. Vasquez, 971 N.E.2d 783 (Mass. 2012). In England, the defense is precluded in cases of murder
and attempted murder, but not in cases of aircraft hijacking. See Regina v. Abdul-Hussain, [1999] Crim. L. R. 570 (Ct. App.).

QUESTIONS: (a) Sentencing. What is the rationale for removing the duress defense when the potential punishment is at its highest? Is it sufficient to allow an argument grounded in duress to come only in the sentencing phase?

(b) Duress as a defense to felony murder. Suppose that a defendant is compelled to participate in a robbery, and during the course of that crime a bystander is shot and killed by one of the other robbers. If duress is available in a
prosecution for robbery but not in a murder prosecution, should the defendant be able to invoke the duress defense in a prosecution for felony murder? Logically, the answer should be yes: A well-founded claim of duress will defeat the robbery

charge, and any allegation of murder must therefore rest upon independent proof of malice, without regard to the underlying felony. Most courts accept this analysis. E.g., People v. Reichard, 949 N.W.2d 64 (Mich. 2020); McMillan v. State, 51 A.3d
623 (Md. 2012). But some courts hold that duress is not available as a defense to any homicide charge, including felony murder. See State v. Whitaker, 459 P.3d 1074 (Wash. 2020); Steven J. Mulroy, The Duress Defense's Uncharted Terrain, 43
San Diego L. Rev. 159 (2006).

(c) The defendant's role in a homicidal offense. Where, as in most jurisdictions, duress cannot be a defense to a murder charge, should the defense nonetheless remain available if the coerced defendant's participation in the crime was
relatively minor? Consider the observations of Chief Justice Bray, dissenting in Regina v. Brown, [1968] S.A.S.R. 467, 494:

The reasoning generally used to support the proposition that duress is no defence to a charge of murder is, to use the words of Blackstone cited above, that “he ought rather to die himself, than escape by the murder of an

innocent.” Generally speaking | am prepared to accept this position.

p.92t
p.922

Its force is obviously considerably less where the act of the threatened man is not the direct act of killing but only the rendering of some minor form of assistance, particularly when it is by no means certain that if he refuses

the death of the victim will be averted, or conversely when it is by no means certain that if he complies the death will be a necessary consequence. It would seem hard, for example, if an innocent passer-by seized in the

street by a gang of criminals visibly engaged in robbery and murder in a shop and compelled at the point of a gun to issue misleading comments to the public, or an innocent driver compelled at the point of a gun to convey

the murderer to the victim, were to have no defence... .

When is a defendant's role sufficiently limited to justify the availability of a duress defense to homicide?

PROBLEM

The question whether duress should be available as a defense to murder or other serious offenses becomes critical in international efforts to prosecute individuals involved in perpetrating atrocities, such as the mass killings that took
place in the 1990s in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.

Drazen Erdemovié was charged before the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) with crimes against humanity and war crimes for his participation in the mass execution of 1,200 unarmed Muslim men and
boys in Srebrenica during a five-hour period in July 1995. At the time of the massacre, Erdemovi¢ was a low-ranking soldier in the Serbian army. He testified that when members of his unit were ordered to shoot the civilians, he refused, only to
be threatened with instant death: “If you don't wish to do it, stand in the line with the rest of them and give others your rifle so that they can shoot you.” Prosecutor v. Erdemovié, No. IT-96-22-A (Intl. Crim. Trib. for the Former Yugoslavia, Appeals
Chamber, Oct. 7, 1997), at p. 6. The prosecution did not dispute Erdemovié’s account of the facts; rather, it argued that duress could not constitute a complete defense to such crimes, but could be considered only as a mitigating factor in sentenc-
ing. Consider these issues:

1. The question of guilt. The Appeals Chamber of the ICTY, in a 3-2 vote, agreed with the prosecution that duress can only be a mitigating factor, not a complete defense to such charges. Two judges in the majority insisted that “he
ought rather to die himself, than kill an innocent.”102 The House of Lords has taken a similar position (Abbott v. The Queen [1976] 3 All E.R. 140, 146):

A terrorist of notorious violence might, e.g., threaten death to A and his family unless A obeys his instructions to put a bomb with a time fuse set by A in a certain passenger aircraft and/or in a thronged market, railway station

or the like. . . . Is there any limit to the number of people you may kill to save your own life and that of your family?

p.922
p.928

Is the reasoning persuasive? The dissent in Erdemovié castigated this approach for setting “standards of behaviour which require mankind to perform acts of martyrdom, and brand as criminal any behaviour falling below those stan-
dards”; it offered this example, drawn from an actual case before the ICTY:123

An inmate of a concentration camp, starved and beaten for months, is then told, after a savage beating, that if he does not kill another inmate, who has already been beaten with metal bars and will certainly be beaten to

death before long, then his eyes will, then and there, be gouged out. He kills the other inmate as a result. Perhaps a hero could accept a swift bullet in his skull to avoid having to kill, but it would require an extraordinary —

and perhaps impossible act of courage to accept one’s eyes being plucked out.

Does the dissent have the stronger argument, or is it simply making a different point? Professor Alexander K.A. Greenawalt notes (The Pluralism of International Criminal Law, 86 Ind. LJ. 1063, 1118 (2011)):

[T]he majority's reasoning . . . reflects the concern that granting Erdemovi¢’s defense would somehow endorse his behavior. The criminal law is more nuanced than that, however. . . . The law may maintain that Erdemovi¢’s

actions were regrettable . .. while at the same time acknowledging [that] self-sacrifice may be too much to expect under the circumstances. [This] perspective does not require downgrading duress into a mere partial defense

that offers only mitigation of punishment. Instead, if the law does not expect self-sacrifice on Erdemovic's part, it should afford a complete defense while recognizing that his behavior is merely excused, rather than justified.

2. Apossible justification? There was an important complicating factor for Erdemovic: It was virtually certain that if he had refused to execute the innocent civilians, he himself would have been immediately killed, and the massacre
would then have been carried out by others. In other words, more people would have died if he had resisted the threat. A dissenting judge argued that the decision to succumb to the threat and kill the innocent victims therefore was the lesser evil.

Is that analysis sound? Professor Luis E. Chiesa observes (Duress, Demanding Heroism, and Proportionality, 41 Vand. J. Transnat’l L. 741, 769 (2008)):

[This] contention presupposes an oversimplified calculus of what constitutes the lesser evil. [Bly giving way to the threats, the actor is aiding someone else in the commission of a wrongful and heinous act. This collaboration

in the perpetration of a crime is, in and of itself, an evil that should weigh against yielding to the threats. [T]hese types of decisions are “not merely a matter of weighing the lives saved versus the life lost,” for the agent's moral

integrity is compromised by his forced involvement in the production of evil. [Thus,] a coerced actor who harms an innocent victim may act wrongfully despite the fact that she could not have prevented the harm.

Nonetheless, Professor Chiesa continues (id. at 771):

p.928
p.924

[Blecause the actor effectively lacked the capacity to prevent the harm threatened from occurring, punishing [her] for deciding to save her own life instead of dying to protect innocent people who were going to die anyway

would be unfair. [Y]ielding to the coercive threats in this case is wrongful but perfectly understandable and, hence, not punishable.

3. The appropriate sentence. Erdemovié ultimately served a five-year prison term. Do the arguments for denying the duress defense altogether suggest that this relatively lenient sentence (for having helped murder 1,200 persons)
was inappropriate? How can a sentence of this sort possibly deter people facing a threat of instant death from participating in a mass atrocity? Or is deterrence the wrong way to view the purpose of punishment in a case like this, which may be
grounded more on expressive concerns? If so, does criminal condemnation suffice without severe sanctions?

NOTE ON POSITIVE INDUCEMENTS

Should there be a defense when a crime is committed in response to inducements (as opposed to threats) that would overcome the resistance of a person of ordinary firmness? Sir James Stephen, reflecting the prevailing common-

law view, thought not: “It is at the moment when temptation to crime is strongest that the law should speak most clearly and emphatically to the contrary.” 2 James Fitzjames Stephen, A History of the Criminal Law of England 107 (1983). But since

some inducements can affect ordinary, law-abiding people as powerfully as forcible threats, why should the two be treated differently? Consider the offer of employment, housing, or medical care to a person in desperate need. Wouldn’t an offer to
donate a kidney to a seriously ill person who otherwise lacked access to one be as difficult for that person to resist as a threat to inflict serious bodily injury on a healthy person?
The only inducement defense that exists in American law is that of entrapment, which applies only to excessive inducements offered by government agents. See the discussion of entrapment in the section on accomplice liability in
Chapter 7, p. 695 supra. It is widely accepted that the primary purpose of the defense is to deter government overreaching in undercover operations. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.13 at 413-415 (1985). Yet the most
common version of the defense is considerably narrower, because it is available only to a supposedly “innocent” defendant — someone not “predisposed” to offend. See Jacobson v. United States, 503 U.S. 540, 553 (1992). Given this focus on the
particular defendant's culpability or predisposition, why shouldn’t the excuse be available for similarly “innocent” defendants whose lack of predisposition is overcome by nongovernmental inducements?
3. Intoxication
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
When intoxication is proffered as an excuse, the applicable law depends first and foremost on whether the defendant became intoxicated voluntarily or involuntarily. We consider first the extremely common problem of voluntary
intoxication
p.924
p.925
before turning to the comparatively rare cases in which a criminal defendant claims involuntary intoxication.
a. Voluntary Intoxication
GLANVILLE WILLIAMS, CRIMINAL LAW: THE GENERAL PART 564 (2d ed. 1961): If a man is punished for doing something when drunk that he would not have done when sober, is he not in plain truth punished for getting drunk?
ROBERTS v. PEOPLE, 19 MICH. 401, 419 (1870): [A defendant] must be presumed to have intended the obscuration and perversion of his faculties which followed from his voluntary intoxication. He must be held to have purposely blinded his moral
perceptions, and set his will free from the control of reason — to have suppressed the guards and invited the mutiny; and should therefore be held responsible as well for the vicious excesses of the will, thus set free, as for the acts done by its
prompting.
People v. Hood
‘Supreme Court of California
462 P.2d 370 (Cal. 1969)
TRAYNOR, C.J. [The evidence showed that defendant, who had been drinking heavily, resisted an effort by a police officer to subdue and arrest him, and in the course of the struggle seized the officer's gun and shot him in the legs.
Defendant was convicted at trial of assault with a deadly weapon. Because the trial court had given the jury “hopelessly conflicting instructions on the effect of intoxication,” the California Supreme Court reversed and attempted to clarify the issue

for retrial. The court explained that the relevance of intoxication generally turns on whether the charged offense is a crime of “specific intent” or “general intent.” Assault with intent to kill is clearly a specific intent crime, but the lower courts were in
conflict about which category properly described other crimes of assault, such as simple assault and assault with a deadly weapon. The court then continued:]

[The] problem is to reconcile two competing theories of what is just in the treatment of those who commit crimes while intoxicated. On the one hand, the moral culpability of a drunken criminal is frequently less than that of a sober
person effecting a like injury. On the other hand, it is commonly felt that a person who voluntarily gets drunk and while in that state commits a crime should not escape the consequences. [To] achieve a compromise between the conflicting feelings
of sympathy and reprobation for the intoxicated offender, . .. courts both in England and this country drew a distinction between so-called specific intent and general intent crimes. [The upshot was that evidence of intoxication could be considered
to negate a required specific intent, but not to negate “general intent.”]

Specific and general intent have been notoriously difficult terms to define and apply, and a number of text writers recommended that they be abandoned altogether. . .. When the definition of a crime consists of only the description of
a particular act, without reference to intent to do a further act or achieve a future consequence, [the intention to commit that particular act] is deemed to be a

p.926

p.926
general criminal intent. When the definition refers to defendant's intent to do some further act or achieve some additional consequence, the crime is deemed to be one of specific intent.2 There is no real difference, however, only a linguistic one,
between an intent to do an act already performed and an intent to do that same act in the future... .

The difficulty with applying such a test to the crime of assault or assault with a deadly weapon is that no word in the relevant code provisions unambiguously denotes a particular mental element, yet the word “attempt” in Penal Code
section 240 [which defines assault] strongly suggests goal-directed, intentional behavior. This uncertainty accounts for the conflict over whether assault is a crime only of intention or also of recklessness. [W]hatever reality the distinction between
specific and general intent may have in other contexts, the difference is chimerical in the case of assault with a deadly weapon or simple assault. Since the definitions of both specific intent and general intent cover the requisite intent to commit a
battery, the decision whether or not to give effect to evidence of intoxication must rest on other considerations.

A compelling consideration is the effect of alcohol on human behavior. A significant effect of alcohol is to distort judgment and relax the controls on aggressive and antisocial impulses. Alcohol apparently has less effect on the ability to
engage in simple goal-directed behavior, although it may impair the efficiency of that behavior. In other words, a drunk man is capable of forming an intent to do something simple, such as strike another, unless he is so drunk that he has reached
the stage of unconsciousness. What he is not as capable as a sober man of doing is exercising judgment about the social consequences of his acts or controlling his impulses toward antisocial acts. He is more likely to act rashly and impulsively
and to be susceptible to passion and anger. It would therefore be anomalous to allow evidence of intoxication to relieve a man of responsibility for the crimes of assault with a deadly weapon or simple assault, which are so frequently committed in
just such a manner. . . . (Accordingly, the court held, evidence of intoxication is not admissible to negate the intent required for conviction of simple assault or assault with a deadly weapon.?]

Those crimes that have traditionally been characterized as crimes of specific intent [such as assault with intent to rape or assault with intent to kill] are not affected by our holding here. The difference in mental activity between
formulating

p.926
p.927
an intent to commit a battery and formulating an intent to commit a battery for the purpose of raping or killing may be slight, but it is sufficient to justify drawing a line between them and considering evidence of intoxication in the one case and
disregarding it in the other. Accordingly, on retrial the court should not instruct the jury to consider evidence of defendant's intoxication in determining whether he committed assault with a deadly weapon on a peace officer or any of the lesser as-
saults included therein. . ..
STATE v. STASIO, 396 A.2d 1129 (NJ. 1979): [The defendant was convicted of assault with intent to rob. Conceding that this was a “specific intent” crime, the court nonetheless ruled that evidence of voluntary intoxication was inadmissible’]
[Dlistinguishing between specific and general intent gives rise to incongruous results by irrationally allowing intoxication to excuse some crimes but not others. In some instances if the defendant is found incapable of formulating the specific intent

necessary for the crime charged, such as assault with intent to rob, he may be convicted of a lesser included general intent crime, such as assault with a deadly weapon. In other cases there may be no related general intent offense so that intox-
ication would lead to acquittal. ..

The [traditional] approach may free defendants of specific intent offenses even though the harm caused may be greater than in an offense held to require only general intent. This course thus undermines the criminal law's primary
function of protecting society from the results of behavior that endangers the public safety. This should be our guide rather than concern with logical consistency in terms of any single theory of culpability... . The demands of public safety and the
harm done are identical irrespective of the offender's reduced ability to restrain himself due to his drinking. . ..

Our holding today does not mean that voluntary intoxication is always irrelevant in criminal proceedings. Evidence of intoxication may be introduced to demonstrate that premeditation and deliberation have not been proven so that a
second degree murder cannot be raised to first degree murder or to show that the intoxication led to a fixed state of insanity. Intoxication may be shown to prove that a defendant never participated in a crime. Thus it might be proven that a defen-
dant was in such a drunken stupor and unconscious state that he was not a part of a robbery. . . . Under some circumstances intoxication may be relevant to demonstrate mistake. However, in the absence of any basis for the defense, a trial court
should not in its charge introduce that element. A trial court, of course, may consider intoxication as a mitigating circumstance when sentencing a defendant.

[PAsHMAN, J, dissenting:] [T]he majority rules that a person may be convicted of the crimes of assault with intent to rob and breaking and entering with intent to steal even though he never, in fact, intended to rob anyone or steal anything. The
majority arrives at this anomalous result by holding that voluntary intoxication can never constitute a defense to any crime other than first-degree murder even though, due to intoxication, the accused may not have possessed the mental state
specifically required as an element of the offense. This holding . . . defies logic and sound public policy. . . .
A person who intentionally commits a bad act is more culpable than one who engages in the same conduct without any evil design. The intentional wrongdoer [also] constitutes a greater threat to societal repose. A sufficiently
intoxicated
p.927
p.928
defendant is thus subject to less severe sanctions not because the law “excuses” his conduct but because the circumstances surrounding his acts have been deemed by the Legislature to be less deserving of punishment. . . .

Just as the lack of premeditation, willfulness, or deliberation precludes a conviction for first-degree murder, so should the lack of intent to rob or steal be a defense to assault and battery with intent to rob, or breaking and entering with
intent to steal. The principle is the same in both situations. If voluntary intoxication negates an element of the offense, the defendant has not engaged in the conduct proscribed by the criminal statute, and hence should not be subject to the sanc-
tions imposed by that statute.

The majority . . . professes to be concerned with protecting society from drunken offenders. There are several problems with this approach. First, the majority's opinion is not even internally consistent. Although intoxication is not to be
given the status of a defense, the majority states that it can be considered to “buttress the affirmative defense of reasonable mistake.” It is difficult to comprehend why the public would be less endangered by persons who become intoxicated and,
as a result, commit alcohol-induced “mistakes” . . . than by persons who get so intoxicated that they commit the same acts without any evil intent. .. .

The most important consideration, however, is that the standards for establishing the defense are extremely difficult to meet. Contrary to the implications contained in the majority opinion, it is not the case that every defendant who has
had a few drinks may successfully urge the defense. [T]he defense cannot be established solely by showing that the defendant might not have committed the offense had he been sober. What is required is a showing of such a great prostration of
the faculties that the requisite mental state was totally lacking. That is, to successfully invoke the defense, an accused must show that he was so intoxicated that he did not have the intent to commit an offense. Such a state of affairs will likely exist
in very few cases. | am confident that our judges and juries will be able to distinguish such unusual instances... .

NOTES ON VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION AS EVIDENCE NEGATING MENS REA

Why try to distinguish between whole classes of offenses for which voluntary intoxication can serve as a defense and those for which it cannot? Wouldn't it be more straightforward to admit evidence of voluntary intoxication whenever it
is logically relevant to a fact in dispute? Decisions like Hood and Stasio reflect widespread resistance to this approach: In nearly all jurisdictions, evidence of intoxication is sometimes inadmissible even when it is logically relevant. These Notes ex-
plore the reasons for this reluctance and the doctrinal forms that it takes.

1. Developments after Hood and Stasio. In California and New Jersey, subsequent statutes superseded the tests applied in Hood and Stasio. California, at the time of Hood, allowed intoxication evidence to be considered in deter-
mining “purpose, motive or intent,” and in 1994, the California Supreme Court ruled that intoxication evidence was admissible on the question whether a defendant had formed the malice (recklessness) required for second-degree murder. The
legislative response was swift. As amended in 1995, Cal. Penal Code §29.4(b) (2021)

p.928

p.929
states that “[elvidence of voluntary intoxication is admissible solely on the issue of whether or not the defendant actually formed a required specific intent, or, when charged with murder, whether the defendant premeditated, deliberated, or har-
bored express malice aforethought [i.e., intent to kill].” As a result, such evidence is not admissible on the issue of implied malice (I. recklessness).

The New Jersey legislature moved in the opposite direction. After Stasio held that intoxication evidence was not admissible to negate specific or general intent (except in cases of first-degree murder), the legislature enacted a provision
specifying that for all criminal offenses generally, intoxication evidence can be considered in determining purpose or knowledge but not in determining recklessness or negligence. N.J. Stat. Ann. §2C:2-8(b) (2021).

Looking more widely, the law is far from uniform. Many federal courts follow the “specific intent” versus “general intent” approach described in Hood. See United States v. White Calf, 634 F.3d 453, 458 (8th Cir. 2011). In United States
v. Veach, 455 F.3d 628 (6th Cir. 2006), U.S. Park Rangers arrested a motorist for driving while intoxicated. The motorist shoved one of the officers, and once in the patrol car, he said, “[I]f get a shot at you.) . . . I'll kill youf}] I'm going to cut off your
head.” He was convicted of two offenses: assaulting a federal officer (18 U.S.C. §111), and threatening to assault a federal officer “with intent to impede [such] officer while engaged in the performance of official duties.” 18 U.S.C. §115(a)(1)(B). The
court held that the ample evidence of defendant's intoxication was properly ruled irrelevant to the charge of simple assault under §111, but that the trial judge had erred in ruling this evidence irrelevant on the question whether the defendant had
formed the specific “intent to impede” required for conviction under §115.

Roughly half of the states use the same test: The distinction between crimes of “specific intent” and “general intent” is decisive. E.g., People v. Stone, 471 P.3d 1148, 1151 (Colo. Ct. App. 2020); State v. Murrin, 435 P.3d 1126 (Kan.
2019). But several states, following the Stasio approach, exclude logically relevant intoxication evidence even on the issue of specific intent, except in first-degree murder cases (e.g., Swisher v. Commonwealth, 506 S.E.2d 763 (Va. 1998), and
many states bar defense use of intoxication evidence on all mens rea issues. See R.W. Gascoyne, Modern Status of the Rules as to Voluntary Intoxication as Defense to Criminal Charge, 8 A.L.R.3d 1236 (2016). Ohio is one of the states following
this last approach. In State v. Arnold, 2 N.E.3d 1009, 1026 (Ohio 2013), the court ruled that evidence of intoxication was irrelevant to the specific intent required on a capital charge of aggravated murder, and then upheld the conviction and a sen-
tence of life without possibility of parole.

2. Why should intoxication be treated differently from other logically relevant evidence? Some of the reluctance to give intoxication its normal significance in rebutting evidence of mens rea is explained by the close connection
between alcohol consumption and crime, especially violent crime. The World Health Organization reports that there are strong links between alcohol and interpersonal violence “across all cultures.” Studies find that alcohol is a factor in 40 per-
cent of all

p.929

. 990
violent crimes, and 37 percent of those who are incarcerated report that they were drinking at the time of their arrest.1°5 Treating intoxication differently as a matter of criminal liability is only one way to address this relationship. Studies show, for
example, that violent crime increases as alcohol becomes more readily available and, conversely, that violent crime can be reduced by limiting access to alcohol. See D. Mark Anderson et al., Wet Laws, Drinking Establishments and Violent Crime,
128 Econ. J. 1333 (2017); Tate Twinam, Danger Zone: Land Use and the Geography of Neighborhood Crime, 100 J. Urb. Econ. 104 (2017). Sobriety monitoring programs!2° have also been found to reduce crime. Beau Kilmer & Greg Midgette,
Criminal Deterrence: Evidence from an Individual-Level Analysis of 24/7 Sobriety, 39 J. Pol'y Analysis & Mgmt. 801 (2020). Should the law seek to address this relationship by reducing sentences (or even dismissing charges) for alcohol-related of-
fenses against individuals who agree to wear an alcohol-monitoring bracelet or otherwise limit their access to alcohol?

3. The Model Penal Code. The MPC, and many of the recent court decisions, reject the controlling significance of the general intent-specific intent distinction and instead focus directly on the question of when intoxication evidence
should be admissible.
Model Penal Code

§2.08. Intoxication
[See the Appendix for text of this section.]
MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT to §2.08 at 357-359 (1985): Two major issues are . . . presented by the Model Code’s provisions. The first . . . is the question of whether intoxication ought to be accorded a significance that
is entirely coextensive with its relevance to disprove purpose or knowledge when they are the requisite mental elements of a specific crime. The answer ought to be affirmative. [W]hen purpose or knowledge, as distinguished from recklessness, is
made essential for conviction, the reason very surely is that in the absence of such states of mind the conduct involved does not present a comparable
990
p.991
danger. [In contrast,] in the case of crimes of violence against the person, purpose or knowledge rarely is required to establish liability . . . ; recklessness or even negligence is ordinarily sufficient.

The second and more difficult question relates to recklessness, where awareness of the risk created by the actor's conduct ordinarily is requisite for liability under Section 2.02. The problem is whether intoxication ought to be accorded
a significance coextensive with its relevance to disprove such awareness, as in the case of purpose or knowledge. .. .

Those who oppose a special rule for drunkenness in relation to awareness of the risk in recklessness draw strength . . . from the proposition that it is precisely the awareness of the risk in recklessness that is the essence of its moral
culpability — a culpability dependent upon the magnitude of the specific risk knowingly created. When that risk is greater in degree than that which the actor perceives at the time of getting drunk, as is frequently the case, the result of a special rule
is bound to be a liability disproportionate to culpability. Hence the solution urged is to dispense with any special rule, relying rather on the possibility of proving foresight at the time of drinking and, when this cannot be proved, upon a generalized
prohibition of being drunk and dangerous, with sanctions appropriate for such behavior. This approach would also permit prosecution for negligence if negligent commission of the act in question was sufficient to establish criminal liability. . .. The
actor's culpability in failing to perceive a risk would be judged against the standard of a man in normal possession of his faculties. Thus, the fact that the defendant was drunk will not exculpate him from a charge of negligence. . . .

The case thus made is worthy of respect, but there are strong considerations on the other side. There is first the weight of the antecedent law which . . . has tended toward a special rule for drunkenness in this context. Beyond this, . . .
awareness of the potential consequences of excessive drinking on the capacity of human beings to gauge the risks incident to their conduct is by now so dispersed in our culture that it is not unfair to postulate a general equivalence between the
risks created by the conduct of the drunken actor and the risks created by his conduct in becoming drunk. Becoming so drunk as to destroy temporarily the actor's powers of perception and judgment is conduct that plainly has no affirmative
social value to counterbalance the potential danger. The actor's moral culpability lies in engaging in such conduct. Added to this are the impressive difficulties posed in litigating the foresight of any particular actor at the time when he imbibes and
the relative rarity of cases where intoxication really does engender unawareness as distinguished from imprudence. These considerations led to the conclusion, on balance, that the Model Code should declare that unawareness of a risk, of which
the actor would have been aware had he been sober, is immaterial. Most states with revised codes have taken a similar position.

4, The recklessness equation. Is the Model Penal Code right to equate drunkenness with recklessness? Suppose a defendant has several drinks at a party, assuming that his roommate (the designated driver) will take him home
afterwards. On the way home, the roommate becomes sick and is unable to drive, so the defendant takes the wheel. Shortly afterwards, he does not stop at a stop sign, failing to realize the risk that a pedestrian might be crossing from a blind spot
at the intersection. As a result, he is unable to stop in time to avoid a pedestrian crossing the road, and the pedestrian is killed. In a jurisdiction that follows the MPC framework for homicide,

p99
p. 992

the defendant could perhaps be convicted of negligent homicide, but should he be considered guilty of the more serious MPC offense of reckless manslaughter? Is the MPC approach sound in equating his willingness to get drunk at the party
with the culpability involved in recklessly killing? Gideon Yaffe argues (Intoxication, Recklessness, and Negligence, 9 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 547, 581 (2012)) that the MPC rule is defensible only as applied to situations in which the defendant was con-
sciously aware, when he became intoxicated, of the harms that his post-intoxication conduct would risk. Consider Stephen J. Morse, Fear of Danger, Flight from Culpability, 4 Psychol. Pub. Pol'y & L. 250, 254 (1998):

As an empirical matter, . .. this equation is often preposterous. An agent will not be consciously aware while becoming drunk that there is a substantial and unjustifiable risk that he or she will commit a particular crime when

drunk, unless the person has a previous history of . .. committing this specific crime [while drunk]. If such a prior history . . . exists, then the prosecution is capable of proving [the] previous awareness. The prosecution should

not be able to rely on what is, in effect, the conclusive presumption that becoming drunk demonstrates the same culpability as the actual conscious awareness of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the defendant would

commit the specific harm.

5, Intoxication and due process. Once a state decides to require a particular mens rea as an element of an offense (for example, knowledge or recklessness), how can the state legitimately deny defendants the opportunity to present
relevant exculpatory evidence that bears on the question whether, in fact, they had the required mens rea?

Montana v. Egelhoff, 518 U.S. 37 (1996), involved a state law defining “deliberate homicide” as a killing committed “purposely” or “knowingly.” But Mont. Penal Code §45-2-203 provided that “an intoxicated condition . . . may not be
taken into consideration in determining the existence of a mental state which is an element of the offense unless [the intoxication was involuntary].” Egelhoff was convicted of deliberate homicide after a trial at which the judge told the jury, in accor-
dance with §45-2-208, that it could not consider his intoxicated condition in determining whether he had acted purposely or knowingly. The Montana Supreme Court reversed and held the statute unconstitutional. The court said that the evidence
of Egelhoff's intoxication was “clearfly] . . . relevant to the issue of whether [he] acted knowingly and purposely,” and that the rule precluding consideration of that evidence had in effect “relieved [the State] of part of its burden to prove [guilt] be-
yond a reasonable doubt.”

The U.S. Supreme Court did not agree, but the Court produced five separate opinions and was unable to agree on a single rationale. Justice Scalia, writing for four members of the Court, emphasized that the State must still offer evi-
dence sufficient to prove purpose or knowledge beyond a reasonable doubt. He acknowledged that “by excluding a significant line of evidence that might refute mens rea, the statute made it easier for the State to meet [that] requirement.” “But,”
Justice Scalia continued, “any evidentiary rule can have that effect. ‘Reducing’ the State's burden in this manner is not unconstitutional, unless the rule of evidence itself violates a fundamental principle of fairness (which . . . this one does not).” Id.
at 55. Justice O'Connor,

p.992

p. 989
also writing for four members of the Court, reached the opposite conclusion. She reasoned that “to impede the defendant's ability to throw doubt on the State's case, [makes] the State’s burden to prove its case . . . correspondingly easier,” and
that the statute therefore violated the due process requirement that the prosecution prove each element of an offense beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. at 61.

Justice Ginsburg, casting the deciding vote, found it unnecessary to resolve this disagreement and upheld the Montana statute on a different ground. She concluded that the Montana rule did not exclude evidence relevant to a required
element of the offense, because §45-2-203 had in effect redefined deliberate homicide. As she interpreted Montana law, a deliberate-homicide conviction required the prosecution to prove either (1) that the defendant had killed purposely or
knowingly, or (2) “that the defendant killed under circumstances that would otherwise establish knowledge or purpose ‘but for’ [the defendant's] voluntary intoxication.” Id. at 58. She reasoned that Montana had not excluded relevant exculpatory
evidence, because the intoxication evidence was irrelevant to an accusation based on the second theory, which the prosecution had proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

QUESTIONS: Is Justice Ginsburg’s interpretation of the Montana statute workable? In the case of an intoxicated actor, how should the jury go about determining whether his act of killing would have been knowing or purposeful “but for” his
voluntary intoxication? Which of the opinions offers the best way of implementing the requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt? Consider State v. Boyston, 298 P.3d 887, 897-899 (Ariz. 2013). The defendant was convicted of first-degree
murder and sentenced to death after a trial in which he was barred from offering evidence of voluntary intoxication to rebut the required element of premeditation; the Arizona Supreme Court affirmed the conviction and death sentence, upholding
the constitutionality under Egelhoff of the state’s statute, which provides that evidence of voluntary intoxication was not admissible to rebut any required mental state.

For incisive critiques of the opinions in Egelhoff, see Stephen J. Morse, Internal and External Challenges to Culpability, 53 Ariz. St. LJ. ___ (forthcoming 2021), available at https://ssm.com/abstract=3764989; Ronald J. Allen, Foreword:
Montana v. Egelhoff — Reflections on the Limits of Legislative Imagination and Judicial Authority, 87 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 633 (1997); Larry Alexander, The Supreme Court, Dr. Jekyll, and the Due Process of Proof, 1996 Sup. Ct. Rev. 191.

6. A separate offense? In his critique of the MPC’s recklessness “equation” (the notion that knowingly drinking to excess is equivalent to knowingly creating a risk of harm), Professor Morse argues that this notion confuses the vague
and relatively minor culpability involved in choosing to get drunk with the much more serious culpability involved in the mens rea required for crimes like rape and murder. But what criminal charges would be available if the prosecution must restrict
its attention to the defendant's conduct in choosing to get drunk? At present, such behavior usually is not in itself a crime. Should it be? A German statute creates a separate offense applicable to any person who commits a wrongful act after in-
tentionally or negligently getting intoxicated. Although the act of getting drunk must be committed intentionally or negligently, no additional culpability is required with respect to the subsequent wrongful act that brings the statute into

p. 983

p. 984
play. See George Fletcher, Rethinking Criminal Law 846-848 (1978). Is this kind of law preferable to the American approach? And if so, what punishment would be appropriate for the crime of committing a wrongful act after intentionally or negli-
gently getting drunk?

7. Voluntary intoxication and insanity. Should evidence of voluntary intoxication be admissible for any purpose other than to refute the existence of the specific mens rea of the charged offense? Such intoxication, if severe, might
produce a state in which culpability in the broader sense — the ability to understand the consequences of one’s actions or to meaningfully choose to engage in them — is entirely absent. The common-law rule, still widely in effect, allows a defense
when voluntary intoxication produces a permanent condition sufficient to meet the jurisdiction's test for legal insanity — for example, a substantial incapacity either to appreciate the criminality of the actor’s conduct or to conform to the law. When
this incapacity results from prolonged extensive use of alcohol, it is therefore treated the same as a similar incapacity that results from mental disease. But when voluntary intoxication causes that type of incapacity only on a temporary basis, it is
not a defense. See State v. Booth, 169 N.W.2d 869, 873 (Iowa 1969).

Is this rule so restrictive because of the low probability that someone might become temporarily insane through intoxication? Or is the rule restrictive because it would be too difficult to detect false assertions of such a condition? Why
should defendants’ choice to become drunk deprive them of an insanity defense if their assertions of temporary insanity are factually true? For a critique of this restrictive approach, see Alyssa Ferreone, Drinking Away Mens Rea: The Blurred Line
Between Voluntary Intoxication and Alcohol-Induced Brain Damage, 23 Quinnipiac Health L.J. 165 (2020).

b. Involuntary Intoxication
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Should evidence of intoxication be treated differently if the defendant did not choose to become intoxicated, but instead became drunk by accident or because someone else tricked him into getting drunk? In one respect, involuntary
intoxication is clearly treated more generously than voluntary intoxication is. When involuntary intoxication produces a condition sufficient to meet the jurisdiction's test for legal insanity, it can be a defense even if the impaired condition is only
temporary (see MPC §2.08(4)); in contrast, as the preceding section explains, when the same incapacity results from voluntary intoxication, it does not afford a defense (beyond its permitted relevance to mens rea), unless the incapacity is perma-
nent.107 But perhaps surprisingly, a defendant who is impaired to a lesser degree does not have an incapacity defense, even when that incapacity resulted from purely involuntary

p. 994

p. 985
intoxication. As the MPC Commentaries explain, “The actor whose personality is altered by intoxication to a lesser degree [than legal insanity] is treated like others who may have difficulty in conforming to the law [through no fault of their own] and
yet are held responsible for violation.”28 Consider the contrasting views of two English courts on the availability of a defense for involuntary intoxication.

Regina v. Kingston
Court of Appeal, Criminal Division [1993]
4 All E.R. 373, rev'd, House of Lords [1994] 3 All E.R. 353

Lorp TaYLor oF GosFoRTH, C.J. [for the Court of Appeal]: [In order to blackmail defendant, Penn lured a 15-year-old boy to his (Penn's) flat and then invited defendant over to abuse the boy sexually. Penn photographed and audiotaped
defendant committing the act. At trial for indecent assault, defendant said he could not remember drinking anything before going to the bedroom, but stated that he sometimes drank coffee at Penn's flat. In addition, defendant could be heard to
say on the tape “I don’t know why, am | falling asleep?” and “Have you put something in my coffee?”

[At trial, the judge instructed the jury it should acquit the defendant only if it found that because of the drug he did not intend to commit an indecent assault upon the boy, but so long as he did have that intent, it was irrelevant that he
had been drugged, because “a drugged intent is still an intent.” The jury convicted.

[Defendant's counsel argued on appeal that “an accused person may be entitled to be acquitted if there is a possibility that although his act was intentional, the intent itself arose out of circumstances for which he bears no blame.” After
noting that there was little authority for this proposition, the court turned to first principles:]

[he purpose of the criminal law is to inhibit, by proscription and by penal sanction, anti-social acts which individuals may otherwise commit. . . . Having paedophiliac inclinations and desires is not proscribed; putting them into practice
is. If the sole reason why the threshold between the two has been crossed is or may have been that the inhibition which the law requires has been removed by the clandestine act of a third party, the purposes of the criminal law are not served by
nevertheless holding that the person performing the act is guilty of an offence... . If therefore drink or drug, surreptitiously administered, causes a person to lose his self-control and for that reason to form an intent which he would not otherwise
have formed, . . . the law should exculpate him because the operative fault is not his. [Involuntary intoxication negatives the mens rea. . ..

By. .. summing up as he did, the judge effectively withdrew the issue from the jury. In our judgment, that amounted to a material misdirection. . .. [Conviction set aside and appellant discharged.]

Lorp MusmiLt [for the House of Lords]: [W]e are concerned here with a case of disinhibition. The drug is not alleged to have created the desire to which the respondent gave way, but rather to have enabled it to be released.
p. 995
p. 996

. .. The decision [below] was explicitly founded on [the] general principle . . . that if blame is absent the necessary mens rea must also be absent. My Lords, with every respect I must [reject the] argument which treats the absence of
moral fault on the part of the appellant as sufficient in itself to negative the necessary mental element of the offence. . ..

To recognize a new defense of this type would be a bold step. . .. So one must turn to consider just what defence is now to be created. The judgment under appeal implies [several] characteristics.

1. The defence applies to all offences, except perhaps to absolute [strict liability] offences. It therefore differs from other defences such as provocation and diminished responsibility.

2. The defence is a complete answer to a criminal charge. If not rebutted it leads to an outright acquittal, and unlike provocation and diminished responsibility leaves no room for conviction and punishment for a lesser offence. The
underlying assumption must be that the defendant is entirely free from culpability. . . .

5. The defence is subjective in nature. Whereas provocation and self-defence are judged by the reactions of the reasonable person in the situation of the defendant, here the only question is whether this particular defendant's inhibitions
were overcome by the effect of the drug. The more susceptible the defendant to the kind of temptation presented, the easier the defence is to establish.

[The defence appears to run into difficulties at every turn. . .. Before the jury could form an opinion on whether the drug might have turned the scale witnesses would have to give a picture of the defendant's personality and susceptibili-
ties, for without it the crucial effect of the drug could not be assessed; pharmacologists would be required to describe the potentially disinhibiting effect of a range of drugs whose identity would, if the present case is anything to go by, be unknown;
psychologists and psychiatrists would express opinions, not on the matters of psychopathology familiar to those working within the framework of the Mental Health Acts but on altogether more elusive concepts. No doubt as time passed those

concerned could work out techniques to deal with these questions. Much more significant would be the opportunities for a spurious defence. Even in the field of road traffic the “spiked” drink as a special reason for not disqualifying from driving is
a regular feature. Transferring this to the entire range of criminal offences is a disturbing prospect. The defendant would only have to assert, and support by the evidence of well-wishers, that he was not the sort of person to have done this kind of
thing, and to suggest an occasion when by some means a drug might have been administered to him for the jury to be sent straight to the question of a possible disinhibition. The judge would direct the jurors that if they felt any legitimate doubt on
the matter — and by its nature the defence would be one which the prosecution would often have no means to rebut — they must acquit outright. . . .

My Lords, the fact that a new doctrine may require adjustment of existing principles to accommodate it, and may require those involved in criminal trials to learn new techniques, is not of course a ground for refusing to adopt it, if that is
what the interests of justice require. Here, however, justice makes no such demands, for the interplay between the wrong done to the victim, the individual characteristics and frailties of the defendant, and the pharmacological effects of whatever
drug may be potentially involved can be far better recognised by a tailored choice from the continuum of sentences available to the judge than by the application of a single Yea-or-Nay jury decision. [Court of Appeal reversed.]

p. 996
p.997
NOTES

1. A problem of culpability or of proof? The House of Lords offered two different grounds for rejecting the defense of involuntary intoxication — that involuntary “disinhibition” does not negate mens rea because an intoxicated
defendant still possesses the intent to perform the criminal act, and that such a defense would create insurmountable evidentiary problems. Is the court right that the defendant's preexisting illegal desires make his actions voluntary to some de-
gree? Or was the lower court right that in such cases the purposes of the criminal law are not served by punishment? If no purposes of punishment are served, are problems of proof nonetheless sufficient reason to deny a defense?

2. Pushing the boundaries of intoxication. While alcohol and illegal drugs are the most common intoxicating substances, defendants have also asserted defenses of involuntary intoxication from taking prescription medication. In
People v. Garcia, 113 P.3d 775 (Colo. 2008), the defendant went berserk and brutally assaulted his wife a few days after she asked for a divorce; the court held that he was entitled to present a defense that his behavior was triggered by involuntary
intoxication in the form of insulin shock unexpectedly resulting from his own injection of a large dose of insulin for his diabetic condition. But in Cobb v. State, 884 So. 2d 437 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2004), a defendant who shot her former lover was not
allowed to present evidence of involuntary intoxication based on the effects of the antidepressants Xanax and Paxil, because she had knowingly taken higher-than-prescribed doses.

3. Comparing insanity and intoxication defenses. Whether defendants are better off raising an insanity or an intoxication defense in cases involving involuntary intoxication may vary based on differences in how the jurisdiction
treats each defense. For example, a patient in a Nebraska emergency room who received medication that made him agitated enough to punch a police officer sought, when prosecuted, to claim insanity because it would have been a complete
defense whereas in Nebraska involuntary intoxication could only be used to negate mens rea. State v. Bigelow, 931 N.W.2d 842, 844 (Neb. 2019). In other jurisdictions, the tactical advantages may run in the opposite direction, and defendants may
prefer a defense of involuntary intoxication over insanity because, if successful, it can be more protective under the relevant state law. As noted in Garcia, supra (113 P.3d at 783):

[An] accused found to be legally insane . . . is committed to the custody of the Department of Human Services until determined eligible for release. An accused who successfully asserts the defense of involuntary intoxication

is held morally blameless, and is at once returned to society as a free person.

Is there a legitimate basis for this difference in the consequences of the two defenses? Presumably, the assumption is that a person who is legally insane is more likely to be dangerous to others in the future than a person whose
ordinary mental condition was altered by involuntary intoxication. But does the difference in consequences make sense in the absence of assurance that the impact on the defendant of the intoxicants will truly be temporary? Reconsider these is-
sues in connection with the material on the disposition of persons found not guilty by reason of insanity, p. 945, Note 2, infra.

p.997
p. 998

4. Mental Disorder
a. The Defense of Legal Insanity
INTRODUCTORY NOTES

Mental incapacity has legal significance in a variety of settings; for example, it may render a contract unenforceable or a will void. In the criminal process, mental incapacity can be a defense to a criminal charge, or it can preclude the
guilty plea, trial, sentencing, or execution of a defendant. Our principal focus is on the appropriate contours of the insanity defense: What forms of mental incapacity should provide a complete defense to criminal responsibility? Note how the
insanity defense differs from duress; in duress actors argue that they are no different from the rest of us, whereas the basis for the insanity excuse is that they are very different from the rest of us. Before wrestling with the complexities of compet-
ing legal standards for insanity, consider the following accounts of two seriously mentally ill defendants, both of whom were deemed competent to stand trial and whose defenses of insanity were rejected by juries.

1. Atale of two insanity defenses. (a) Steven Green (facts reported in State v. Green, 643 S.W.2d 902 (Tenn. 1982)). Steven Green was 18 years old when he shot and killed a Chattanooga police officer with the officer’s own
revolver in a city park where the homeless Green was apparently residing. A bizarre note left on the victim’s body led the police to an FBI agent, who reported that Green had walked into the FBI building a few weeks before the murder complaining
of “voices” that were “directing” him. In response, the agent suggested to Green that he seek mental health assistance at a city hospital, advice that Green did not follow.

Green's mental illness had become apparent early in his life. He first received psychiatric treatment at the age of seven, when he was diagnosed with paranoia and treated for more than two years. At age 12, Green attacked his mother
with a knife and again received short-term psychiatric treatment. As a teenager, Green reported hearing voices and exhibited increasingly bizarre behavior, which led to his hospitalization for more than a month, until his family’s insurance coverage
ran out. He continued to receive out-patient care, but because the medications he received made him feel like a “zombie,” he stopped taking them and refused to return to the out-patient clinic. Although Green managed to graduate from high
school and enlisted in the Navy, he was soon thereafter discharged for failure to adapt to regulations. Continuing to hear voices, he attacked his brother with a knife and ran away from his parents’ home in New York City to Tennessee, where he
stayed first with an uncle and then with an aunt; both relatives ejected him from their homes because of his bizarre and potentially dangerous behavior. His father traveled to Tennessee and tried to persuade Green to return home to New York, but
Green refused, so his father left him in Memphis with some money and a new pair of shoes. Two months later, Green was arrested for murder. On the day Officer Wilcox was killed, Green was found carrying what was apparently his only posses-
sion at that time, a pair of shiny black shoes.

Although initially found incompetent to stand trial and committed to a mental health facility, Green’s ability to think coherently gradually improved in response to intensive drug therapy, and he was found competent to stand trial. At trial,
mental

p. 938

p.939
health experts testified that they and all the other professional staff members who had contact with Green after his arrest agreed unanimously that he was insane at the time the offense. The prosecution offered no experts in rebuttal, but instead
presented police officers who had contact with Green at around the time of the offense; they testified that Green appeared “normal” to them. The jury rejected Green’s insanity defense and convicted him of first-degree murder.

(b) Andrea Yates (facts reported in Yates v. State, 171 S.W.3d 215 (Tex. App. 2005)). Andrea Yates drowned her five children, ranging in age from seven months to seven years, in a bathtub in an attempt, she said, to save them from
Satan. After giving birth to three children in three-and-a-half years, Yates moved with her family into a converted bus in a trailer park in the Houston area. When she told her husband that she felt depressed and overwhelmed, he suggested that she
talk to her mother and a friend. After the birth of her fourth child a year later, Yates suffered from severe depression and tried to commit suicide. She was admitted to the psychiatric unit of a hospital for a week and continued to see a psychiatrist
after her release. A month later, her husband found her holding a knife to her own throat in the bathroom, and she was again hospitalized. During this hospitalization, Yates told a psychologist that she had been having visions and hearing voices

since the birth of her first child. Her treating psychiatrist ranked Yates as one of the five sickest patients he had ever seen at the time of this second hospitalization, and he warned both Yates and her husband that she had a high risk of another psy-
chotic episode if she had another baby.

Fifteen months later, Yates gave birth to her fifth child. A few months after that, Yates’s father died, and she began to suffer from depression again. She was again hospitalized. During this hospitalization, Yates was placed on suicide
watch and was observed as being catatonic or nearly catatonic and possibly delusional. Two weeks later, Yates was discharged at her own and her husband's request, though she continued to receive out-patient care. The psychiatrist who dis-
charged her recommended that someone stay with her at all times and that she not be left alone with her children. Yates’s mother-in-law came to help with the children, and reported that Yates was almost catatonic, stared into space, scratched
her head until she created bald spots, and did not eat. Three weeks later, Yates was hospitalized again but discharged after ten days, refusing her doctor’s recommendation that she receive electroconvulsive therapy. During the next month, Yates
did not report any suicidal or psychotic thoughts, and her psychiatrist decided to taper off her use of Haldol, the powerful antipsychotic drug that had been previously prescribed, though she remained on other antidepressant medication. Five
weeks after her most recent hospital discharge, Yates methodically drowned all five of her children.

At trial, 12 mental health professionals testified regarding Yates’s mental state. All agreed that she was psychotic at the time of her offense, and only one testified that Yates’s mental state did not meet the state's insanity standard. The
jury nonetheless rejected her insanity defense and found her guilty of capital murder, though she was sentenced to life imprisonment instead of death.

(c) The sequels. Despite the rejection of their insanity defenses by their trial juries, Green and Yates each prevailed in different ways on appeal. The appellate court reversed Green's conviction on the ground that the prosecution had
failed

p.999

p. 940
to carry its burden of disproving insanity, as was then (but no longer is) required by Tennessee law. The appellate court reversed Yates’s conviction on the ground that the lone expert who testified against her insanity plea had suggested that Yates
fabricated her defense after watching a Law & Order television episode about a woman who drowned her children and was found to be insane; in fact, no such episode existed. On retrial before a new jury in 2006, Yates was found not guilty by rea-
son of insanity. For helpful analysis of the Yates trials, see Theodore Y. Blumoff, Rationality, Insanity, and the Insanity Defense: Reflections on the Limits of Reason, 39 Law & Psychol. Rev. 161 (2014).

(d) Thoughts and questions. The Yates and Green cases, though not “typical” (perhaps no insanity case is), offer some insight into the dynamics of criminal justice in insanity-defense cases. Before considering the details of legal
doctrine, we can reflect on several broader issues:

First, Green's and Yates’s appellate victories are as rare as their initial trial defeats are common: The insanity defense is rarely asserted and even more rarely accepted. See pp. 962-963 infra. Why are juries so reluctant to accept an
insanity plea, and is that reluctance appropriate or misplaced? Should our legal system run the risk of imposing criminal punishment on individuals who are as deeply impaired as Green and Yates clearly were?

Second, both Green and Yates were able to offer extensive expert testimony to support their insanity pleas. Should a successful defense require so much medical (as opposed to lay) testimony? Does the necessity of producing expert
witnesses unduly limit the defense to defendants wealthy enough to hire such experts (or lucky enough to have court-appointed lawyers who have the inclination and resources to do so)? Are juries right to approach such expert testimony with
great skepticism? Or should our rules encourage juries to give more deference to the weight of expert opinion?

Third, consider how easily (at least in hindsight) we can identify so many missed opportunities to prevent the tragic deaths that occurred: Green could have received more consistent mental health treatment throughout his childhood;
that he did not is largely explained simply by the fact that his own family lacked adequate health insurance coverage. Green's homelessness could have been addressed by his family, or by local charities, or by the city of Chattanooga. The FBI
agent to whom Green turned could have done something to assure that he received treatment. Yates could have received more aggressive treatment from the many mental health professionals who saw her and recognized the seriousness of her
illness. Or she could have gotten more help from family members. Perhaps she and her husband should have heeded the warning about not having more children or been offered counseling on how to avoid future pregnancies.

Do these missed opportunities suggest that it is unjust to hold people like Green and Yates responsible for their criminal acts, given how clear their mental illness was to all around them? Or does the proper response lie in the provision
of better social services rather than in changes within the criminal justice system?

2. Terminology defined. In considering the relevance of mental incapacity in the criminal process, it is helpful to distinguish among three distinct concepts: mental illness, insanity, and incompetence. “Mental illness” is a medical
rather than a legal term, used by clinicians to refer to a disorder recognized by the therapeutic community for purposes of diagnosis and treatment. In contrast, “insanity” is a

p.940

p94
legal term that refers to a mental state, existing at the time of a criminal offense, that is considered sufficient to preclude criminal responsibility. “Incompetence” is also a legal term; it refers to a person's mental state at the time of a legal proceed-
ing. A person who lacks sufficient mental capacity to understand or participate in the relevant legal proceeding is deemed incompetent (either to stand trial, enter a guilty plea, be sentenced, or even be executed).

Because the medical category of mental illness is far broader than the legal categories of insanity or incompetence, it is possible and indeed common for people suffering from mental illness to be held neither insane nor incompetent.
Indeed, 37 percent of people in prison and 44 percent of the people in jail have been told by a mental health professional that they had a mental illness.10° Because the determinations of insanity and incompetence refer to different time periods
(time of offense versus time of legal proceeding), and because the legal standards for insanity and incompetence are different, it is possible that a person could be deemed insane and yet competent, or conversely, sane and yet incompetent to
stand trial or participate in other legal proceedings. For probing analysis of the distinct legal doctrines relating to mental disorder at various stages of the criminal process (and in related processes that lead to confinement for purposes of social
protection), see Stephen J. Morse, Mental Disorder and Criminal Law, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 885 (2011).

3. Competence to stand trial. Although precise wording varies across jurisdictions, Model Penal Code §4.04 states the generally accepted test of competence to be tried and sentenced: “No person who as a result of mental disease
or defect lacks capacity to understand the proceedings against him or to assist in his own defense shall be tried, convicted or sentenced for the commission of an offense so long as such incapacity endures.” In Dusky v. United States, 362 U.S.
402 (1960), the Court stated: “[T]he test must be whether [the defendant] has sufficient present ability to consult with his lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational understanding — and whether he has a rational as well as factual understanding
of the proceedings against him.” This focus on “rational” and “factual” understanding, however, typically neglects mood disorders and certain forms of organic brain damage that can “unreasonably [interfere] with decision-relevant emotional
perception, processing, and expression.” Terry A. Maroney, Emotional Competence, “Rational Understanding,” and the Criminal Defendant, 43 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1375, 1381 (2006). The Dusky test remains in widespread use, but there is no uniform
standard for competency evaluations,11° and courts differ on whether the defense or prosecution has the burden to prove competency. See State v. Curtis, 921 N.W.2d 342, 347 (Minn. 2018).

May defendants be forcibly medicated in order to render them competent to stand trial? The Supreme Court held in Sell v. United States, 539 U.S. 166 (2003), that the Constitution sometimes permits forced medication to render a
defendant competent to stand trial but suggested that those instances may well be “rare”

p94

p.942
in light of the constitutional right to refuse medical treatment in the absence of unusual circumstances. To uphold such involuntary treatment, a court must find that (1) the government has an important interest in trying the defendant for the crime
at issue; (2) forced medication is likely to render the defendant competent and unlikely to have side effects that interfere with the ability to assist defense counsel; (3) alternative, less intrusive treatments are unlikely to achieve substantially the same
results; and (4) the treatment is in the defendant's best medical interest in light of the relevant condition. A principal concer is that these criteria give insufficient weight to forced medication’s potential for negative side effects. See Dora W. Klein,
Curiouser and Curiouser: Involuntary Medications and Incompetent Criminal Defendants After Sell v. United States, 13 Wm. & Mary Bill Rts. J. 897, 899-900 (2006), arguing that “[alny medication that succeeds in rendering the defendant competent
to stand trial is likely to alter his mental functioning and physical appearance in myriad ways, thereby potentially compromising the fairness of his trial.” For further criticism of Sell’s framework, see Blake R. Hills, Sell v. United States: Has the Split
Between the Lower Courts Created a Substantial Likelihood of Injustice?, 38 Quinnipiac L. Rev. 83 (2019).

Is a finding of incompetence to stand trial warranted when a defendant's memory is impaired? If the defendant is suffering from total amnesia concerning the alleged crime but is otherwise in full command of her faculties, most courts
hold that the defendant is competent to stand trial. See State v. Bruhn, 438 P.3d 1031, 1035 (Utah Ct. App. 2019); State v. Decato, 75 A.3d 1131 (N.H. 2013). What is the basis for this view? Doesn't an inability to recall the events charged seriously
impede a defendant's ability to mount a defense? Compare State v. McClendon, 419 P.2d 69 (Ariz. 1966) (improper to hold trial if continuance might enable amnesiac to recover).

4, Execution. In Ford v. Wainwright, 477 U.S. 399 (1986), the Supreme Court held that the Eighth Amendment's proscription of “cruel and unusual punishment” bars execution of the insane, but the Court offered no definition of
what constitutes insanity for purposes of the Eighth Amendment requirement. Nor did the Court pinpoint the specific reasons why execution of the “insane” would be cruel and unusual. Justice Marshall, speaking for five members of the Court,
concluded:

Unanimity of rationale . .. we do not find. “But whatever the reason of the law is, itis plain the law is so.” Hawles, [Remarks on the Trial of Mr. Charles Bateman, [1685] 11 HOW. St. Tr. *477 (1816)]. We know of virtually no

authority condoning the execution of the insane at English common law. . . . And the intuition that such an execution simply offends humanity is evidently shared across this Nation. Faced with such widespread evidence of a

restriction upon sovereign power, this Court is compelled to conclude that the Eighth Amendment prohibits a State from carrying out a sentence of death upon a prisoner who is insane. Whether its aim be to protect the con-

demned from fear and pain without comfort of understanding, or to protect the dignity of society itself from the barbarity of exacting mindless vengeance, the restriction finds enforcement in the Eighth Amendment.

p.942
p. 949
Justice Powell, in a concurring opinion, commented as follows:

[S]ome authorities contended that the prohibition against executing the insane was justified as a way of preserving the defendant's ability to make arguments on his own behalf. [This justification] has slight merit today.

Modern practice provides far more extensive review of convictions and sentences than did the common law. . . . It is thus unlikely indeed that a defendant today could go to his death with knowledge of undiscovered trial

error that might set him free. . ..

The more general concern of the common law — that executions of the insane are simply cruel — retains its vitality. It is as true today as when Coke lived that most men and women value the opportunity to

prepare, mentally and spiritually, for their death. Moreover, today as at common law, one of the death penalty’s critical justifications, its retributive force, depends on the defendant's awareness of the penalty’s existence and

purpose. . . . For precisely these reasons, Florida requires the Governor to stay executions of those who “d[o] not have the mental capacity to understand the nature of the death penalty and why it was imposed” on them.

Fla. Stat. §922.07 (1985). A number of States have more rigorous standards, but none disputes the need to require that those who are executed know the fact of their impending execution and the reason for it. Such a stan-

dard appropriately defines the kind of mental deficiency that should trigger the Eighth Amendment prohibition.

Most jurisdictions now define insanity for purposes of execution along the lines endorsed by Justice Powell in Ford," and the Supreme Court subsequently clarified that competence to be executed requires, at a minimum, that the
person have a “rational understanding” rather than merely an awareness of the nexus between his or her crime and the punishment. Panetti v. Quarterman, 551 U.S. 930, 959 (2007). People who cannot remember their crimes may still be executed,
according to the Supreme Court, unless that “[memory] loss combines and interacts with other mental shortfalls to deprive a person of the capacity to comprehend why the State is exacting death as punishment.” Madison v. Alabama, 139 S. Ct.
718, 727-728 (2019). A few states have adopted stricter tests than Panetti. In Washington and South Carolina, sanity for purposes of execution requires that the person not only understand the nature of the death penalty and why it is being im-
posed, but also have the ability to communicate rationally with defense counsel. Singleton v. State, 437 S.E.2d 53 (S.C. 1993); State v. Harris, 789 P.2d 60, 64-65 (Wash. 1990). The American Bar Association endorses that standard as well.112

The Supreme Court has not decided whether it is constitutionally permissible to forcibly medicate people in order to render them competent to be executed. The problem is a recurrent one, because up to 70 percent of people on death
row are estimated to suffer from some form of mental illness, and antipsychotic drugs are an increasingly popular means of treating mental disorder. See Robert Johnson, Death Work 50 (1990). Yet “[alecording to nearly universal ethical opinion
within

p.949

p. 944
the mental health professions, treatment with the purpose or inevitable effect of enabling the state to carry out an otherwise prohibited execution is unethical.” See Brian D. Shannon & Victor R. Scarano, Incompetency to Be Executed: Continuing
Ethical Challenges and Time for a Change in Texas, 45 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 419, 424 (2013) (quoting Professor Richard Bonnie). At least two courts have held that the state may not subject insane death-row prisoners to antipsychotic medication,
against their will, in order to restore their sanity so that they may be executed. See Singleton v. State, 437 S.E.2d 53, 62 (S.C. 1993) (“justice can never be served by forcing medication on an incompetent inmate for the sole purpose of getting him
well enough to execute”); State v. Perry, 610 So. 2d 746, 747 (La. 1992) (same). Does that approach mean that the incompetent incarcerated person (or someone acting on his behalf) must choose between continued insanity and death by execu-
tion? Is there any way to escape this dilemma? See Anna Trenga, Forcible Medication of Criminal Defendants: To Stand Trial and to Be Executed, 25 Temp. Pol. & C.R. L. Rev. 265 (2016).

In Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U.S. 304 (2002), the Court held that the Eighth Amendment forbids the execution of persons with acute intellectual disabilities, even if they are not “insane” under the Ford standard. See p. 1183 infra. As in Ford,
the Court discerned a societal consensus (though not unanimity) against the execution of those with acute intellectual disabilities. But whereas the Ford Court had based the exemption from execution on the condemned person's mental state
at the time of execution, the Atkins Court explained that intellectual disability precludes execution because it undermines a defendant's culpability for the charged crime at the time it was committed and places such defendants at special risk of
wrongful execution. Id. at 319-321. Atkins, however, applies only to conditions of intellectual disability. If a defendant has a history of mental illness but not intellectual disability, Atkins does not apply, and the Eighth Amendment does not preclude
execution unless the Panetti test is satisfied. Dickerson v. State, 175 So. 3d 8, 18 (Miss. 2015).

NOTES ON ADMINISTERING THE INSANITY DEFENSE

1. Who may raise the defense? In most jurisdictions, the decision to raise the insanity issue must be lett entirely within the defendant's control. Courts have stressed that a properly counseled defendant may prefer to be found guilty
rather than not guilty by reason of insanity, because the latter verdict can lead to longer confinement, more intrusive treatment, or greater stigma. See, e.g., Frendak v. United States, 408 A.2d 364 (D.C. 1979). And a competent defendant may
decline to plead insanity even against the advice of his attorney. See, e.g., United States v. Read, 918 F.3d 712 (9th Cir. 2019); Commonwealth v. Federici, 696 N.E.2d 111 (Mass. 1998). Compare Hughes v. State, 2011 Ark. 147 (2011). Ina prosecu-
tion for making terroristic threats, the defendant pleaded not guilty, but the state introduced evidence that he was suffering from a mental disease at the time of the offense. He was found not guilty by reason of insanity, and the court ordered him
committed; the Arkansas Supreme Court then dismissed his appeal on the ground that state statutes granted an appeal in a criminal case only when the defendant had been “convicted.” And see Bratty v. Attorney-General, [1963] A.C. 386, 411,
where Lord Denning, speaking of the English practice, said: “The old notion that

p. 944
p. 946
only the defence can raise a defence of insanity is now gone. The prosecution are entitled to raise it and it is their duty to do so rather than allow a dangerous person to be at large.”

2. Disposition after acquittal. How should the law deal with defendants who have been acquitted on grounds of legal insanity? As they have been found not guilty, they cannot be blamed for their actions. On the other hand, those
actions have done harm and the public demands protection against any repetition. Consider the following:

(@) Civil commitment. One approach to protecting the public while also respecting the person's innocence is to rely on the processes for civil commitment. In these processes, a judge, after a hearing, decides whether to commit
people indefinitely to a mental institution because a mental disability makes them a danger to themselves or others. In states that adopt this approach, insanity acquittees may be committed only in compliance with the procedural and substantive
standards for any mentally disturbed person in the community, and there are constitutional restrictions on civil commitment. For example, the standard of proof is high — both mental illness and dangerousness must be proven by clear and con-
vincing evidence. Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418 (1979). That high threshold in civil commitment serves to reduce the risk of confining members of the public who are simply idiosyncratic. But is that concern equally applicable to those who have
been shown to be irresponsible authors of criminal acts? Many states have thought not and have enacted special commitment procedures for insanity acquittees in which the crucial factual findings (mental illness and dangerousness) can be made
by a preponderance of the evidence. See Jan Brakel, After the Verdict: Dispositional Decisions Regarding Criminal Defendants Acquitted by Reason of Insanity, 37 DePaul L. Rev. 181 (1988).

Other jurisdictions follow a different approach: Commitment is automatic and mandatory for all insanity acquittees. In defense of this approach, it has been observed that it “not only provides the public with the maximum immediate
protection, but may also work to the advantage of mentally diseased or defective defendants by making the defense of irresponsibility more acceptable to the public and to the jury.” Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §4.08 at 256
(1985). But is a finding that the defendant was insane at the time of the offense sufficiently probative of present mental illness and dangerousness to justify confinement?

In Jones v. United States, 463 U.S. 354 (1983), the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of mandatory commitment. The Court asserted that, as a matter of common sense, the mental disorder and dangerousness of an insanity
acquittee are likely to continue through to the time of trial and thereafter. Do you agree? Even if a presumption of continuing insanity is plausible, what is the justification for making that presumption in effect irrebuttable, by requiring automatic
commitment without any hearing on the present mental disorder and dangerousness of the defendant? The Court in Jones also noted that the committed person was given an opportunity to demonstrate his recovery at a hearing within 50 days of

commitment. Does this allay the reservations about the justification for the initial commitment? One court noted “the practical difficulties of requiring a mental patient to overcome the effects of his confinement, his closed environment, his possible
incompetence and the debilitating effects of drugs or other treatment. . ..” Fasulo
p.946
p. 946
v. Arafeh, 378 A.2d 553, 557 (Conn. 1997). These practical difficulties often mean that the initial commitment becomes an indefinite one. For a discussion of Jones's reach and its limits, see Bailey Wendzel, Not Guilty, Yet Continuously Confined:
Reforming the Insanity Defense, 57 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 391 (2020).

(b) Duration of confinement. Regardless of the procedure used to support an initial commitment, how long may the person committed be held? Acquittees may remain committed longer than they would be if they had been convicted
of the same charges. Mac McClelland, When “Not Guilty” Is a Life Sentence, N.Y. Times Mag. (Sept. 27, 2017). In California, individuals charged with nonviolent crimes who were acquitted by reason of insanity were confined nine times longer than
those convicted of similar crimes. Fatma Marouf, Assumed Sane, 101 Cornell L. Rev. Online 25, 31 (2016). The average length of stay, according to one study, is five to seven years, but thousands are held for much longer. One review found almost
1,000 people within 6 study states who had been hospitalized for 5 to 15 years and more than 400 who had been held longer than 15 years. McClelland, supra. And although insanity acquittals are comparatively rare, the cumulative total of insan-
ity acquittees confined after their trials can be significant. There are more than ten thousand people involuntarily confined to psychiatric hospitals after being found not guilty by reason of insanity or not competent to stand trial. Id.

Under regular civil commitment statutes, the medical facility must release patients when they have recovered and are no longer dangerous to themselves or others. Provisions for commitment of insanity acquittees, however, require
that the appropriate finding be made by a judge, usually with the burden on the inmate to prove that he meets the conditions for release. As a result, the person committed after winning acquittal may in practice be held indefinitely, sometimes for
life.

Should extended commitment of this sort be permissible even when the crime charged was a minor property offense punishable by no more than a short prison term? In Jones, supra, the Supreme Court held that an insanity acquittee
subjected to automatic commitment could be held indefinitely, even when the period he had spent in confinement exceeded the maximum sentence authorized for the underlying offense. The Court reasoned that dangerousness warranting indef-
inite commitment may be established by proof of a nonviolent act against property, in that case, shoplifting. Do you agree? Is there a case for requiring release at the maximum term for the offense of which the defendant was acquitted, unless the
state can then meet the ordinary criteria for civil commitment by establishing by clear and convincing evidence of continued mental illness and posing a danger to self or others? This is the law in roughly a dozen states. See, e.g., Wood v. Main,
789 F. Supp. 2d 519, 520 (D.N.J. 2011); Brakel, supra, at 196. For an argument that this is the correct standard, see Wendzel, supra.

(c) Guilty but mentally ill. One major concem in states using standard civil commitment is that a committed insanity acquittee may be released too soon. In Michigan, an acquittee committed under the ordinary civil commitment laws
was released, as the law required, upon a medical determination that he was no longer mentally ill and dangerous. His recovery, however, was dependent upon his continuing to take his prescribed medicine, which he failed to do, resulting in a
crime spree that shocked the community. This led to the enactment in Michigan of the first “Guilty but Mentally III” statute. See Sharon M. Brown & Nicholas J. Wittner,

p. 946

p.947
Criminal Law (1978 Annual Survey of Michigan Law), 25 Wayne L. Rev. 335 (1978). This statute allowed the jury three options — it could find the defendant guilty, not guilty by reason of insanity, or guilty but mentally ill (GMI) at the time of the
offense. If the jury returns a GMI verdict, the court retains the same sentencing authority it has when a defendant is found guilty; if the court sentences the defendant to prison, treatment is provided ‘as is psychiatrically indicated for his mental
illness,” but even if treatment is successful, the defendant still must serve the full term of the sentence. Similar GMI statutes are now found in about a dozen states, almost always as an addition to, rather than a replacement for, the traditional
insanity defense. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Andrews, 158 A.3d 1260, 1263-1264 (Pa. 2017). What is the practical effect of such laws? In their favor, GMI statutes establish a cap on how long the defendant can be held without a fresh judicial
determination of dangerousness and mental disorder. But in practice, are they likely to make an insanity acquittal less likely and thereby make conviction of morally innocent persons more likely? For a critique, see Stephen J. Morse, Preventive De-
tention: Mental Disorder and Criminal Law, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 885, 934 (2011).

The experiment with “Guilty but Mentally III” statutes also suggests broader issues because of the pervasive perception that public safety considerations make some dilution of the insanity defense a practical necessity. Of course,
many would dispute this view. But if public opinion insists on some such dilution, what is the best way to achieve it? Is it preferable to dilute the insanity defense in the way that the “Guilty but Mentally Ill” laws do (by encouraging juries not to vote

an insanity acquittal) or in the way that Jones, supra, does (by depriving insanity acquittees of the full benefits of an ordinary acquittal)? See Stephen J. Schulhofer, Two Systems of Social Protection, 7 J. Contemp. Legal Issues 69 (1996); Paul H.
Robinson, Foreword: The Criminal-Civil Distinction and Dangerous Blameless Offenders, 83 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 693 (1993).

3. Instructing the jury on the consequences of an insanity acquittal. In jurisdictions that provide for mandatory commitment following an insanity acquittal, defendants have pressed to have the jury informed of that fact because
the jury may otherwise assume that an insanity acquittal will lead to the release of a dangerous, mentally unstable individual. Yet most courts have held that the jury should not be instructed on the procedures that follow an insanity verdict, on
the ground that what will happen to the defendant is not relevant to whether the defendant meets the test of legal insanity. See, e.g., State v. Becker, 818 N.W.2d 135 (lowa 2012). For federal prosecutions, the Supreme Court has held that juries
should not be informed of the mandatory commitment provisions applicable under federal law. Shannon v. United States, 512 U.S. 573 (1994). The Court said that “the principle that juries are not to consider the consequences of their verdicts is a
reflection of the basic division of labor in our legal system between judge [as sentencer] and jury [as factfinder]”; the Court also noted that “[even if] some jurors will harbor the mistaken belief that defendants found [not guilty by reason of insanity]
will be released into society immediately . . . [there is] no reason to depart from ‘the almost invariable assumption of the law that jurors follow their instructions.””

Some courts take a less formalistic view, holding that when commitment is mandatory, a jury should be informed that defendants found not guilty by reason of insanity must be detained until they are no longer mentally ill and danger-
ous. See, e.g., Foster v. State, 832 S.E.2d 346, 349-351 (Ga. 2017). In Commonwealth v.

p.947

p. 948
Mutina, 323 N.E.2d 294, 301-302 (Mass. 1975), the court reasoned that “[ijf jurors can be entrusted with responsibility for a defendant's life and liberty . . . they are entitled to know what protection they and their fellow citizens will have if they con-
scientiously apply the law to the evidence and arrive at a verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity.” In Commonwealth v. Chappell, 40 N.E.3d 1031, 1043-1044 (Mass. 2015), the court concluded that its Mutina decision had not gone far enough:
“On reflection, we think an instruction that . . . mentions the potential for successive commitment orders that could span the duration of the defendant's life . . . may better accomplish [Mutina’s] purposes.” Accordingly, the court proposed adding
to the Massachusetts model jury instructions the explanation that “[tJhere is no limit to the number of such renewed orders of commitments as long as the defendant continues to be mentally ill and dangerous; if these conditions do continue, the
defendant may remain committed for the duration of his [or her] life.” Id. at 1045.
QUESTION: If commitment is not mandatory, should the jury be informed of that fact?

4, Burden of proof. Al jurisdictions create a presumption of legal sanity at the trial. The effect of this presumption is that, in the absence of evidence on the issue, the sanity of the accused is presumed for all legal purposes. Where
American jurisdictions differ is on two issues: (1) How much evidence must be presented before the effect of the presumption disappears and the question of the defendant's insanity becomes an issue that must be established by the evidence? (2)
Who bears the burden of persuasion, and how is that burden defined?

As to the first question, some states require only “some evidence” of legal insanity in order to eliminate the presumption of sanity. Massachusetts, for example, follows this approach. Commonwealth v. Lawson, 62 N.E.3d 22, 31 (Mass.
2016). Other jurisdictions require more to overcome the presumption of sanity, usually that the evidence raise a reasonable doubt about the sanity of the accused, e.g., Jamezic v. State, 723 So. 2d 355 (Ala. 1996). For discussion of the issue, see
Julian Eule, The Presumption of Sanity: Bursting the Bubble, 25 UCLA L. Rev. 637 (1978).

As to the second question, once insanity becomes an issue, roughly a dozen states continue to adhere to what once was the majority rule requiring the prosecution to prove the sanity of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. See
Commonwealth v. Keita, 712 N.E.2d 65, 73 (Mass. 1999), where the court supported this rule on the ground that “[t]here is no theoretical justification for maintaining a lower standard for the proof of sanity than for the proof of guilt.” This approach
was widely abandoned in the aftermath of the Hinckley verdict, see pp. 961-962 infra. About three-quarters of the states now place the burden of proof of insanity on the defense.11 In most of these jurisdictions, the defendant must meet that
burden by a preponderance of the evidence. E.g., State v. Glenn, 468 P.3d 126, 142 (Haw. 2020). Several states are more demanding. In Florida, the defendant must prove insanity by “clear and convincing evidence,” Fla. Stat. §775.027(2) (2021),
and in Wisconsin

p.948
p.949

the defendant must establish insanity “to a reasonable certainty,” State v. Burton, 832 N.W.2d 611, 624 (Wis. 2013). For the federal courts, the question is governed by 18 U.S.C. §17(b) (2021): “The defendant has the burden of proving the defense
of insanity by clear and convincing evidence.”

(i) Competing Formulations
M'Naghten’s Case

House of Lords

10 Cl. & F. 200, 8 Eng. Rep. 718 (1843)

[Defendant was indicted for the murder of Edward Drummond, secretary to the prime minister, Sir Robert Peel. Apparently M’Naghten had mistaken Drummond for Peel and had shot Drummond by mistake. Upon his arrest he told
police that he had come to London to murder the prime minister because “[tJhe tories in my city follow and persecute me wherever I go, and have entirely destroyed my peace of mind. [They do everything in their power to harass and persecute
me; in fact they wish to murder me.” The defense introduced extensive expert and lay testimony indicating that M’Naghten was obsessed with delusions and sutfered from acute insanity. The presiding judge, Lord Chief Justice Tindal, in his
charge to the jury stated:

The question to be determined is whether at the time the act in question was committed, the prisoner had or had not the use of his understanding, so as to know that he was doing a wrong or wicked act. If the jurors should

be of opinion that the prisoner was not sensible, at the time he committed it, that he was violating the laws both of God and man, then he would be entitled to a verdict in his favour: but if, on the contrary, they were of opin-

ion that when he committed the act he was in a sound state of mind, then their verdict must be against him.

[The jury returned a verdict of “not guilty, on the ground of insanity.” The verdict attracted great public attention and aroused considerable alarm. The press suggested that the insanity defense left madmen free to kill with impunity.
Queen Victoria was particularly concerned: She herself had been the object of three recent assassination attempts, and one of her attackers had also benefited from an insanity acquittal. Both the M’Naghten verdict and the general problem of the
insanity defense were debated in the House of Lords. As a result, the English judiciary (there were some 15 judges at the time) were invited to attend the House of Lords for the purpose of delivering answers to certain questions propounded to
them. The famous M’Naghten rule is found in the answer to the second and third questions delivered by Lord Chief Justice Tindal.]

p.949
p. 950

Your Lordships are pleased to inquire of us, secondly, “What are the proper questions to be submitted to the jury, where a person alleged to be afflicted with insane delusion respecting one or more particular subjects or persons, is
charged with the commission of a crime (murder, for example), and insanity is set up as a defence?” And, thirdly, “In what terms ought the question to be left to the jury as to the prisoner's state of mind at the time when the act was committed?”
And as these two questions appear to us to be more conveniently answered together, we have to submit our opinion to be, that the jurors ought to be told in all cases that every man is to be presumed to be sane, and to possess a sufficient degree
of reason to be responsible for his crimes, until the contrary be proved to their satisfaction; and that to establish a defence on the ground of insanity, it must be clearly proved that, at the time of the committing of the act, the party accused was
labouring under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing; or, if he did know it, that he did not know he was doing what was wrong. The mode of putting the latter part of the
question to the jury on these occasions has generally been, whether the accused at the time of doing the act knew the difference between right and wrong: which mode, though rarely, if ever, leading to any mistake with the jury, is not, as we
conceive, so accurate when put generally and in the abstract, as when put with reference to the party's knowledge of right and wrong in respect to the very act with which he is charged. If the question were to be put as to the knowledge of the
accused solely and exclusively with reference to the law of the land, it might tend to confound the jury, by inducing them to believe that an actual knowledge of the law of the land was essential in order to lead to a conviction; whereas the law is
administered upon the principle that every one must be taken conclusively to know it, without proof that he does know it. If the accused was conscious that the act was one which he ought not to do, and if the act was at the same time contrary to

the law of the land, he is punishable; and the usual course therefore has been to leave the question to the jury, whether the party accused had a sufficient degree of reason to know that he was doing an act that was wrong: and this course we think
is correct, accompanied with such observations and explanations as the circumstances of each particular case may require.

‘THE KING v. PORTER, 55 COMMW. L.R. 182, 186-188 (1933): [Presiding at trial, Justice Dixon explained the M’Naghten rule in his charge to the jury:] There is a legal standard of disorder of mind which is sufficient to afford a ground of irresponsibil-
ity for crime, and a ground for your finding [a verdict of not guilty on the ground of insanity).

Before explaining what that standard actually is, | wish to draw your attention to some general considerations affecting the question of insanity in the criminal law in the hope that by so doing you may be helped to grasp what the law
prescribes. The purpose of the law in punishing people is to prevent others from committing a like crime or crimes. Its prime purpose is to deter people from committing offences. It may be that there is an element of retribution in the criminal law,
so that when people have committed offences the law considers that they merit punishment, but its prime purpose is to preserve society from the depredations of dangerous and vicious people. Now, it is perfectly useless for the law to attempt, by
threatening punishment, to deter people from committing crimes if their mental

950

p.951
condition is such that they cannot be in the least influenced by the possibility or probability of subsequent punishment; if they cannot understand what they are doing or cannot understand the ground upon which the law proceeds. The law is not
directed, as medical science is, to curing mental infirmities. The criminal law is not directed, as the civil law of lunacy is, to the care and custody of people of weak mind. . . . This is quite a different thing from the question, what utility there is in the
punishment of people who, at a moment, would commit acts which, if done when they were in sane minds, would be crimes. What is the utility of punishing people if they be beyond the control of the law for reasons of mental health? In considering
that, it will not perhaps, if you have ever reflected upon the matter, have escaped your attention that a great number of people who come into a Criminal Court . . . would not be there if they were the normal type of average everyday people. Many of
them are very peculiar in their dispositions and peculiarly tempered. That is markedly the case in sexual offences. Nevertheless, they are mentally quite able to appreciate what they are doing and quite able to appreciate the threatened punishment
of the law and the wrongness of their acts, and they are held in check by the prospect of punishment. It would be very absurd if the law were to withdraw that check on the ground that they were somewhat different from their fellow creatures in
mental make-up or texture at the very moment when the check is most needed. You will therefore see that the law, in laying down a standard of mental disorder sufficient to justify a jury in finding a prisoner not guilty on the ground of insanity at the
moment of offence, is addressing itself to a somewhat difficult task. It is attempting to define what are the classes of people who should not be punished although they have done actual things which in others would amount to crime. . . . With that
explanation | shall tell you what that standard is.

The first thing which I want you to notice is that you are only concerned with the condition of the mind at the time the act complained of was done. .. .

The next thing which | wish to emphasize is that his state of mind must have been one of disease, disorder or disturbance. Mere excitability of a normal [person], passion, even stupidity, obtuseness, lack of self-control, and impulsive-
ness, are quite different things from what | have attempted to describe as a state of disease or disorder or mental disturbance arising from some infirmity, temporary or of long standing. If that existed it must then have been of such a character as
to prevent [the defendant] from knowing the physical nature of the act . . . or of knowing that [it] was wrong. . . .

Blake v. United States
United States Court of Appeals, Fifth Circuit
407 F.2d 908 (1969)

BELL, Circuit Judge: . .. Blake was charged with bank robbery, 18 U.S.C.A. §2113. The evidence that he committed the robbery was overwhelming; his principal defense was insanity at the time of the commission of the offense. He was
convicted and . . . this appeal followed. . . . Appellant urges that the definition of insanity given the jury in charge for determining the issue of not guilty by reason of insanity was outmoded and prejudicial... .

p.951
p. 962

[Blake came from a well-to-do family, completed two years of college, and briefly served in the Navy until given a medical discharge after suffering an epileptic seizure. The following year, he received electroshock therapy, and the year
after that he was hospitalized for psychiatric treatment for the first time. Over the next 20 years, Blake continued to need extensive psychiatric care, including numerous periods of in-patient treatment and further electroshock therapy. During this
time, he was a heavy drinker who also used stimulants and drugs. In his 20s, Blake managed to work for his father’s construction company and marry and start a family. As his drinking and irrational behavior increased, however, he was no longer
able to work, and in his 30s Blake was twice adjudged incompetent and hospitalized in mental institutions for periods of six months. He was divorced from his first wife, and subsequently married three more times. In addition to his repeated hos-
pitalizations, Blake served a brief prison sentence when his probation for shooting his second wife was revoked because of a further charge of aggravated assault. While in prison, Blake was hospitalized several times, and he was released from
prison less than three months before the robbery for which he was convicted in the instant case. As the Fifth Circuit summarized: “To this point Blake's adult life had been one long round of confinement for mental problems and drinking when not
confined.”]

The facts of the robbery are rather bizarre. Blake . . . was registered at a Jacksonville hotel. He obtained a hotel employee as a chauffeur for the purpose of driving him about town. He stopped by a bar en route to the robbery, had
several drinks and told a waitress that he would be back later with a large sum of money. The waitress jokingly asked him if he planned to rob a bank. He said, “That's possible.”

The bank [robbed] was a member of the bank group [with which he had argued bitterly for several years over] a trust which was established either by or for him several years earlier. [Blake] ordered his driver to take him to the bank and
wait, walked in during rush hour, demanded the money, obtained it, and walked out. He had no trouble getting away immediately to Tampa in the same car and with the same driver. He returned from Tampa to Jacksonville the very next day with
an attorney [for a hearing] in the district court and was arrested for the robbery.

There was psychiatric testimony that Blake was suffering from the mental disease of schizophrenia, marked with psychotic episodes, and that his behavior on the occasion of the robbery indicated that appellant was in a psychotic
episode. This was described as a form of severe mental illness. There was testimony that in such a period his actions would not be subject to his will. On the other hand, there was psychiatric testimony that he had a sociopathic personality and
was not suffering from a mental disease. [T]he burden was on the prosecution, once the hypothesis of insanity was established, to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Blake was sane at the time of the commission of the crime. . . .

We come then to the definition of insanity given in charge. The district court charge was based on the dictum in Davis v. United States, 165 U.S. 373, 378 (1897). [The defense objected to the Davis standard and proposed substitution
of the MPC instead] The Davis standard is as follows:

The term “insanity” as used in this defense means such a perverted and deranged condition of the mental and moral faculties as to render a person incapable of distinguishing between right and wrong, or unconscious at the

time of the nature of the act he is committing, or where, though

p.952
p. 959

conscious of it and able to distinguish between right and wrong and know that the act is wrong, yet his will, by which I mean the governing power of his mind, has been otherwise than voluntarily so completely destroyed that

his actions are not subject to it, but are beyond his control.

Section 4.01 of the ALI Model Penal Code is as follows:

(1) A person is not responsible for criminal conduct if at the time of such conduct as a result of mental disease or defect he lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate the criminality (wrongfulness) of his con-
duct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law.
(2) As used in this Article, the terms “mental disease or defect” do not include an abnormality manifested only by repeated criminal or otherwise antisocial conduct. . . .

The facts of this case point up the difference in the standards. Here the facts are such, read favorably to the government as they must be, as not to show complete mental disorientation under the absolutes of Davis. The record does
show evidence which, if believed, would indicate that Blake suffered from a severe mental disease which the jury might have found impaired his control over the conduct in question. He could not prevail under a Davis charge. He might have pre-
vailed under a substantial lack of capacity type charge.

We think that a substantiality type standard is called for in light of current knowledge regarding mental illness. A person, as Blake here, may be a schizophrenic or may merely have a sociopathic personality. The evidence could go either
way. He may or may not have been in a psychotic episode at the time of the robbery. But, he was not unconscious, incapable of distinguishing right and wrong nor was his will completely destroyed in terms of the Davis definition. Modifying the
lack of mental capacity by the adjective “substantial,” still leaves the matter for the jury under the evidence, lay and expert, to determine mental defect vel non and its relationship to the conduct in question. . . . [Conviction reversed.]

Model Penal Code and Commentaries (1985)
$4.01 at 164-172

No problem in the drafting of a penal code presents greater intrinsic difficulty than that of determining when individuals whose conduct would otherwise be criminal ought to be exculpated on the ground that they were suffering from
mental disease or defect when they acted as they did. The problem is the drawing of a line between the use of public agencies and force (1) to condemn the offender by conviction, with resulting sanctions in which the ingredient of reprobation is
present no matter how constructive one may seek to make the sentence and the process of correction, and (2) modes of disposition in which the condemnatory element is absent, even though restraint may be involved. . . . Stating the matter dif-
ferently, the problem is to etch a decent working line between the areas assigned to the authorities responsible for public health and those responsible for the correction of offenders. .. .

p. 959
p.954

As far as its principle extends, the M’Naghten rule is right. Those who are irresponsible under the test are plainly beyond the reach of the restraining influence of the law, and their condemnation would be both futile and unjust. A
deranged person who believes he is squeezing lemons when he chokes his wife, or who kills in supposed self-defense on the basis of a delusion that another is attempting to kill him, is plainly beyond the deterrent influence of the law; he needs
restraint but condemnation is meaningless and ineffective. Moreover, the category defined by the rule is so extreme that to the ordinary person the exculpation of those it encompasses bespeaks no weakness in the law. He does not identify such
persons with himself; they are a world apart.

The question remains, however, whether the M’Naghten rule goes far enough to draw a fair and workable distinction. In two respects, this question must be answered in the negative. The M’Naghten test addresses itself to the actor's
“knowledge,” which can naturally be understood as referring to a simple awareness by the actor of his wrongdoing such as would be manifested by a verbal acknowledgment on his part of the forbidden nature of his conduct. One shortcoming
of this criterion is that it authorizes a finding of responsibility in a case in which the actor is not seriously deluded concerning his conduct or its consequences, but in which the actor's appreciation of the wrongfulness of his conduct is a largely
detached or abstract awareness that does not penetrate to the affective level. Insofar as a formulation centering on “knowledge” does not readily lend itself to application to emotional abnormalities, the M’Naghten test appears less than optimal as
a standard of responsibility in cases involving affective disorder.

A second and more pervasive difficulty with the M’Naghten standard appears in cases in which the defendant's disorder . . . destroys or overrides the defendant's power of self-control... .

Responding to the M’Naghten formulation's inadequacy in connection with claims that emphasize a defendant's volitional incapacity rather than his inability to understand, a minority of jurisdictions . . . explicitly supplemented the
M’Naghten rule by what was commonly called the “irresistible impulse” test... .

The Model Code formulation is based on the view that a sense of understanding broader than mere cognition, and a reference to volitional incapacity should be achieved directly in the formulation of the defense. . .

In contrast to the M’Naghten and “irresistible impulse” criteria, the Model Code formulation reflects the judgment that no test is workable that calls for complete impairment of ability to know or to control. The extremity of these concep-
tions had posed the largest difficulty for the administration of the old standards. Disorientation, psychiatrists indicated, might be extreme and still might not be total; what clinical experience revealed was closer to a graded scale with marks along
the way. . .. To meet these difficulties, it was thought that the criterion should ask if the defendant, as a result of mental disease or defect, was deprived of “substantial capacity” to appreciate the criminality (or wrongfulness) of his conduct or to
conform his conduct to the requirements of law, meaning by “substantial” a capacity of some appreciable magnitude when measured by the standard of humanity in general, as opposed to the reduction of capacity to the vagrant and trivial dimen-
sions characteristic of the most severe afflictions of the mind.

p.954

p. 955

The adoption of the standard of substantial capacity may well be the Code’s most significant alteration of the prevailing tests. It was recognized, of course, that “substantial” is an open-ended concept, but its quantitative connotation
was believed to be sufficiently precise for purposes of practical administration. The law is full of instances in which courts and juries are explicitly authorized to confront an issue of degree. Such an approach was deemed to be no less essential and
appropriate in dealing with this issue than in dealing with the questions of recklessness and negligence.

United States v. Lyons
United States Court of Appeals, Fifth Circuit (en banc)
731 F.2d 243, 739 F.2d 994 (1984)

Gee, J. Defendant Robert Lyons was indicted on twelve counts of knowingly and intentionally securing controlled narcotics. . . . Lyons proffered evidence that in 1978 he began to suffer from several painful ailments, that various
narcotics were prescribed to be taken as needed for his pain, and that he became addicted to these drugs. He also offered to present expert witnesses who would testify that his drug addiction affected his brain both physiologically and psycho-
logically and that as a result he lacked substantial capacity to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law. . . .

[The trial court excluded the proffered evidence, and Lyons was convicted.]

Today the great weight of legal authority clearly supports the view that evidence of mere narcotics addiction, standing alone and without other physiological or psychological involvement, raises no issue of such a mental defect or dis-
ease as can serve as a basis for the insanity defense. . . .

We do not doubt that actual physical damage to the brain itself falls within the ambit of “mental disease or defect.” . . . Because the proffer offers evidence tending to suggest such damage, that evidence should have been submitted to
the jury. And although we today withdraw our recognition of the volitional prong of [the insanity defense] — that as to which such evidence has usually been advanced — we also conclude that should Lyons wish to offer such evidence in an attempt
to satisfy the remaining cognitive prong, fairness demands that we afford him an opportunity to do so.

. .. We last examined the insanity defense in Blake v. United States, [supra], where we adopted the ALI Model Penal Code definition of insanity. [W]e concluded that then current knowledge in the field of behavioral science supported
such a result. Unfortunately, it now appears our conclusion was premature. . . .

Reexamining the Blake standard today, we conclude that the volitional prong of the insanity defense — a lack of capacity to conform one’s conduct to the requirements of the law — does not comport with current medical and scientific
knowledge, which has retreated from its earlier, sanguine expectations. Consequently, we now hold that a person is not responsible for criminal conduct on the grounds of insanity only if at the time of that conduct, as a result of a mental disease
or defect, he is unable to appreciate the wrongfulness of that conduct.

p. 955
p. 956

We do so for several reasons. First, as we have mentioned, a majority of psychiatrists now believe that they do not possess sufficient accurate scientific bases for measuring a person's capacity for self-control or for calibrating the
impairment of that capacity. Bonnie, The Moral Basis of the Insanity Defense, 69 A.B.A. J. 194, 196 (1983). “The line between an irresistible impulse and an impulse not resisted is probably no sharper than between twilight and dusk.” American
Psychiatric Association Statement on the Insanity Defense, 11 (1982) [APA Statement]. Indeed, Professor Bonnie [supra] states:

There is, in short, no objective basis for distinguishing between offenders who were undeterrable and those who were merely undeterred, between the impulse that was irresistible and the impulse not resisted, or between

substantial impairment of capacity and some lesser impairment.

In addition, the risks of fabrication and “moral mistakes” in administering the insanity defense are greatest “when the experts and the jury are asked to speculate whether the defendant had the capacity to ‘contro!’ himself or whether he
could have ‘resisted’ the criminal impulse.” Bonnie, supra, at 196. Moreover, psychiatric testimony about volition is more likely to produce confusion for jurors than is psychiatric testimony concerning a defendant's appreciation of the wrongfulness
of his act. It appears, moreover, that there is considerable overlap between a psychotic person's inability to understand and his ability to control his behavior. Most psychotic persons who fail a volitional test would also fail a cognitive test, thus ren-
dering the volitional test superfluous for them. Finally, [case law currently] requires that such proof be made by the federal prosecutor beyond a reasonable doubt, an all but impossible task in view of the present murky state of medical knowledge.

[Wie see no prudent course for the law to follow but to treat all criminal impulses — including those not resisted — as resistible. To do otherwise in the present state of medical knowledge would be to cast the insanity defense adrift
upon a sea of unfounded scientific speculation, with the palm awarded case by case to the most convincing advocate of that which is presently unknown — and may remain so, because unknowable... .

Ruain, J., with whom Tare, J., joins, dissenting. . . . An adjudication of guilt is more than a factual determination that the defendant pulled a trigger, took a bicycle, or sold heroin. It is a moral judgment that the individual is blameworthy. “Our

collective conscience does not allow punishment where it cannot impose blame.” . . “{Hlistorically, our substantive criminal law is based on a theory of punishing the [vicious] will. It postulates a free agent confronted with a choice between doing

right and wrong, and choosing freely to do wrong.”3. . . An acquittal by reason of insanity is a judgment that the defendant is not guilty because, as a result of his mental condition, he is unable to make an effective choice regarding his behavior.
p. 956
p.957

The majority does not controvert these fundamental principles; indeed it accepts them as the basis for the defense when the accused suffers from a disease that impairs cognition. It rests its decision to redefine insanity and to narrow
the defense on “new policy considerations.” . . .

The first is the potential threat to society created by the volitional prong of the insanity defense. Public opposition to any insanity-grounded defense is often based, either explicitly or implicitly, on the view that the plea is frequently
invoked by violent criminals who fraudulently use it to evade just punishment. . . . This perception depicts an insanity trial as a “circus” of conflicting expert testimony that confuses a naive and sympathetic jury. And it fears insanity acquittees as of-
fenders who, after manipulating the criminal justice system, are soon set free to prey once again on the community.

Despite the prodigious volume of writing devoted to the plea, the empirical data that are available provide little or no support for these fearsome perceptions and in many respects directly refute them. Both the frequency and the
success rate of insanity pleas are grossly overestimated by professionals and lay persons alike; the plea is rarely made, and even more rarely successful.2 The number of insanity pleas based on control defects, as compared to those based on lack
of cognition, must have been almost negligible.

The perception that the defendant who successfully pleads insanity is quickly released from custody is also based only on assumption... . “The truth is that in almost every case, the acquittee is immediately hospitalized and evaluated
for dangerousness. Usually, the acquittee remains hospitalized for an extended time.”2

Another set of objections to the plea is based on the thesis that factfinders — especially juries — are confused and manipulated by the vagueness of the legal standards of insanity and the notorious “battle of the experts” who present
conclusory, superficial, and misleading testimony. These conditions, the argument runs, conspire to produce inconsistent and “inaccurate” verdicts.

Let us first put these objections in perspective. Most cases involving an insanity plea do not go to trial; instead, like most other criminal cases, they are settled by a plea bargain. In many of the cases that do go to trial, psychiatric testi-
mony is presented by deposition, without disagreement among experts, and without opposition by the prosecution. And in the few cases in which a contest does develop, the defendant is usually convicted. . . .

The manipulated-jury argument is supported largely by declamation, not data. [NJo source has been cited to the court to support the conclusion that, as an empirical matter, pleas based upon the volitional prong present an especially
problematic task for the jury.

p.957
p. 958

Indeed, the majority opinion does not assert that the insanity defense, particularly the control test, doesn’t work; it contends that the defense can’t work. The principal basis for this contention is the belief, held by “a majority of psychia-
trists,” that they lack “sufficient accurate scientific bases for measuring a person's capacity for self-control or for calibrating the impairment of that capacity.” . . . [Blut the absence of useful expert evidence, if indeed there is none, does not obviate
the need for resolving the question whether the defendant ought to be held accountable for his criminal behavior. . . .

Our concept of responsibilty in this sense is not limited to observable behavior: it embraces meaningful choice, and necessarily requires inferences and assumptions regarding the defendant's unobservable mental state. . . . The
difference between the concepts of excusing circumstances such as coercion and the insanity defense is that the former is based on objective assumptions about human behavior and is tested against hypothetical-objective standards such as
“the reasonable person.” “The insanity defense [on the other hand] marks the transition from the adequate man the law demands to the inadequate man he may be.”!Z

The relevant inquiry under either branch of the insanity test is a subjective one that focuses on the defendant's actual state of mind. Our duty to undertake that inquiry is not based on confidence in the testimony of expert witnesses, but
on the ethical precept that the defendant's mental state is a crucial aspect of his blameworthiness. . . . The availability of expert testimony and the probative value of such testimony are basically evidentiary problems that can be accommodated
within the existing test. . ..

[A] defendant pleading insanity typically faces both a judge and a jury who are skeptical about psychiatry in general and the insanity plea in particular. . . . The formal allocation of the persuasion burden notwithstanding, the defendant to
prevail must convince the doubting factfinder that, despite present outward appearances, he was insane at the time he committed the crime.

The majority's fear that the present test invites “moral mistakes” is difficult to understand. The majority opinion concedes that some individuals cannot conform their conduct to the law's requirements. . . . [T]he majority embraces a
rule certain to result in the conviction of at least some who are not morally responsible and the punishment of those for whom retributive, deterrent, and rehabilitative penal goals are inappropriate. A decision that virtually ensures undeserved, and
therefore unjust, punishment in the name of avoiding moral mistakes rests on a peculiar notion of morality. ..

Judges are not, and should not be, immune to popular outrage over this nation’s crime rate. Like everyone else, judges watch television, read newspapers and magazines, listen to gossip, and are sometimes themselves victims. They
receive the message trenchantly described in a recent book criticizing the insanity defense: “Perhaps the bottom line of all these complaints is that guilty people go free. .. . These are not cases in which the defendant is alleged to have committed
acrime. Everyone knows he did it.”25 Although understandable as an expression of uninformed popular

p. 958
p.959
opinion, such a viewpoint ought not to serve as the basis for judicial decisionmaking; for it misapprehends the very meaning of guilt.

. .. By definition, guilt cannot be attributed to an individual unable to refrain from violating the law. When a defendant is properly acquitted by reason of insanity under the control test, the guilty does not go free. . ..

NOTES ON THE “VOLITIONAL PRONG” CONTROVERSY

1. Practical concerns. Professor Michael Corrado has challenged the claim that it is impossible to tell the difference between those who can't control their behavior and those who can but won't. He writes (The Case for a Purely
Volitional Insanity Defense, 42 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 481, 502) (2009)) that “the line between those who can't. . . and those who won't. . . can be very clear indeed.” Professor Corrado adds that “those who advanced [the contrary claim] should be a
little red-faced, . . . especially if their argument was that the possibility of abuse was too great.” In making that point, he refers to Supreme Court decisions upholding the constitutionality of so-called sexually violent predator (SVP) statutes. Those
decisions (discussed at pp. 1103-1104 infra) stress that SVP confinement is constitutionally permissible only for people who can’t control their behavior, not for those who simply won't. In upholding such statutes, the Court has accepted the
premise that it is possible to reliably distinguish between those two sorts of people. See Kansas v. Crane, 534 U.S. 407, 413 (2002) (SVP commitment is permissible only on “proof of serious difficulty in controlling behavior . . . sufficient to distin-
guish the dangerous sexual offender [who is subject to preventive confinement] from the dangerous but typical recidivist convicted in an ordinary criminal case.”).114

Research in social psychology since Lyons was decided may shed light on this problem of distinguishing those who can’t control their behavior from those who simply won't,11 and advances in neuroscience may be especially perti-
nent.118 Accordingly, some observers argue, the case for retaining the volitional prong is stronger than it was at the time of Lyons. Some argue it is particularly important to have a volitional prong to address the reduced culpability of individuals
with

p.959

p. 960
post-traumatic stress disorder who fare better under the MPC test than they do under the M’Naghten rule. W. Chris Jordan, Conditioned to Kill: Volition, Combat Related PTSD, and the Insanity Defense: Providing a Uniform Test for Uniformed
Trauma, 16 Rutgers J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 1 (2019). Others are more skeptical of a volitional framework." A persistent concern, even as more sophisticated studies accumulate, is that some experts see “no way to calibrate the degree of impairment
of behavior controls.”!12 Professor Ken Levy writes (Does Situationism Excuse? The Implications of Situationism for Moral Responsibility and Criminal Responsibility, 68 Ark. L. Rev. 731, 744 (2015):

[Wie cannot hope to sift out the genuinely blameworthy from the genuinely blameless wrongdoers until we first figure out what the thresholds are for each capacity and therefore how diminished these capacities may become

before we deem the agent non-responsible. Because capacities cannot be measured in discrete quantities like pounds and inches, we cannot precisely quantify these thresholds or precisely determine if any particular per-

son whose responsibility we question falls below them.

2. Moral culpability. For careful development of the argument that, even aside from practical concerns, a purely cognitive test for insanity is the appropriate test as a matter of moral principle, see Stephen J. Morse, Rationality and
Responsibility, 74 S. Cal. L. Rev. 251 (2000). Professor Morse argues (id. at 252-253):

[The law's concept of the person is a creature who acts for reasons and is potentially able to be guided by reason. ... When we want to know why an agent intentionally behaved as she did, we do not desire a biophysical

explanation, as if the person were simply biophysical flotsam and jetsam. Instead, we seek the reason she acted, the desires and beliefs that formed the practical syllogism that produced intentional conduct. . . . The law's

concept of responsibility follows from its view of the person. . . . Legally responsible agents [are] people who have the general capacity to grasp and be guided by good reason in particular legal contexts.

Professor Corrado, in contrast, argues (supra, at 509) that the essence of an insanity defense lies not exclusively in cognitive incapacity but also in volitional incapacity:

Where a person, whether or not he knows the nature of his act, cannot avoid performing the act, he should be excused — unless he himself is responsible for not being able to avoid it. [T]he defining characteristic of a

. 960
p.961

mental condition that moves its victim from the category of the sane to the category of the legally insane is that it deprives her of the ability to choose to conform her behavior to the law. It may do that through depriving her of

the ability to reason; it may do that through depriving her of the ability to appreciate the wrongfulness of her action, but even when it does neither of those things, it may rob her of her responsibility for her actions by depriv-

ing her of the ability to act in accordance with her best judgment.

NOTES ON CHANGES IN THE LAW

1. The Hinckley acquittal. The change from Blake to Lyons exemplifies a shift in attitudes toward the insanity defense that began in the 1980s. Before then, about half the states had adopted some version of the MPC, as did all but

one of the U.S. Courts of Appeal. But this trend in favor of the MPC approach was abruptly reversed following the 1982 trial of John W. Hinckley, Jr., who — in a misguided attempt to impress the actress Jodie Foster — shot and wounded Presi-

dent Reagan and several others in an abortive assassination attempt witnessed on national television. When the jury, applying the MPC test, found Hinckley not guilty by reason of insanity, public opinion reacted with outrage over the verdict.112
Public reaction to the case reflected a broader sentiment in society of fear, often misplaced, toward people with mental illness.

If there was fear that Hinckley would soon be walking the streets, free to menace others, subsequent events put that concern in perspective. After the acquittal, Hinckley stayed confined for treatment at St. Elizabeth's Hospital in
Washington, D.C., where he had been held since his arrest in 1981, and he remained there (except for brief furloughs) for more than 35 years. In July 2016, after experts from St. Elizabeth's and the government agreed that Hinckley's psychiatric
disorders “have been in full and sustained remission for well over twenty years,” U.S. District Judge Paul Friedman found that Hinckley no longer posed a danger to himself or others and granted him “convalescent leave,” permitting his release
under strict conditions. United States v. Hinckley, 200 F. Supp. 3d 1 (D.D.C. 2016). Hinckley was required to live with his mother and remain within a 50-mile radius of her home, except when traveling for treatment at least once a month at St. Eliz~
abeth's. The release order specified that he must have no access to social media, avoid all contact with the press, and have no contact with a number of specified individuals, including Foster and members of the Reagan family. Id. at 19-20.
QUESTIONS: Was public condemnation of the Hinckley verdict premature or too superficial? In light of subsequent events, does the NGRI approach provide a better framework than the criminal justice system for dealing with individuals like John
Hinckley?

2. Restricting access to the insanity defense. Whatever may be the right lesson to draw from the Hinckley trial, its impact on the law has been lasting. Efforts to restrict defenses based on mental illness included adjustments in the
burden of

p.961

p.962
proof, changes in the disposition of insanity acquittees, introduction of a separate verdict of “Guilty but Mentally Ill,” and complete abolition of the insanity defense. See Ralph Slovenko, The Insanity Defense in the Wake of the Hinckley Trial, 14
Rutgers L.u. 373 (1983); Peter Arenella, Reflections on Current Proposals to Abolish or Reform the Insanity Defense, 8 Am. J.L. & Med. 271 (1982). Developments in each of the areas just mentioned are explored in the appropriate places in this
chapter. The present Note focuses on the formulation of the insanity test itself.

(a) State law. Twenty-one states still adhere to the MPC test or a modified version of it.12° E.g., Wis. Stat. §971.15(1) (2021); see Kate E. Bloch & Jeffrey Gould, Legal Indeterminacy in Insanity Cases: Clarifying Wrongfulness and
Applying a Triadic Approach to Forensic Evaluations, 67 Hastings L.J. 913, 915 (2016). But many have returned to M’Naghten. California adopted the MPC formula by judicial decision in 1978 but reverted to M’Naghten as a result of a voter initia-
tive in 1982. See John Q. LaFond & Mary L. Durham, Back to the Asylum 64 (1992). According to one count, 25 states adhere to some form of the M’Naghten rule.121

(b) Federal law. As part of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, Congress enacted a provision that supersedes the Lyons decision and narrows the insanity test even further. 18 U.S.C. §17(a) provides:

It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under any Federal statute that, at the time of the commission of the acts constituting the offense, the defendant, as a result of a severe mental disease or defect, was unable to

appreciate the nature and quality or the wrongfulness of his acts. Mental disease or defect does not otherwise constitute a defense.

3. Legislative proposals. Three influential bodies have, in similar language, proposed retention of the cognitive branch of the MPC test and rejection of the volitional branch. See American Bar Association, Criminal Justice Mental
Health Standards §7-6.1(a) (approved Feb. 9, 1983); American Psychiatric Association, Statement on the Insanity Defense, 140 Am. J. Psychiatry 6 (1983); National Conf. of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, Model Insanity Defense and Post-
Trial Disposition Act §201 (1984). The ABA standard provides:

A person is not responsible for criminal conduct if, at the time of such conduct, and as a result of mental disease or defect, that person was unable to appreciate the wrongfulness of such conduct.

4, Rates of use and success of the insanity defense. As noted in Judge Rubin's dissent in Lyons, supra, the frequency and success rates of insanity pleas are often overestimated. The actual use of the insanity defense varies
markedly from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. In 1985, Colorado had an average of one insanity plea for every 5,000 arrests, while the rate was one in 480 arrests for Michigan and one in 200 arrests for Wyoming. As might be expected, success rates for
insanity pleas tend to be higher where the plea is less frequent. Success rates ranged from 44 percent of all insanity pleas tendered in Colorado to 7 percent in Michigan and 2 percent in

p.962
p. 968
Wyoming.122 In New York between 2007 and 2016, only six defendants in more than five thousand murder cases raised successful NGRI claims.12° Overall, the insanity defense is raised in less than 1 percent of all cases.24 “Only an estimated
one-120th of 1 percent of contested felony cases end in a successful N.G.R.I. defense.”125 Success rates have varied very little over time; they were virtually identical in the early 1980s, before the post-Hinckley reforms took effect.12°
5. The effect of different versions of the insanity defense. There is little evidence that different formulations of the insanity defense produce different results in practice. In one attempt to study this question empirically,127 the
researcher assembled roughly 100 experimental jury panels from actual jury pools in Chicago, St. Louis, and Minneapolis. The juries listened to the transcript of an actual insanity defense case, then deliberated until they reached a unanimous
verdict. One-third of the juries were given the M’Naghten instruction, one-third a more liberalized test, and one-third were simply told to find the defendant not guilty by reason of insanity “[i]f you believe the defendant was insane” at the time of
the offense. It turned out the differences in instruction made much less difference than the composition of the jury. Other researchers reached similar conclusions from studies using mock jurors who read case summaries. Asked whether to acquit
under M’Naghten, the irresistible impulse test, the MPC, and “their own best lights,” no significant differences in acquittal rates were found.125
Another approach relies on before-and-after comparisons in jurisdictions that have enacted statutory changes. In Wyoming, legislation replaced M’Naghten with the MPC test; the change had no significant effect on the rate of insanity
pleas tendered, the rate of insanity acquittals, or in the characteristics of defendants invoking the defense.12° California moved in the opposite direction, replacing the MPC test with M’Naghten; again, there was no significant change in the rate of
insanity pleas and acquittals or in the types of defendants invoking the defense.192
p. 963
p.964
6. Prospects for reform. Professor Alan A. Stone, who served on the committee that prepared the American Psychiatric Association's formulation of a proposed insanity defense, p. 962, Note 3, supra, offered some pessimistic reflec-
tions on the possibility of successfully reforming the insanity defense (Law, Psychiatry, and Morality 94-96 (1984)):
[The] APA proposal involves going back to an essentially cognitive test — again in part because psychiatric testimony relevant to cognitive matters . . . “is more reliable, and has a stronger scientific base” than testimony
relevant to volition. [But the] defense [in Hinckley] found ample evidence of thought disorder, including . . . magical thinking . . . and a break with reality. The prosecution found none of this. . .
‘An exchange between defense and prosecution psychiatrists will illustrate one aspect of [the] more basic theoretical problems. [A defense expert] said that the Valium Hinckley took may well have produced
“paradoxical rage,” thus causing him to be unable to control himself. A psychiatrist testifying for the prosecution] said it was “appropriate” for Hinckley to take Valium if he was anxious about assassinating the President. Put
aside the fact that these are both conjectures. They are conjectures which are part of two quite different kinds of discourse.
The theory of paradoxical rage is part of a discourse about organisms with brains, enzymes, and physical chemical reactions. The theory of appropriate behavior is part of a discourse about persons with minds,
intentions, and motivated actions. In the discourse about organisms, . . . paradoxical rage is caused by the chemical release of the inhibitory neural system. In the discourse about persons, the self is the agent who chooses,
who intends, and who assumes a firing position and pulls the trigger. Morality does not enter the discourse of organisms because free will and choice are not part of that language. To say that a person had a paradoxical rage
reaction is to confuse the two discourses. . . . Psychiatry has not yet found a unified discourse about organisms and persons. That is the giant iceberg against which the insanity defense inevitably is wrecked. Neither psychi-
atry nor law nor moral philosophy has found a sure way past this barrier. It does no good to pretend the barrier does not exist or to ask the jury to deal with it. These are not questions for which common sense has an answer.
Kahler v. Kansas
Supreme Court of the United States
140 S. Ct. 1021 (2020)

Justice KAGAN delivered the opinion of the Court.

[Kansas charged petitioner James Kahler with capital murder after he shot and killed four family members. Kahler introduced testimony by a forensic psychiatrist that he suffered from “severe major depression” and that “his capacity to
manage his own behavior had been severely degraded so that he couldn't refrain from

p.964

p. 965
doing what he did.” State v. Kahler, 410 P.3d 105, 114 (Kan. 2018) (per curiam). The trial court ruled, consistent with Kansas law, that this evidence could be considered in determining whether Kahler had the required mens rea (.e., intent to kill) but
that mental illness, whatever its nature, could not otherwise form the basis of a defense. Kahler was convicted and sentenced to death. On appeal, he argued that Kansas’s abolition of insanity as an independent defense, distinct from lack of mens
rea, violated constitutional due process. The Kansas Supreme Court rejected his challenges and affirmed his murder conviction and death sentence.]

. .. Kansas law provides that “[ijt shall be a defense to a prosecution under any statute that the defendant, as a result of mental disease or defect, lacked the culpable mental state required as an element of the offense charged.” Under
that statute, a defendant may introduce any evidence of any mental illness to show that he did not have the intent needed to commit the charged crime. . . .

At the same time, the Kansas statute provides that “[mlental disease or defect is not otherwise a defense.” In other words, Kansas does not recognize any additional way that mental illness can produce an acquittal. Most important for
this case, a defendant's moral incapacity cannot exonerate him, as it would if Kansas had adopted both original prongs of M’Naghten. Assume, for example, that a defendant killed someone because of an “insane delusion that God had] ordained
the sacrifice.” The defendant knew what he was doing {killing another person), but he could not tell moral right from wrong; indeed, he thought the murder morally justified. In many States, that fact would preclude a criminal conviction, although it
would almost always lead to commitment in a mental health facility. In Kansas, by contrast, evidence of a mentally ill defendant's moral incapacity — or indeed, of anything except his cognitive inability to form the needed mens rea — can play no
role in determining guilt.

That partly closed-door policy changes once a verdict is in. At the sentencing phase, a Kansas defendant has wide latitude to raise his mental illness as a reason to judge him not fully culpable and so to lessen his punishment. He may
present evidence that his disease made him unable to understand his act's moral wrongness — as in the example just given of religious delusion. Or he may try to show (in line with M’Naghten’s spinoff) that the illness prevented him from “appre-
ciat[ing] the [conduct's] criminality.” Or again, he may offer testimony (here invoking volitional incapacity) that he simply could not “conform [his] conduct” to legal restraints. ..

. .. Kahler [asks] this Court to decide whether the Due Process Clause requires States to provide an insanity defense that acquits a defendant who could not “distinguish right from wrong” when committing his crime — or, otherwise put,
whether that Clause requires States to adopt the moral-incapacity test from M’Naghten. We granted certiorari and now hold it does not. . ..

A challenge like Kahler's must surmount a high bar. Under well-settled precedent, a state rule about criminal liability — laying out either the elements of or the defenses to a crime — violates due process only if it “offends some principle
of justice so rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people as to be ranked as fundamental.” Our primary guide in applying that standard is “historical practice.” And in assessing that practice, we look primarily to eminent common-law au-
thorities (Blackstone, Coke, Hale, and the like), as well as to early English and American

p. 966

p. 966
judicial decisions. The question is whether a rule of criminal responsibility is so old and venerable — so entrenched in the central values of our legal system — as to prevent a State from ever choosing another. An affirmative answer, though not
unheard of, is rare. ...

In Powell v. Texas ®, this Court explained why. There, Texas declined to recognize “chronic alcoholism” as a defense to the crime of public drunkenness. The Court upheld that decision, emphasizing the paramount role of the States
in setting “standards of criminal responsibility.” In refusing to impose “a constitutional doctrine” defining those standards, the Court invoked the many “interlocking and overlapping concepts” that the law uses to assess when a person should
be held criminally accountable for “his antisocial deeds.” “The doctrines of actus reus, mens rea, insanity, mistake, justification, and duress” — the Court counted them off — reflect both the “evolving aims of the criminal law” and the “changing

religious, moral, philosophical, and medical views of the nature of man.” . . . That “constantly shifting adjustment” could not proceed in the face of rigid “[cJonstitution[al] formulas.” Within broad limits, Powell thus concluded, “doctrine[s] of criminal
responsibility” must remain “the province of the States.”

Nowhere has the Court hewed more closely to that view than in addressing the contours of the insanity defense. Here, uncertainties about the human mind loom large. . . . Indeed, while addressing the demand for an alcoholism defense
in Powell, the Court pronounced — as something close to self-evident — that “[nJothing could be less fruitful” than to define a specific “insanity test in constitutional terms.”

. .. Kahler concludes that the moral-incapacity standard is a “principle of justice so rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people as to be ranked as fundamental.”

. .. One point, first, of agreement: Kahler is right that for hundreds of years jurists and judges have recognized insanity (however defined) as relieving responsibility for a crime. . . . But neither do we think Kansas departs from that broad
principle. First, Kansas has an insanity defense negating criminal liability — even though not the type Kahler demands. [T]he defendant can use that evidence to show that his illness left him without the cognitive capacity to form the requisite in-
tent. ... Second, and significantly, Kansas permits a defendant to offer whatever mental health evidence he deems relevant at sentencing. . . . And sentencing is the appropriate place to consider mitigation: The decisionmaker there can make a
nuanced evaluation of blame, rather than choose, as a trial jury must, between alll and nothing. In any event, so Kansas thinks. .. .

Defining the precise relationship between criminal culpability and mental illness involves examining the workings of the brain, the purposes of the criminal law, the ideas of free will and responsibility. It is a project demanding hard
choices among values, in a context replete with uncertainty, even at a single moment in time. And it is a project, if any is, that should be open to revision over time, as new medical knowledge emerges and as legal and moral norms evolve. Which
is all to say that it is a project for state governance, not constitutional law. . ..

p. 966
p.967

Justice Breyer, with whom Justice Ginsaure and Justice SoTomayor join, dissenting . . .

Like the Court, | believe that the Constitution gives the States broad leeway to define state crimes and criminal procedures, including leeway to provide different definitions and standards related to the defense of insanity. But here,
Kansas has not simply redefined the insanity defense. Rather, it has eliminated the core of a defense that has existed for centuries: that the defendant, due to mental illness, lacked the mental capacity necessary for his conduct to be considered
morally blameworthy. ..

Amuch-simplified example will help the reader understand the conceptual distinction that is central to this case. Consider two similar prosecutions for murder. In Prosecution One, the accused person has shot and killed another
person. The evidence at trial proves that, as a result of severe mental illness, he thought the victim was a dog. Prosecution Two is similar but for one thing: The evidence at trial proves that, as a result of severe mental illness, the defendant thought
that a dog ordered him to kill the victim. Under the insanity defense as traditionally understood, the government cannot convict either defendant. Under Kansas’ rule, it can convict the second but not the first.

. .. do not mean to suggest that M’Naghten's particular approach to insanity is constitutionally required. . .. M’Naghten's second prong is merely one way of describing something more fundamental. Its basic insight is that mental
illness may so impair a person's mental capacities as to render him no more responsible for his actions than a young child or a wild animal. Such a person is not properly the subject of the criminal law. . . .

Few doctrines are as deeply rooted in our common-law heritage as the insanity defense. Although English and early American sources differ in their linguistic formulations of the legal test for insanity, with striking consistency, they all
express the same underlying idea: A defendant who, due to mental illness, lacks sufficient mental capacity to be held morally responsible for his actions cannot be found guilty of a crime. . .. And to this day, the overwhelming majority of U.S. juris-
dictions recognize insanity as an affirmative defense that excuses a defendant from criminal liability even where he was capable of forming the mens rea required for the offense. . .

The Court points out, correctly, that many of the common-law sources state that the insane lack mens rea or felonious intent... . But what did they mean by that? At common law, the term mens rea ordinarily incorporated the notion
of “general moral blameworthiness” required for criminal punishment. The modern meaning of mens rea is narrower and more technical. [Looking at the context of how mens rea is used at common law,] we see that, over and over again, they link
criminal intent to the presence of free will and moral understanding. . . .

| believe that our history shows clearly that the criminal law has always required a higher degree of individual culpability than the modern concept of mens rea. . .

To see why Kansas’ departure is so serious, go back to our two simplified prosecutions: the first of the defendant who, because of serious mental illness, believes the victim is a dog; the second of a defendant who, because of serious
mental illness, believes the dog commanded him to kill the victim. Now ask, what moral difference exists between the defendants in the two examples? Assuming equivalently

p.967

p. 968
convincing evidence of mental illness, | can find none at all. In both cases, the defendants differ from ordinary persons in ways that would lead most of us to say that they should not be held morally responsible for their acts. | cannot find one de-
fendant more responsible than the other. And for centuries, neither has the law.

. .. Without doubt, assessing the defendant's claim of insanity is difficult. That is one reason | believe that States must remain free to refine and redefine their insanity rules within broad bounds. But juries have been making that deter-
mination for centuries and continue to do so in 45 States. And I do not see how an administrative difficulty can justify abolishing the heart of the defense. . . . Kansas argues that it has not abolished the insanity defense or any significant part of it. It
has simply moved the stage at which a defendant can present the full range of mental-capacity evidence to sentencing. But our tradition demands that an insane defendant should not be found guilty in the first place. Moreover, the relief that Kan-
sas offers, in the form of sentencing discretion and the possibility of commitment in lieu of incarceration, is a matter of judicial discretion, not of right.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS ON KAHLER

1. Commitment versus imprisonment. Early in its opinion, the Court states, “In many States, [inability to tell right from wrong] would preclude a criminal conviction, although it would almost always lead to commitment in a mental
health facility.” Is the Court implying that there isn’t that much practical difference between Kansas’s regime and that of states that recognize insanity as an independent defense? If so, do you agree?

2. The sentencing alternative. In explaining how Kansas preserves the broad principle that insanity reduces responsibility for crime, the Court says, “[S]ignificantly, Kansas permits a defendant to offer whatever mental health evi-
dence he deems relevant at sentencing. . . . And sentencing is the appropriate place to consider mitigation: The decisionmaker there can make a nuanced evaluation of blame, rather than choose, as a trial jury must, between all and nothing.” Is the
Court correct that evidence of severe mental disorder, when introduced at sentencing, will be used for a “nuanced evaluation of blame”? Would the testimony of Kahler's expert stating that Kahler “couldn't refrain from doing what he did” be con-
sidered mitigating or aggravating in the eyes of a jury or judge at sentencing?

3. Definitions of insanity. The Court notes widespread and ongoing disagreement about what “insanity” means. Justice Breyer says that “States must remain free to refine and redefine their insanity rules within broad bounds” and
that “M’Naghten's particular approach to insanity is [not] constitutionally required.” But if the Court had ruled for Kahler, wouldn't that decision unleash constitutional challenges to various state definitions of insanity and to how they are applied?
NOTES ON ABOLITION OF THE INSANITY DEFENSE

1. Terminology. Near the end of its opinion, the Kahler majority states that “Kansas has an insanity defense negating criminal liability — even though not the type Kahler demands” (emphasis added). Is this correct, or has Kansas
abolished the insanity defense entirely? Apart from agreement or disagreement with the Court’s

p. 968
p. 969
ultimate conclusion, clarifying the terminology can help to see how the Kansas regime works and the place of insanity evidence within that regime.

Note that the Kansas statute to which the Court refers affords a defense when any mental disease or defect (even one far short of insanity) negates a required mental state. And of course, under ordinary rules of evidence, Kansas
affords a defense when a mental condition that is not a mental disease or defect negates a required mental state — for example, when evidence of PTSD is offered to show that the defendant honestly believed there was an imminent threat to the
defendant's life. But conversely, even when a defendant's mental condition meets every conceivable conception of insanity, that condition does not afford a defense if it doesn’t negate mens rea. In effect, the Kansas statute not only says that
insanity is not an independent defense; it says that insanity by itself has no special legal significance. A mental condition (even a mild one) that negates mens rea is a defense; a mental condition, no matter how severe, that does not negate mens
rea is not a defense. In other words, “insanity” as a distinct legal concept is not relevant.

2. State efforts to abolish the insanity defense. State efforts to abolish the insanity defense in the early decades of the past century were usually held unconstitutional under state constitutions guaranteeing due process of law. See,
e.g., Sinclair v. State, 132 So. 581 (Miss. 1931); State v. Strasburg, 110 P. 1020 (Wash. 1910). After the Hinckley verdict, five states (Idaho, Kansas, Montana, Nevada, and Utah) passed legislation to abolish insanity as an independent defense and
treat evidence of mental illness as relevant solely to sentencing and to the question whether the defendant had formed the required mens rea (such as intent to kill). See, e.g., Mont. Code Ann. §§46-14-311, 46-14-312(2) (2021). Kahler makes clear
that laws along those lines will withstand a constitutional challenge under federal law. In Finger v. State, 27 P.3d 66, 84 (Nev. 2001), however, the Nevada Supreme Court struck down that state's abolition statute on state constitutional grounds.
Finger was charged with murdering his mother. His defense — unavailable under the Nevada statute — was that his longstanding paranoid schizophrenia, which included visual and auditory hallucinations, precluded criminal responsibility because
it led him to believe that his mother was plotting to kill him. The Nevada Supreme Court held that allowing evidence of Finger's mental illness only to negate his intent to kill was insufficient; due process required that he be able to argue that he did
not know that his intentional killing was wrong.

3. Assessing abolition.

(@) The Court's “hands-off” principle. The Court in Kahler cites Powell for the idea that “doctrine[s] of criminal responsibility” must remain “the province of the States.” Does this “hands-off” approach appropriately recognize the
values of federalism and judicial restraint? Or does it abdicate the Court's responsibility to protect criminal defendants from a political process that may pay insufficient attention to their legitimate interests? Has judicial deference to state legisla-
tive judgments improved the criminal law or contributed to the excessive growth of the penal state?

(b) Blame asa criminal law imperative. Apart from questions about the role of the Supreme Court in policing the boundaries of criminal law, Kahler raises fundamental moral questions about the essential prerequisites of just punish-
ment. Consider the following comments:

p.969

p.970
PROFESSOR HERBERT WECHSLER, INSANITY AS A DEFENSE: A PANEL DISCUSSION, 37 F.R.D. 365, 381-383 (1964): [H]ow would you feel about living in a society in which a differentiation [between the sick and the bad] were not attempted? For
example, your elderly father in an advanced arteriosclerotic state is taken to the hospital and while in the hospital experiences .. . a delusion . .. and knocks over a lamp, with the result that an attendant is killed. [WJould you be satisfied with a legal
system in which he could be indicted and convicted of a homicidal crime and his condition regarded as relevant only on the question of what to do with him? Everybody would say no to this. That is why the criterion of responsibility as affected
by disease or a defect [requires] a determination of blameworthiness in the ordinary moral sense, . . . in the sense that the afflictive sanctions of the law will not be visited on anyone unless he does something which is the product of a choice. .. .
[Gleneral confidence that this is so seems to me quite central to the sense of security that is one of the greatest values in a law abiding society.
STEPHEN J. MORSE & RICHARD J. BONNIE, ABOLITION OF THE INSANITY DEFENSE VIOLATES DUE PROCESS, 41 J. AM. ACAD. PSYCH. & L. 488, 489-493 (2013): In both law and morals, the capacity for reason is the primary foundation for responsi-
bility and competence. .. . Legally insane offenders are not excused solely because they had a severe mental disorder at the time of the crime. The mental disorder must also impair their ability to understand or appreciate that what they are doing
is wrong. [Their actions] do not reflect culpable personal qualities and actions. To convict such people offends the basic sense of justice. . . .

The negation of mens rea and the affirmative defense of legal insanity are different claims [that] are not substitutes for one another. . . . In virtually all cases, mental disorder, even severe disorders marked by psychotic symptoms such as
delusions and hallucinations, does not negate the required mens rea for the crime charged. [Consider the case of Andrea Yates [p. 939 supra], the Texas woman who drowned her five children in a bathtub. She delusionally believed that she was
corrupting her children and that unless she killed them, they would be tortured in Hell for all eternity[.] She therefore formed the intention to kill them [and] planned the homicides carefully. Ms. Yates . . . thought the homicides were fully justified by
the eternal good of the children under the circumstances. If only society knew what she knew, they would approve of her conduct as justified... .

[ohn Joseph Delling] had a major mental disorder, paranoid schizophrenia, and as a result, delusionally believed that his victims were [shrinking his brain]. He therefore believed that he needed to kill the victims to save his own life. His
grossly delusional belief was the cause of his formation of the intent to kill. .. . He [like Yates] was completely out of touch with reality [but they intended to kill]. Thus, the mens rea alternative is not an acceptable replacement or substitute for the
insanity defense.

NORVAL MORRIS, PSYCHIATRY AND THE DANGEROUS CRIMINAL, 41 S. CAL. L. REV. 514, 519-521 (1968): Overwhelmingly, criminal matters are disposed of by pleas of guilty and by bench trials. Only the exceptional case goes to trial by jury. And
of these exceptional cases, in only two of every hundred is this defense raised. Does anyone believe that this percentage measures the actual significance of gross psychopathology to crime? Let him visit the nearest criminal court or penitentiary if

p.970
port
he does. Clearly this defense is a sop to our conscience, a comfort for our failure to address the difficult arena of psychopathology and crime.

. . It too often is overlooked that one group's exculpation from criminal responsibility confirms the inculpation of other groups. .. . You argue that insanity destroys, undermines, diminishes man's capacity to reject what is wrong and to
adhere to what is right. So does the ghetto — more so. But surely, you reply, | would not have us punish the sick. Indeed | would, if you insist on punishing the grossly deprived. To the extent that criminal sanctions serve punitive purposes, | fail to
see the difference between these two defenses. To the extent that they serve rehabilitative, treatment, and curative purposes | fail to see the need for the difference. . . .

MORSE & BONNIE, supra, at 490-491: Morris .. . makes a morally irrelevant comparison between socially disadvantaged persons and persons with severe mental disorders. . . . The reason we do not excuse most disadvantaged [defendants] . . . is
not because we lack sympathy for their unfortunate backgrounds or because we fail to recognize that social disadvantage is a powerful cause of crime, as it surely is. Rather, most disadvantaged defendants [ike most people who suffer from men-
tal disease] are held responsible because they possess minimal reason and are not compelled to offend. . . .

STEPHEN J. MORSE, INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL CHALLENGES TO CULPABILITY, 53 ARIZ. ST. L.J.___ (forthcoming 2021): Montana is the only state for which there is a systematic study of mental disorder claims pre- and post-abolition of the insan-
ity defense. [T]he number of cases, the types of defendants and the types of crimes did not change. [But u]nder the mens rea alternative, more defendants were convicted and the number of defendants found incompetent to stand trial increased
markedly. . . . The increase in convictions in Montana demonstrates that abolition of the insanity defense does, in fact, expose severely mentally ill offenders to unjust punishment. Moreover, the rise in the number of defendants found incompetent
to stand trial who would previously have been found competent and acquitted suggests that an incompetency finding is being used as a tool for diversion in cases involving less serious charges that likely would have led to stipulated insanity ac-
quittals under the pre-abolition statute. This is also objectionable.

MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT TO $4.01, at 182-186 (1985): A variety of reasons for abolition have been advanced from quite different ideological perspectives. [For some advocates, abolition is] designed to curb “uncon-
scionable abuse” of the insanity defense. . . . This position . . . has little empirical support. . . . Unfounded fears of “abuse” are hardly a sufficient reason for abolishing a defense that has properly come to be viewed as fundamental.

The other attack on the insanity defense is more complex and it goes to the roots of the criminal law. It shares with the first position a skepticism that distinctions can sensibly be made between those who are responsible and those
who are not. Critics taking this view cite the rarity of the employment of the defense as evidence that most mentally ill defendants are being convicted despite the availability of the defense. They doubt that the stigma of those convicted and subse-
quently treated as mentally disturbed is any worse than the stigma of those who commit criminal acts and are committed to high security institutions for the mentally ill. ... They argue that there is little basis for withholding condemnation of those
whose

port

p.972
mental illness causes them to act criminally when those whose deprived economic and social background causes them to act criminally are condemned. They regard the adversarial debate over the responsibility of particular defendants as
wasteful, confusing for the jury, and possibly harmful for those defendants who are mentally disturbed. They think psychiatric diagnosis should be employed primarily after conviction to determine what sort of correctional treatment is appropriate
instead of prior to conviction to determine criminal responsibility. Ideally, in the view of some of these critics, criminal convictions generally should not be regarded as stigmatizing, but as determinants of dangerousness to which the community
must respond.

When properly understood, this attack is a challenge to the basic notion that a criminal conviction properly reflects moral condemnation. . . . Yet those who advance the attack do not provide persuasive reasons for believing it would
benefit society if the association between moral wrongdoing and criminal conviction were dissipated. Nor do they give reasons for supposing that the association will be dissipated in the near future. Yet they propose labeling as criminal many per-
sons whom society at large would clearly not regard as morally blameworthy.

For additional discussion of these issues, see Christopher Slobogin, An End to Insanity: Recasting the Role of Mental Iliness in Criminal Cases, 86 Va. L. Rev. 1199 (2000), supporting an approach that would consider mental disorder only if relevant
to other criminal defenses, such as self-defense, duress, and lack of mens rea. Jessica Harrison notes that this approach, which relegates nearly all mentally insane defendants to prison, may only worsen their condition, and the state will nonethe-
less be forced to release them when their sentences terminate. Harrison, Idaho's Abolition of the Insanity Defense — An Ineffective, Costly, and Unconstitutional Eradication, 51 Idaho L. Rev. 575 (2015).
Despite the differences among prevailing formulations of the insanity defense, all of them generally incorporate two basic concepts. First, these tests generally excuse when the defendant is unable to know (or appreciate) that her action
was “wrong”; second, they generally require that the disabling condition, however defined, be attributable to “a mental disease or defect.” The following subsections explore the meaning of these two concepts.
(ii) The Meaning of Wrong
State v. Crenshaw
Washington Supreme Court
659 P.2d 488 (1983)
BRACHTENBACH, J. . .. While defendant and his wife were on their honeymoon in Canada, petitioner was deported as a result of his participation in a brawl. He secured a motel room in Blaine, Washington, and waited for his wife to join
him. When she arrived 2 days later, he immediately thought she had been unfaithful — he sensed “it wasn’t the same Karen . . . she'd been with someone else.”
Petitioner did not mention his suspicions to his wife, instead he took her to the motel room and beat her unconscious. He then went to a nearby store, stole a knife, and returned to stab his wife 24 times, inflicting a fatal wound. He left
again, drove to a nearby farm where he had been employed and borrowed an ax. Upon
p.972
p.978
returning to the motel room, he decapitated his wife with such force that the ax marks cut into the concrete floor under the carpet and splattered blood throughout the room.
Petitioner then proceeded to conceal his actions. He placed the body in a blanket, the head in a pillowcase, and put both in his wife's car. Next, he went to a service station, borrowed a bucket and sponge, and cleaned the room of
blood and fingerprints. Before leaving, petitioner also spoke with the motel manager about a phone bill, then chatted with him for a while over a beer.
When Crenshaw left the motel he drove to a remote area 25 miles away where he hid the two parts of the body in thick brush. He then fled, driving to the Hoquiam area, about 200 miles from the scene of the crime. There he picked up
two hitchhikers, told them of his crime, and enlisted their aid in disposing of his wife's car in a river. The hitchhikers contacted the police and Crenshaw was apprehended shortly thereafter. He voluntarily confessed to the crime.
The defense of not guilty by reason of insanity was a major issue at trial. Crenshaw testified that he followed the Moscovite religious faith, and that it would be improper for a Moscovite not to kill his wife if she committed adultery. Cren-
shaw also has a history of mental problems, for which he has been hospitalized in the past. The jury, however, rejected petitioner's insanity defense, and found him guilty of murder in the first degree. .. .
Petitioner assigned error to insanity defense instruction 10 which reads: . . .
For a defendant to be found not guilty by reason of insanity you must find that, as a result of mental disease or defect, the defendant's mind was affected to such an extent that the defendant was unable to perceive the
nature and quality of the acts with which the defendant is charged or was unable to tell right from wrong with reference to the particular acts with which defendant is charged.
What is meant by the terms “right and wrong” refers to knowledge of a person at the time of committing an act that he was acting contrary to the law.
But for the last paragraph, this instruction tracks the language of . .. the M’Naghten test as codified in RCW 9A.12.-010. Petitioner contends, however, that the trial court erred in defining “right and wrong” as legal right and wrong rather
than in the moral sense. . .

The definition of the term “wrong” in the M’Naghten test has been considered and disputed by many legal scholars. . . . This court's view has been [as follows]:

[O]nly those persons “who have lost contact with reality so completely that they are beyond any of the influences of the criminal law,” may have the benefit of the insanity defense in a criminal case.

State v. McDonald, 89 Wash. 2d 256, 272 (1977). Given this perspective, the trial court could assume that one who knew the illegality of his act was not necessarily “beyond any of the influences of the criminal law,” thus finding support for the
statement in instruction 10.
Alternatively, the statement in instruction 10 may be approved because, in this case, legal wrong is synonymous with moral wrong. [I]t is important to note that it is society's morals, and not the individual's morals, that are the standard
for
p.978
p.974
judging moral wrong under M’Naghten. If wrong meant moral wrong judged by the individual's own conscience, this would seriously undermine the criminal law, for it would allow one who violated the law to be excused from criminal responsibility
solely because, in his own conscience, his act was not morally wrong. . . .

There is evidence on the record that Crenshaw knew his actions were wrong according to society's standards, as well as legally wrong. Dr. Belden testified:

I think Mr. Crenshaw is quite aware on one level that he is in conflict with the law and with people. However, this is not something that he personally invests his emotions in.

We conclude that Crenshaw knew his acts were morally wrong from society's viewpoint and also knew his acts were illegal. His personal belief that it was his duty to kill his wife for her alleged infidelity cannot serve to exculpate him
from legal responsibility for his acts.

A narrow exception to the societal standard of moral wrong has been drawn for instances wherein a party performs a criminal act, knowing it is morally and legally wrong, but believing, because of a mental defect, that the act is
ordained by God: such would be the situation with a mother who kills her infant child to whom she is devotedly attached, believing that God has spoken to her and decreed the act. Although the woman knows that the law and society condemn the
act, it would be unrealistic to hold her responsible for the crime, since her free will has been subsumed by her belief in the deific decree.

This exception is not available to Crenshaw, however. Crenshaw argued only that he followed the Moscovite faith and that Moscovites believe it is their duty to kill an unfaithful wife. This is not the same as acting under a deific com-
mand. Instead, it is akin to “[t]he devotee of a religious cult that enjoins . . . human sacrifice as a duty [and] is not thereby relieved from responsibility before the law.” Crenshaw’s personal “Moscovite” beliefs are not equivalent to a deific decree
and do not relieve him from responsibility for his acts. . . .

NOTES

1. Legal versus moral wrong. American courts are divided on the issue presented in Crenshaw. Several jurisdictions hold that an insanity acquittal requires the defendant to be unaware that his conduct was legally wrong. Although
ignorance of the law is not, of course, a defense, knowledge of the law will be sufficient in these jurisdictions to defeat any claim under M’Naghten that the defendant lacked the capacity to know that his act was wrong. Kahler v. Kansas, 140 S.
Ct. 1021, 1035 n.10 (2020) (listing states with this approach). In contrast, a number of decisions hold that “wrong” means “morally wrong.” E.g., State v. Roberts, 876 N.W.2d 863 (Minn. 2016); People v. Coddington, 2 P.3d 1081 (Cal. 2000). Many
jurisdictions leave the issue to the jury without specifying whether “wrong” means legally or morally wrong. E.g., State v. Chanthabouly, 262 P.3d 144, 162 (Wash. Ct. App. 2011); State v. Morgan, 863 So. 2d 520, 525 n.5 (La. 2004) (identifying this
practice as the predominant American approach). The issue causes considerable confusion for trial judges and expert witnesses. See Kate E. Block & Jeffery Gould, Legal Indeterminacy in Insanity Cases: Clarifying Wrongfulness and Applying a
Triadic Approach to Forensic Evaluations, 67 Hastings L.J. 913 (2016).

p.974
p.976

Which approach to this issue is more consistent with the purposes of an insanity defense? On the one hand, if defendants have sufficient awareness to realize the illegality of their conduct and to attempt to conceal their crimes, don’t
they fall, by definition, among those whose behavior is potentially deterrable? On the other hand, consider 2 James F. Stephen, History of the Criminal Law of England 167 (1883):

In Hadfield’s case, . . . knowledge of the illegality of his act was the very reason why he did it. He wanted to be hung for it. He no doubt knew it to be wrong in the sense that he knew that other people would disapprove of it,

but he would also have thought, had he thought at all, that if they knew all the facts (as he understood them) they would approve of him, and see that he was sacrificing his own interest for the common good. | could not say

that such a person knew that such an act was wrong. His delusion would prevent anything like an act of calm judgment in the character of the act.

In People v. Serravo, 823 P.2d 128 (Colo. 1992), expert testimony established that due to either brain damage or paranoid schizophrenia, defendant suffered from the delusion that God had told him to construct a multimillion-dollar
sports facility to teach people the path to perfection and that he believed he had to stab his wife to achieve that goal. At his trial for her murder, psychiatric experts for both the state and the defense agreed that Serravo was unable to distinguish
moral right from wrong but probably knew that his act was illegal. Holding that knowledge of the act's illegality will not defeat a M’Naghten defense, the court said (Id. at 135-139):

[Slome cases subsequent to M’Naghten have interpreted the right-wrong test as [meaning] that a person's simple awareness that an act is illegal is a sufficient basis for finding criminal responsibility. [S]uch an analysis

injects a formalistic legalism into the insanity equation to the disregard of [its] psychological underpinnings. A person in an extremely psychotic state . . . might be aware that an act is prohibited by law, but . .. may be utterly

without the capacity to comprehend that the act is inherently immoral. A standard of legal wrong would render such a person legally responsible and subject to imprisonment . . . notwithstanding the patent injustice of such

a disposition. Conversely, a person who, although mentally ill, . . is aware that an act is morally wrong, but does not realize that it is illegal, should nonetheless be held responsible for the act, as ignorance of the law is no

excuse. . .. A clarifying instruction on the definition of legal insanity, therefore, should clearly state that . .. the phrase “incapable of distinguishing right from wrong’ refers to a person's cognitive inability, due to a mental

disease or defect, to distinguish right from wrong as measured by a societal standard of morality, even though the person may be aware that the conduct in question is criminal. Any such instruction should also expressly in-

form the jury that the phrase “incapable of distinguishing right from wrong” does not refer to a purely personal and subjective standard of morality.

For a helpful review of the possible meanings of “wrong” and their bearing on an appropriate insanity defense, see Stephen J. Morse, Preventive Detention: Mental Disorder and Criminal Law, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 885, 927
(2011); Herbert Fingarette, The Meaning of Criminal Insanity 123 (1972).

p.976
p.976

2. The deific decree exception. Why does the court in Crenshaw suggest that the result would be different if the defendant had said that his acts were “ordained by God” rather than merely by his “Moscovite” religion? In a later case,
State v. Cameron, 674 P.2d 650 (Wash. 1983), where there was evidence the defendant believed God was instructing him, the court reversed for failure to give a “deific decree” instruction. A concurring judge observed, “Both Crenshaw and the
subject case were almost factually identical; both involved outrageous, vicious, messy murders. . . . | frankly don’t see much or any distinction, however, in carrying out or executing a murder under the direction of God or Crenshaw's Moscovite re-
ligious beliefs, or under the beliefs of a prophet, Buddha, etc. . . .”

Is there any coherent way to distinguish deific decrees from religious beliefs generally or even from nonreligious command hallucinations? For skepticism that such distinctions are possible, see Grant H. Morris & Ansar Haroun, “God
Told Me to Kill”: Religion or Delusion?, 38 San Diego L. Rev. 973 (2001). But even if such distinctions can be drawn, why should legal outcomes turn on them? Professor Rabia Belt notes a paradox: “Why is it when we talk to God we're said to be
praying — but when God talks to us, we're said to be schizophrenic?” Belt, When God Demands Blood: Unusual Minds and the Troubled Juridical Ties of Religion, Madness, and Culpability, 69 U. Miami L. Rev. 755, 755 (2015) (quoting comedian
Lily Tomlin).

Is the point that obedience to a deific decree (by a person who believed God really had issued it) would be morally correct — a direct application of M’Naghten, because the individual would not realize the act was wrong? But why
wouldn't that same point hold if an individual believed their religion demanded an action even if it was not directly communicated by a deity? Is the difference one of how reliable the source must appear to the defendant? Consider Professor Belt’s
comments, supra, at 755, 760-761:

[The deific decree exception] unacceptably privileges certain mentally ill criminal defendants whose delusions fit within an outdated model. . . . Where the deific decree doctrine once affirmed the official and scientific belief

that Christian law was supreme over secular law, its emphasis on the commands of a Judeo-Christian God today runs counter to understandings in both law and psychiatry of the nature of religion. Worse yet, its scope

appears to be vanishingly small. Where it once reflected a scientific and official acceptance of an autonomous realm for Christianity distinct from culpability and mental illness, that belief is now absent from both discourses.

[Defic decree doctrine has outlived its usefulness. A somewhat more generous insanity defense would reduce the inequities and irrationalities that deific decrees involve without appreciably loosening standards for criminal

culpability.

(iii) The Meaning of “Mental Disease or Defect”
State v. Guido

New Jersey Supreme Court

191 A.2d 45 (1963)

Weintraus, C.J. Adele Guido was convicted of murder in the second degree and sentenced to imprisonment for a minimum of 24 years and a maximum of 27 years. She appeals directly to this Court. .. .

p.976
p.977

The victim was defendant's husband. When they first met, she was a young girl and he a professional fighter of some success. . . . All the details of the marital discord need not be stated. [Defendant] wanted a divorce, while decedent
insisted upon holding on to her notwithstanding he would not or could not end his extra marital romance. .. . In the early morning of April 17, 1961, after deceased fell asleep on a couch in the living room while watching television, defendant,
according to her testimony, took the gun and went into her room, intending to end her life. Deciding that suicide would be no solution, she returned to the living room to put the weapon back in the suitcase, but when her eyes fell upon Guido, she
raised the weapon and fired until it was empty.

With respect to physical abuse, the jury could find that although there were only a few incidents of actual injury, there was the constant threat of it... . It appears that on several occasions shortly before the homicide defendant called
the local police to express her fear of harm... .

Defendant . . . was examined by two court-appointed psychiatrists. [Their] report contained sundry medical findings and ultimately the opinion that defendant was “legally” sane at the time of the shooting. Mr. Saltzman [defense coun-
sel] met with the psychiatrists, and after some three hours of debate the psychiatrists changed their opinion as to “legal” insanity although their underlying medical findings remained the same. They then retyped the last page of their report. .. .

[During closing argument, the prosecutor, who had discovered this change in the psychiatric reports, charged that the insanity defense had been “concocted” and that defense counsel had “perpetrated a fraud on this Court.” Defen-
dant sought reversal of her conviction on the ground that this line of argument was unjustified and inexcusably prejudicial.]

When the basis of the change in the experts’ opinion was explored, it quickly appeared that the change was thoroughly consistent with honesty however mistaken it might be. . . . Specifically, the doctors originally understood that the
“disease of the mind” required by [M’Naghten] means a psychosis and not some lesser illness or functional aberration. As the result of their pretrial debate with Mr. Saltzman, the doctors concluded they had had too narrow a view of M’Naghten
and that the “anxiety neurosis” they had found did qualify as a “disease” within the legal rule, and hence . . . defendant did not know right from wrong and she did not know what she was doing was wrong because of that “disease.” ..

The change in the opinions of the defense psychiatrists simply focuses attention upon an area of undeniable obscurity. [T]he M’Naghten rule requires a “disease of the mind.” The competing [tests] of legal insanity also require a disease
(or defect) of the mind. . . . But the hard question under any concept of legal insanity is, What constitutes a “disease”? . . . The postulate is that some wrongdoers are sick while others are bad, and that it is against good morals to stigmatize the
sick. Who then are the sick whose illness shows they are free of moral blame? We cannot turn to the psychiatrist for a list of illnesses which have that quality because, for all his insight into the dynamics of behavior, he has not solved the riddle of
blame. The question remains an ethical one, the answer to which lies beyond scientific truth.

[Although emphasis [in the M’Naghten rule is] upon a state of mind, it is nonetheless required that that state be due to “disease” and not something else. So our cases contrast that concept of insanity with “emotional insanity” or “moral
insanity” which, upon the dichotomy mentioned above, is attributed to moral depravity or weakness and hence will not excuse the offender even if his rage

p.s77

p.978
was so blinding that he did not really appreciate what he was doing or that it was wrong. .. . Yet the traditional charge of the M’Naghten rule to the jury does not attempt to say what is meant by “disease,” and [there is a] rather universal reluctance
to assay a definition. ...

We have described the problem, not to resolve it, but simply to reveal the room for disputation, to the end of demonstrating the unfairness of charging defendant, her attorney, and her witnesses with a fraud when the change in the
experts’ opinion . . . involved no departure from prior medical findings but rather a change in the witnesses’ understanding of what the law means by “disease.” . .

The judgment is reversed. . ..

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Questions on Guido. If “mental disease” is a legal concept, why were the psychiatrists allowed to express their conclusions about it at all? In what sense were they “experts” in the meaning of a legal concept?

2. The legal definition of disease. In agreement with Guido, most courts treat “mental disease” for purposes of the insanity defense as a legal, not a medical concept, but few indicate the criteria that determine when this legal
element is present. In Commonwealth v. Dunphe, 158 N.E.3d 1254, 1262-1263 (Mass. 2020), the court noted that “mental disease or defect” is “a legal term, not a medical term” and explained that its jury instructions do not define it because “the
subject is so complex and obscure that any general explanatory formula is likely to mislead and confuse.” When jurisdictions do offer criteria, the tests typically give little guidance. Consider whether the following formulation is helpful (McDonald v.
United States, 312 F.2d 847, 850-851 (D.C. Cir. 1962)):

What psychiatrists may consider a “mental disease or defect” for clinical purposes, where their concern is treatment, may or may not be the same as mental disease or defect for the jury's purpose in determining criminal

responsibility. Consequently, for that purpose the jury should be told that a mental disease or defect includes any abnormal condition of the mind which substantially affects mental or emotional processes and substantially

impairs behavior controls.

Other definitions are similar but more restrictive. Maine defines mental disease or defect as “a severely abnormal mental condition that grossly and demonstrably impairs a defendant's perception or understanding of reality.” Me. Rev.
Stat. Ann. tit. 17-A, §39(2) (2021). The American Psychiatric Association proposes this definition (140 Am. J. Psychiatry 6 (1980):

[The terms mental disease or mental retardation include only those severely abnormal mental conditions that grossly and demonstrably impair a person's perception or understanding of reality and that are not attributable

primarily to the voluntary ingestion of alcohol or other psychoactive substances.

3. “Temporary” insanity? A common assumption is that mental disorder is typically deep seated and difficult to cure, casting doubt on moral blame but prompting grave concer about the defendant's dangerousness. Should it
matter if the

p.978

p.979
defendant's abnormal mental condition was transitory — brought on by unusual circumstances and no longer at work by the time of trial? “Temporary” insanity could afford the defendant an ideal defense, justifying acquittal without justifying
subsequent detention for treatment. Doctrinally, temporary insanity is not a formally distinct defense. Should it be? And if so, what kinds of mental disturbance should qualify? Should the criminal law be especially receptive to such defenses? Or
especially wary? For a thought-provoking discussion, see Russell D. Covey, Temporary Insanity: The Strange Life and Times of the Perfect Defense, 91 B.U. L. Rev. 1597 (2011).

4, Specific applications. Suppose that psychiatric examination indicates that defendants, because of “explosive personality disorder,” lack the capacity to “appreciate” the wrongfulness of their aggressive, violent reactions. Do they
qualify for the insanity defense? Should the answer depend on whether the psychiatric profession classifies this abnormality as a “personality disorder” rather than as a psychosis?

Note how the McDonald definition applies in this situation. The defendant's situation presumably is “abnormal,” but is it a “condition of the mind” within the meaning of McDonald? Is this a legal or a medical question?

Apart from the McDonald formulation, what is the “right” result in the preceding example? Suppose that a defendant suffers from an impairment of cognition or control sufficiently serious to satisfy the prevailing insanity test. Should it
matter whether the impairment results from disease or only from a “personality disorder”? Regardless of the source of the defendant's impairment, it would seem that blame is inappropriate (and deterrence unlikely) in both cases — or in neither. In
other words, why bother to define disease?

The disease requirement has often defeated defense efforts to introduce evidence of a great variety of mental difficulties, including the psychological impacts of intimate partner violence,11 compulsive gambling disorder,"°2 premen-
strual syndrome,!3° postpartum disorders,'° post-traumatic stress disorders,1°° alcohol and drug addictions,1°° and sexual disorders such as pedophilia, sadism, and masochism.127 Is this obstacle to a successful insanity defense good or bad?
Would abolishing it help restrain the reach of the penal state? What would be the consequences for

p.979
p. 960
public safety? If these psychological conditions could support an insanity defense, should people acquitted on that basis then be subject to civil commitment? Should people acquitted on that basis remain confined until they are “cured” of that
condition? For discussion, see Stephen J. Morse, Excusing and the New Excuse Defenses: A Legal and Conceptual Review, 23 Crime & Just. 329 (1998).
NOTE ON THE PSYCHOPATH

‘A major policy issue concerns the application of the insanity defense to the psychopath — the person with a long history of antisocial conduct. Many people who persist in committing unlawful acts “know” (in a purely verbal way) that
their conduct is illegal, but they experience little or no empathy and have no apparent capacity to “understand” (at the “affective,” emotional level) the rights of others. Their behavior brings them repeatedly into conflict with others and with the law.
Often, psychiatrists diagnose them as suffering from “psychopathic personality” or “sociopathic personality,” now more commonly designated “antisocial personality disorder,” and many mental health professionals regard the disorder as a “men-
tal disease.” Is such a person legally insane?

MPC §4.01(2), commonly referred to as the “caveat paragraph,” was designed to exclude from the concept of “mental disease or defect” the case of the so-called psychopathic personality. It states that “the terms ‘mental disease or
defect’ do not include an abnormality manifested only by repeated criminal or otherwise antisocial conduct.” Consider State v. Werlein, 401 N.W.2d 848 (Wis. Ct. App. 1987), decided in a state that had adopted the caveat paragraph. The defen-
dant, for no apparent reason, opened fire with a semiautomatic rifle, inflicting serious injury on the victim. He was convicted of attempted first-degree murder. At trial, he had called Dr. Albert Lorenz, who diagnosed him as suffering from antisocial
personality disorder:

Lorenz testified that Werlein’s [symptoms] included an inability to handle work, squandering money, lack of attachment to people or groups, and reckless behavior. Lorenz stated that Werlein has no personality of his own,

cannot plan for the future, and follows others much like a little child would. Lorenz concluded that as a result of Werlein’s illness, he could not conform his conduct to the requirements of law.

The trial court struck Dr. Lorenz’s testimony and precluded the jury from considering whether Werlein was mentally irresponsible. The court of appeals reversed, holding that the caveat paragraph was inapplicable, because Lorenz's
diagnosis went far beyond that of an abnormality manifested only by repeated criminal or otherwise antisocial conduct. Cf. Wade v. United States, 426 F.2d 64, 73 (9th Cir. 1970): “[I]t is practically inconceivable that a mental disease or defect
would, in the terms of paragraph (2), be ‘manifested only by repeated criminal or otherwise antisocial conduct” (emphasis added). For further discussion, see Shanee Brown, Impunity for the Incorrigible Psychopath?: Neurobiological Abnormali-
ties Do Not Exempt Psychopaths from Criminal Responsibility, 7 Charlotte L. Rev. 239 (2016).

QUESTIONS: (a) Consider whether the psychopathic defendant should be excluded from the insanity defense. Does the answer depend on the relevant facts (such as whether psychopaths feel emotion, whether they are deterrable or
p. 960
p.961
treatable)? Or does it depend on judgments about values and policy? If the latter, does the judgment turn on the impact of an insanity defense on social protection in these cases, or does it center on whether the psychopath can justly be blamed?
Some experts suggest another concern: Samuel Perry et al. suggest (in A DSM-III Casebook of Differential Therapeutics 304-305 (1985)) that because mental health professionals have limited capacity to treat psychopathy, and because psycho-
pathic defendants will prey on vulnerable mental patients, such defendants should not avoid punishment by being referred for a treatment that does not exist. For analysis of these issues, see Craig A. Stern, The Heart of Mens Rea and the Insanity
of Psychopaths, 42 Cap. U. L. Rev. 619 (2014); Steven K. Erickson & Michael J. Vitacco, Predators and Punishment, 18 Psychol. Pub. Pol'y & L. 1 (2012).
(b) If itis right to exclude the psychopathic defendant from the insanity defense, does the MPC test successfully achieve that result? If not, how should it be amended?
NOTES ON AUTOMATISM — SANE AND INSANE

Should the insanity defense apply to acts performed by a defendant who is not conscious of performing them, such as acts performed while sleepwalking or under hypnosis? Like defendants who are insane, defendants in a state of
automatism do not seem proper subjects for either blame or deterrence. But unlike insanity, automatism is not always the product of “a mental disease or defect.” Should the law attempt to distinguish between automatism that is a result of a men-
tal disease or defect (“insane automatism”) and automatism that has some other source (“sane automatism”)? Note what is at stake: Non-insane automatism may give rise to the complete defense of involuntary action, see p. 251 supra, whereas
the insanity defense generally results in a prolonged period of incapacitation and treatment, see pp. 945-947 supra.

1. Defendant's option? Most American courts hold that the defendant may elect to plead either insanity, involuntariness, or both. See, e.g., State v. Jenner, 451 N.W.2d 710 (S.D. 1990). The English rule, in contrast, holds that when
automatism results from a mental disease or defect, the only defense available is the plea of not guilty by reason of insanity. See Bratty v. Attorney-General, [1963] A.C. 386 (H.L. 1961). A minority of American jurisdictions follow the English ap-
proach. See, e.g., Loven v. State, 831 S.W.2d 387 (Tex. App. 1992).

2. Distinguishing sane from insane automatisms. Where insanity and automatism are mutually exclusive defenses, courts must decide whether the claimed automatism results from a mental disorder. For example, in Wyoming,
where impairments resulting from “mental illness or deficiency” can support only an insanity defense, the definition of “mental deficiency” is “a defect attributable to intellectual disability, brain damage and cognitive disabilities.” Wyo. Stat.
§7-11-301 (a)(i) (2021). In Fulcher v. State, 633 P.2d 142 (Wyo. 1981), the defendant was charged with aggravated assault. With supporting expert testimony, he claimed that his actions were committed in a state of automatism resulting from trau-
matic head injuries inflicted in a brawl shortly before the alleged offense. If such injuries are a form of “brain damage,” Wyoming law would require them to be presented as an insanity defense. But the Wyoming Supreme Court held that they were
not, and accordingly that the automatism defense remained available. The court said (id. at 146):

p.961
p. 962

It is our view that the “brain damage” contemplated in the statute is some serious and irreversible condition having an impact upon the ability of the person to function. It is undoubtedly something far more significant than a

temporary and transitory condition.
A dissenting judge commented (id. at 155, 162-163):

There is no basis whatsoever that supports the proposition . . . that... “the ‘brain damage’ contemplated in the statute is some serious and irreversible condition. . ..” . .. How long should the condition exist before it comes

within the cloak of the statute — a minute, an hour, a day, a week, two weeks, a month, a year, five years, a lifetime? The statute says nothing about a temporary condition or one that is “serious and irreversible.”
QUESTION: What considerations might have led the majority to reach its interpretation of the statute?

3. Sleep. Relatively few cases have dealt with criminal conduct during various states of sleep. The courts appear to be divided on the question whether the defendant in such a case is entitled to outright acquittal due to the absence
of a volitional act, or whether the defendant must plead insanity and face commitment to a mental hospital. In McClain v. State, 678 N.E.2d 104 (Ind. 1997), the court held that the defendant's sleep disorder could form the basis of an automatism
(involuntary-act) defense. Noting that Indiana law required commitment proceedings to follow an insanity acquittal, the court observed that merging the automatism and insanity defenses, as the state urged, would force a sane but automatistic de-
fendant to face “a choice of possible commitment or effectively presenting no defense at all.” Id. at 108.

An English case reached the opposite conclusion. In Regina v. Burgess, [1991] 2 All E.R. 769, the defendant fell asleep while watching a videotape with his neighbor. He awoke to find himseff hitting her on the head with a bottle and
attempting to strangle her. He quickly came to his senses and called an ambulance for her, but he was charged with assault. He had no history of mental illness and had been on completely friendly terms with the victim. Because the defendant's
automatism derived from an “internal” source, the court concluded that it was the result of a “mental disease” and that he therefore could raise only the defense of insanity, not automatism. Burgess was found not guilty by reason of insanity. For
criticism of the result, see Irene Mackay, The Sleepwalker Is Not Insane, 55 Mod. L. Rev. 714 (1992). For a discussion of the neuroscience behind sleepwalking and how it relates to the insanity defense, see April Xiaoyi Xu, Applying the Model Penal
Code Insanity Defense to Sleepwalking Killers and Psychopaths: Interfacing Neuroscience and Criminal Law, 23 New Crim. L. Rev. 471, 481-493 (2020).

b. Diminished Capacity
United States v. Brawner
United States Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit
471 F.2d 969 (1972)
LEVENTHAL, J. [After examining the test of legal insanity as a complete defense, the court considered whether mental health evidence should be admissible apart from its bearing on the insanity issue.] [E]xpert testimony as to a
p.962
p. 968
defendant's abnormal mental condition may be received and considered, as tending to show... . that defendant did not have the specific mental state required for a particular crime or degree of crime — even though he was aware that his act was
wrongful and was able to control it, and hence was not entitled to complete exoneration.

Some of the cases following this doctrine use the term “diminished responsibility,” but we prefer [to] avoid this term, for its convenience is outweighed by its confusion: Our doctrine has nothing to do with “diminishing” responsibility of

a defendant because of his impaired mental condition, but rather with determining whether the defendant had the mental state that must be proved as to all defendants.

Procedurally, the issue of abnormal mental condition negativing a person's intent may arise in different ways: For example, the defendant may offer evidence of mental condition not qualifying as mental disease. . . . Or he may tender
evidence that qualifies [as a mental disease], yet the jury may conclude from all the evidence that defendant has knowledge and control capacity sufficient for responsibility. .. .

The issue often arises with respect to mental condition tendered as negativing the element of premeditation in a charge of first degree premeditated murder. . . . An offense like deliberated and premeditated murder requires a specific
intent that cannot be satisfied merely by showing that defendant failed to conform to an objective standard. This is plainly established by the defense of voluntary intoxication. . ..

Neither logic nor justice can tolerate a jurisprudence . . . such that one defendant can properly argue that his voluntary drunkenness removed his capacity to form the specific intent but another defendant is inhibited from a submission
of his contention that an abnormal mental condition, for which he was in no way responsible, negated his capacity to form a particular specific intent, even though the condition did not exonerate him from all criminal responsibility. ..

The pertinent reasoning was succinctly stated by the Colorado Supreme Court as follows [Battalino v. People, 199 P.2d 897, 901 (Colo. 1948):

Acclaim of insanity cannot be used for the purpose of reducing a crime of murder in the first degree to murder in the second degree or from murder to manslaughter. If the perpetrator is responsible at all in this respect, he

is responsible in the same degree as a sane man; and if he is not responsible at all, he is entitled to an acquittal in both degrees. However, . . . evidence of the condition of the mind of the accused at the time of the crime,

together with the surrounding circumstances, may be introduced, not for the purpose of establishing insanity, but to prove that the situation was such that a specific intent was not entertained — that is, to show absence of

any deliberate or premeditated design. (Emphasis in original.) ...

Our rule permits the introduction of expert testimony as to abnormal condition if it is relevant to negative, or establish, the specific mental condition that is an element of the crime. The receipt of this expert testimony to negative the
mental condition of specific intent requires careful administration by the trial judge. . . . The judge will . .. determine whether the testimony is grounded in sufficient scientific support to warrant use in the courtroom, and whether it would aid the jury
in reaching a decision on the ultimate issues. . . .

p. 968
p.964
Clark v. Arizona
Supreme Court of the United States
548 U.S. 735 (2006)

Justice SoureRr delivered the opinion of the Court.

[Defendant shot and killed Jeffrey Moritz, a police officer who had pulled him over for a traffic stop. He was charged under an Arizona statute making it first-degree murder to “intentionally or knowingly” kill a police officer in the line of
duty. He waived his right to a jury. At a bench trial, the prosecutor offered circumstantial evidence that Clark knew he was killing a law enforcement officer — the officer was in uniform, in a marked police car with emergency lights flashing, and
Clark had acknowledged these symbols of police authority when he stopped.

Clark claimed mental illness, which he sought to introduce both for the affirmative defense of insanity and to negate the prosecution's evidence that he had acted intentionally or knowingly to kill a law enforcement officer. Arizona law
did not permit him to use evidence of mental illness to negate mens rea, and the Supreme Court considered whether that limit violated due process.]

. .. Clark's argument is [that Arizona’s restrictions violate] a defendant's right as a matter of simple due process to present evidence favorable to himself on an element that must be proven to convict him.°2.. . . Clark claims a right to
require the factfinder in this case to consider testimony about his mental illness and his incapacity directly, when weighing the persuasiveness of other evidence tending to show mens rea. [HJowever, the right to introduce relevant evidence can
be curtailed if there is a good reason for doing that. . .. We think there are [such reasons]: in the controversial character of some categories of mental disease, in the potential of mental-disease evidence to mislead, and in the danger of according
greater certainty to capacity evidence than experts claim for it.

. .. It bears repeating that not every State will find it worthwhile to make the judgment Arizona has made, and the choices the States do make about dealing with the risks posed by mental-disease and capacity evidence will reflect their
varying assessments about the presumption of sanity as expressed in choices of insanity rules. The point here simply is that Arizona has sensible reasons to assign the risks as it has done by channeling the evidence.9. ..

The judgment of the Court of Appeals of Arizona is, accordingly, affirmed.

p.964
p. 965
Justice KENNEDy, with whom JusTIcE STEVENS and JusTIce GINSBURG join, dissenting.

. .. In the instant case Arizona's proposed reasons are insufficient to support its categorical exclusion. While the State contends that testimony regarding mental illness may be too incredible or speculative for the jury to consider, this
does not explain why the exclusion applies in all cases to all evidence of mental illness. . ..

The reliability rationale has minimal applicability here. . .. Schizophrenia . . . is a well-documented mental illness, and no one seriously disputes either its definition or its most prominent clinical manifestations. The State's own expert
conceded that Clark had paranoid schizophrenia and was actively psychotic at the time of the killing. ...

Contrary to the Court's suggestion, the fact that the state and defense experts drew different conclusions about the effect of Clark's mental illness on his mental state only made Clark's evidence contested; it did not make the evidence
irrelevant or misleading. The trial court was capable of evaluating the competing conclusions, as factfinders do in countless cases where there is a dispute among witnesses... .

The fact that mental-illness evidence may be considered in deciding criminal responsibility does not compensate for its exclusion from consideration on the mens rea elements of the crime. . . . Criminal responsibility involves an inquiry
into whether the defendant knew right from wrong, not whether he had the mens rea elements of the offense. While there may be overlap between the two issues, “the existence or nonexistence of legal insanity bears no necessary relationship to.
the existence or nonexistence of the required mental elements of the crime.” Mullaney v. Wilbur, 421 U.S. 684, 706 (1975) (Rehnquist, J., concurring).

Even if the analyses were equivalent, there is a different burden of proof for insanity than there is for mens rea. Arizona requires the defendant to prove his insanity by clear and convincing evidence. The prosecution, however, must
prove all elements of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. The shift in the burden on the criminal responsibility issue, while permissible under our precedent, cannot be applied to the question of intent or knowledge without relieving the State of
its responsibility to establish this element of the offense. . . .

Future dangerousness is not, as the Court appears to conclude, [supra] n.45, a rational basis for convicting mentally ill individuals of crimes they did not commit. Civil commitment proceedings can ensure that individuals who present a
danger to themselves or others receive proper treatment without unfairly treating them as criminals. [T]he Court ought not to imply otherwise. . . .

. .. In sum, the rule forces the jury to decide guilt in a fictional world with undefined and unexplained behaviors but without mental illness. This rule has no rational justification and imposes a significant burden upon a straightforward
defense: He did not commit the crime with which he was charged.

NOTES ON MENTAL DISORDER TO NEGATE MENS REA

1. State of the law. As Justice Kennedy's dissent noted, many states impose no special restrictions on the use of mental health evidence to rebut a required mens rea. One recent count finds that 16 states bar evidence of mental

illness to
p. 985
p. 986

negate culpability elements of any kind, 13 states permit mental illness to negate only a specific intent, and 23 American jurisdictions allow mental illness evidence to negate any element. Paul Robinson, Murder Mitigation in the Fifty-Two American
Jurisdictions: A Case Study in Doctrinal Interrelation Analysis, 47 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 19, 24 (2014). The MPC takes this last approach as well. See MPC §4.02(1) (“Evidence that the defendant suffered from a mental disease or defect is admissible
whenever it is relevant to prove that the defendant did or did not have a state of mind which is an element of the offense.”).

2. The variety of restrictions. Jurisdictions imposing restrictions have done so in different ways.

(@) Total ban. Putting the constitutional issue aside, how can a total ban on using mental health evidence to negate mens rea be justified as a matter of policy? If a jury can be trusted to deal with such evidence on the issue of legal
insanity, why can't it be trusted to deal properly with such evidence on the issue of the required mental state? For discussion, see Eric Collins, Insane: James Holmes, Clark v. Arizona, and America's Insanity Defense, 31 J.L. & Health 33 (2018);
Peter Arenella, The Diminished Capacity and Diminished Responsibility Defenses: Two Children of a Doomed Marriage, 77 Colum. L. Rev. 827, 860 (1977).

(b) Capacity evidence. Other jurisdictions prohibit the use of mental health evidence to establish lack of capacity to form a mental state, but allow such evidence on the issue of whether the defendant in fact had the relevant mental
state. E.g., State v. Flattum, 122 Wis. 2d 282, 303 (1985); see Keith v. Schaub, 772 F.3d 451 (7th Cir. 2014).
QUESTION: Why shouldn't defendants be allowed to show that they didn’t have a required mental state by introducing evidence that they lacked the capacity to form that mental state? Consider Stephen J. Morse, Undiminished Confusion in
Diminished Capacity, 75 J. Crim. L. & Criminology, 1, 42 (1984):

Amens reais a relatively simple mental state; it requires little cognitive capacity to intend to do something or to know legally relevant facts, such as that the car one is driving across the border contains contraband in a

hidden compartment. A mentally abnormal person may not form a requisite intent or have the required knowledge, but it will rarely be because he lacked the capacity to form the mens rea. For example, suppose a mentally

disordered person [becomes] lost in a deserted part of town on a cold evening. Lacking the resources to find his way to proper shelter, he breaks into a building to get out of the cold. Caught by the police while doing so,

he is charged with burglary on the theory that he intended to steal. Our poor defendant is innocent of burglary because he lacks the mens rea for theft — he only wanted to stay warm, not to steal — but [the reason he lacks]

mens rea [is not that] he did not have the capacity to form it. He was perfectly capable of intending to steal; [he simply] did not intend to do so on this occasion. The defendant's mental disorder is relevant to proving that he

lacked mens rea, for it is the reason he . . . got lost, and needed to get warm, but his mental disorder did not affect his capacity to form the mens rea.

p. 986
p.967

(©) Specific intent. In several states, as in federal courts that follow the Brawner approach, mental health evidence is admissible to negate a required specific intent but not a general intent.1°® In Arizona, although defendants generally
cannot use evidence of a mental disease or defect to show lack of mens rea, courts have permitted its use as “evidence of a character trait for impulsivity to cast doubt on the existence of premeditation.” State v. Malone, 444 P.3d 733, 734 (Ariz.
2019).
QUESTION: What is the basis for allowing mental health evidence to rebut mens rea only in prosecutions for specific intent crimes or on the question of premeditation? In McCarthy v. State, 372 A.2d 180, 183 (Del. 1977), the court suggests a
rationale applicable to certain specific intent crimes. Upholding a refusal to give diminished capacity instructions in a prosecution for the specific intent offenses of kidnapping and attempted rape, the court stated:

This specific intent-general intent dichotomy explains [the] application of the doctrine in such cases as assault and battery with intent to kill; first degree forgery, requiring specific intent to defraud; . .. and entering a building

with intent to commit theft. In each of these instances, the requisite specific intent constituted an aggravating factor to an otherwise general mens rea offense and the doctrine was applied to permit a finding of the lesser

offense. [A]cceptance of the doctrine requires that there be some lesser-included offense which lacks the requisite specific intent of the greater offense charged. Otherwise, the doctrine of diminished responsibility becomes

an impermissible substitute test of criminal responsibility. . . . In the instant case, there are no such lesser-included offenses within those for which the defendant was charged and tried. The acceptance of the doctrine in this

case, therefore, would be inconsistent with the theory's basic purpose.

Compare People v. Wetmore, 583 P.2d 1308, 1315 (Cal. 1978):

[llf a crime requires specific intent, a defendant who, because of mental disease or defect lacks that intent, cannot commit that crime. The presence or absence of a lesser included offense within the charged crime cannot

affect the result. [W]e do not perceive how a defendant who has in his possession evidence which rebuts an element of the crime can logically be denied the right to present that evidence merely because it will result in his

acquittal. [If the charged crime lacks a lesser included offense, the] solution to this problem [lies] in providing [legislation] for the confinement and treatment of defendants with diminished capacity arising from mental disease

or defect.

p.967

p. 968
Current California law largely continues to follow Wetmore: Evidence of mental disorder cannot be introduced to negate a defendant's capacity to form any mental state, but such evidence “is admissible solely on the issue of whether or not the
accused actually formed a required specific intent.” People v. Herrera, 247 Cal. App. 4th 467, 475 (2016) (emphasis added).

3. Criticism of Clark. For probing analysis of the majority and dissenting opinions in Clark, see Stephen J. Morse, Internal and External Challenges to Culpability, 53 Ariz. St. LJ. __ (forthcoming 2021); Ronald J. Allen, Clark v, Ari-
zona: Much (Confused) Ado About Nothing, 4 Ohio St. LJ. 135 (2006); Peter Westen, The Supreme Court's Bout with Insanity: Clark v. Arizona, 4 Ohio St. L.J. 143 (2006). In a pointed critique, Professor Dora W. Klein notes (Rehabilitating Mental
Disorder Evidence After Clark v. Arizona: Of Burdens, Presumptions, and the Right to Raise Reasonable Doubt, 60 Case W. Rsrv. L. Rev. 645 (2010)) that some evidence of mental disorder is consistently helpful and trustworthy; as a result, she ar-
gues, the potential untrustworthiness of some evidence of this sort cannot justify categorically precluding defendants from presenting any mental disorder evidence to disprove mens rea.

NOTE ON MENTAL DISORDER AS A GROUND FOR MITIGATION

The diminished capacity issue in cases like Brawner and Clark (the use of evidence of mental disorder to negate a required mens rea) must be distinguished from what is sometimes called “diminished responsibility” or “partial respon-
sibility.” According to the latter doctrine, the fact that defendants were mentally disturbed entitles them to a reduction in the severity of their sentences, even though the prosecution has proved all the legal elements required for conviction. Such a
doctrine has been recognized by some European countries. In the United Kingdom, for example, a partial-responsibility doctrine is available to reduce murder to manslaughter. The English Homicide Act, 1957, 5 & 6 Eliz. Il, ch. Il, §2(1).

Should this approach be adopted in the United States? Given the convoluted American rules on the admissibility of mental disorder to negate mens rea, would it be more straightforward to create an explicit affirmative defense for cases
in which mens rea requirements are technically present but a mental disorder suggests greatly reduced culpability? See Stephen J. Morse, Mental Disorder and Criminal Law, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 885, 938 (2011), proposing that a verdict
of “Guilty but Partially Responsible” for defendants with diminished responsibility should result in a sentencing reduction, with “considerations of public safety [playing] a large role in determining how much reduction would be possible for various
crimes.” Such an approach might not be simpler than the current American doctrines, but presumably it would bring the degree of punishment more nearly in line with moral blame than do rules like Arizona's, which categorically exclude mental
health evidence on issues of mens rea.

Introducing evidence of psychopathy at sentencing may be “double-edged.” Today, neuroimaging can show a brain's abnormalities or irregular neurological activities. Some studies suggest that individuals diagnosed with antisocial
personality disorder have less gray matter volume and less amygdala activation than others. Michael L. Perlin & Alison J. Lynch, In the Wasteland of Your Mind: Criminology,

p. 968

p. 969
Scientific Discoveries and the Criminal Process, 4 Va. J. Crim. L. 304 (2016). Some defendants rely on this data to argue for mitigation, saying these irregularities make them less culpable for their criminal behavior and prove their brains are differ-
ent. But while this evidence may mitigate blameworthiness, it also may make the person appear to be a greater danger in the future because the risk seems to have a physical basis. Bang Thi, The Psychological Double-Edged Sword: How Media
Stigma Influences Aggravating and Mitigating Circumstances in Capital Sentencing, 25 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Soc. Just. 173, 177 (2016). See also Elizabeth Nevins-Saunders, Not Guilty as Charged: The Myth of Mens Rea for Defendants with Mental

Retardation, 45 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1419, 1461 (2012), expressing concern that “jurors, or even judges, [may] sentence more, rather than less, harshly because of the defendant's mental [condition] if they have the option to do so,” because they
may see in that condition a greater reason to fear the defendant's future dangerousness.
The nearest thing to a comparable doctrine in American law appears in sentencing provisions authorizing courts to use their discretion to impose a lesser sentence in cases of reduced capacity. An example is §5K2.13 of the Federal
Sentencing Guidelines, which provides (U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual (2018):
A downward departure may be warranted if (1) the defendant committed the offense while suffering from a significantly reduced mental capacity; and (2) the significantly reduced mental capacity contributed substantially to
the commission of the offense. . . . However, the court may not depart below the applicable guideline range if (1) the significantly reduced mental capacity was caused by the voluntary use of drugs or other intoxicants; (2) the
facts and circumstances of the defendant's offense indicate a need to protect the public because the offense involved actual violence or a serious threat of violence; (3) the defendant's criminal history indicates a need to in-
carcerate the defendant to protect the public. . . .
QUESTIONS: If the principle behind §5K2.13 is sound, why should a reduced sentence be limited to cases of nonviolent crimes and to defendants without serious criminal histories? If Professor Morse is right that defendants who are less
culpable, because of mental impairment short of legal insanity, should receive less severe punishment, why should a sentencing reduction be precluded for defendants facing the longest sentences? Consider the comments of Judge Richard Pos-
ner in United States v. Garthus, 652 F.3d 715 (7th Cir. 2011):
From a “just deserts” standpoint, diminished capacity argues for a lighter sentence, but from the standpoint of preventing recidivism it argues for a heavier one. The heavier sentence may not deter a criminal from repeating
his crime when he is released (that is implied by saying he has diminished capacity), but it will reduce his lifetime criminal activity by incapacitating him for a longer time than if he received a lighter sentence.
The MPG, as we have seen (see p. 985, Note 1, supra), permits the use of mental health evidence to rebut a required mens rea, but for cases in which the elements of an offense are proved, the Code rejects a statutory reduction of
punishment for reduced mental capacity. The Commentary explains (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §210.3 at 71-72 (1980)):
p. 989
p.990
[Allowing] the defendant’s own mental disorder or emotional instability as a basis for partially excusing his conduct [would] undoubtedly [achieve] a closer relation between criminal liability and moral guilt. ... But this ap-
proach . . . decreases the incentives for him to behave as if he were normal. . . . In short, diminished responsibility brings formal guilt more closely into line with moral blameworthiness, but only at the cost of driving a wedge
between dangerousness and social control.
Many jurisdictions leave each sentencing judge free to decide, without “guidelines,” what significance (if any) to attach to mental illness when it neither establishes insanity nor negates a mens rea in a particular case. Does this approach
‘enable judges to more appropriately tailor punishment to moral fault? Or will it (and should it) lead judges to treat diminished mental capacity as an aggravating factor?
5. Changing Patterns of Excuse
Robinson v. California
‘Supreme Court of the United States
370 U.S. 660 (1962)

Justice STEWART delivered the opinion of the Court.

A California statute makes it a criminal offense for a person to “be addicted to the use of narcotics.” This appeal draws into question the constitutionality of that provision of the state law, as construed by the California courts in the
present case. .. .

[The prosecution's evidence was principally the testimony of policemen that defendant had scar tissue, discoloration, and needle marks that indicated his frequent use of narcotics.]

The judge . . . instructed the jury that the appellant could be convicted under a general verdict if the jury agreed either that he was of the “status” or had committed the “act” denounced by the statute. “All that the People must show is
either that the defendant did use a narcotic in Los Angeles County, or that while in the City of Los Angeles he was addicted to the use of narcotics. . ..”

Under these instructions the jury returned a verdict finding appellant “guilty of the offense charged.” .. .

The broad power of a State to regulate the narcotic drugs traffic within its borders is not here in issue. . . . This statute is not one which punishes a person for the use of narcotics, for their purchase, sale or possession, or for antisocial
or disorderly behavior resulting from their administration. It is not a law which even purports to provide or require medical treatment. Rather, we deal with a statute which makes the “status” of narcotic addiction a criminal offense, for which the
offender may be prosecuted “at any time before he reforms.” California has said that a person can be continuously guilty of this offense, whether or not he has ever used or possessed any narcotics within the State, and whether or not he has been
guilty of any antisocial behavior there.

p. 990
p.991

It is unlikely that any State at this moment in history would attempt to make it a criminal offense for a person to be mentally ill, or a leper, or to be afflicted with a venereal disease. A State might determine that the general health and
welfare require that the victims of these and other human afflictions be dealt with by compulsory treatment, involving quarantine, confinement, or sequestration. But, in the light of contemporary human knowledge, a law which made a criminal of-
fense of such a disease would doubtless be universally thought to be an infliction of cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments.

We cannot but consider the statute before us as of the same category. In this Court counsel for the State recognized that narcotic addiction is an illness. Indeed, it is apparently an illness which may be contracted innocently or
involuntarily.

We hold that a state law which imprisons a person thus afflicted as a criminal, even though he has never touched any narcotic drug within the State or been guilty of any irregular behavior there, inflicts a cruel and unusual punishment in
violation of the Fourteenth Amendment. To be sure, imprisonment for ninety days is not, in the abstract, a punishment which is either cruel or unusual. But the question cannot be considered in the abstract. Even one day in prison would be a cruel
and unusual punishment for the “crime” of having a common cold. . . .

Reversed.

Justice Doustas, concurring, ..

The addict is a sick person. He may, of course, be confined for treatment or for the protection of society. Cruel and unusual punishment results not from confinement, but from convicting the addict of a crime. . . . A prosecution for
addiction, with its resulting stigma and irreparable damage to the good name of the accused, cannot be justified as a means of protecting society, where a civil commitment would do as well. ... We would forget the teachings of the Eighth Amend-
ment if we allowed sickness to be made a crime and permitted sick people to be punished for being sick. The age of enlightenment cannot tolerate such barbarous action.

Justice HARLAN, concurring.

| am not prepared to hold that on the present state of medical knowledge it is completely irrational and hence unconstitutional for a State to conclude that narcotics addiction is something other than an illness, nor that it amounts to
cruel and unusual punishment for the State to subject narcotics addicts to its criminal law. . . . But in this case the trial court’s instructions permitted the jury to find the appellant guilty on no more proof than that he was present in California while
he was addicted to narcotics. Since addiction alone cannot reasonably be thought to amount to more than a compelling propensity to use narcotics, the effect of this instruction was to authorize criminal punishment for a bare desire to commit a
criminal act. ..

p.991
p.992
Justice WHITE, dissenting. . . .

The Court clearly does not rest its decision upon the narrow ground that the jury was not expressly instructed not to convict if it believed appellant's use of narcotics was beyond his control. The Court recognizes no degrees of addic-
tion. The Fourteenth Amendment is today held to bar any prosecution for addiction regardless of the degree of frequency of use, and the Court's opinion bristles with indications of further consequences. If it is “cruel and unusual punishment” to
convict appellant for addiction, it is difficult to understand why it would be any less offensive to the Fourteenth Amendment to convict him for use on the same evidence of use which proved he was an addict. . . .

The Court has not merely tidied up California's law by removing some irritating vestige of an outmoded approach to the control of narcotics. At the very least, it has effectively removed California's power to deal effectively with the
recurring case under the statute where there is ample evidence of use but no evidence of the precise location of use. Beyond this it has cast serious doubt upon the power of any State to forbid the use of narcotics under threat of criminal punish-
ment. I cannot believe that the Court would forbid the application of the criminal laws to the use of narcotics under any circumstances. But the States, as well as the Federal Government, are now on notice. They will have to await a final answer in
another case... .

NOTES

1. Competing rationales. Justice Douglas and Justice Harlan offer different reasons for concurring in the reversal of Robinson's conviction. Which of their views (or neither) is endorsed by Justice Stewart's opinion for the Court?
Justice Stewart notes that the California statute creates a form of continuous criminal liability, that it fails to require that any criminal act actually be performed within the jurisdiction, and that it imposes punishment for a disease. Are all of these
failings necessary for constitutional invalidation, or would any one of them suffice? What if a statute criminalized a specific act (such as drug use) that could be considered the involuntary product of a disease (drug addiction)? Or what if a statute
criminalized a status (such as being a member of a criminal organization) that was entirely voluntary?

2. Status versus act. In considering why a status crime may sometimes impose “cruel and unusual punishment” in violation of the Eighth Amendment, review the materials on the requirement of voluntary conduct, pp. 251-259 supra.
Those materials considered the act requirement as a component of “culpability,” one of the core “elements of just punishment” in any legal system. To what extent should culpability be viewed as a constitutional requirement for criminal punish-
ment? How would constitutionalizing the culpability requirement affect the nature of permissible criminal laws and the scope of required excuses? The cases that follow explore these questions.

Powell v. Texas
Supreme Court of the United States
392 U.S. 514 (1968)

Justice MARSHALL announced the judgment of the Court and delivered an opinion in which THe Cuier Justice, JusTICe BLACK, and Justice HARLAN join.

p.992
p. 989

In late December 1966, appellant was arrested and charged with being found in a state of intoxication in a public place, in violation of Texas Penal Code, Art. 477 (1952), which reads as follows: “Whoever shall get drunk or be found in
a state of intoxication in any public place, or at any private house except his own, shall be fined not exceeding one hundred dollars.” . . .

The trial judge . . ., sitting without a jury, . . . ruled as a matter of law that chronic alcoholism was not a defense to the charge. He found appellant guilty, and fined him $50. There being no further right to appeal within the Texas judicial
system, appellant appealed to this Court. . . .

The principal testimony was that of Dr. Davis Wade, a Fellow of the American Medical Association, duly certified in psychiatry. . .. Dr. Wade sketched the outlines of the “disease” concept of alcoholism; noted that there is no generally
accepted definition of “alcoholism”; alluded to the ongoing debate within the medical profession over whether alcohol is actually physically “addicting” or merely psychologically “habituating”; and concluded that in either case a “chronic alcoholic”
is an “involuntary drinker,” who is “powerless not to drink,” and who “loses his self-control over his drinking.” He testified that he had examined appellant, and that appellant is a “chronic alcoholic,” who “by the time he has reached [the state of
intoxication] is not able to control his behavior, and [who] has reached this point because he has an uncontrollable compulsion to drink.” . . . He added that in his opinion jailing appellant without medical attention would operate neither to rehabili-
tate him or lessen his desire for alcohol.

On cross-examination, Dr. Wade admitted that when appellant was sober he knew the difference between right and wrong, and he responded affirmatively to the question whether appellant's act of taking the first drink in any given
instance when he was sober was a “voluntary exercise of his will.” Qualifying his answer, Dr. Wade stated that

these individuals have a compulsion, and this compulsion, while not completely overpowering, is a very strong influence, an exceedingly strong influence, and this compulsion, coupled with the firm belief in their mind that

they are going to be able to handle it from now on causes their judgment to be somewhat clouded.

Appellant testified concerning the history of his drinking problem. He reviewed his many arrests for drunkenness; testified that he was unable to stop drinking; stated that when he was intoxicated he had no control over his actions and
could not remember them later, but that he did not become violent; and admitted that he did not remember his arrest on the occasion for which he was being tried. On cross-examination, appellant admitted that he had had one drink on the morn-
ing of the trial and had been able to discontinue drinking. . ..

The State made no effort to obtain expert psychiatric testimony of its own, or even to explore with appellant's witness the question of appellant's power to control the frequency, timing, and location of his drinking bouts, or the substan-
tial disagreement within the medical profession concerning the nature of the disease, the efficacy of treatment and the prerequisites for effective treatment. . .. Instead, the State concerned itself with a brief argument that appellant had no defense
to the charge because he “is legally sane and knows the difference between right and wrong.”

p.999
p. 998

Following this abbreviated exposition of the problem before it, the trial court indicated its intention to disallow appellant's claimed defense of “chronic alcoholism.” Thereupon defense counsel submitted, and the trial court entered, the
following “findings of fact”:

(1) That chronic alcoholism is a disease which destroys the afflicted person's will power to resist the constant, excessive consumption of alcohol.

(2) That a chronic alcoholic does not appear in public by his own volition but under a compulsion symptomatic of the disease of chronic alcoholism.

(3) That Leroy Powell, a defendant herein, is a chronic alcoholic who is afflicted with the disease of chronic alcoholism.

Whatever else may be said of them, those are not “findings of fact” in any recognizable, traditional sense in which that term has been used in a court of law; they are the premises of a syllogism transparently designed to bring this case
within the scope of this Court’s opinion in Robinson v. California, 370 U.S. 660 (1962). Nonetheless, the dissent would have us adopt these “findings” without critical examination; it would use them as the basis for a constitutional holding that “a
person may not be punished if the condition essential to constitute the defined crime is part of the pattern of his disease and is occasioned by a compulsion symptomatic of the disease.”

The difficulty with that position, as we shall show, is that it goes much too far on the basis of too little knowledge. In the first place, the record in this case is utterly inadequate to permit the sort of informed and responsible adjudication
which alone can support the announcement of an important and wide-ranging new constitutional principle. We know very little about the circumstances surrounding the drinking bout which resulted in this conviction, or about Leroy Powell's drink-
ing problem, or indeed about alcoholism itself... .

[The inescapable fact is that there is no agreement among members of the medical profession about what it means to say that “alcoholism” is a “disease.” . . . [There is widespread agreement today that “alcoholism” is a “disease,” for
the simple reason that the medical profession has concluded that it should attempt to treat those who have drinking problems. There the agreement stops. . . .

The trial court’s “finding” that Powell “is afflicted with the disease of chronic alcoholism, which destroys the afflicted person's will power to resist the constant, excessive consumption of alcohol” covers a multitude of sins. . .. Dr. Wade
[testified] that once appellant began drinking he appeared to have no control over the amount of alcohol he finally ingested. Appellant's own testimony concerning his drinking on the day of the trial would certainly appear, however, to cast doubt
upon the conclusion that he was without control over his consumption of alcohol when he had sufficiently important reasons to exercise such control. . . . Dr. Wade testified that when appellant was sober, the act of taking the first drink was a “vol-
untary exercise of his will,” but that this exercise of will was undertaken under the “exceedingly strong influence” of a “compulsion” which was “not completely overpowering.” Such concepts, when juxtaposed in this fashion, have little meaning. . ..

Itis one thing to say that if a man is deprived of alcohol his hands will begin to shake, he will suffer agonizing pains and ultimately he will have hallucinations; it is quite another to say that a man has a “compulsion” to take a drink, but
that he also retains a certain amount of “free will” with which to resist. It is simply impossible, in

p. 998

p. 995
the present state of our knowledge, to ascribe a useful meaning to the latter statement. This definitional confusion reflects, of course, not merely the undeveloped state of the psychiatric art but also the conceptual difficulties inevitably attendant
upon the importation of scientific and medical models into a legal system generally predicated upon a different set of assumptions. . ..

Despite the comparatively primitive state of our knowledge on the subject, it cannot be denied that the destructive use of alcoholic beverages is one of our principal social and public health problems. . .. There is as yet no known
generally effective method for treating the vast number of alcoholics in our society. [It is entirely possible that, even were the manpower and facilities available for a full-scale attack upon chronic alcoholism, we would find ourselves unable to help
the vast bulk of our “visible” — let alone our “invisible” — alcoholic population. . .. The medical profession cannot, and does not, tell us with any assurance that, even if the buildings, equipment and trained personnel were made available, it could
provide anything more than slightly higher-class jails for our indigent habitual inebriates. Thus we run the grave risk that nothing will be accomplished beyond the hanging of a new sign — reading “hospital” — over one wing of the jailhouse.

One virtue of the criminal process is, at least, that the duration of penal incarceration typically has some outside statutory limit; this is universally true in the case of petty offenses, such as public drunkenness, where jail terms are quite
short on the whole. “Therapeutic civil commitment” lacks this feature; one is typically committed until one is “cured.” Thus, to do otherwise than affirm might subject indigent alcoholics to the risk that they may be locked up for an indefinite period
of time under the same conditions as before, with no more hope than before of receiving effective treatment and no prospect of periodic “freedom.”

Faced with this unpleasant reality, we are unable to assert that the use of the criminal process as a means of dealing with the public aspects of problem drinking can never be defended as rational... ..

Appellant claims that his conviction on the facts of this case would violate the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause [as applied] in Robinson. .. .

On its face the present case does not fall within that holding. [Texas] has not sought to punish a mere status, as California did in Robinson; nor has it attempted to regulate appellant's behavior in the privacy of his own home. Rather,
it has imposed upon appellant a criminal sanction for public behavior which may create substantial health and safety hazards, both for appellant and for members of the general public, and which offends the moral and aesthetic sensibilities of a
large segment of the community. This seems a far cry from convicting one for being an addict, being a chronic alcoholic, being “mentally ill or a leper. . . .”

Robinson so viewed brings this Court but a very small way into the substantive criminal law. And unless Robinson is so viewed it is difficult to see any limiting principle that would serve to prevent this Court from becoming, under the
aegis of the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause, the ultimate arbiter of the standards of criminal responsibility, in diverse areas of the criminal law, throughout the country.

Itis suggested in dissent that Robinson stands for the “simple” but “subtle” principle that “[cjriminal penalties may not be inflicted on a person for being in a condition he is powerless to change.” . .. In that view, appellant's “condition”
of public intoxication was “occasioned by a compulsion symptomatic of the disease” of chronic alcoholism, and thus, apparently, his behavior lacked the critical

p. 995

p. 996
element of mens rea. Whatever may be the merits of such a doctrine of criminal responsibility, it surely cannot be said to follow from Robinson. The entire thrust of Robinson's interpretation of the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause is that
criminal penalties may be inflicted only if the accused has committed some act, has engaged in some behavior, which society has an interest in preventing, or perhaps in historical common law terms, has committed some actus reus. It thus does
not deal with the question of whether certain conduct cannot constitutionally be punished because it is, in some sense, “involuntary” or “occasioned by a compulsion.” . . .

Ultimately, then, the most troubling aspects of this case, were Robinson to be extended to meet it, would be the scope and content of what could only be a constitutional doctrine of criminal responsibility. In dissent it is urged that the
decision could be limited to conduct which is “a characteristic and involuntary part of the pattern of the disease as it afflicts” the particular individual, and that “it is not foreseeable” that it would be applied “in the case of offenses such as driving
acar while intoxicated, assault, theft, or robbery.” That is limitation by fiat... . If Leroy Powell cannot be convicted of public intoxication, it is difficult to see how a State can convict an individual for murder, if that individual, while exhibiting normal
behavior in all other respects, suffers from a “compulsion” to kill, which is an “exceedingly strong influence,” but “not completely overpowering.” Even if we limit our consideration to chronic alcoholics, it would seem impossible to confine the prin-
ciple within the arbitrary bounds which the dissent seems to envision. . . .

Traditional common-law concepts of personal accountability and essential considerations of federalism lead us to disagree with appellant. . . . And in any event this Court has never articulated a general constitutional doctrine of mens
rea.

We cannot cast aside the centuries-long evolution of the collection of interlocking and overlapping concepts which the common law has utilized to assess the moral accountability of an individual for his antisocial deeds. The doctrines
of actus reus, mens rea, insanity, mistake, justification, and duress have historically provided the tools for a constantly shifting adjustment of the tension between the evolving aims of the criminal law and changing religious, moral, philosophical,
and medical views of the nature of man. This process of adjustment has always been thought to be the province of the States.

Nothing could be less fruitful than for this Court to be impelled into defining some sort of insanity test in constitutional terms. Yet, that task would seem to follow inexorably from an extension of Robinson in this case. If a person in the
“condition” of being a chronic alcoholic cannot be criminally punished as a constitutional matter for being drunk in public, it would seem to follow that a person who contends that, in terms of one test, “his unlawful act was the product of mental
disease or mental defect,” Durham v. United States, 214 F.2d 862, 875 (C.A.D.C. Cir. 1954), would state an issue of constitutional dimension with regard to his criminal responsibility had he been tried under some different and perhaps lesser stan-
dard, e.g., the right-wrong test of M’Naghten's Case. . .. But formulating a constitutional rule would . . . freeze the developing productive dialogue between law and psychiatry into a rigid constitutional mold. It is simply not yet the time to write into
the Constitution formulas cast in terms whose meaning, let alone relevance, are not yet clear either to doctors or to lawyers.

Affirmed.

p. 996
p.997
Justice BLAck, whom Justice HARLAN joins, concurring. . ..

| agree with Justice Marshall that the findings of fact in this case are inadequate. . . . | could not, however, consider any findings that could be made with respect to “voluntariness” or “compulsion” controlling . . . as a constitutional
matter. When we say that appellant's appearance in public is caused not by “his own” volition but rather by some other force, we are clearly thinking of a force that is nevertheless “his” except in some special sense.! The accused undoubtedly
commits the proscribed act and the only question is whether the act can be attributed to a part of “his” personality that should not be regarded as criminally responsible. Almost all of the traditional purposes of the criminal law can be significantly
served by punishing the person who in fact committed the proscribed act, without regard to whether his action was “compelled” by some elusive “irresponsible” aspect of his personality. [P]unishment of such a defendant can clearly be justified
in terms of deterrence, isolation, and treatment. On the other hand, medical decisions concerning the use of a term such as “disease” or “volition,” based as they are on the clinical problems of diagnosis and treatment, bear no necessary corre-
spondence to the legal decision whether the overall objectives of the criminal law can be furthered by imposing punishment. [Mluch as | think that criminal sanctions should in many situations be applied only to those whose conduct is morally
blameworthy, see Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246 (1951), | cannot think the States should be held constitutionally required to make the inquiry as to what part of a defendant's personality is responsible for his actions and to excuse any-
‘one whose action was, in some complex, psychological sense, the result of a “compulsion.” . . .

Justice WaITe, concurring in the result.

Ifit cannot be a crime to have an irresistible compulsion to use narcotics [Robinson], | do not see how it can constitutionally be a crime to yield to such a compulsion. Punishing an addict for using drugs convicts for addiction under
a different name. Distinguishing between the two crimes is like forbidding criminal conviction for being sick with flu or epilepsy but permitting punishment for running a fever or having a convulsion. Unless Robinson is to be abandoned, the use
of narcotics by an addict must be beyond the reach of the criminal law. Similarly, the chronic alcoholic with an irresistible urge to consume alcohol should not be punishable for drinking or for being drunk. [But] | cannot say that the chronic who

proves his disease and a compulsion to drink is shielded from conviction when he has knowingly failed to take feasible precautions against committing a criminal act, here the act of going to or remaining in a public place. On such facts the alco-
holic is like a person with smallpox, who could be convicted for being on the street but not for being ill, or like the epileptic, punishable for driving a car but not for his disease.
Justice ForrAs, with whom Justice Doue.as, JUSTICE BRENNAN, and Justice STEWART join, dissenting. . . .
p.997
p. 998

Robinson stands upon a principle which, despite its subtlety, must be simply stated and respectfully applied because it is the foundation of individual liberty and the cornerstone of the relations between a civilized state and its citizens:
Criminal penalties may not be inflicted upon a person for being in a condition he is powerless to change. In all probability, Robinson at some time before his conviction elected to take narcotics. But the crime as defined did not punish this conduct.
The statute imposed a penalty for the offense of “addiction” — a condition which Robinson could not control. Once Robinson had become an addict, he was utterly powerless to avoid criminal guilt. He was powerless to choose not to violate the
law.

In the present case, appellant is charged with a crime comprised of two elements — being intoxicated and being found in a public place while in that condition. The crime, so defined, differs from that in Robinson. The statute covers
more than a mere status. But the essential constitutional defect here is the same as in Robinson, for in both cases the particular defendant was accused of being in a condition which he had no capacity to change or avoid. The trial judge [found]
that Powell is a “chronic alcoholic [who] does not appear in public by his own volition but under a compulsion symptomatic of the disease of chronic alcoholism.” | read these findings to mean that appellant was powerless to avoid drinking; that
having taken his first drink, he had “an uncontrollable compulsion to drink” to the point of intoxication; and that, once intoxicated, he could not prevent himself from appearing in public places. . . . The findings in this case, read against the back-
ground of the medical and sociological data to which | have referred, compel the conclusion that the infliction upon appellant of a criminal penalty for being intoxicated in a public place would be “cruel and inhuman punishment.” . . .

STATE EX REL. HARPER v. ZEGEER, 296 S.E.2d 873 (W. VA. 1982): We believe that criminally punishing alcoholics for being publicly intoxicated violates the prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. W. Va. Const. art. Ill, §5. In Powell v.
Texas, 392 U.S. 514 (1968), five Justices [were] unwilling to extend Robinson's rationale to public intoxication. . . . Since Powell, no state court has held that alcoholics could not be punished criminally for public intoxication, except Minnesota.

Most states have adopted the Uniform Alcoholism and Intoxication Treatment Act that deals with alcoholism as a disease. Others stopped short of decriminalization, and instead developed diversionary systems for both alcoholics and
public drunks.” . . . We urge our Legislature to enact a comprehensive plan for dealing with alcoholics in a humane and beneficial manner.

Criminal punishment of chronic alcoholics violates constitutional prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishment. However, their public presence is a potential threat to their own and others’ well-being, is often offensive, even obnox-
ious to.

p. 998
p.999
other people, and the State has a legitimate right to get them off the streets or out of whatever public area in which they may be gamboling. . . 12

If the arresting officer has knowledge that the accused has a previous history of arrests for public intoxication, he has a duty to bring these facts to the attention of the judicial officer, or to make application for involuntary hospitalization
for examination of an accused who, because of his inebriated state, is likely to harm himself or others if allowed to remain at liberty. ... Upon a showing that an accused is a chronic alcoholic, he is to be accorded all of the procedural safeguards
that surround those with mental disabilities who are accused of crime.

NOTES

1. Alcoholism. The scientific premises of the defense position in Powell are questioned in Herbert Fingarette, Heavy Drinking (1988). Professor Fingarette characterizes the disease concept of alcoholism as a “myth” that attained ever
wider public acceptance just at the time that its empirical foundations were being discredited by researchers and that research over the next two-and-a-half decades consistently contradicted that concept. Fingarette states (id. at 3) that at the time
of his writing “no leading research authorities accept the classic disease concept [of alcoholism].” Fingarette observes (id. at 32) that “[alnyone who has ever observed the behavior of a chronic heavy drinker cannot help feeling a sense of powerful
momentum at work.” Nonetheless, Fingarette notes, studies show that on any particular occasion heavy drinkers, including those labeled chronic alcoholics, may drink heavily, moderately, or not at all, and the choice depends on a wide variety of
situational factors including the rewards or penalties the drinker believes likely to follow.

For a discussion more sympathetic to the view of alcoholism as a disease, see L. Tiffany & M. Tiffany, Nosologic Objection to the Criminal Defense of Pathological Intoxication: What Do the Doubters Doubt?, 13 Int'l J.L. & Psychiatry 49
(1990). In Addiction and the Theory of Action, 25 Quinnipiac L. Rev. 117 (2006), Professor Michael Louis Corrado notes that the law often recognizes defenses (like provocation) that are based on judgments about a defendant's lack of control. As
a result, he argues (id. at 145-146):

[he idea of a defect of will is essential [in many areas of the law]. That means that we must recognize the possibility that the addict suffers from such a defect, from such great difficulty in controlling his behavior that he is

entitled to an excuse. Whether the facts support an addiction excuse remains an empirical question, but the idea that evidence of such difficulty is impossible to come by, . . . seems to have no basis in fact.

2. People who lack stable living arrangements. A Los Angeles ordinance, discussed in Chapter 3 in connection with the actus reus requirement (see p. 250 supra), makes it an offense for any person to “sit, lie or sleep in or upon any
street,

p.999
p. 1000
sidewalk or other public way.” In a suit brought by people who had no permanent housing and proved that the city had too few beds to accommodate them, the U.S. Court of Appeals held that the Eighth Amendment, as interpreted in Robinson
and Powell, barred enforcement of the ordinance against these individuals (Jones v. City of Los Angeles, 444 F.3d 1118, 1136-1137 (9th Cir. 2006)):

Whether sitting, lying, and sleeping are defined as acts or conditions, they are universal and unavoidable consequences of being human. . . . In contrast to Leroy Powell, Appellants have made a substantial showing that they

are “unable to stay off the streets on the night[s] in question.” [T]he conduct at issue here is involuntary and inseparable from status — . . . given that human beings are biologically compelled to rest, whether by sitting, lying,

or sleeping.

A dissenting judge objected that the Eighth Amendment claim was untenable because the ordinance “targets conduct — sitting, lying or sleeping on city sidewalks.” Id. at 1139 (Rymer, J., dissenting).12 Other courts are similarly divided
about whether such ordinances are constitutional as applied to the people who are unable to obtain permanent housing.1° Which result follows from the principles articulated in Robinson and Powell? Should it matter how people became un-
housed in the first place and whether their situation was based on voluntary choices? Does the answer depend on the availability of shelter space or affordable housing in a given jurisdiction? For helpful discussions of the issue, see Joy H. Kim,
Note, The Case Against Criminalizing Homelessness: Functional Barriers to Shelters and Homeless Individuals’ Lack of Choice, 95 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1150 (2020); Ryan P. Isola, Note, Homelessness: The Status of the Status Doctrine, 54 U.C. Davis L.
Rev. 1725 (2021).

3. Alcoholism and people who lack housing. In Powell, Justice White's separate opinion suggests that he might have provided a fifth vote for reversal if Leroy Powell had proved that he had not “knowingly failed to take feasible
precautions against committing . . . the act of going to or remaining in a public place.” Some subsequent cases have upheld the constitutionality of public drunkenness statutes, even as applied to people who simultaneously suffer from alcoholism
and lack permanent housing. E.g., People v. Kellogg, 119 Cal. App. 4th 593, 603-604 (2004), where the court said:

p. 1000
p. 1001

[Mlisdemeanor culpability for public intoxication, even as applied to a homeless chronic alcoholic such as Kellogg, is neither disproportionate to the offense nor inhumane. . . . To the extent Kellogg has no choice but to be

drunk in public given the nature of his impairments, his culpability is low; however, the penal sanctions imposed on him [maximum jail terms of six months] are correspondingly low. Given the state's interest in providing for

the safety of its citizens, including Kellogg, imposition of low-level criminal sanctions for Kellogg's conduct does not tread on the federal or state constitutional proscriptions against cruel and/or unusual punishment.

Other courts have treated Justice White's opinion as controlling. Virginia had a law, similar to that in Powell, which subjected a person deemed to be a “habitual drunkard,” with a penalty of up to one year in jail and/or substantial fines.
Between 2007 and 2015, Virginia designated more than 1,220 people as “habitual drunkards” under the law, thus making them subject to arrest for having or attempting to possess alcohol.!“1 In Manning v. Caldwell, 930 F.3d 264 (4th Cir. 2019),
unhoused individuals in Virginia challenged the law on vagueness and Eighth Amendment grounds. In an 8-7 decision, the en banc Fourth Circuit concluded that the term “habitual drunkard” was unconstitutionally vague because it “offerfed] no
meaningful standard of conduct” and invited “arbitrary enforcement.” Id. at 278. It further concluded that, even assuming the law could survive a vagueness challenge, the plaintiffs stated a viable Eighth Amendment claim under both Robinson and
Powell, with the court placing particular reliance on Justice White's concurrence as the controlling statement of law. Id. at 282-285.

4, Mens rea and the Constitution. Justice Marshall's plurality opinion rejected Robinson's defense of chronic alcoholism not only because of the insufficiency of the empirical case for the “disease” concept of alcoholism, but also
because of the undesirability of “a general constitutional doctrine of mens rea,” p. 996 supra, something that concerned the Court in its Kahler decision as well, see p. 964 supra. What would such a constitutional doctrine look like, and what con-
sequences would it have? Canada offers one answer to this question, having interpreted the “fundamental justice” provision of its Charter of Rights and Freedoms to require mens rea as a condition for a criminal conviction. See, e.g., Reference Re
Section 94(2) of the Motor Vehicle Act, R.S.B.C. 1979 [1985] 2 S.C.R. 486 (holding strict liability unconstitutional on the ground that protection of the morally innocent is required by “precepts of fundamental justice”). See p. 345 supra. For discus-
sion of the Canadian experience on this issue, see Bruce P. Archibald, The Constitutionalization of the General Part of Criminal Law, 67 Can. Bar Rev. 403 (1998).

5. Non-criminal incarceration of the dangerous. Justice Marshall worried that accepting Powell's defense would lead to the civil commitment of people suffering from alcoholism that would be non-criminal in name only — “the
hanging of a new sign reading ‘hospital’ — over one wing of the jailhouse.” The Supreme Court has upheld the constitutionality of preventive civil commitment of the dangerous

p. 1001
p. 1002
when there is a mental disorder of some sort and “proof of serious difficulty in controlling behavior.” Kansas v. Crane, 534 U.S. 407, 413 (2002) (upholding that state's provision for the commitment of so-called sexually violent predators). In what
ways would non-criminal incapacitation and treatment be a preferable (or more worrisome) disposition for people who have drinking problems related in some way to their commission of criminal offenses? For people addicted to controlled sub-
stances? For someone who has serious difficulty in controlling behavior because of genetic factors or environmental deprivation? For probing criticism of preventive confinement on the basis of difficulty in controlling behavior, see Stephen J.
Morse, Mental Disorder and Criminal Law, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 885, 951-960 (2011). Consider the materials that follow.
United States v. Moore
United States Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit
486 F.2d 1139 (1973)

Witkey, J. . .. Appellant contends that his conviction [for possession of heroin] was improper because he is a heroin addict with an overpowering need to use heroin and should not, therefore, be held responsible for being in possession
of the drug. After careful consideration, we must reject appellant's contention. . . .

[The prosecution conceded that Moore was an addict. The evidence was in conflict as to whether he was a trafficking addict. The trial court refused to permit defendant's expert witnesses to testify on the nature of defendant's heroin
addiction, and declined to instruct the jury that a nontrafficking addict could not be convicted under the statutes charged.]

We believe it is clear from the evidence that Moore was not a mere nontrafficking addict but was in fact engaged in the drug trade. Yet even if we were to assume that appellant was a simple addict and nothing more, we believe that his
conviction must be sustained... .

According to appellant this case has one central issue:

Is the proffered evidence of Appellant's long and intensive dependence on (addiction to) injected heroin, resulting in substantial impairment of his behavior controls and a loss of self-control over the use of heroin, relevant to

his criminal responsibility for unlawful possession . . . ?

In other words, is appellant's addiction a defense to the crimes, involving only possession, with which he is charged? . . . The gist of appellant's argument here is that “the common law has long held that the capacity to control behavior
is a prerequisite for criminal responsibility.” . . .

Drug addiction of varying degrees may or may not result in loss of self-control, depending on the strength of character opposed to the drug craving. Under appellant's theory, adopted by the dissenters, only if there is a resulting loss of
self-control can there be an absence of free will which, under the extension of the common law theory, would provide a valid defense to the addict. . . . But if it is absence of free will which excuses the mere possessor-acquirer, the more desperate
bank robber for drug money has an even more demonstrable lack of free will and derived from precisely the same factors as appellant argues should excuse the mere possessor.

p. 1002
p. 1008

... [T]he problem of the heroin traffic makes certain policies necessary that should not be weakened by the creation of this defense. . . . Robinson is no authority for the proposition that the Eighth Amendment prevents punishment of an
addict for acts he is “compelled” to do by his addiction. .. .

[M)he interpretation that Robinson ... . that it was not criminal to give in to the irresistible compulsions of a “disease,” weaves in and out of the Powell [v. Texas] opinions, but there is definitely no Supreme Court holding to this effect. . ..

[Conviction affirmed]

LeveNTHAL, J., with whom McGowaN, J., concurs. . . .

Appellant [argues], in essence, . . . that the “mental disease or defect” requirement of [the insanity defense] is superfluous. He discerns a broad principle that excuses from criminal responsibility when conduct results from a condition
that impairs behavior control. . . . The broad assertion is that in general the mens rea element of criminal responsibility requires freedom of will, which is negatived by an impairment of behavioral control and loss of self-control... .

It does not follow that because one condition (mental disease) yields an exculpatory defense if it results in impairment of . . . behavioral controls the same result follows when some other condition impairs behavior controls. . . .

The legal conception of criminal capacity cannot be limited to those of unusual endowment or even average powers. A few may be recognized as so far from normal as to be entirely beyond the reach of criminal justice, but in general
the criminal law is a means of social control that must be potentially capable of reaching the vast bulk of the population. Criminal responsibility . . . specifically extends to those who have a realistic problem of substantial impairment and lack of
capacity due, say, to. . . susceptibility to suggestion; or to a loss of control . .. as a result of passion .. . ; or to a depravity that blocks out conscience as an influence on conduct. The criminal law cannot “vary legal norms with the individual's ca-
pacity to meet the standards they prescribe, absent a disability that is both gross and verifiable, such as [mental disease or defect]. The most that it is feasible to do with lesser disabilities is to accord them proper weight in sentencing.”®5

[here is no broad common law principle of exculpation on ground of lack of control, but rather a series of particular defenses staked out in manageable areas, with the call for justice to the individual confined to ascertainable and
verifiable conditions, and limited by the interest of society in control of conduct. . . .

Waictr, J., dissenting: . . . [C]riminal responsibility is assessed only when through “free will” a man elects to do evil, and if he is not a free agent, or is unable to choose or to act voluntarily, or to avoid the conduct which constitutes the crime, he is
outside the postulate of the law of punishment. . . . Moreover, recognition of a defense of “addiction” for crimes such as possession of narcotics is consistent . . . with the traditional goals of penology — retribution, deterrence, isolation and rehabil-
itation. . . . Revenge, if it is ever to be legitimate, must be premised on moral blameworthiness, and what segment of our society would feel its need for retribution satisfied when it wreaks vengeance upon those who are diseased because
p. 1008
p. 1004

of their disease? [T]here may have been a time in the past before the addict lost control when he made a conscious decision to use drugs. But imposition of punishment on this basis would violate the longstanding rule that “[t]he law looks to the
immediate, and not to the remote cause; to the actual state of the party, and not to the causes, which remotely produced it.” .. .

[The merits of [the deterrence] argument appear doubttul. [I]t is widely agreed that the threat of even harsh prison sentences cannot deter the addict from using and possessing the drug. A similar situation prevails insofar as deterrence
of potential addicts is concemed. [NJothing in this opinion would in any way affect the criminal responsibility of non-addict users for crimes they may commit — including illegal possession of narcotics. . .

Shifting our focus now to the goal of isolating the offender, we arrive here at not only a justifiable basis for action but one which, in some cases at least, may be vital to the interests of society. . . . This does not mean, however, that the
goal of isolation justifies infliction of criminal punishment upon the addict. On the contrary, this interest may be fully vindicated through a program of civil commitment with treatment. . . .

This, then, brings us to the final and most important goal of modern penology — to rehabilitate the offender. [SJociety has a responsibility to both the individual and the community to treat the offender so that upon his release he may
function as a productive, law-abiding citizen. . ..

Perhaps the most troublesome question arising out of recognition of the addiction defense | suggest is whether it should be limited only to those acts — such as mere possession for use — which are inherent in the disease itself. It can
hardly be doubted that, in at least some instances, an addict may in fact be “compelled” to engage in other types of criminal activity in order to obtain sufficient funds to purchase his necessary supply of narcotics. . . . Nevertheless, | am convinced
that Congress has manifested a clear intent to preclude common law extension of the defense beyond those crimes which, like the act of possession, cause direct harm only to the addict himself... . The essential inquiry, then, is simply whether,
at the time of the offense, the defendant, as a result of his repeated use of narcotics, lacked substantial capacity to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law.

BazELon, C.J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part): . . . On the issue of guilt or innocence, Judge Wright's views are closest to my own. I cannot, however, accept his view that the addiction/responsibility defense should be limited to the
offense of possession. | would also permit a jury to consider addiction as a defense to a charge of, for example, armed robbery or trafficking in drugs, to determine whether the defendant was under such duress or compulsion, because of his ad-
diction, that he was unable to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law. . ..
MEIR DAN-COHEN, ACTUS REUS, in ENCYCLOPEDIA OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE 15, 18-19 (1983): There is no escaping the recognition that the requirement of voluntariness is locked in a deadly, and possibly losing, battle with determinism. Scientific
(psychological, biological, or medical) explanations . . . almost invariably increase the deterministic element in our view of human conduct. . . . The more such accounts we possess, the greater the encroachment on the presupposition of voluntari-
ness that underlies the criminal law. Any recognition of a case of involuntariness is bound to take us down a slippery slope, at the end of which we would
p. 1004
p. 1005
have nullified the entire criminal law. On the other hand, a refusal to go down the slope, or any attempt to stop somewhere along the way, is bound to be arbitrary and unfair. ..
NOTES

1. Developments since Moore. Reviewing the subsequent decisions, Professor Richard Boldt finds (The Construction of Responsibility in the Criminal Law, 140 U. Pa. L. Rev. 2245, 2285-2294 (1992):

With few significant exceptions, [state courts] have declined to recognize any version of the involuntariness or lack-of-choice defense pressed by alcoholic or drug-addicted defendants. [T]he near universal hostility accorded

such arguments by the few courts to reach the issue... is significant evidence that a judicially created involition doctrine is unlikely to emerge in the foreseeable future.

Yet in a comprehensive analysis of the issues, Professors Farrell and Marceau conclude that voluntariness must be seen as an implied element (not an affirmative defense) in every crime and that a voluntary actus reus should be a
constitutionally necessary prerequisite to any criminal conviction. See lan P. Farrell & Justin F. Marceau, Taking Voluntariness Seriously, 54 B.C. L. Rev. 1545, 1546 (2013).

2. From drug addiction to societal deprivation. Beyond his position that drug addiction should be a defense when a defendant could not conform his behavior to law, Judge Bazelon subscribed to a more general principle — that

impaired behavior controls from any source should provide a defense. The next Note examines this broader issue.

NOTE ON STRUCTURAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEPRIVATION

RICHARD DELGADO, “ROTTEN SOCIAL BACKGROUND”: SHOULD THE CRIMINAL LAW RECOGNIZE A DEFENSE OF SEVERE ENVIRONMENTAL DEPRIVATION?, 3 LAW & INEQUALITY 9, 20-23 (1985): Judge Bazelon first raised the possibility that
extreme poverty might give rise to an environmental deprivation] defense in United States v. Alexander, [471 F.2d 923 (D.C. Cir. 1973]. . . . In Alexander, one of the defendants shot and killed a marine in a tavern after the marine called him a “black
bastard.” The defense attempted to show that the youth's action stemmed from an irresistible impulse to shoot, which they, in turn, traced to an emotionally and economically deprived childhood in Watts, California. The defendant reported that
when he was young, his father deserted the family and the boy grew up with little money or attention. He was subjected to racist treatment and learned to fear and hate white persons.

A psychiatrist testified that the defendant suffered from impaired behavior controls rooted in [what the psychiatrist termed] his “rotten social background” [RSB]. The psychiatrist refused to label the defendant insane, however. The trial
judge instructed the jury to disregard the testimony about the defendant's deprived background and to consider only whether or not his mental condition met the legal standard of insanity. The jury found him sane and the defendant was sentenced
to twenty years to life.

p. 1005
p. 1006

The court of appeals affirmed. In a lengthy, troubled opinion that concurred in part and dissented in part, Judge Bazelon laid out his early thoughts on the RSB defense. For Bazelon, the trial judge erred in instructing the jury to disregard
the testimony about defendant's social and economic background. That testimony might well have persuaded the jury that the defendant's behavioral controls were so impaired as to require acquittal, even though that impairment might not render
him clinically insane. Apart from this, exposure to the testimony would benefit society. As a result of learning about the wretched conditions in which some of its members live, society would presumably decide to do something about them.

Nevertheless, Bazelon was not prepared to abandon all the trappings of the “disease” model. Among other things, that model provides a rationale for detaining dangerous persons following acquittal. Bazelon reviewed other possible
dispositions for the RSB defendant — outright release, preventive detention, and psychological reprogramming — finding each unacceptable. According to Bazelon, the ultimate solution to the problem of violent crime in our society is some form of
income redistribution coupled with other social reform measures. The current narrow insanity test conceals the need for such reform and thus should be broadened, although disposition of offenders not “sick” in any classic sense remained a prob-
lem for Bazelon. Judge Bazelon further developed his views on an RSB defense in his Hoover lecture” and in a reply article. . . 22

In a response to Judge Bazelon®® and a short rejoinder,2° Professor Stephen Morse argued against Judge Bazelon’s position. For Morse, all environments affect choice, making some choices easy and others hard. Rarely, however,
will environmental adversity completely eliminate a person's power of choice. Poor persons are free to choose or not choose to commit crimes, and the criminal law may justifiably punish them when they give in to temptation and break the law.
Although he conceded a statistical correlation between poverty and crime, Morse denied that poverty causes crime. He pointed out that some poor persons are law-abiding, while some wealthy persons break the law, and that economic improve-
ments often result in more, not less, crime. Moreover, Bazelon’s social-welfare suggestions would be impractical because there is not enough money to eradicate all poverty; giving money to the poor would entail higher taxation, thus endangering
such goals as free accumulation and disposition of wealth; and though eradicating poverty may eliminate some crime, it is a wasteful way to do it. Consequently, Bazelon’s broadened inquiry into culpability could exonerate dangerous criminals
without generating socially useful knowledge or experience. Indeed, Bazelon's defense skirts paternalism. When an individual has freely broken the law, respect for that individual's personhood demands punishment; any other treatment demeans
the defendant, and treats him or her as something less than an autonomous individual.

p. 1006
p. 1007

The Bazelon-Morse debate thus raises, but does not answer, a number of key questions concerning [this kind of] defense. Does economic and cultural disadvantage impair controls or otherwise cause crime, and if so, how? If severe

impairment can be shown in a particular case, what effect should this have on criminal responsibility? What should be done with the successful RSB defendant?

NOTE

Professor Delgado goes on to argue that the criminal law should recognize a defense of severe environmental deprivation. And in a subsequent piece (The Wretched of the Earth, 2 Ala. C.R. & C.L. L. Rev. 1, 9-14 (2011)), Delgado
contends that law is unique among leading disciplines in failing to acknowledge that “poverty is an important determinant of human action and one’s life chances”; as a result, he argues, defendants who suffer severe environmental deprivation be-
come “double victims” who are failed by society during their upbringing and again in their interactions with the law enforcement system.

In accord with Delgado, Professor Theodore Y. Blumoff notes (The Problems with Blaming, in Law, Mind, and Brain 127, 129 (M. Freeman & O. Goodenough eds., 2009) that the prevalent social attitude “accepts without much debate
that the wrongdoing actor virtually always possesses . . . sufficient cognitive and volitional capacity to [avoid] the crime they have committed,” but, to the contrary, “poor environmental conditions do in fact effect changes within an individual's cog-
nitive and volitional control.” See also Robert B. McCaleb, Note, Rejustifying Retributive Punishment on Utilitarian Grounds in Light of Neuroscientific Discoveries More Than Philosophical Calisthenics!, 63 Clev. St. L. Rev. 515, 516 (2015):

RSB is qualitatively different from classical defenses in several relevant ways. First, RSB is uniquely interested in the causal relationship between environmental conditions and social behavior. [This] point of view is widely

accepted in neuroscience, partially (though controversially) accepted in moral philosophy, and generally not accepted in the law. Second, RSB takes a very broad timeline into account. It connects environmental stimuli to an

actor’s later behavior in a way that other defenses do not. [These unique features [are] skeptically received by the classical criminal law mainly because of [their] fundamentally non-scientific, folk-psychological position on

free will. However, discoveries in contemporary neuroscience strongly support each of these features.

Rejecting these views, Professor Erik Luna argues that liability must rest on individual culpability, not “group characterizations or actuarial assessments.” Erik Luna, Spoiled Rotten Social Background, 2 Ala. C.R. & C.L. L. Rev. 23, 45
(2011). To make his point, he suggests a thought experiment in which RSB is inverted and “Spoiled-Rotten Social Background” (i.e., great affluence) becomes relevant to criminal liability. Difficult questions follow, he suggests: If “SRSB” poses
nearly insuperable line-drawing problems (which defendants would be wealthy enough?), the same must be said of RSB. And in what way would SRSB be relevant? If RSB is a defense, SRSB should be an aggravator, but in terms of utilitarian
goals like deterrence and incapacitation, Luna contends, those suffering from RSB might

p. 1007

p. 1008
warrant more punishment and affluent SRSB defendants arguably would warrant less, given their access to employment opportunities and other environmental support. Professor Luna concludes that a substantive criminal law defense like RSB is
not the solution for defendants who face acute environmental deprivation; rather, he argues, what is needed is greater attention to abuses in street-level policing and the delivery of effective defense services for indigent defendants.

For further analysis of these issues, see Nicola Lacey, Socializing the Subject of Criminal Law? Criminal Responsibility and the Purposes of Criminalization, 99 Marq. L. Rev. 541 (2016); Stephen J. Morse, Severe Environmental Depriva-
tion (aka RSB): A Tragedy, Not a Defense, 2 Ala. C.R. & C.L. L. Rev. 147 (2011); Samuel H. Pillsbury, The Meaning of Deserved Punishment, 67 Ind. L.J. 719 (1992). Consider these comments:

HLL.A. HART, PUNISHMENT AND RESPONSIBILITY 31-33 (1968): [NJo legal system in practice admits without qualification the principle that all criminal responsibility is excluded by any of the excusing conditions. . . . This is so for a variety of
reasons.

For one thing, it is clear that not only lawyers but scientists and plain men differ as to the relevance of some excusing conditions, and this lack of agreement is usually expressed as a difference of view regarding what kind of factor
limits the human capacity to control behaviour. Views so expressed have indeed changed with the advance of knowledge about the human mind. Perhaps most people are now persuaded that it is possible for a man to have volitional control of his
muscles and also to know the physical character of his movements and their consequences for himself and others, and yet be unable to resist the urge or temptation to perform a certain act; yet many think this incapacity exists only if it is associ-
ated with well-marked physiological or neurological symptoms or independently definable psychological disturbances. . . .

Another reason limiting the scope of the excusing conditions is difficulty of proof. Some of the mental elements involved are much easier to prove than others. It is relatively simple to show that an agent lacked, either generally or on
a particular occasion, volitional muscular control; it is somewhat more difficult to show that he did not know certain facts . . . ; itis much more difficult to establish whether or not a person was deprived of “self-control” by passion provoked by
others, or by partial mental disease. As we consider these different cases not only do we reach much vaguer concepts, but we become progressively more dependent on the agent's own statements about himself, buttressed by inferences from

“common-sense” generalizations about human nature, such as that men are capable of self-control when confronted with an open till but not when confronted with a wife in adultery. The law is accordingly much more cautious in admitting “de-
fects of the will” than “defect in knowledge” as qualifying or excluding criminal responsibility.
CLARENCE THOMAS, PUNISHMENT AND PERSONHOOD, THE CITY JOURNAL, Autumn 1994, at 31: How did the ideas underlying [the legal revolution in individual rights] affect the functioning of the criminal justice system?
Many began questioning whether the poor and minorities could be blamed for the crimes they committed. Our legal institutions and popular culture began identifying those accused of wrongdoing as victims of upbringing and circum-
stances. Many argued that human actions and choices, like events in the natural world, are often caused by factors beyond one’s control. No longer was an individual
p. 1008
p. 1009
identified as the cause of a harmful act. Rather, societal conditions or the actions of institutions or other people became the responsible causes of harm. These external causes might include poverty, poor education, a faltering family structure,
systemic racism or other forms of bigotry, and spousal or child abuse, just to name a few... .

As a further extension of these ideas, some began challenging society's moral authority to hold many of our less fortunate citizens responsible for their harmful acts. Punishment is an expression of society's disapproval or reproba-
tion. . .. Critics insisted, though, that an individual's harmful conduct is not the only relevant factor in deciding whether punishment is justified. The individual's conduct must be judged in relation to how society has acted toward that individual
in the past. Many began to hesitate to hold responsible those individuals whose conduct might be explained as a response to societal injustice. How can we hold the poor responsible for their actions, some asked, when our society does little to
remedy the social conditions of the ill-educated and unemployed in our urban areas? Similarly, others questioned how we could tell blacks in our inner cities to face the consequences for breaking the law when the very legal system — and indeed
the society — that will judge their conduct had perpetuated years of racism and unequal treatment under the law.

Once our legal system accepted the general premise that social conditions and upbringing could be excuses for harmful conduct, the range of cases that might prevent society from holding anyone accountable for his actions became
potentially limitless. Do we punish a drunk driver who has a family history of alcoholism? A bigoted employer reared in a segregationist environment, who was taught that blacks are inferior? The fraudulent and manipulative businessman who was
raised in a poor family and who had never experienced the good life? The abusive father or husband whose parents mistreated him? A thief or drug pusher who was raised in a dysfunctional family and who received a poor education? A violent
gang member, rioter or murderer who attributes his rage, aggression, and lack of respect for authority to a racist society that has oppressed him since birth? Which of these individuals, if any, should be excused for his conduct? Can we really
make any principled distinctions among them?

An effective criminal justice system — one that holds people accountable for harmful conduct — cannot be sustained when there are boundless excuses for violent behavior and no moral authority for the state to punish. If people know
that they are not going to be held accountable because of a myriad of excuses, how will our society be able to influence behavior and provide incentives to follow the law? How can we teach future generations right from wrong if the idea of criminal
responsibility is riddled with exceptions and our governing institutions and courts lack moral self-confidence? A society that does not hold someone accountable for harmful behavior can be viewed as condoning, even endorsing, such conduct. In
the long run, a society that abandons personal responsibility will lose its moral sense, destroying, above all, the lives of the urban poor.

This is not surprising. A system that does not hold individuals accountable for their harmful acts treats them as less than full citizens. In such a world, people are reduced to the status of children or, even worse, treated as though they
were animals without a soul. There may be a hard lesson here. In the face of societal injustice, it is natural and easy to demand recompense or a dispensation from conventional norms. But all too often, doing so involves the individual accepting di-
minished responsibility for his future. Doesn't the acceptance of diminished

p. 1009

p. 1010
responsibility shackle the human spirit from rising above the tragedies of one’s condition? When we demand something from our oppressors — more lenient standards of conduct, for example — are we merely going from a state of slavery toa
more deceptive, but equally destructive, state of dependency?

What's more, efforts to rehabilitate criminals will never work in a system that often neglects to assign blame to individuals for their harmful acts. How can we encourage criminals not to retum to crime if our justice system fosters the
idea that it is the society that has perpetuated racism and poverty that is to blame for aggression and crime, not the individual who engaged in harmful conduct? Thus, it is society, not the wrongdoer, that is in greatest need of rehabilitation and
reform. .. .

Doubtless the rights revolution had a noble purpose: to stop society from treating blacks, the poor, and others as if they were invisible, not worthy of attention. But the revolution missed a larger point by merely changing their status
from invisible to victimized. Minorities and the poor are human beings — capable of dignity as well as shame, folly as well as success. [They] should be treated as such.

QUESTIONS

1. Is Justice Thomas right to suggest that severe economic deprivation and structural racism do not undermine society's moral right to inflict punishment? That environmental circumstances do not undermine the personal responsibility
of people who commit certain (for example, nonviolent) crimes? That workable lines cannot be drawn?

2. If the substantive criminal law does not offer an excuse to criminal defendants when environmental deprivation and structural racism contributed to their misconduct, should other aspects of the criminal justice process fill this gap?

(@) Should prosecutors take into account defendants’ race or socioeconomic status in exercising their charging discretion or in offering plea bargains? Compare Memorandum from Jefferson B. Sessions, Atty. Gen. to All Fed. Prose-
cutors (May 10, 2017)142 (directing that “federal prosecutors must charge and pursue the most serious, readily provable offense or offenses” in the absence of exceptional circumstances), with Memorandum of Attorney General Eric H. Holder, Jr.
(May 19, 2010)4° (noting that “discretion is essential to the fair, effective, and even-handed administration of the federal criminal laws” and directing that “a federal prosecutor should ordinarily charge ‘the most serious offense . . . that is likely to
result in a sustainable conviction’” but only after “an individualized assessment of the extent to which particular charges fit the specific circumstances of the case” and “fairly represent the defendant's criminal conduct’).

(b) Should juries consider the race or socioeconomic status of defendants before deciding whether to vote to acquit despite the evidence (\., to nullify the criminal law)? For the debate about whether jurors are sometimes legally and
morally justified in voting to nullify charges against African-American defendants in cases involving drug possession and other nonviolent crime, see pp. 181-183 supra.

p. 1010
p.1011

(c) Should sentencing judges or sentencing guidelines take race or socioeconomic status into account in determining levels of punishment? Do Justice Thomas's concerns suggest that leniency is inappropriate at both the guilt and
sentencing phases? Congress has mandated that the federal sentencing guidelines be “entirely neutral” as to race and socioeconomic status. 28 U.S.C. §994(d). Do you agree? Consider Professor Jeffrie Murphy's argument, Chapter 1, p. 35,
supra, that theories of retributive justice must account for structural biases in society against the poor and communities of color such as lack of educational and employment opportunities, housing, transportation, and health care. Can guidelines
be “entirely neutral” as to race and socioeconomic status without considering these structural dynamics?

What about the relevance of other environmental circumstances in sentencing? In United States v. Smith, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 174279 (E.D.N.Y. Dec. 14, 2015), the defendant was convicted of conspiracy to import a substantial quan-
tity of heroin. The guideline sentencing range for her offense called for imprisonment for a term between 108 and 135 months. U.S. District Judge Jack Weinstein imposed a substantially lower sentence (id. at *9-11):

The defendant had a traumatic childhood as a result of the crack cocaine epidemic of the 1980's. She experienced sexual abuse, domestic violence, and all of the stressors associated with extreme poverty. However, as a

parent she has worked hard to prevent her children from such grave experiences. . . . Respectful consideration was given to the sentencing guidelines . . . to ensure that the sentence is “sufficient, but not greater than neces-

sary to comply with the purposes” of sentencing. . . . A custodial sentence is unnecessary and would cause immeasurable harm to the children. [Therefore,] defendant is sentenced to time-served, a supervised release term

of three years, and 500 hours of community service. No fine is levied because defendant is unlikely to have assets from which to pay a fine.

. .. The sentence will send a message that any involvement, for whatever purpose and in whatever capacity, in a conspiracy to import drugs into the United States will result in punishment. Specific deterrence is
achieved through the defendant's understanding of the consequences that accompany a charge such as this and [its] many collateral consequences. . . . Itis unlikely that she will engage in further criminal activity in light of
her disassociation with the co-conspirators, her family obligations . . . and her evident remorse.

QUESTIONS: What sentence does Justice Thomas's analysis suggest for a case like Smith? As a judge sworn to respect the congressional judgment that importing substantial quantities of heroin should be a very serious crime, what sentence
would you impose?

(d) Should structural racism and environmental deprivation influence how we police such behaviors? Some advocates who urge limiting or abolishing the police highlight alternative mechanisms that more directly address those depri-
vations. Professor Allegra M. McLeod (Envisioning Abolition Democracy, 132 Harv. L. Rev. 1613, 1630 (2019)), describes a program in Oregon that sends a response team of “at least one nurse or EMT and one crisis worker in cases of ‘drug and
substance abuse,

p.1011

p. 1012
poverty-related issues, and mental health crises’ without involving police — often intervening to support people who are homeless and other populations otherwise subject to frequent police contact, arrest, and incarceration.” McLeod focuses on
this model as an alternative approach to harm reduction that could usher in more collective democratic governance. But is this model also preferable or necessary to counteract the structural biases in policing itself? For example, there is ample ev-
idence of discriminatory treatment of people in color in policing, prosecution, and sentencing. See Radley Balko, There's Overwhelming Evidence That the Criminal Justice System Is Racist. Here's the Proof, Wash. Post, June 10, 2020.

Even if the administration of punishment cannot fully account for the many other forms of structural bias in American life (from housing to transportation to employment to education to health care), should it at least seek to acknowledge
and adjust for its own contributions to systemic bias? If so, how? Would any effort to reduce punishment or charging or policing result in inadequate protection for underprivileged communities? Or are there alternative models to traditional polic-
ing and punishment that better reduce harm and inequities?

‘1. Justifications and excuses are sometimes treated differently from other defenses for purposes of assigning the burden of proof. See Patterson v. New York, Chapter 2, supra.

1, Because a judge typically is not present at grand jury proceedings, the prosecutor usualy takes responsibilty for explaining to the jurors the applicable law. — EDS.

b, Five dollars in 1984 was equivalent to $13.10 in 2021. See https://www.bls.qov/data/inflation_calculator.htm — Eps.

«©. Allen was less seriously injured and recovered fully from his wounds. — EDs.

2, See Carl M, Cannon, Bemard Goetz's Subway Gunshots Echo Stil, Dec. 22, 2014, htips/ww.realclearpolitics.com/aricles/2014/12/22/bemard_qoetzs subway qunshots echo stil 125034,html

5, For accounts of the case, see Ta-Nehisi Coates, Trayvon Martin and the Irony of American Justice, The Atlantic (July 15, 2013); Manuel Rolg-Franzia, Zimmerman Found Not Guiy in Killing of Trayvon Martin, Wash. Post, July 14, 2013.

4, Zoe Tillman, Feds Won't Bring Civil Rights Charges in Death of Trayvon Martin, Legal Times (Feb. 24, 2015).

1146. [One commentator argued that the] “reason Trayvon Martin died is because he looked a certain way, and it wasn't based on skin colar. f Trayvon Martin had been wearing a jacket... and atte, .. | don't think George Zimmerman would've had any problem. But he was wearing a hoodie, and
he looked a certain way, and that way is how gangstas look. And therefore he got attention.”

5,61 Minn. L. Rev. at 481-482.

5. Eg, State v. Grifin, 2010 WL 292878 (Vt. Jan. 15, 2010).

7. See, e.g. Porter v. State, 166 A.3d 1044 (Md. 2017). Some state statutes also take this approach, e.g., 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. §2503(b) (2021), p. 466 supra.

5, Eg,, Grbbins v. Commonwealth, 483 S.W.3d 370 (Ky. 2016).

11. This version of the homicide — with a drunk Mr. Kelly as the aggressor both in pushing Ms. Kelly to the ground and again in rushing at her with his hands in a threatening position after the two had been separated — is sharply disputed by the State. The prosecution presented testimony intended
to show that the intial scuffle was started by Gladys; that upon disentanglement, while she was restrained by bystanders, she stated that she intended to kill Emest; that she then chased after him, and upon catching up with him stabbed him with a pair of scissors taken from her pocketbook.

‘a, On remand, the prosecution did not challenge the admissibilty of the expert's evidence on “battered woman's syndrome.” Instead It offered its own experts to support the conclusion that the defendant did not meet the criteria of the syndrome. Apparently the strategy was successful because
at the second trial she was again convicted of reckless manslaughter. See Bergen (N.J.) Rec., June 27, 1985, p. A21; Eilzabeth Schneider, Describing and Changing: Women’s Self-Defense Work and the Problem of Expert Testimony on Battering, 9 Women's Rs. L. Rep. 195, 205 n.69 (1986). — EDs.

9, US. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Intimate Partner Violence, 1993-2010 (Nov. 2016) (hereinafter DOJ 2015 Report, pp. 3, 10.

10. US. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal Victimization, 2019, at 5; U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal Victimization, 2018, at 4

111, See Finbar Toesland, Coronavirus Restrictions Highlight LGBT Domestic Abuse Crisis, NBC News, Apr. 17, 2020, https://www.nbcnews.convfeature/nbe-out/coronavirus-restrictions-highlight-igbtq-domestic-abuse-crisis-n1 186376.

112, Disagreements around this Issue echo those that focus on the continued usefulness of the “violence against women” concept in connection with rape. See p. 983 supra.

13, DOJ 2015 Report, supra note 9, at 3.

14, US. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Intimate Partner Violence in the United States 1993-2005 (Dec. 2007), p. 24; U.S. Dept. of Justice, Natl. Institute of Justice, Practical Implications of Current Domestic Violence Research (June 2009), pp. 1, 3.

115, See Reva B. Siegel, “The Rule of Love": Wife Beating as Prerogative and Privacy, 105 Yale LJ. 2117 (1996).

116, See Erin R. Collins, The Evidentiary Rules of Engagement in the War Against Domestic Violence, 90 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 397, 404 (2015).

117, See Lawrence W. Sherman, Policing Domestic Violence: Experiments and Dilemmas (1992); Stephen J. Schulhofer, The Feminist Challenge in Criminal Law, 143 U. Pa. L. Rev. 2151, 2158-2170 (1994); Joan Zorza, The Criminal Law of Misdemeanor Domestic Violence, 8 J. Crim. L. & Criminol-
ogy 46 (1992).

118, Sherman, supra note 17, at 210.

19, See Amy M. Zelcer, Battling Domestic Violence: Replacing Mandatory Arrest Laws with a Trifecta of Preferential Arrest, Officer Education, and Batterer Treatment Programs, 51 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 541, 545 (2014); Lisa A. Goodman & Deborah Epstein, Listening to Battered Women: A Survivor-
Centered Approach to Advocacy, Mental Health, and Justice 90 (2008)

20. Others, however, believe that “victim empowerment” often undermines effective enforcement and the interests of victims themselves. See Jane Alken & Katherine Goldwasser, The Perils of Empowerment, 20 Cornell J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 139, 152 (2010). See also Cheryl Hanna, No Right to Choose:
Mandated Victim Participation in Domestic Violence Prosecutions, 109 Harv. L. Rev. 1849, 1909 (1996), concluding that “leaving the choice of prosecution to the victim... creates more problems than it solves.”

21, See Deseriee A. Kennedy, Using the NFL as a Model? Considering Zero Tolerance in the Workplace for Batterers, 45 U. Balt. L. Rev. 293 (2016); Njeri Mathis Rutledge, Employers Know Best? The Application of Workplace Restraining Orders to Domestic Violence Cases, 48 Loy. LA. L. Rev. 175
(e014),

22, See Goodman & Epstein supra note 19; Nina W. Tarr, Employment and Economic Security for Victims of Domestic Abuse, 16 S. Cal, Rev. L. & Soc. Just. 871 (2007).

23, See Eve S. Buzawa & Carl G. Buzawa, Domestic Violence: The Criminal Justice Response 247-255 (Sd ed. 2003).

24, Quoted in Goodmark, p. 827 supra, at 50-51.

25, Justice Department surveys report that about 150,000 men annually are victims of intimate partner violence, predominantly by their female partners. DOJ 2015 Report, supra note 9, at. 10.

26, Natalle E. Serra, Queering International Human Rights: LGBT Access to Domestic Violence Remedies, 21 Am. U. J. Gender Soc. Pol'y & L. 583, 585 (2019).

27. Leonard D. Pertnoy, Same Violence, Same Sex, Different Standard: An Examination of Same-Sex Domestic Violence and the Use of Expert Testimony on Battered Woman's Syndrome in Same-Sex Domestic Violence Cases, 24 St. Thomas L. Rev. 544, 545 (2012).

28, For a useful overview, see Christina Samons, Same-Sex Domestic Violence: The Need for Affirmative Legal Protections at All Levels of Government, 22 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Soc. Just. 417 (2019); Rylan Lilith, Reconsidering the Abuse That Dare Not Speak Its Name: A Criticism of Recent Legal
‘Scholarship Regarding Same-Gender Domestic Violence, 7 Mich. J. Gender & L. 181 (2001).

29. Ina recent case, M.E. sought an order of protection when the woman she was dating reacted badly to M.E.’s desire to end the relationship. A judge denied relief because the relevant statute applied to situations Involving “persons of the opposite sex who are in a dating relationship or have
been in a dating relationship.” The appellate court held that restriction unconstitutional, M.E. v. T.J., 854 8.E.2d 74 (N.C. Ct. App. 2020), but similar limitations can be common in practice even when not legally explicit.

‘80. See Toesland, supra note 11.

31, See, e.g., Andrea L. Roberts et al., Exposure to American Football and Neuropsychiatric Health in Former National Football League Players, 20 Am. J. Sports Med. (No. 10), p. 1 (2019); Football Players Health Study at Harvard University (Sept. 5, 2019), htips://footbaliplayershealth.harvard.edu/
about/news/results-concussion-playing-experience-and-long-term-health,

82, See, e.g,, State v. Mahoney, 2012 WL 5872100, at “1 (N.J. App. Nov. 2, 2012); Nancy Wright, Voice for the Voiceless: The Case for Adopting the Domestic Abuse Syndrome for Self Defense Purposes for All Victims of Domestic Violence Who Kill Their Abusers, 4 Crim. L. Brief 76 (2009).

a Imperfect self-defense, as we have seen, p. 819 note 4, supra, more commonly applies when the jury concludes that defendants truly believe they have to kill to avold an imminent threat to thelr ives, but that belief was not reasonable. — EDS.

83, Eig., Hernandez v. State, 2006 WL 997922 (Tex. App. Feb. 22, 2006). But in the nonconfrontational case of Evans v. State, 109 So. 3d 1044 (Miss. 2013), the court seemed to relax the imminence requirement by permitting a battered child to use expert testimony on PTSD to support his claim
that his subjective fear of death or great bodily harm could support a defense of imperfect self-defense.

‘34, Compare Porter v. State, 166 A.Sd 1044 (Md, 2017) (allowing the defense), with Varner v. Stovall, 500 F.3d 491 (6th Cir. 2007) (denying the defense).

47. Lenore E. Walker, A Response to Elizabeth M. Schneider's Describing and Changing, 9 Women’s Ris. L. Rep. 223 (1986).

‘85, Traditionally, if the person in danger did not have the right to use force, then the third party had no defense, even if the third party reasonably thought that force was necessary. But most jurisdictions now reject this instance of strict llablity and allow the mistaken third party a defense, provided
that the third party's belief in the need to use defensive force was reasonable. E.g., People v. Walker, 42 N.E.8d 688, 692 (N.Y. 2015). Conversely, if the third party knows that deadly force Is not really necessary (for example, knows that the assallant Is using an unloaded gun), the third party would not be jus-
tifled in kiling the assailant, even if the person attacked might be.

36. E,g,, State v. Janes, 850 P.2d 495, 506 (Wash. 1993).

7, See Richard Maxwell Brown, No Duty to Retreat 4-30 (1991).

‘38, Joseph Beale, Retreat from a Murderous Assault, 16 Harv. L. Rev. 567, 681 (1903).

‘39. Brown, supra note 37.

40, State v. Robbins, 388 N.E.2d 755, 758-759 (Ohio 1979)

41, See State v. Tate, 2015 WL 4719654, at °3 (Tenn. Crim. App. Aug. 10, 2015); Tenn, Code Ann. §39-11-611 (2016).

42, E.g,, Commonwealth v. Gonzalez, 991 N.E.2d 1036, 1046 (Mass. 2013); State v. Hill, 801 N.W.2d 646, 658-659 (Minn. 2011).

43, See Culverson v. State, 797 P.2d 238, 240 (Nev. 1990).

44, Eight additional states follow the same rule as a resutt of judicial decisions. See Stand Your Ground Laws, Giffords Law Center, pp. 9-11 (2021), httpsy/ajfords.orq/lawcenter/qun-laws/policy-areas/quns-in-public/stand-your-ground-laws (providing state-by-state citations).

45. Kansas's SYG law, for example, allows a person claiming setf-defense to block prosecution unless, at a preliminary hearing, the prosecutor can establish “probable cause” to believe that the use of force was unjustified. State v. Collins, 425 P.3d 630 (Kan. Ct. App. 2018). But this gatekeeping
function of the preliminary hearing (or grand jury indictment) is not an innovation but instead a conventional requirement in all criminal prosecutions.

46. The facts set out above are drawn from the reported decision and supplementary details described in Liptak, supra.

47. Mark Follman & Lauren Williams, Actually, Stand Your Ground Played a Major Role in the Trayvon Martin Case, Mother Jones, July 19, 2013, https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2019/07/stand-your-ground-george-zimmerman-trayvon-martin,

48. U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Race Effects of Stand Your Ground Laws 16 (2020) (Statement of Commissioner Michael Yak), https://www.uscor. gov/pubs/2020/04-06-Stand-Your-Ground.paf.

49. Alexa R. Yakubovich et al., Effects of Laws Expanding Civilian Rights to Use Deadly Force in Self-Defense on Violence and Crime: A Systematic Review, Am. J. Pub. Health, Apr. 2021, at e1-e14, https://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/10.2105/AJPH.2020.306101 (finding that self-defense claims
under SYG laws were more often denied when the defendant was a racial minority and the victim was white),

‘50, Rosanna Smart et al., The Science of Gun Policy: A Critical Synthesis of Research Evidence on the Effects of Gun Policies in the United States xxiv, 241-245 (2d ed. 2020), https://www.rand.orc/pubs/research_reports/RR2088-1,htmi

‘51. American Bar Assn., Res. 112 (Feb. 2015), http:/vww.americanbar.org/news/reporter_tesources/midyear-meeting-2015/house-of-delegates-resolutions/112.html,

‘52, E.g, Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. ch. 720, 6/7-4(c)(1) (2021).

53. See, e.g., N-Y. Penal Law §35.15(1)(b) (2021), requiring the nonlethal aggressor to withdraw completely in order to regain the right to self-defense.

2. A common law burglary was the breaking and entering of a mansion house in the night with the intent to commit a felony. ... Burglary under Penal Code section 459 differs from common law burglary in that the entry may be in the daytime and of numerous places other than a mansion house...
and breaking is not required. . . .For example, under section 459 a person who enters a store with the intent of committing theft is guilty of burglary. ... It would seem absurd to hold that a store detective could kill that person if necessary to prevent him from committing that offense. .

54. Eg,, Fla. Stat. §776.013(2) (2021). E.g., Ga. Stat. Ann, §16-3-24.1 (2021).

55. For the classic treatment of the subject, see Egon Bittner, The Functions of the Police in Modern Society (1970).

‘56. See Fatal Force [real time Washington Post database], available at https://www. washingtonpost. com/graphics/investigations/police-shootings-database/.

57. See Black Lives Matter, available at http://blacklivesmatter.com.

‘58, Audra D. Burch et al., How Black Lives Matter Reached Every Comer of America, N.Y. Times, June 14, 2020; Richard Luscombe & Vivian Ho, George Floyd Protests Enter Third Week as Push for Change Sweeps America, The Guardian, June 14, 2020, https://www.thequardian.com/us-
news/2020/jun/07/qeorge-floyd-protests-enter-third-week.

‘59. Tim Arango, Derek Chauvin Receives 22 and a Half Years for Murder of George Floyd, N.Y. Times, June 25, 2021.

‘60. Catie Edmondson, House Passes Sweeping Policing Bill Targeting Racial Bias and Use of Force, N.Y. Times, June 25, 2021.

61. See Kimberly kindy et a., Half of the Nation's Largest Police Departments Have Banned or Limited Neck Restraints Since June, Wash. Post, Sept. 6, 2020.

(62. Ryan Gabrielson et al., Deadly Force, in Black and White (ProPublica, Oct. 10, 2014), https:/www,propublica.orq/article/deadly-force-in-black-and-white,

63. Franklin E. Zimring, When Police Kill ch. 1, at *25 (2017). See also 2020 Washington Post database, supra note 56 (reporting 1,000 fatal police shootings between March 2020 and March 2021).

64.1

65. Gabrielson, supra note 62.

66. Id

7. Zimring, supra note 63, ch. 3.

68. See Kimberly Kindy & Kimbriell Kelly, Thousands Dead, Few Prosecuted, Wash. Post, Apr. 11, 2015.

69, Durham v, State, 159 N.E. 145, 147 (Ind. 1927.

70. Dan Kahan, David Hoffman & Donald Braman, Whose Eyes Are You Going to Believe? Scott v. Harris and the Perils of Cognitive liberalism, 122 Harv. L. Rev. 837 (2008).

1. Its avallable at http://www. youtube.com/watch?v=DBY2y2¥smN0,

‘72, Durham, supra, 159 N.E. at 147 n.3.

73. See Al Baker et al, Beyond the Chokehold: The Path to Eric Gamer's Death, N.Y. Times, June 13, 2015.

74, Kisela v. Hughes, 138 S. Ct. 1148, 1152 (2018)

75, See Michael Wines, Race and Police Shootings: Are Blacks Targeted More?, N.Y. Times, Aug. 30, 2014

76. For example, a study of 95 million traffic stops between 2011 and 2078 found that Black drivers were much more likely to be pulled over than white drivers but that the disparity was significantly lower at night, when police are less able to distinguish the driver's race. The study also found that
Black drivers were more likely to be searched after a stop but that white drivers were more likely to be found with illegal drugs, suggesting that the suspicion threshold for a search was lower for Black drivers than for white drivers. Emma Pierson et al., A Large-Scale Analysis of Racial Disparities in Police
‘Stops Across the United States, 4 Nature Human Behaviour 736 (2020), hittps://dol.orq/10.1038/s41562-020-0856-1. For a review of the extensive empirical literature on this and related issues, see Radley Balko, There's Overwhelming Evidence That the Criminal Justice System Is Racist. Here's the Proof,
Wash. Post, June 10, 2020.

‘7. See pp. 612-815 supra.

78, Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §3.02 at 14 (1985).

79. http:/Awww.recorder.com/News/Local/Needles-Exchanges-in-Massachusetts-1262994

‘80. Today, Massachusetts permits the use of marijuana for both medicinal and adult recreational purposes. [Massachusetts] Cannabis Control Commission, httos://www.mass.gov/orgs/cannabis-control-commission.

81, https://medicalmarijuana.procon.org/legal-medical-marijuana-states-and-dc.

182. La, Rev. Stat. §14:62.5 (2021) defines looting as the “intentional entry [without authorization] into .. . any structure belonging to another ...., in which normal security of property is not present by virtue of a hurricane, flood, fire, [or] act of God, . . . and the obtaining [of] property of the owner”;
violations are punishable by “imprison{ment] at hard labor for [up to] fifteen years.”

£83. Jeremy Lovell, Ferry Safety Still an Issue 10 Years After Herald, J. Com., Mar. 13, 1997, at 3B.

84, See John M. Taurek, Should the Numbers Count?, 6 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 293 (1977); Jeffrie G. Murphy, The Killing of the Innocent, 57 Monist 527 (1973).

‘85, Johannes Andenaes, The General Part of the Criminal Law of Norway 169 (1965).

‘86, Adapted from Sanford H. Kadish, Blame and Punishment 122-123 (1987).

87. For famous discussions of the issues, see Judith Jarvis Thomson, The Trolley Problem, 94 Yale LJ. 1395 (1985); Philippa Foot, Utilitarianism and the Virtues, 94 Mind 196 (1985).

88, See Thomson, supra note 87, at 1397. We are indebted to Alec Walen for calling our attention to the importance of this variation.

‘89. In accord, Edward C. Lyons, Slaughter of the Innocents: Justification, Excuse and the Principle of Double Etfect, 18 Berkeley J. Crim. L. 231 (2013), suggests a defense to the killing of innocents in some cases. For a forceful challenge to the MPC position that a person under attack can defend
by killing innocent aggressors, see Alec Walen, Consensual Sex Without Assuming the Risk of Carrying an Unwanted Fetus; Another Foundation for the Right to an Abortion, 63 Brook. L. Rev. 1051, 1095-1100 (1997).

‘90. Cases that invoke the doctrine of “transferred intent,” see p. 582 supra (and its corollary of transferred privilege), arguably might allow a person in this situation to claim self-defense in connection with acts that cause the death of an innocent bystander.

91. See, eg, Alec D. Walen, Transcending the Means Principle, 33 Law & Phil. 427 (2014); Thomas Nagel, The View from Nowhere 175-185 (1986); Alex J. Bellamy, Supreme Emergencies and the Protection of Non-Combatants in War, 80 Int'l Aff. 829, 849 (2004); Alison Mcintyre, Doing Away with
Double Effect, 111 Ethics 219 (2001).

92. https://www.oregon. qov/oha/PH/PROVIDERP ARTNERRESOURCES/EVALUATIONRESEARCH/DEATHWITHDIGNITYACT/Documents/year23.paf (hereinafter Oregon DWDA Evaluation).

93. Some believe that DWDA's safeguards are citcumwvented in practice and that the state agency charged with monitoring the law needs to scrutinize its implementation more carefully. See Herbert Hendin & Kathleen Foley, Physician-Assisted Suicide in Oregon: A Medical Perspective, 106 Mich.
LL. Rev. 1613 (2008). Compare Steve Perlmutter, Physician-Assisted Suicide — A Medicolegal Inquiry, 15 Mich. St. J. Med. & L. 203, 224 (2011), finding “no alarming problems.”

‘94, Oregon DWDA Evaluation, supra note 92.

95. See https:/mww.deathwithdignity org/leam/death-with-dignity-acts/.

96. Paul Vieira, Deadlock over Canada’s Law Regulating Physician-Assisted Suicide Broken, Wall St. J., June 17, 2016; Catherine S. Shaffer et al., A Conceptual Framework for Thinking About Physician-Assisted Death for Persons with a Mental Disorder, 22 Psychol. Pub. Pol'y & L. 141 (2016).

97. Abigall Abrams, Assisted Suicide Law in Germany Passes Despite Concems over Nazi Association, IB Times (Nov. 6, 2015); David Chazan, France Passes New End-of-Life Legislation to Alleviate Suffering, The Telegraph (Mar. 17, 2015).

98. http:/Awww.dignitas.chy/images/stories/pat/statistik-ftb-jahr-wohnsitz-1998-2020.paf.

99. See Crown Prosecution Service, Policy for Prosecutors in Respect of Cases of Encouraging or Assisting Suicide (updated Oct. 2014), http://www. cps.qov.uk/publications/prosecution/assisted suicide policy.html,

a, Reconsider the treatment of involuntary acts in Chapter 3, pp. 251-254 supra, as a form of excuse as well as the negation of the actus reus element of a criminal offense. — EDS.

'b, Reconsider the defenses of mistake of fact and mistake of law, see Chapter 3, pp. 312-329 and 350-375 supra, as excuses as well as the negation of the mens rea element of a criminal offense. — EDS.

'b. For the leading defense of the view that punishment should be wholly forward-looking and divorced from blame, see Barbara Wooton, Crime and the Criminal Law (1963). For a critique, see H.L.A. Hart, Book Review, 74 Yale LJ. 1825 (1965). — EDS.

1. For the leading defense of the view that punishment should be wholly forward-looking and divorced from blame, see Barbara Wooton, Crime and the Criminal Law (1963). For a critique, see H.L.A. Hart, Book Review, 74 Yale LJ. 1325 (1965). — EDs.

a. Hanaway was an unindicted co-conspirator who acted as the victim in a number of staged accidents. — Eps.

b, New Jersey does have such a statute at the present time, because the legislature eventually enacted the draft proposal discussed later in the court's opinion. — EDs.

6. Several states, by statute, continue to require that the actor have reasonable cause to believe that his life was in danger. . .. Minnesota limits the defense to situations in which “instant death’ is threatened. Minn. Stat. 609.08 (1965).

+12. The most significant difference between the two provisions is the treatment of duress as a defense to murder. The Model Penal Code permits it as an affirmative defense, while the New Jersey Penal Code allows it only to reduce a crime from murder to mansiaughter.

29. 2J. Stephen, History of the Criminal Law of England 108 (1883).

‘30, General Principles of Criminal Law 448 (2d ed. 1960).

100. Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.02 at 242 (1985) (discussing the analogous issue with respect to the reasonableness requirement in the definition of negligence).

101. Law Commission, Consultation Paper No. 122, at 55 (1992).

1102, Prosecutor v. Erdemovié, No. IT-96-22-A, Joint Separate Opinion of Judge McDonald and Judge Vohrah at {171 (Intl. Crim. Trib. for the Former Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, Oct. 7, 1997).

103. Erdemovi¢, supra note 102, Separate and Dissenting Opinion of Judge Cassese, at p. 18.

1a, See the Note on “specific intent” and “general intent,” Chapter 3, p. 289 supra. — EDs.

6. Penal Code, section 240 provides: “An assauit is an unlawful attempt, coupled with a present ability, to commit a violent injury on the person of another.”

.b. Consistent with this approach, subsequent California decisions have ruled that an assault, unlike a classic attempt, does not require a purpose to commit a battery. People v. Chance, 189 P.3d 971, 975 (Cal. 2008) (“An assault is an incipient or inchoate battery. ... As a result, a specific intent to
injure is not an element of assautt.”}; People v. Navarro, 152 Cal. Rptr. 3d 109, 115 (Ct. App. 2019) (“[A] defendant who honestly believes that his act was not likely to resutt in a battery is stil guilty of assault if a reasonable person, viewing the facts known to defendant, would find that the act would directly,
naturally and probably resutt in a battery.”). These decisions remove any ambiguity about the classification of assault; in terms of the traditional distinction, that offense clearly qualifies as a “general intent” crime. — EDS.

104. World Health Organization, Policy Briefing, Alcohol and Violence (2006), https://www.who.nt/violence_injury_prevention/violence/world report/factsheets/pb_violencealcohol.pdt.

105. National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence, Alcohol, Drugs, and Crimes, https://www.ncadd.org/about-addiction/alcohol-drugs-and-crime,

108. Such programs take a variety of forms. One, familiar at off-campus college events, is to designate someone who commits to remain sober during the event and to keep an eye on others in order to prevent or respond to problems. See Stanford Office of Substance Use Programs Education
& Resources, What Is a Sober Monitor?, https://super stanford. edu/trainings/sober-monitor/what-sober-monitor, Another, more important for alcohol-related crime generally, is a “SCRAM” bracelet, a transdermal alcohol-monitoring patch that operates 24/7. See, e.g., SCRAM Systems, Continuous Alcohol
Monitoring, https://www.scramsystems.com/scram-blog/what-Is-scram-cam-bracelet-how-does-it-work, When the wearer has been drinking, the bracelet can send an alert to that effect to law enforcement (e.g., Montana 24/7 Sobriety Program, https://do|mt.qov/247-sobriety-program) or to a commercial
addiction-recovery service (¢.g., Soberlink, https://www.soberlink.com/alcohol-addiction-recovery).

107. See, e.g., Schmuhl v. Commonwealth, 818 S.E.2d 71, 61-82 (Va. Ct. App. 2018). In addition, involuntary intoxication presumably is admissible to negate the mens rea required in a general intent crime, even though voluntary intoxication would not be. The MPC does not address this issue
explicitly, but the availability of such a defense seems implicit in the fact that the rule of §2.08(2), which makes intoxication evidence unavailable to negate recklessness, applies only to voluntary intoxication.

108, Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §4.01 at 363 (1985).

109. U.S. Dept. of Justice, Indicators of Mental Health Problems Reported by Prisoners and Jail Inmates, 2011-2012 (June 2017), https:/bjs.ojp.qov/content/pub/pat/imhprp|i1112,pat.

110. See also Curt R. Barto! & Anne M. Bartol, Introduction to Forensic Psychology 163 (Sd ed. 2012).

111. Eg,, Ark. Code Ann, §16-90-506(d) (2021)

112, Am, Bar Assn., Criminal Justice Standards §7-5.6(b).

113, The Insanity Defense Among the States, available at https://www.findiaw.com/criminal/criminal-procedure/the-insanity-defense-among-the-states.html.

At the time of his arrest, M'Naghten was found in possession of £750, and as a result he “probably had the best-financed defense in the history of the Old Bailey.” He had the assistance of “four of the most able barristers in Britain [and] nine prominent medical experts.” No expert witnesses
appeared for the prosecution. See Richard Moran, Knowing Right from Wrong 90 (1981), which provides a fascinating, detailed account of M’'Naghten’s Case. — EDS.

1. For discussion of the law governing the burden of proof, see p. 948, Note 4, supra. — EDs.

‘5. Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246, 250 n.4 (1952) (quoting Pound, Introduction to Sayre, Cases on Criminal Law (1927).

8. For example, one extensive study examined the opinions held by college students, the general public, state legislators, law enforcement officers, and mental health personnel in Wyoming. Estimates of the frequency with which [felony] defendants entered the plea ranged from 18% to 57%.
During the time period considered, however, the actual frequency was only 0.47%: one case in 200. Similar, although estimates of its success rate varied from 19% to 44%, during the relevant period only one of the 102 defendants who entered the plea was acquitted by reason of insanity. ...

9. Rappeport, The Insanity Plea Scapegoating the Mentally Ill — Much Ado about Nothing?, 24 So. Tex. LJ. 687, 696 (1983)...

17. A. Goldstein, The insanity Defense 18 (1967).

25. W. Winslade & J. Ross, The Insanity Plea 2-3 (1983) (emphasis added).

1114. On the other side of this debate, however, many observers argue that the Court's decisions upholding SVP commitment are unsound, precisely because the effort to distinguish those who can’t from those who won't is, in their view, inherently “vague and not operationalizable.” See, e.g.,
‘Stephen J. Morse, Mental Disorder and Criminal Law, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 885, 953 (2011); see also Sandra G. Mayson, Dangerous Defendants, 127 Yale LJ. 490 (2018).

1115, See Rebecca Hollander-Blumoff, Crime, Punishment, and the Psychology of Seff-Control, 61 Emory LJ. 501 (2012).

1116. See Erica Beecher-Menas & Edgar Garcia-Rill, Actus Reus, Mens Rea, and Brain Science: What Do Volition and Intent Really Mean?, 106 Ky. Ll. 265 (2018); Elizabeth O. Bennet, Neuroscience and Criminal Law: Have We Been Getting It Wrong for Centuries and Where Do We Go from Here?,
85 Fordham L. Rev. 437, 449 (2016) (‘Cleatty, brain scans may be used in sentencing proceedings to identity and support claims of lesser culpability due to circumstances beyond the control of the offender that could have a mitigating effect on the sentence”)

117, See Paul Litton, The Mistaken Quest for a Control Test: For a Rationality Standard of Sanity, in the Insanity Defense: Muttidisciplinary Views on Its History, Trends, and Controversies 185 (Mark D. White ed., 2017); Andrew King-Ries, Arbitrary and Godlike Determinations: Insanity, Neuro-
science, and Social Control in Montana, 76 Mont. L. Rev. 281, 262 (2015); Steven Penney, Impulse Control and Criminal Responsibility: Lessons from Neuroscience, 35 Int'l J.L. & Psychiatry 99 (2012).

116. John Fabian, The Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act: Legal and Psychological Aspects of the New Civil Commitment Law for Federal Sex Offenders, 60 Clev. St. L. Rev. 307, 322 (2012),

1119. See Valerie P. Hans & Dan Slater, John W. Hinckley, Jr. and the Insanity Defense: The Public's Verdict, 47 Pub. Opinion Q. 202 (1983)

1120. FindLaw, The Insanity Defense Among the States (Jan. 23, 2019), https://www.findlaw.com/criminal/eriminal-procedure/the-insanity-defense-among-the-states.htil,

121.1.

+122, Hugh McGinley & Richard Pasewark, National Survey of the Frequency and Success of the Insanity Plea and Alternate Pleas, J. Psychiatry & L. (Spring 1989), at 205, 208-214.

1123, James C. McKinley Jr. & Jan Ransom, Nanny Faces Tough Insanity Test: Did She Know Killing Was Wrong?, N.Y. Times, Mar. 27, 2018.

1124, Judge Eugene M. Fahey et al., “The Angels that Surrounded My Cradle”: The History, Evolution, and Application of the Insanity Defense, 68 Buff. L. Rev. 805, 806 (2020).

1125. Mac McClelland, When “Not Guilty” Is a Life Sentence, N.Y. Times Mag. (Sept. 27, 2017).

1126. See National Commission on the Insanity Defense, Myths and Realities 14-15 (1983); Randy Borum & Solomon M. Fulero, Empirical Research on the Insanity Defense and Attempted Reforms, 23 Law & Hum. Behav. 375 (1999).

1127, Rita James Simon, The Jury and the Defense of Insanity (1967).

1128, See Norman J. Finkel, The Insanity Defense: A Comparison of Verdict Schemas, 15 Law & Hum. Behav. 533 (1991); Norman J. Finkel, The Insanity, Defense Reform Act of 1984: Much Ado About Nothing, 7 Behav. Sci. & L. 399 (1989).

1129. Richard A. Paseward et al, Insanity Plea: Statutory Language and Trial Procedure, 12 J. Psychiatry & L. 399 (1984).

130. Margaret A. MoGreevy et al., The Negligible Etfects of California's 1982 Reform of the Insanity Defense Test, 148 Am. J. Psychiatry 744 (1991).

a. See p. 992 infra. — EDs.

131, Eg,, Bechtel v. State, 640 P.2d 1, 7 (Okla. Crim. App. 1992); State v. Curley, 250 So. 3d 236 (La. 2018).

132, Eg,, United States v. Gould, 741 F.2d 45 (ath Cir. 1984).

183, See Christopher Boorse, Premenstrual Syndrome and Criminal Responsibility, in Premenstrual Syndrome 81-124 (B.E. Ginsburg & B.F. Carter eds., 1987).

1184, See Rachel L. Carmickle (Comment), Postpartum lliness and Sentencing: Why the Insanity Defense Is Not Enough for Mothers with Postpartum Depression, Anxiety, and Psychosis, 37 J. Legal Med. 579 (2017).

135. Eg., People v. Babbitt, 755 P.2d 253 (Cal. 1998); see Thomas L. Hafemeister & Nicole A. Stockey, Last Stand? The Criminal Responsibility of War Veterans Returning from Iraq and Afghanistan with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, 85 Ind. LJ. 87 (2010).

136, Eg,, State v. Elzey, 244 A3d 1068 (Md. 2021); see Alan Reed & Nicola Wake, Potentiate Liability and Preventing Fautt Attribution: The Intoxicated “Offender,” 47 J. Marshall L. Rev. 57 (2013); Dawinder S. Sidhu, Criminal Law x Addiction, 99 N.C. L. Rev. 1083 (2021).

187. Eg,, State v. Armstrong, 789 N.E.2d 657 (Ohio Ct. App. 2003); see Melissa Hamilton, Adjudicating Sex Crimes as Mental Disease, 33 Pace L. Rev. 536, 598 (2013); Margo Kaplan, Taking Pedophilia Seriously, 72 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 75 (2015).

‘39. Clark's argument assumes that Arizona’s rule is a rule of evidence, rather than a redefinition of mens rea. We have no reason to view the rule otherwise, and on this assumption, it does not violate due process.

45, Arizona’s rule is supported by a further practical reason. [If substantial mental-disease and capacity evidence is accepted as rebutting mens rea in a given case, the affirmative defense of insanity will probably not be reached or ruled upon; the defendant will simply be acquitted (or perhaps
convicted of a lesser included offense). If an acquitted defendant suffers from a mental disease or defect that makes him dangerous, he will neither be confined nor treated psychiatrically unless a judge so orders after some independent commitment proceeding, But if a defendant succeeds in showing him-
self insane, Arizona law . .. wil require commitment and treatment as a consequence of that finding. .. . It makes sense, then, to channel capacity evidence to the issue structured to deal with mental incapacity when such a claim is raised successfully.

138, Federal law was potentially muddied by enactment in 1984 of 18 U.S.C. §17, which adopted the M’Naghten test of insanity and then declared that “mental disease or defect does not otherwise constitute a defense.” However, as observed in United States v. Twine, 853 F.2d 676, 679 (9th Cir.
1988), “a careful reading of the 1984 Act and its history [shows] that Congress . .. did not intend to eliminate a defendant's ability to disprove gut with mental defect evidence that negates mens real.” This is now the prevailing view. See United States v. Herbst, 460 F. Appx. 387, 394 (6th Cir. 2012).

9. Not only may addiction innocently result from the use of medically prescribed narcotics, but a person may even be a narcotics addict from the moment of his birth. ..

|L If an intoxicated person is actually carried into the street by someone else, “he” does not do the act at all, and of course he is entitled to acquittal. E.g., Martin v. State, 31 Ala. App. 334 (1944) [p. 248 supra].

1. State v. Fearon, 166 N.W.2d 720 (Minn. 1969). — EDs.

b. See, e.g,, Cal. Penal Code §§647() & (g) (2021), which provide that when a person found drunk in public is “unable to exercise care for his or her own safety or the safety of others,” a police officer “shall place the person .. . in civil protective custody [and have the person] taken to a facility,
designated pursuant to... . the Welfare and Institutions Code, for the 72-hour treatment and evaluation of inebriates.” — EDs.

10. The State has a right and duty to prosecute people who, while drunk, commit crimes: drunken drivers, for example, . .. assaulters, and such. This opinion is about people who are charged solely with public intoxication. .

139. As indicated in our earlier discussion of Jones, the parties subsequently settled the case, and the Ninth Circuit then dismissed the litigation as moot. See p. 250, Note 17, supra. The Ninth Circuit reaffirmed the central holding in Martin v. City of Boise, 920 F.3d 584 (8th Cir. 2019).

1140, At least seven federal courts and various state courts have, like Jones, applied Robinson to people who lack permanent housing and concluded that these jurisdictions are effectively punishing the status of being unhoused. Four federal courts and various state courts have upheld ordinances
that apply to unhoused people, concluding that these ordinances are regulating conduct, not the status of lacking housing, similar to the logic of the dissent in Jones. Hannah Kieschnick, Note, A Cruel and Unusual Way to Regulate the Homeless: Extending the Status Crimes Doctrine to Anti-Homeless Ordi-
ances, 70 Stan. L. Rev. 1569, 1582-1583 (2018).

141. Nick Sibilla, Federal Court Strikes Down Virginia's “Habitual Drunkard” Law that Criminalized Owning Alcohol, Forbes (Aug. 2, 2019), https:/Amww.forbes. comysites/nicksibilla/2019/08/02/federal-court-strikes-clown-virginias-habitual-drunkard-Iaw-that-criminalized-owning-alcohol’?
sh=46a647001439,

65, ALI Model Penal Code §2.09, Comment (Tent. Draft No. 10, 1960), at 6.

87. David Bazelon, The Morality of the Criminal Law, 49 S. Cal. L. Rev. 385 (1976).

‘88, David Bazelon, The Morality of the Criminal Law: A Rejoinder to Professor Morse, 49 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1269 (1976).

95. Stephen Morse, The Twilight of Welfare Criminology: A Reply to Judge Bazelon, 49 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1247 (1976).

96. Stephen Morse, The Twilight of Welfare Criminology: A Reply to Judge Bazelon, 49 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1275 (1976).

142, https://www justice. gov/archives/opa/press-release/file/965696/download.

1143. http://www. justice. gov/oip/holder-memo-charging-sentencing.paf

p. 1012
