p. 169
CHAPTER 3
DEFINING CRIMINAL CONDUCT — THE ELEMENTS OF JUST PUNISHMENT
A. INTRODUCTION

Three foundational principles limit the imposition of punishment: legality, culpability, and proportionality. Each of these principles has a long history of recognition in common-law precedents and in state penal codes based on them.
This chapter explores that common-law tradition in depth.

More recently, American criminal law has been shaped by the Model Penal Code (MPC) — a project of the American Law Institute, which is a private nonprofit association of prominent lawyers, judges, and academics. Proposals for this
“model” code, drafted over a ten-year period by a large group of criminal law scholars and practitioners, culminated in a “Proposed Official Draft,” which the Institute endorsed in 1962. The MPC is not, in itself, “law,” and it is not legally binding
anywhere. But since 1962, more than half of the states have enacted modern criminal codes that draw heavily on the MPC, so many state codes look like the MPC. Moreover, the MPC has been influential with courts throughout the country, even
in jurisdictions that have not adopted codes based on the MPC. Courts have increasingly used the MPC as a persuasive source of the doctrines and principles that govern the imposition of criminal liability. The Appendix to this book reprints the
principal provisions of the MPC in their entirety and, as an introduction to them, provides an overview of the origins and evolution of the MPC. See p. 1207 infra.

Like the common-law tradition, the MPC gives central importance to the principles of legality, culpability, and proportionality. Its statement of guiding purposes (§1.02(1)) emphasizes that its provisions aim “to give fair warning of the
nature of the conduct declared to constitute an offense” (legality), “to safeguard conduct that is without fault from condemnation as criminal” (culpability), and “to differentiate on reasonable grounds between serious and minor offenses” (propor-
tionality).

p. 169

p. 190
The Code expands upon the common law by implementing these principles systematically and in detail. Accordingly, along with our close examination of the common-law approach, this chapter focuses on the relevant provisions of the MPC as
well.

In examining the material in this chapter, consider to what extent the American criminal law system is in fact faithful to the three principles identified here. And when departures from them occur, are the departures justified? Is a relax-
ation of the commitment to some or all of these principles responsible in some measure for the current record high rates of incarceration?

B. LEGALITY
Commonwealth v. Mochan

Superior Court of Pennsylvania
110 A.2d 788 (Pa. 1955)

Hit, J. [Two indictments charged that the defendant “intending the morals and manners of the good citizens of this Commonwealth . . . to debauch and corrupt, and further devising and intending to harass, embarrass and vilify . .
‘one Louise Zivkovich .. . unlawfully, wickedly and maliciously did . . . make numerous telephone calls to the dwelling house of the said Louise Zivkovich at all times of the day and night, in which said telephone calls and conversations resulting
therefrom the said Michael Mochan did wickedly and maliciously refer to the said Louise Zivkovich as a lewd, immoral and lascivious woman of an indecent and lewd character, and other scurrilous opprobrious, filthy, disgusting and indecent
language . . . to the great damage, injury and oppression of the said Louise Zivkovich and other good citizens of this Commonwealth . .. , and against the peace and dignity of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.” . . . Defendant was tried and con-
victed before a judge without a jury. He appealed on the ground that the conduct charged in the indictments, concededly not a criminal offense under any Pennsylvania statute, did not constitute a misdemeanor at common law.]

In anumber of States and especially in the common law State of Pennsylvania the common law of England, as to crimes, is in force except in so far as it has been abrogated by statute. The indictments . . . by their language, clearly
purported to charge a common law crime not included in our Penal Code or elsewhere in our statutory law. . . .

Itis of little importance that there is no precedent in our reports which decides the precise question here involved. The test is not whether precedents can be found in the books but whether the alleged crimes could have been prose-
cuted and the offenders punished under the common law. In Commonwealth v. Miller, 94 Pa. Super. 499, 507, the controlling principles are thus stated: “The common law is sufficiently broad to punish as a misdemeanor, although there may be no
exact precedent, any act which directly injures or tends to injure the public to such an extent as to require the state to interfere and punish the wrongdoer, as in the case of acts which injuriously affect public morality, or obstruct, or pervert public
justice, or the

p. 190

p.191
administration of government.” Cf. Com. of Penna. v. DeGrange, 97 Pa. Super. 181, in which it is said: “Whatever openly outrages decency and is injurious to public morals is a misdemeanor at common law.” Any act is indictable at common law
which from its nature scandalously affects the morals or health of the community. . .

To endeavor merely to persuade a married woman to commit adultery is not indictable. Smith v. Commonwealth, 54 Pa. 209. The present defendant's criminal intent was evidenced by a number of overt acts beyond the mere oral
solicitation of adultery. The vile and disgusting suggestions of sodomy alone and the otherwise persistent lewd, immoral and filthy language used by the defendant, take these cases out of the principle of the Smith case. Moreover potentially at
least, defendant's acts injuriously affected public morality. The operator or anyone on defendant's four-party telephone line could have listened in on the conversations, and at least two other persons in Mrs. Zivkovich's household heard some of
defendant's immoral and obscene language over the telephone.

[The] charges in the body of the indictments identify the offense as a common law misdemeanor and the testimony established the guilt of the defendant.

Judgments and sentences affirmed.

Woonsine, J. [dissenting]: Not unmindful of the reprehensible conduct of the appellant, | nevertheless cannot agree with the majority that what he did was a crime punishable under the laws of this Commonwealth.

The majority is declaring something to be a crime which was never before known to be a crime in this Commonwealth. They have done this by the application of such general principles as “it is a crime to do anything which injures or
tends to injure the public to such an extent as to require the state to interfere and punish the wrongdoer”; and “whatever openly outrages decency and is injurious to public morals is a misdemeanor.” . . . Under the division of powers in our consti-
tution it is for the legislature to determine what “injures or tends to injure the public.”

One of the most important functions of a legislature is to determine what acts “require the state to interfere and punish the wrongdoer.” There is no reason for the legislature to enact any criminal laws if the courts delegate to themselves
the power to apply such general principles as are here applied to whatever conduct may seem to the courts to be injurious to the public.

There is no doubt that the common law is a part of the law of this Commonwealth, and we punish many acts under the common law. But after nearly two hundred years of constitutional government in which the legislature and not the
courts have been charged by the people with the responsibility of deciding which acts do and which do not injure the public to the extent which requires punishment, it seems to me we are making an unwarranted invasion of the legislative field
when we arrogate that responsibility to ourselves by declaring now, for the first time, that certain acts are a crime.

When the legislature invades either the judicial or the executive fields, or the executive invades either the judicial or legislative fields, the courts stand ready to stop them. But in matters of this type there is nothing to prevent our invasion
of the legislative field except our own seff restraint. . .. Until the legislature says that what the defendant did is a crime, | think the courts should not declare it to be such.

| would therefore reverse the lower court and discharge the appellant.

p.191
p.192
NOTES

1. The legality principle. One of the most ancient and widely repeated doctrines of the criminal law is the legality principle, often stated as nulla poena sine lege — no punishment without law. Does the conviction in Mochan violate the
nulla poena requirement? Or is that requirement satisfied by the preexisting Pennsylvania doctrine making it a misdemeanor to commit “any act which directly injures or tends to injure the public to such an extent as to require the state to interfere
and punish the wrongdoer”?

In thinking about these questions, consider what values the nulla poena requirement might serve. Perhaps most obvious is the need to give individuals fair warning as to the conduct that could subject them to prosecution. Another is
the need to control discretion of police, prosecutors, and juries. Reflecting these concerns, the legality principle bars both retroactivity and vagueness: The nulla poena principle requires previously established law and that law must be announced
in reasonably clear terms, so that the average person does not have to guess its meaning. The bans on retroactivity and vagueness now have constitutional status, at least under some circumstances. The constitutional issues are explored below,
retroactivity in connection with Keeler v. Superior Court, p. 207 infra, and vagueness in connection with City of Chicago v. Morales, p. 216 infra.

Is it wise to place strict limits on fashioning new criminal offenses retroactively? Do the requirements of prospectivity and clarity give devious people an opportunity to engage in “loop-holing,” finding clever ways to cheat and injure
others in ways not specifically prohibited? Or is loop-holing a price we must pay for affording fair notice and controlling discretion? An unusual British decision similar to Mochan upheld a conviction for a new common-law offense (in this instance,
“conspiracy to corrupt public morals”) on the basis of conduct involving publication of a directory of prostitutes and their services (Shaw v. Director of Public Prosecutions, [1962] A.C. 220 (House of Lords)). Viscount Simonds stated:

[There remains in the courts of law a residual power to enforce the supreme and fundamental purpose of the law, to conserve not only the safety and order but also the moral welfare of the State, and . . . it is their duty to

guard it against attacks which may be the more insidious because they are novel and unprepared for. [GJaps [in statutory law] will always remain since no one can foresee every way in which the wickedness of man may dis-

rupt the order of society. [I]f the common law is powerless in such an event, then we should no longer do her reverence.

2. The institutional limits of courts. Suppose that the Pennsylvania court had reversed Mochan’s conviction for lack of fair warning but had held that, in the future, anyone making obscene phone calls with intent to harass or embar-
rass the recipient would be guilty of a misdemeanor. Suppose that the court, concerned about possible vagueness, had given specific examples of the kind of language that would be considered “obscene.” If Mochan then continued to engage in
similar conduct after the court's decision, and if he were convicted for his subsequent behavior, would that conviction still be troublesome? Is it acceptable for courts to provide the needed specificity, so long as they only do so prospectively? Or
does the legality principle reflect important separation-of-powers values in addition to those protected by requiring prospectivity and clarity? Reconsider Judge Woodside's dissent.

p.192
p. 198

3. Old common-law crimes. For centuries, the English Parliament met infrequently and legislated only sporadically. The criminal law, like the rest of the law, was left to the courts, and it developed slowly, case by case, in what we call
the common-law method. As a result, crimes like murder, manslaughter, larceny, and many others were defined by the judges, with essentially no guidance from Parliament. By the time of the American Revolution, the definitions of these offenses
had been largely settled through this common-law process.

After Independence, most of the new American states continued to apply the common law of England, except to the extent that it was specifically repealed by new statutes. Thus, judge-made crimes like murder, manslaughter, and lar-
ceny, often called “common law crimes,” remained in force throughout the United States. As more penal laws were enacted, some states made their new legislation exclusive and abrogated all common-law crimes not recognized in new statutes.
Others — like Pennsylvania at the time of Mochan — took the position that the common law of England remained applicable in the absence of contrary state legislation. See Note, Common Law Crimes in the United States, 47 Colum. L. Rev. 1332
(1947).

The initial round of state criminal enactments, during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, typically codified the common-law definitions, or sometimes simply incorporated them by implication, for example, by enacting a
homicide statute that gave no definition of murder and stated merely that “all murder is punishable by death.” Thus, many offenses against persons and property retained their traditional, judge-made definitions and continued to be referred to as
“common law crimes,” even after they had acquired a statutory basis.

Starting in the 1960s, statutes adopting the common-law definitions were replaced in most states by modern codifications inspired by the Model Penal Code. But penal codes that reflect the older pattern can still be found in perhaps as
many as a third of the states. In these states, “common-law crimes” of the older sort remain in force; their definitions, though initially judge-made, have long since won legislative approval. These older common-law crimes, despite their name, do
not pose the problems presented in a case like Mochan, where judges define and punish an offense not previously recognized by statute or precedent.

4, New common-law crimes. Contrary to the decision in Mochan, most American jurisdictions — including Pennsylvania — have now abolished the common-law doctrine that conferred on courts an openly acknowledged power to
create new crimes. See, e.g., 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. Ann. §107(b) (2021). The doctrine survives in a substantial minority of the states, however. See Carissa Byrne Hessick, The Myth of Common Law Crimes, 105 Va. L. Rev. 965, 980-981 (2019), noting
that “more than a dozen states expressly retain a role for common law crimes.”

p. 199
p. 194

The Supreme Court has never held it unconstitutional for state judges to create new common-law crimes. To the contrary, the Court has confirmed that judicial crime-creation is constitutionally permissible under some circumstances,
as we will discuss in connection with Rogers v. Tennessee, p. 212 infra. Nonetheless, as a matter of general criminal law principles (as distinct from the narrower requirements of constitutional law), the Court led the opposition to common-law
crimes, with an early decision rejecting the authority of federal judges to create new crimes for matters prosecuted in federal courts. United States v. Hudson & Goodwin, 11 U.S. (7 Cranch) 32 (1812). Soon thereafter, in United States v. Wiltberger,
18 U.S. (5 Wheat) 76, 95 (1820), Chief Justice John Marshall elaborated, emphasizing the “plain principle, that the power of punishment is vested in the legislative, not in the judicial department. It is the legislature, not the court, which is to define
acrime, and ordain a punishment.” See also United States v. Bass, 404 U.S. 336, 349 (1971): “Because of the seriousness of criminal penalties, and because criminal punishment usually represents the moral condemnation of the community, leg-
islatures and not courts should define criminal activity.”

The assumption that rule-of-law values are best served by requiring legislatures to define all crimes does not necessarily stand up to the realities of the legislative process. Professor Hessick points out (Hessick, supra, 105 Va. L. Rev.
at 968-969) that

[sltripping judges of the power to shape substantive criminal law and placing that power exclusively with the legislature, we are told, provides more notice to individual citizens, ensures that decisions about criminal justice

matters are subject to democratic accountability, appropriately separates government powers between branches, minimizes discretion that could lead to abuse, and increases uniformity and deterrence. [Yet in reality,] the

shift away from common law crimes did not result in clearly worded prohibitions that reflect democratic preferences. Instead, legislatures have written imprecise and overly broad criminal laws with extremely harsh penal-

ties[, ensuring] that most defendants will plea bargain, rather than risk trial. As a result, the true scope and meaning of criminal laws have been left to prosecutors, rather than judges. Prosecutors’ decisions about how to

enforce criminal laws — what some have called the real criminal law — are shielded from public view, and they do not bind prosecutors in future cases. . .. Abandoning common law crimes in favor of statutes has resulted in

less certainty, less transparency, and less accountability — hardly a triumph of the rule of law.

5. The meaning of legislation. Because, under the prevailing view, crimes must be defined by statute, the reach of the criminal law in most jurisdictions in theory is determined solely by statutory language. But it is left to the courts to
interpret what the statutory language means. How should judges go about this task? Should they approach it differently in criminal than in civil cases? What safeguards or principles can make sure the crime is really defined by the legislature, not
by a court? Consider these questions as you read the cases that follow.

p. 198
p. 195
McBoyle v. United States
Supreme Court of the United States
283 U.S. 25 (1931)

Justice HOLMES delivered the opinion of the Court.

The petitioner was convicted of transporting from Ottawa, Illinois, to Guymon, Oklahoma, an airplane that he knew to have been stolen, and was sentenced to serve three years’ imprisonment and to pay a fine of $2,000. The judgment
was affirmed. . . . A writ of certiorari was granted by this Court on the question whether the National Motor Vehicle Theft Act applies to aircraft. That Act provides: “Sec. 2. That when used in this Act: (a) The term ‘motor vehicle’ shall include an
automobile, automobile truck, automobile wagon, motor cycle, or any other self-propelled vehicle not designed for running on rails; .. . Sec. 3. That whoever shall transport or cause to be transported in interstate or foreign commerce a motor ve-
hicle, knowing the same to have been stolen, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $5,000, or by imprisonment of not more than five years, or both.”

. . The question is the meaning of the word “vehicle” in the phrase “any other self-propelled vehicle not designed for running on rails.” No doubt etymologically it is possible to use the word to signify a conveyance working on land,
water or air, and sometimes legislation extends the use in that direction. . . . But in everyday speech “vehicle” calls up the picture of a thing moving on land. . . . So here, the phrase under discussion calls up the popular picture. For after including
automobile truck, automobile wagon and motor cycle, the words “any other self-propelled vehicle not designed for running on rails” still indicate that a vehicle in the popular sense, that is a vehicle running on land, is the theme. It is a vehicle that
uns, not something, not commonly called a vehicle, that flies. Airplanes were well-known in 1919, when this statute was passed; but it is admitted that they were not mentioned in the reports or in the debates in Congress. It is impossible to read
words that so carefully enumerate the different forms of motor vehicles and have no reference of any kind to aircraft, as including airplanes under a term that usage more and more precisely confines to a different class. . ..

Although it is not likely that a criminal will carefully consider the text of the law before he murders or steals, it is reasonable that a fair warning should be given to the world in language that the common world will understand, of what the
law intends to do if a certain line is passed. To make the warning fair, so far as possible the line should be clear. When a rule of conduct is laid down in words that evoke in the common mind only the picture of vehicles moving on land, the statute
should not be extended to aircraft, simply because it may seem to us that a similar policy applies, or upon the speculation that, if the legislature had thought of it, very likely broader words would have been used.

Judgment reversed.

Yates v. United States
Supreme Court of the United States
574 U.S. 528 (2015)

Justice GiNsauRG announced the judgment of the Court and delivered an opinion, in which THe Culer Justice, Justice BreveRr, and Justice SoTomayor join.

p. 195
p. 196

John Yates, a commercial fisherman, caught undersized red grouper in federal waters in the Gulf of Mexico. To prevent federal authorities from confirming that he had harvested undersized fish, Yates ordered a crew member to toss the
suspect catch into the sea. For this offense, he was charged with, and convicted of, violating 18 U.S.C. §1519, which provides:

“Whoever knowingly alters, destroys, mutilates, conceals, covers up, falsifies, or makes a false entry in any record, document, or tangible object with the intent to impede, obstruct, or influence the investigation or proper

administration of any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the United States . . . , or in relation to or contemplation of any such matter or case, shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than

20 years, or both.”

Yates was also indicted and convicted under §2232(a), which provides:

“Whoever, before, during, or after any search for or seizure of property by any person authorized to make such search or seizure, knowingly destroys, damages, . . . disposes of, . .. or otherwise takes any action, .. . for

the purpose of preventing or impairing the Government's lawful authority to take such property into its custody or control . . . shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.”

Yates does not contest his conviction for violating §2232(a), but he maintains that fish are not trapped within the term “tangible object,” as that term is used in §1519.

Section 1519 was enacted as part of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, legislation designed to protect investors and restore trust in financial markets following the collapse of Enron Corporation. A fish is no doubt an object that is
tangible. . . . But it would cut §1519 loose from its financial-fraud mooring to hold that it encompasses any and all objects, whatever their size or significance, destroyed with obstructive intent. Mindful that in Sarbanes-Oxley, Congress trained its
attention on corporate and accounting deception and cover-ups, we conclude that a matching construction of §1519 is in order: A tangible object captured by §1519, we hold, must be one used to record or preserve information.

L

On August 23, 2007, .. . Officer John Jones . . . decided to board the Miss Katie to check on the vessel's compliance with fishing rules [and] noticed three red grouper that appeared to be undersized hanging from a hook on the deck.
At the time, federal conservation regulations required immediate release of red grouper less than 20 inches long. Violation of those regulations is a civil offense punishable by a fine or fishing license suspension. Suspecting that other undersized
fish might be on board, Officer Jones proceeded to inspect the ship's catch, [and] determined that 72 fish fell short of the 20-inch mark. With few exceptions, the measured fish were between 19 and 20 inches; . .. none were less than 18.75 inches.
After separating the fish measuring below 20 inches from the rest of the catch by placing them in wooden crates, Officer Jones directed Yates to leave the fish, thus segregated, in the crates until the Miss Katie returned to port [where Jones again]
measured the

p. 196

p.197
fish... . This time, however, the measured fish . .. slightly exceeded the lengths recorded on board. [O]ne of the crew members admitted that, at Yates’s direction, he had thrown overboard the fish Officer Jones had measured at sea, and that he
and Yates had replaced the tossed grouper with fish from the rest of the catch.

[Yates] was indicted for destroying property to prevent a federal seizure, in violation of §2232(a), and for destroying, concealing, and covering up undersized fish to impede a federal investigation, in violation of §1519. By the time of the
indictment, the minimum legal length for Gulf red grouper had been lowered from 20 inches to 18 inches. No measured fish in Yates’s catch fell below that limit. The record does not reveal what civil penalty, if any, Yates received for his possession
of fish undersized under the 2007 regulation.

Yates was tried on the criminal charges in August 2011. [HJe moved for a judgment of acquittal on the §1519 charge [arguing] that the section sets forth “a documents offense.” . . . The trial judge . . . read “tangible object” as a term
“independent” of “record” or “document.” For violating §1519 and §2232{a), the court sentenced Yates to imprisonment for 30 days, followed by supervised release for three years. For life, he will bear the stigma of having a federal felony convic-
tion. On appeal, the Eleventh Circuit [affirmed]. [We] now reverse. . . .

IL.

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act, all agree, was prompted by the exposure of Enron’s massive accounting fraud and revelations that the company’s outside auditor, Arthur Andersen LLP, had systematically destroyed potentially incriminating
documents. . . . Prior law made it an offense to “intimidat[e], threate[n], or corruptly persuad[e] another person” to shred documents. §1512(b). Section 1519 cured a conspicuous omission by imposing liability on a person who destroys records
himself. .. . In the Government's view, §1519 extends beyond the principal evil motivating its passage [to impose] a general ban on the spoliation of evidence, covering all physical items that might be relevant to any matter under federal investiga-
tion.

Yates urges a contextual reading of §1519, tying “tangible object” to the surrounding words, the placement of the provision within the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, and related provisions enacted at the same time. . .. Section 1519, he main-
tains, targets not all manner of evidence, but records, documents, and tangible objects used to preserve them, e.g., computers, servers, and other media on which information is stored.

We agree with Yates and reject the Government's unrestrained reading. “Tangible object” in §1519, we conclude, is better read to cover only objects one can use to record or preserve information, not all objects in the physical world.

A. The ordinary meaning of an “object” that is “tangible,” as stated in dictionary definitions, is “a discrete . . . thing” that “possess[es] physical form,” Black's Law Dictionary 1683 (10th ed. 2014). From this premise, the Government
concludes that “tangible object,” as that term appears in §1519, covers the waterfront, including fish from the sea.

Whether a statutory term is unambiguous, however, does not turn solely on dictionary definitions of its component words. Rather, “[t]he plainness or ambiguity of statutory language is determined [not only] by reference to the language
itself, [but as well by] the specific context in which that language is used, and the

p.197

p. 198
broader context of the statute as a whole.” Ordinarily, a word's usage accords with its dictionary definition. In law as in life, however, the same words, placed in different contexts, sometimes mean different things. [Allthough dictionary defini-
tions . . . bear consideration, they are not dispositive of the meaning of “tangible object” in §1519.

Supporting a reading of “tangible object,” as used in §1519, in accord with dictionary definitions, the Government points to Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 16 [which] requires the prosecution to grant a defendant's request to
inspect “tangible objects” within the Government's control that have utility for the defense. . . . Rule 16’s reference to “tangible objects” has been interpreted to include any physical evidence. Rule 16 is a discovery rule designed to protect defen-
dants by compelling the prosecution to turn over to the defense evidence material to the charges at issue. In that context, a comprehensive construction of “tangible objects” is fitting. In contrast, §1519 is a penal provision that refers to “tangible
object” not in relation to a request for information relevant to a specific court proceeding, but rather in relation to federal investigations or proceedings of every kind, including those not yet begun. Just as the context of Rule 16 supports giving
“tangible object” a meaning as broad as its dictionary definition, the context of §1519 tugs strongly in favor of a narrower reading.

B. Familiar interpretive guides aid our construction of the words “tangible object” as they appear in §1519. We note first §1519's caption: “Destruction, alteration, or falsification of records in Federal investigations and bankruptcy.” That
heading conveys no suggestion that the section prohibits spoliation of any and all physical evidence. . . . Neither does the title of the section of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in which §1519 was placed: “Criminal penalties for altering documents.” . . .
While these headings are not commanding, they supply cues that Congress did not intend “tangible object” in §1519 to sweep within its reach physical objects of every kind. . . . If Congress indeed meant to make §1519 an all- encompassing ban
on the spoliation of evidence, as the dissent believes Congress did, one would have expected a clearer indication of that intent.

. .. The contemporaneous passage of §1512(c)(1) . . . is also instructive. Section 1512(c)(1) provides: “(c) Whoever corruptly — “(1) alters, destroys, mutilates, or conceals a record, document, or other object, or attempts to do so, with
the intent to impair the object's integrity or availability for use in an official proceeding . . . shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both.” . . .

Yates does not dispute . . . that §1512(c)(1)'s reference to “other object” includes any and every physical object. But if §1519’s reference to “tangible object” already included all physical objects . . . then Congress had no reason to
enact §1512(c)(1): ... Nowhere does the Government explain what independent function §1512(c)(1) would serve if the Government is right about the sweeping scope of §1519. We resist a reading of §1519 that would render superfluous an entire
provision passed in proximity as part of the same Act.

The words immediately surrounding “tangible object” in §1519 — “falsifies, or makes a false entry in any record [or] document” — also cabin the contextual meaning of that term. [WJe rely on the principle of noscitur a sociis — a word is
known by the company it keeps — to “avoid ascribing to one word a meaning so broad that it is inconsistent with its accompanying words, thus giving unintended breadth to the Acts of Congress.” [‘Tangible object”] is therefore appropriately read
to refer, not to any tangible object, but specifically to the subset of tangible objects involving records and documents, i.e., objects used to record or preserve information. . . .

p. 198
p. 199

A canon related to noscitur a sociis, ejusdem generis, counsels: “Where general words follow specific words in a statutory enumeration, the general words are [usually] construed to embrace only objects similar in nature to those objects
enumerated by the preceding specific words.” . . . Had Congress intended “tangible object” in §1519 to be interpreted so generically as to capture physical objects as dissimilar as documents and fish, Congress would have had no reason to refer
specifically to “record” or “document.” The Government's unbounded reading of “tangible object” would render those words misleading surplusage. . . . It is highly improbable that Congress would have buried a general spoliation statute covering
objects of any and every kind in a provision targeting fraud in financial record-keeping. . .

Finally, if our recourse to traditional tools of statutory construction leaves any doubt . . . , we would invoke the rule that “ambiguity concerning the ambit of criminal statutes should be resolved in favor of lenity.” .. . “[T]he rule of lenity
ensures that criminal statutes will provide fair warming concerning conduct rendered illegal and strikes the appropriate balance between the legislature, the prosecutor, and the court in defining criminal liability.” [I]t is appropriate, before we choose
the harsher alternative, to require that Congress should have spoken in language that is clear and definite.” . . . For the reasons stated, we resist reading §1519 expansively to create a coverall spoliation of evidence statute, advisable as such a
measure might be. Leaving that important decision to Congress, we hold that a “tangible object” within §1519's compass is one used to record or preserve information. . . .

Justice ALITo, concurring in the judgment.

. .. Three features of 18 U.S.C. §1519 stand out to me: the statute’s list of nouns, its list of verbs, and its title. Although pethaps none of these features by itself would tip the case in favor of Yates, the three combined do so.

Start with the nouns. . . . The noscitur a sociis canon instructs that when a statute contains a list, each word in that list presumptively has a “similar” meaning. A related canon, ejusdem generis teaches that general words following a list
of specific words should usually . . . mean something “similar.” Applying these canons to §1519's list of nouns, the term “tangible object” should refer to something similar to records or documents. A fish does not spring to mind. . . . (W]ho wouldn't
raise an eyebrow if a neighbor, when asked to identify something similar to a “record” or “document,” said “crocodile”?

This reading, of course, has its shortcomings . . . because “record” and “document” are themselves quite general. [A]dding “tangible object” to §1519 would ensure beyond question that electronic files are included. . . . Congress
enacts “catchall[s]” for “known unknowns.” But where noscitur a sociis and ejusdem generis apply, “known unknowns” should be similar to known knowns, i.e., here, records and documents. This is especially true because reading “tangible object”
too broadly could render “record” and “document” superfluous.

Next, consider §1519's list of verbs: “alters, destroys, mutilates, conceals, covers up, falsifies, or makes a false entry in.” . . . How does one make a false entry in a fish? “Alters” and especially “falsifies” are also closely associated with
filekeeping. . . . Finally, my analysis is influenced by §1519’s title: “Destruction, alteration, or falsification of records in Federal investigations and bankruptcy.” This too points toward filekeeping, not fish. [T]he title would not be enough on its own.
In conjunction with those other two textual features, however, the Government's argument, though colorable, becomes too implausible to accept.

p.199
. 200
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice ScaLIA, JusTICE KENNEDY, and Justice THoMas join, dissenting.

. .. The term “tangible object” is broad, but clear. .. . And in §1519, context confirms what bare text says: All the words surrounding “tangible object” show that Congress meant the term to have a wide range. That fits with Congress's

evident purpose . . . to punish those who alter or destroy physical evidence — any physical evidence — with the intent of thwarting federal law enforcement. . .

L

When Congress has not supplied a definition, we generally give a statutory term its ordinary meaning. . . . [T]he ordinary meaning of “tangible object” is “a discrete thing that possesses physical form.” A fish is, of course, a discrete thing
that possesses physical form. See generally Dr. Seuss, One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish (1960). So the ordinary meaning of the term “tangible object” in §1519, as no one here disputes, covers fish (including too-small red grouper).

. .. lagree with the plurality (really, who does not?) that context matters in interpreting statutes. ... And sometimes that means, as the plurality says, that the dictionary definition of a disputed term cannot control. But this is not such an
occasion, for here the text and its context point the same way. . ..

Begin with the way the surrounding words in §1519 reinforce the breadth of the term at issue. . . . And the adjacent laundry list of verbs in §1519 (“alters, destroys, mutilates, conceals, covers up, falsifies, or makes a false entry”) further
shows that Congress wrote a statute with a wide scope. Those words are supposed to ensure — just as “tangible object” is meant to — that §1519 covers the whole world of evidence-tampering, in all its prodigious variety. .. .

And legislative history, for those who care about it, puts extra icing on a cake already frosted. [Section] 1519 . . . prohibited a person from inducing another to destroy “record[s], documents], or other object[s]” — of every type — but not
from doing so himself. Congress . . . enacted §1519 to close that yawning gap. But §1519 could fully achieve that goal only if it covered all the records, documents, and objects §1512 did... . And so §1519 was written . . . “to apply broadly to any
acts to destroy or fabricate physical evidence,” as long as performed with the requisite intent. “When a person destroys evidence,” the drafters explained, “overly technical legal distinctions should neither hinder nor prevent prosecution.” Ah well:
Congress, meet today's Court, which here invents just such a distinction with just such an effect. See United States v. Philadelphia Nat. Bank, 374 U.S. 321, 343 (1963) (“[C]reat[ing] a large loophole in a statute designed to close a loophole” is “il-
logical and disrespectful of . . . congressional purpose”)... .

IL.

A. The plurality searches far and wide for anything — anything — to support its interpretation of §1519. But its fishing expedition comes up empty.

The plurality's analysis starts with §1519s title: “Destruction, alteration, or falsification of records in Federal investigations and bankruptcy.” [But] we have followed “the wise rule that the title of a statute and the heading of a section
cannot limit the plain meaning of the text.” . . .A title is, almost necessarily, an abridgment. [Alecordingly, “matters in the text . . . are frequently unreflected in the headings.” . . .

p.200
p.201

The plurality's [further] argument, relying on the surplusage canon, at least invokes a known tool of statutory construction — but it too comes to nothing. Says the plurality: If read naturally, §1519 “would render superfluous” §1512(c)(1),
which Congress passed “as part of the same act.” But that is not so: Although the two provisions significantly overlap, each applies to conduct the other does not. The key difference between the two is that §1519 protects the integrity of “matter[s]
within the jurisdiction of any [federal] department or agency” whereas §1512(c)(1) safeguards “official proceeding[s]”. . . . Section 1519's language often applies more broadly than §1512(c)(1)'s. . . . For example, an FBI investigation counts as a
matter within a federal department's jurisdiction, but falls outside the statutory definition of “official proceeding” as construed by courts. [Clonversely, §1512(c)(1) sometimes reaches more widely than §1519. For example, because an “official
proceeding” includes any “proceeding before a judge or court of the United States,” §1512(c)(1) prohibits tampering with evidence in federal litigation between private parties [but] §1519 wouldn't ordinarily operate in that context because a federal
court isn’t a “department or agency.” So the surplusage canon doesn't come into play. Overlap — even significant overlap — abounds in the criminal law...

Getting nowhere with surplusage, the plurality switches canons, hoping that noscitur a sociis and ejusdem generis will save it. [But] this Court uses noscitur a sociis and ejusdem generis to resolve ambiguity, not create it. [W]hen words
have a clear definition, and all other contextual clues support that meaning, the canons cannot properly defeat Congress's decision to draft broad legislation. Anyway, assigning “tangible object” its ordinary meaning comports with noscitur a sociis
and ejusdem generis. . .. Those canons require identifying a common trait that links all the words in a statutory phrase. [T]he plurality characterizes records and documents as things that preserve information — and so they are. But just as much,
they are things that provide information, and thus potentially serve as evidence. . . . The destruction of records and documents prevents law enforcement agents from gathering facts relevant to official inquiries. And so too does the destruction of
tangible objects — of whatever kind. .. .

Finally, when all else fails, the plurality invokes the rule of lenity. But even in its most robust form, that rule only kicks in when, “after all legitimate tools of interpretation have been exhausted, ‘a reasonable doubt persists’ regarding
whether Congress has made the defendant's conduct a federal crime.” No such doubt lingers here. The plurality points to the breadth of §1519, as though breadth were equivalent to ambiguity. It is not. Section 1519 is very broad. It is also very
clear. Every traditional tool of statutory interpretation points in the same direction, toward “object” meaning object. Lenity offers no proper refuge from that straightforward (even though capacious) construction.° . . .

p.201
p.202

B. [T]he concurrence suggests applying the term “tangible object” in keeping with what “a neighbor, when asked to identify something similar to record or document,” might answer. “[W]ho wouldn't raise an eyebrow,” the concurrence
wonders, if the neighbor said “crocodile”? . . . But §1519's meaning should not hinge on the odd game of Mad Libs the concurrence proposes. No one reading §1519 needs to fill ina blank after the words “records” and “documents.” That is be-
cause Congress, quite helpfully, already did so — adding the term “tangible object.” The issue in this case is what that term means. So if the concurrence wishes to ask its neighbor a question, I'd recommend a more pertinent one: Do you think a
fish (or, if the concurrence prefers, a crocodile) is a “tangible object”? As to that query, “who wouldn't raise an eyebrow” if the neighbor said “no”?

[he concurrence neglects the proper function of catchall phrases like “or tangible object.” The reason Congress uses such terms is precisely to reach things that, in the concurrence’s words, “dol] not spring to mind.” . . . Congress re-
alizes that in a game of free association with “record” and “document,” it will never think of all the other things — including crocodiles and fish — whose destruction or alteration can (less frequently but just as effectively) thwart law enforcement... .

The concurrence suggests that the term “tangible object” serves not as a catchall for physical evidence but to “ensure beyond question” that e-mails and other electronic files fall within §1519's compass. But that claim is eyebrow-
raising in its own right. Would a Congress wishing to make certain that §1519 applies to e-mails add the phrase “tangible object” (as opposed, say, to “electronic communications”)? Would a judge or jury member predictably find that “tangible ob-
ject” encompasses something as virtual as e-mail (as compared, say, with something as real as a fish)? If not (and the answer is not), then that term cannot function as a failsafe for e-mails. .. .

Ill.

Ifnone of the traditional tools of statutory interpretation can produce today’s result, then what accounts for it? The plurality offers a clue when it emphasizes the disproportionate penalties §1519 imposes if the law is read broadly. . . .
That brings to the surface the real issue: overcriminalization and excessive punishment in the U.S. Code.

[think the plurality somewhat — though only somewhat — exaggerates the matter. The plurality omits from its description of §1519 the requirement that a person act “knowingly” and with “the intent to impede, obstruct, or influence”
federal law enforcement. And in highlighting §1519's maximum penalty, the plurality glosses over the absence of any prescribed minimum. (Let's not forget that Yates’s sentence was not 20 years, but 30 days.) Congress presumably enacts laws
with high maximums and no minimums when it thinks the prohibited conduct may run the gamut from major to minor. That is assuredly true of acts obstructing justice. . .. Most district judges, as Congress knows, will recognize differences [and] try
to make the punishment fit the crime. Still and all, | tend to think, for the reasons the plurality gives, that §1519 is a bad law — too broad and undifferentiated, with too-high maximum penalties, which give prosecutors too much leverage and sen-
tencers too much discretion. And I'd go further: In those ways, §1519 is unfortunately not an outlier, but an emblem of a deeper pathology in the federal criminal code.

p.202
p. 203

But whatever the wisdom or folly of §1519, this Court does not get to rewrite the law. . . . If judges disagree with Congress's choice, we are perfectly entitled to say so — in lectures, in law review articles, and even in dicta. But we are not
entitled to replace the statute Congress enacted with an alternative of our own design. I respectfully dissent.
NOTES

1. The rule of lenity. What, precisely, is the “rule of lenity”? In Yates, the plurality opinion states the rule as requiring that “ambiguity concerning the ambit of criminal statutes should be resolved in favor of lenity.” The opinion further
notes that this rule “ensures that criminal statutes will provide fair warning concerning conduct rendered illegal and strikes the appropriate balance between the legislature, the prosecutor, and the court in defining criminal liability.” Note the qual-
ification that the rule applies only to criminal statutes. Why don’t we apply a similar “fair warning” requirement in civil cases that can result in severe negative consequences, such as the taking of a home or the revocation of a person's right to
practice her profession? Government actions in the civil regulatory sphere raise the same separation of powers concerns about the respective roles of the legislature, the court, and the enforcing agency. What, if anything, is unique about criminal
matters?

Two distinct versions of the criminal law’s lenity doctrine have been influential. In one, the doctrine operates at the outset to block judicial speculation about the significance of context and legislative intent; it requires courts to adopt the
narrowest plausible interpretation of a criminal statute's text. In the other version, the doctrine comes into play only as a “last resort,” when all other tools of interpretation fail to clarify the statute's meaning.2

The first conception of the lenity doctrine was more common in the past. It is less important today, but it has had prominent modern defenders. See, e.g., United States v. R.L.C., 503 U.S. 291, 307 (1992) (Scalia, J., concurring). See also
United States v. Hayes, 555 U.S. 415, 436-437 (2009), where Chief Justice Roberts, in dissent, argued that the Court should have relied on the lenity doctrine rather than turning to legislative history: “If the rule of lenity means anything, it is that an
individual should not go to jail for failing to. .. comb through obscure legislative history.” The second approach is now dominant in state and federal courts. See Ocasio v. United States, 136 S. Ct. 1423, 1434 n.8 (2016), where the Court, explain-
ing its current approach, said that lenity can be invoked to interpret a criminal statute only when there is a “grievous ambiguity or uncertainty,” so extreme that the Court “can make no more than a guess as to what Congress intended.”

Does the second approach do too little to rein in the expansion and overreach of the criminal law? Does it adequately serve the lenity doctrine’s goal of ensuring fair warming? For example, if defendants can determine a statute's
meaning

p.203

p.208
only by consulting legislative history and applying other complex tools of statutory interpretation, can we really say that they had fair warning? Shon Hopwood offers additional criticisms of the currently prevalent approach (Hopwood, Restoring the
Historical Rule of Lenity as a Canon, 95 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 918, 918 (2020)):

‘As compared to the modern version of the rule of lenity, the historical rule of strict construction better advances democratic accountability, protects individual liberty, furthers the due process principle of fair warning, and

aligns with the modified version of textualism practiced by much of the federal judiciary today.

Although the rule of lenity is typically applied as a matter of judge-made common law, it can be codified. In 2015, Texas promulgated a statute that requires reasonable ambiguities in statutes to be resolved in favor of defendants. Tex.
Govt. Code §311.035 (2015). The Model Penal Code, along with many state statutes, takes a different approach, in which lenity gets no special consideration at all. See MPC §1.02(3), in the Appendix to this book.

In evaluating each of these approaches, consider how they apply in the following situations:

(a) McBoyle. What purpose was served by reversing McBoyle’s conviction? Would upholding the conviction have subjected McBoyle to punishment without fair warning? Perhaps the Court was less concerned with fairness to
McBoyle than with protecting the prerogatives of the legislature. But was there any reason to think that Congress did not want to punish actions like McBoyle’s? Do we know what punishment Congress thought appropriate to authorize? Are the
reasons for federal involvement weaker in the case of stolen airplanes than in the case of stolen automobiles?

(b) Yates. What purpose was served by reversing Yates’s conviction? Yates certainly knew it was wrong for him to throw the fish overboard. And he does not contest his conviction under 18 U.S.C. §2232(a). Under these circumstances,
how can Yates reasonably claim a lack of fair warning for his conviction under 18 U.S.C. §1519? Perhaps the problem is that Yates is exposed to greater punishment (a maximum of 20 years) under §1519 than under §2232(a) (a maximum of five
years). But given that he received a sentence of 30 days, does this argument hold? Arguably, there is a broader principle at work: If the dissent is right that “§1519 is a bad law — too broad and undifferentiated, with too-high maximum penalties,
which give prosecutors too much leverage and sentencers too much discretion,” isn’t the rule of lenity still necessary to mitigate the problems of severity and discretion, even if a particular defendant did not suffer the harshest potential conse-
quences? But if the dissent is correct that §1519 is “not an outlier, but an emblem of a deeper pathology,” does that suggest that courts have been too lax in their commitment to principles of legality and lenity?

As in McBoyle, an additional concern may have been the court's desire to ensure that criminalization decisions be made by the legislature, not by the courts. Are there reasons to think that Congress did not want to punish conduct like
Yates’s? What result seems more consistent with Congress's intent? Both the plurality and the dissent observe that the provision came about because of a previous loophole in the law: While the prior law reached instances where an individual co-
erced a third person to destroy evidence, it did not cover situations where

p. 208

p. 205
individuals destroyed such evidence on their own. Does it make sense to limit the coverage of a law that is designed to fill such a loophole? Or is it unclear how far Congress intended to go in filling the gap? But even if filling the loophole is a
laudable goal, there remains a question whether the best way to do so is to use broad language that leaves wide charging discretion to prosecutors. Does the prosecutor's charging decision in Yates itself demonstrate the need for reading statutes
more narrowly to cabin prosecutorial overreach?

(c) Using a gun. A federal statute, 18 U.S.C. §924(c), imposes a five-year mandatory minimum sentence on anyone who “during and in relation to [a drug trafficking crime] uses or carries a firearm.” John Angus Smith attempted to buy
two ounces of cocaine, but instead of paying cash, he offered to trade the drugs for his MAC10 firearm. Prosecutors argued that the five-year penalty enhancement applied to anyone who “uses” a firearm in this fashion. The legislative history was
silent on the subject. In Smith v. United States, 508 U.S. 223 (1993), the Court acknowledged that the statutory language “normally evokes an image of . . . use as a weapon.” But the Court also saw “no reason why Congress would have [drawn] a
fine metaphysical distinction between a gun’s role in a drug offense as a weapon and its role as an item of barter; it creates a grave possibility of violence and death in either capacity.” On that ground, the Court held that “use” should be interpreted
to include use of a gun as a form of payment. Do you agree? Is the result consistent with McBoyle?

2. Legislative intent. Statutory interpretation, in criminal cases and all others, begins with the text of the statute itself. But determining a statute's meaning by considering legislative history and other evidence of the legislature's
apparent intent is also well accepted, especially for statutes outside the domain of criminal law. See, e.g., Robert A. Katzmann, Judging Statutes 9-10 (2014); Wisconsin Public Intervenor v. Mortier, 501 U.S. 597, 610 n.4 (1991). That is not to say
that divining legislative intent from sources beyond the text is always straightforward. State legislatures often produce spotty legislative history. Even where legislative history exists, it is often hard to determine what was the intent of the body as.
a whole, because individual members may support a law for different reasons. In part because of these concerns, Justice Scalia was an outspoken critic of the use of legislative history. Consider Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation 17-18, 22
(1997):

[lltis simply incompatible with democratic government, or indeed, even with fair government, to have the meaning of a law determined by what the lawgiver meant, rather than by what the lawgiver promulgated. . .. Men may

intend what they will; but it is only the laws that they enact which bind us. [U]nder the guise or even the self-delusion of pursuing unexpressed legislative intents, common-law judges will in fact pursue their own objectives

and desires, extending their lawmaking proclivities from the common law to the statutory field. [It is] not compatible with democratic theory that laws mean whatever they ought to mean, and that unelected judges decide

what that is.

QUESTIONS: Though he objects to reliance on legislative history, Justice Scalia maintains that textual meaning, when ambiguous, can be identified by resort to “canons of construction,” such as the canons of ejusdem generis and noscitur a
sociis
p. 205
. 206
discussed in Yates. But notice that the plurality and the dissent in Yates, both relying on those canons, drew diametrically opposed conclusions from them. Under those circumstances, do the canons leave judges just as much (or more) room for
discretionary judgment as legislative history does? See William N. Eskridge, Jr., The New Textualism, 37 UCLA L. Rev. 621, 675-676 (1990). With respect to the legitimacy of resort to legislative history, consider Stephen Breyer, On the Uses of Leg-
islative History in Interpreting Statutes, 65 S. Cal. L. Rev. 845, 847, 863, 874 (1992):

[Law] is a human institution, serving basic human or societal needs. It is therefore properly subject to praise, or to criticism, in terms of certain pragmatic values, . . . such as helping to achieve justice by interpreting the law

in accordance with the “reasonable expectations” of those to whom it applies. . . . The “statute is the only law” argument misses the point. No one claims that legislative history is a statute, or even that, in any strong sense,

it is “law.” Rather, legislative history is helpful in trying to understand the meaning of the words that do make up the statute or the “law.” [VJiewed in light of the judiciary’s important objective of helping to maintain coherent,

workable statutory law, the case for abandoning the use of legislative history has not yet been made.

3. Lenity and the politics of crime. Professor Dan Kahan argues that in practice the federal courts have abandoned lenity and that this is a good thing — that courts should seek to fashion sensible laws rather than leaving this task
to Congress. Kahan, Lenity and Federal Common Law Crimes, 1994 Sup. Ct. Rev. 345. He notes that “[m]aking law takes time, [and] takes political consensus, which is difficult and time-consuming to generate.” Further, the “same constraints that
prevent Congress from enacting a detailed solution to a complex and controversial problem may also prevent Congress from adapting any such solution to changed circumstances.” Id. at 351-352. As a result, he argues that allowing Congress to
delegate its criminal law-making responsibilities to the courts “is much more efficient and more effective than [requiring Congress] to make criminal law without judicial assistance.” Id. at 345.

But doesn't the problem of congressional inertia arise again if courts misunderstand what Congress would have wanted? How easy will it be for Congress to fix such misunderstandings? The answer may depend on the direction in
which the judicial error lies. If the courts resolve doubts in favor of broader criminal liability than Congress prefers, will potential defendants have effective ways to lobby Congress to correct the error? Studies find that the one area where Congress
is relatively quick to act to fix a judicial interpretation with which it disagrees involves criminal statutes that have been interpreted more leniently than the prosecution prefers; the Department of Justice gets Congress's ear quickly. Matthew R.
Christiansen & William N. Eskridge, Jr., Congressional Overrides of Supreme Court Statutory Interpretation Decisions, 1967-2011, 92 Tex. L. Rev. 1317, 1383 (2014). The Supreme Court has noted this dynamic in favor of invoking the “venerable”
rule of lenity precisely because it “places the weight of inertia on the party that can best induce Congress to speak more clearly and keeps courts from making criminal law in Congress's stead.” United States v. Santos, 553 U.S. 507, 514 (2008).

p. 206
p.207
PROBLEM

While pretending to be a 14-year-old girl named “Jennifer,” the defendant, an adult male, engaged in conversations on Internet chat rooms with 13- and 14-year-old girls. He would ask the girls questions about their bra sizes and
whether they had ever been naked in front of boys. The defendant ultimately obtained the phone number for one of these girls and texted her, again claiming to be “Jennifer.” The defendant convinced the girl to remove her pants and masturbate.
When the girl's parents found out, the defendant was charged with and convicted of violating 18 U.S.C. §2422(b), which provides:

Whoever . . . knowingly persuades, induces, entices, or coerces any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years, to engage in prostitution or any sexual activity for which any person can be charged [in any state] with

criminal offense, or attempts to do so, shall be fined under this title and imprisoned not less than 10 years or for life.

After receiving his mandatory minimum sentence of ten years, the defendant appeals, arguing that the statute cannot be applied to his conduct because “sexual activity” must be read to require interpersonal physical contact. Assume the legisla-
tive history is silent on this question. What is the proper reading of the statute? For different views, compare United States v. Taylor, 640 F.3d 255 (7th Cir. 2011) (applying the rule of lenity) with United States v. Fugit, 703 F.3d 248 (4th Cir. 2012)
(finding the meaning of “sexual activity” to be plain and not requiring interpersonal physical contact).
Keeler v. Superior Court

Supreme Court of California

470 P.2d 617 (Cal. 1970)

[Five months after obtaining a divorce, a man intercepted his ex-wife on a mountain road. She was in an advanced state of pregnancy by another man; fetal movements had already been observed by her and by her obstetrician. Her ex-

husband said to her, “You sure are [pregnant]. I'm going to stomp it out of you.” He shoved his knee into her abdomen and struck her. The fetus was delivered stillborn, its head fractured.]
Mosk, J. . .. An information was filed charging petitioner . . . with committing the crime of murder (Pen. Code, §187) in that he did “unlawfully kill a human being, to wit Baby Girl Vogt, with malice aforethought.” . . . His motion to set aside the infor-
mation for lack of probable cause was denied, and he now seeks a writ of prohibition.2 .. .
p.207
p. 208

Penal Code section 187 provides: “Murder is the unlawful killing of a human being, with malice aforethought.” The dispositive question is whether the fetus which petitioner is accused of killing was, on February 23, 1969, a “human
being” within the meaning of the statute. If it was not, petitioner cannot be charged with its “murder”. . ..

Section 187 was enacted as part of the Penal Code of 1872 [which] was, in turn, taken verbatim from the first California statute defining murder, part of the Crimes and Punishments Act of 1850. . .. We begin, accordingly, by inquiring
into the intent of the Legislature in 1850 when it first defined murder as the unlawful and malicious killing of a “human being.” . . . We conclude that . . . the Legislature of 1850 intended that term to have the settled common law meaning of a person
who had been born alive, and did not intend the act of feticide — as distinguished from abortion — to be an offense under the laws of California. . .. We hold that in adopting the definition of murder in Penal Code section 187 the Legislature in-
tended to exclude from its reach the act of killing an unborn fetus.

The People urge, however, that the sciences of obstetrics and pediatrics have greatly progressed since 1872, to the point where with proper medical care a normally developed fetus prematurely born at 28 weeks or more has an excel-
lent chance of survival, ie, is “viable”; that the common law requirement of live birth . . . is no longer in accord with scientific fact, since an unborn but viable fetus is now fully capable of independent life; and that one who unlawfully and maliciously
terminates such a life should therefore be liable to prosecution for murder under section 187. We may grant the premises of this argument. . . . But we cannot join in the conclusion. . .. To such a charge there are two insuperable obstacles, one “ju-
risdictional” and the other constitutional.

Penal Code section 6 declares in relevant part that “No act or omission” accomplished after the code has taken effect “is criminal or punishable, except as prescribed or authorized by this code, or by some of the statutes which it
specifies as continuing in force . .. , or by some ordinance, municipal, county, or township regulation. . . .” This section embodies a fundamental principle of our tripartite form of government, i.e., that subject to the constitutional prohibition against
cruel and unusual punishment, the power to define crimes and fix penalties is vested exclusively in the legislative branch. . . . Stated differently, there are no common law crimes in California. . ..

We recognize that the killing of an unborn but viable fetus may be deemed by some to be an offense of similar nature and gravity; but . . . to thus extend liability for murder in California is a determination solely within the province of the
Legislature. .. .

The second obstacle to the proposed judicial enlargement of section 187 is the guarantee of due process of law. Assuming arguendo that we have the power to adopt the new construction of this statute as the law of California, such a
ruling, by constitutional command, could operate only prospectively, and thus could not in any event reach the conduct of petitioner on February 23, 1969.

The first essential of due process is fair warning of the act which is made punishable as a crime. “That the terms of a penal statute creating a new offense must be sufficiently explicit to inform those who are subject to it what conduct on
their part will render them liable to its penalties, is a well-recognized requirement, consonant alike with ordinary notions of fair play and the settled rules of law.” (Connally v. General Constr. Co. (1926) 269 U.S. 385, 391.)...

p.208
p.209

This requirement of fair warming is reflected in the constitutional prohibition against the enactment of ex post facto laws (U.S. Const., art. |, §§9, 10; Cal. Const. art. |, §16). When a new penal statute is applied retrospectively to make
punishable an act which was not criminal at the time it was performed, the defendant has been given no advance notice consistent with due process. And precisely the same effect occurs when such an act is made punishable under a preexisting
statute but by means of an unforeseeable judicial enlargement thereof. (Boule v. City of Columbia (1964) 378 U.S. 347.)

In Bouie two Negroes took seats in the restaurant section of a South Carolina drugstore; no notices were posted restricting the area to whites only. When the defendants refused to leave upon demand, they were arrested and convicted
of violating a criminal trespass statute which prohibited entry on the property of another “after notice” forbidding such conduct. Prior South Carolina decisions had emphasized the necessity of proving such notice to support a conviction under the
statute. The South Carolina Supreme Court nevertheless affirmed the convictions, construing the statute to prohibit not only the act of entering after notice not to do so but also the wholly different act of remaining on the property after receiving
notice to leave.

The United States Supreme Court reversed the convictions, holding that the South Carolina court's ruling was “unforeseeable” and when an “unforeseeable state-court construction of a criminal statute is applied retroactively to subject
a person to criminal liability for past conduct, the effect is to deprive him of due process of law in the sense of fair warning that his contemplated conduct constitutes a crime.” Analogizing to the prohibition against retrospective penal legislation,
the high court reasoned:

Indeed, an unforeseeable judicial enlargement of a criminal statute, applied retroactively, operates precisely like an ex post facto law, such as Art. |, §10, of the Constitution forbids. An ex post facto law has been defined

by this Court as one “that makes an action done before the passing of the law, and which was innocent when done, criminal; and punishes such action,” or “that aggravates a crime, or makes it greater than it was, when

committed.” If a state legislature is barred by the Ex Post Facto Clause from passing such a law, it must follow that a State Supreme Court is barred by the Due Process Clause from achieving precisely the same result by

judicial construction. The fundamental principle that “the required criminal law must have existed when the conduct in issue occurred,” must apply to bar retroactive criminal prohibitions emanating from courts as well as

from legislatures.

The court remarked in conclusion that “Application of this rule is particularly compelling where, as here, the petitioners’ conduct cannot be deemed improper or immoral.” In the case at bar the conduct with which petitioner is charged
is certainly “improper” and “immoral,” and it is not contended he was exercising a constitutionally favored right. But the matter is simply one of degree, and it cannot be denied that the guarantee of due process extends to violent as well as peace-
ful men. The issue remains, would the judicial enlargement of section 187 now proposed have been foreseeable to this petitioner? . . .

Turning to the case law, we find no reported decision of the California courts which should have given petitioner notice that the killing of an unborn but viable fetus was prohibited by section 187. . . . Finally, although a defendant is not
bound

p.209
p.210
to know the decisional law of other states, . . . the cases decided in our sister states from [1947] to the present are unanimous in requiring proof that the child was born alive before a charge of homicide can be sustained. . . .

We conclude that the judicial enlargement of section 187 now urged upon us by the People would not have been foreseeable to this petitioner, and hence that its adoption at this time would deny him due process of law... .

Burke, J., dissenting. The majority hold that “Baby Girl” Vogt, who according to medical testimony, had reached the 35th week of development, had a 96 percent chance of survival, and was “definitely” alive and viable at the time of her death,
nevertheless was not a “human being” under California's homicide statutes. In my view, in so holding, the majority ignore significant common law precedents, frustrate the express intent of the Legislature, and defy reason, logic and common
sense...

The majority opinion suggests that we are confined to common law concepts, and to the common law definition of murder or manslaughter. However, the Legislature, in Penal Code sections 187 and 192, has defined those offenses for
us: homicide is the unlawful killing of a “human being.” Those words need not be frozen in place as of any particular time, but must be fairly and reasonably interpreted by this court to promote justice and to carry out the evident purposes of the
Legislature. .. .

We commonly conceive of human existence as a spectrum stretching from birth to death. However, if this court properly might expand the definition of “human being” at one end of that spectrum, we may do so at the other end. Con-
sider the following example: [There have been continuous] advances in the field of medicine, including new techniques for life revival, restoration and resuscitation such as artificial respiration, open heart massage, transfusions, transplants and a

variety of life-restoring stimulants. . .. Would this court ignore these developments and exonerate the killer of an apparently “drowned” child merely because that child would have been pronounced dead in 1648 and 1850? Obviously not. Whether
a homicide occurred in that case would be determined by medical testimony regarding the capability of the child to have survived prior to the defendant's act. And that is precisely the test which this court should adopt in the instant case. . . .

The majority suggest that to do so would improperly create some new offense. However, the offense of murder is no new offense. Contrary to the majority opinion, the Legislature has not “defined the crime of murder in California to
apply only to the unlawful and malicious killing of one who has been born alive.” Instead, the Legislature simply used the broad term “human being” and directed the courts to construe that term according to its “fair import” with a view to effect the
objects of the homicide statutes and promote justice. (Pen. Code, §4.) What justice will be promoted, what objects effectuated, by construing “human being” as excluding Baby Girl Vogt and her unfortunate successors? Was defendant's brutal act
of stomping her to death any less an act of homicide than the murder of a newly born baby? No one doubts that the term “human being” would include the elderly or dying persons whose potential for life has nearly lapsed; their proximity to death
is deemed immaterial. There is no sound reason for denying the viable fetus, with its unbounded potential for life, the same status.

p.210
p.2it

The majority also suggest that such an interpretation of our homicide statutes would deny defendant “fair warning” that his act was punishable as a crime. Aside from the absurdity of the underlying premise that defendant consulted
Coke, Blackstone or Hale before kicking Baby Girl Vogt to death, it is clear that defendant had adequate notice that his act could constitute homicide. Due process only precludes prosecution under a new statute insufficiently explicit regarding the
specific conduct proscribed, or under a preexisting statute “by means of an unforeseeable judicial enlargement thereof.” . . . The fact that the California courts have not been called upon to determine the precise question before us does not ren-
der “unforeseeable” a decision which determines that a viable fetus is a “human being” under those statutes. Can defendant really claim surprise that a 5-pound, 18-inch, 34-week-old, living, viable child is considered to be a human being? . ..
NOTES

1. The legislative response. Soon after the Keeler decision, the California legislature amended §187 to include the killing of “a fetus” in the definition of murder. Section 187(b) expressly excludes cases of legal abortion with the con-
sent of the mother. The amendment differs from the approach urged in Justice Burke's dissent, in that viability is not an element of the offense; a killing can constitute murder, within the meaning of §187, whenever the fetus has progressed beyond
the embryonic stage of seven to eight weeks. People v. Davis, 872 P.2d 591 (Cal. 1994). Several other states punish fetal homicide as a separate offense, with penalties generally equivalent to those applicable to murder. Some of these statutes,
even broader than California's, apply from the moment of conception. E.g., 720 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 5/9-1.2 (2020).

2. Prosecuting pregnant women. Fetal-homicide laws were initially enacted to address situations like the one in Keeler, where a third party attacks a pregnant woman. Recently, however, prosecutors have used these laws in hun-
dreds of cases against pregnant women themselves, targeting prenatal behavior that endangered their fetuses. See Priscilla A. Ocen, Birthing Injustice: Pregnancy as a Status Offense, 85 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 1163, 1174 (2017). Prosecutions have
been brought both when the fetus dies in utero and when the mother's prenatal behavior causes the baby to die shortly after birth, with the mother’s responsibility for the death premised on prenatal conduct ranging from drug use to dangerous
driving to failure to obtain adequate prenatal care. See Comment, 133 Harv. L. Rev. 1087, 1092-1093 (2020). The breadth of that theory confers vast prosecutorial discretion in deciding when to charge, and the targets of these prosecutions have
been disproportionately poor women of color. Id. at 1094.

In Bei Bei Shuai v. State, 966 N.E.2d 619, 626 (Ind. Ct. App. 2012), a pregnant woman had ingested rat poison in an effort to kill herself, causing a premature birth and the baby's death four days later; the court upheld a homicide charge
under a statute that defines murder to include “knowingly or intentionally killing] a fetus that has attained viability.” For federal prosecutions, the Unborn Victims of Violence Act punishes anyone who commits certain federal crimes and as a result
kills o injures “a child, who is in utero at the time the conduct takes place.” 18 U.S.C. §1841. Unlike many state fetal-homicide laws, the federal statute expressly

pot

p.2i2
excludes from its coverage a mother's actions affecting her own unborn child. Id. §1841(c)(3). But in United States v. Flute, 929 F.3d 584 (8th Cir. 2019), the court upheld a prosecution for involuntary manslaughter, in a case alleging that a Native
American woman's prenatal use of cocaine caused the death of her baby four hours after birth. Because the baby had been born alive, the court held that the Unborn Victims of Violence Act and its maternal exclusion were not controlling and that

prosecutors could use the U.S. Codes general homicide statute to charge the mother for prenatal conduct that led to the baby’s subsequent death.’ For careful exploration of these issues, including the interplay of race, class, and prosecutorial
discretion, see Khiara M. Bridges, Race, Pregnancy, and the Opioid Epidemic: White Privilege and the Criminalization of Opioid Use During Pregnancy,133 Harv. L. Rev. 770 (2020).

3. The retreat from Bouie. In Bouie v. City of Columbia (discussed in Keeler), the Court reasoned that that the due process restrictions on courts include the same ex post facto restrictions applicable to legislatures. That premise
remained well entrenched in the case law for more than three decades. But in Rogers v. Tennessee, 532 U.S. 451 (2001), the Supreme Court reconsidered and gave judges considerable scope to change criminal law retroactively.

Wilbert Rogers had stabbed James Bowdery with a butcher knife. Bowdery went into cardiac arrest and then a coma; he died of related complications about 15 months later. Rogers was convicted of murder, but Tennessee at the time
followed the long-standing common-law rule that an assault resulting in death could be prosecuted as murder only when the victim had died within a year and a day of the defendant's acts. The Tennessee Supreme Court nonetheless sustained
the murder conviction. It concluded that the original justifications for the rule were no longer applicable, announced that “we hereby abolish the common law rule,” and held that its decision eliminating the year-and-a-day requirement applied to
Rogers's case. The U.S. Supreme Court held that this result did not violate the Due Process or Ex Post Facto Clauses:

ROGERS v. TENNESSEE, 532 U.S. 451 (2001): [Bouie] concluded that “if a judicial construction of a criminal statute is ‘unexpected and indefensible by reference to the law which had been expressed prior to the conduct in issue,’ [the construction]
must not be given retroactive effect”... . We found that the South Carolina court's construction of the statute violated this principle because it was so clearly at odds with the statute's plain language and had no support in prior South Carolina
decisions. . ..

Petitioner contends that the Ex Post Facto Clause would prohibit the retroactive application of a decision abolishing the year and a day rule if accomplished by the Tennessee Legislature. He claims that the purposes behind the Clause
are so fundamental that due process should prevent the Supreme Court of Tennessee from accomplishing the same result by judicial decree. . .. To be sure, our opinion

p.2i2

p21
in Bouie does contain some expansive language that is suggestive of the broad interpretation for which petitioner argues. . . . This language, however, was dicta. Our decision in Bouie . . . rested on core due process concepts of notice, foreseeabil-
ity, and, in particular, the right to fair warning as those concepts bear on the constitutionality of attaching criminal penalties to what previously had been innocent conduct. [NJowhere in the opinion did we go so far as to incorporate jot-for-jot the
specific [ex post facto rules] into due process limitations on the retroactive application of judicial decisions.

. .. The Ex Post Facto Clause, by its own terms, does not apply to courts. Extending the Clause to courts through the rubric of due process thus would circumvent the clear constitutional text. It also would evince too little regard for the
important institutional and contextual differences between legislating, on the one hand, and common law decisionmaking, on the other.

. .. In the context of common law doctrines (such as the year and a day rule), there often arises a need to clarify or even to reevaluate prior opinions as new circumstances and fact pattems present themselves. Such judicial acts,
whether they be characterized as “making” or “finding” the law, are a necessary part of the judicial business in States in which the criminal law retains some of its common law elements. Strict application of ex post facto principles in that context
would unduly impair the incremental and reasoned development of precedent that is the foundation of the common law system. . . . It was on account of concerns such as these that Bouie restricted due process limitations on the retroactive appli-
cation of judicial interpretations of criminal statutes to those that are “unexpected and indefensible. . ..”

We believe this limitation . . . accords common law courts the substantial leeway they must enjoy as they engage in the daily task of . . . reevaluating and refining [criminal defenses] as may be necessary to bring the common law into
conformity with logic and common sense. It also adequately respects the due process concern with fundamental faimess and protects against vindictive or arbitrary judicial lawmaking by safeguarding defendants against unjustified and unpre-
dictable breaks with prior law. Accordingly, we conclude that judicial alteration of a common law doctrine of criminal law violates the principle of fair warning, and hence must not be given retroactive effect, only where it is “unexpected and inde-
fensible by reference to the law which had been expressed prior to the conduct in issue.”

[T]he Tennessee court's abolition of the year and a day rule was not unexpected and indefensible. The year and a day rule is widely viewed as an outdated relic of the common law. [T]he primary and most frequently cited justification for
the rule is that 13th century medical science was incapable of establishing causation beyond a reasonable doubt when a great deal of time had elapsed between the injury to the victim and his death; . . . advances in medical and related science
have so undermined the usefulness of the rule as to render it without question obsolete.

For this reason, the year and a day rule has been legislatively or judicially abolished in the vast majority of jurisdictions recently to have addressed the issue. [Pletitioner contends that the judicial abolition of the rule in other jurisdictions
is irrelevant to whether he had fair warning that the rule in Tennessee might similarly be abolished. . . . Due process, of course, does not require a person to apprise himself of the common law of all 50 States in order to guarantee that his actions
p21
p21
will not subject him to punishment in light of a developing trend in the law that has not yet made its way to his State. At the same time, however, the fact that a vast number of jurisdictions have “abolished a rule that has so clearly outlived its pur-
pose” is surely relevant to whether the abolition of the rule in a particular case can be said to be unexpected and indefensible. . . . The [year-and-a-day] rule did not exist as part of Tennessee's statutory criminal code [and] had never once served
as a ground of decision in any prosecution for murder in the State.

There is, in short, nothing to indicate that the Tennessee court's abolition of the rule in petitioner's case represented an exercise of the sort of unfair and arbitrary judicial action against which the Due Process Clause aims to protect.
[The court's decision was a routine exercise of common law decisionmaking in which the court brought the law into conformity with reason and common sense. . . .

ScauiA, J., dissenting: The Court today . . . violates a principle — encapsulated in the maxim nulla poena sine lege — which “dates from the ancient Greeks” and has been described as one of the most “widely held value-judgments in the entire
history of human thought.” J. Hall, General Principles of Criminal Law 59 (2d ed. 1960). Today's opinion produces, moreover, a curious constitution that only a judge could love. One in which . . . the elected representatives of all the people cannot
retroactively make murder what was not murder when the act was committed; but in which unelected judges can do precisely that. . . .| do not believe this is the system that the Framers envisioned — or, for that matter, that any reasonable person
would imagine.

[Llet us be clear that the law here was altered after the fact. . .. Though the Court spends some time questioning whether the year-and-a-day rule was ever truly established in Tennessee, the Supreme Court of Tennessee said it was,
and this reasonable reading of state law by the State's highest court is binding upon us. . . .

The Court attempts to cabin Bouie by reading it to prohibit only “ ‘unexpected and indefensible’ ” judicial law revision. . . . Bowie does indeed use those quoted terms; but they have been wrenched entirely out of context. The “fair
warning” to which Bouie and subsequent cases referred was not “fair waning that the law might be changed,” but fair warning of what constituted the crime at the time of the offense. . . . According to Bouie, not just “unexpected and indefensible”
retroactive changes in the common law of crimes are bad, but all retroactive changes.

. .. There is no doubt that “fair warning” of the legislature's intent to change the law does not insulate retroactive legislative criminalization. Such a statute violates the Ex Post Facto Clause, no matter that, at the time the offense was
committed, the bill enacting the change was pending and assured of passage. .. . “[Flair warning” of impending change cannot insulate retroactive judicial criminalization either.

. .. According to the Court, . .. prohibiting retroactive judicial criminalization . . . would “unduly impair the incremental and reasoned development of precedent that is the foundation of the common law system.” That assessment
ignores the crucial difference between simply applying a law to a new set of circumstances and changing the law that has previously been applied to the very circumstances before the court. [T]he action before us here [is] a square, head on over-
ruling of prior law. [Such retroactive revision of a concededly valid legal rule . . . was unheard-of at the time the original Due Process Clause was adopted. [P]roceeding in that fashion would have been regarded as contrary to the judicial traditions
embraced within the concept of due process. .. .

pot
p21

Itis not a matter, therefore, of “extending the [Ex Post Facto] Clause to courts through the rubric of due process,” and thereby “circumventing the clear constitutional text.” It is simply a matter of determining what due judicial process
consists of — and it does not consist of retroactive creation of crimes. . .. Madison wrote that “ex-post-facto laws . . . are contrary to the first principles of the social compact, and to every principle of social legislation.” The Federalist No. 44, p. 282
(C. Rossiter ed. 1961). | find it impossible to believe, as the Court does, that this strong sentiment attached only to retroactive laws passed by the legislature, and would not apply equally (or indeed with even greater force) to a court's production of
the same result. . . . The injustice to the individuals affected is no less.

Even if | agreed with the Court that the Due Process Clause is violated only when there is lack of “fair warning” . . . ,| would not find such fair warming here. It is not clear to me, in fact, what the Court believes the fair warning consisted
of. Was it the mere fact that “the year and a day rule is widely viewed as an outdated relic of the common law”? So are many of the elements of common-law crimes, such as “breaking the close” as an element of burglary, or “asportation” as an
element of larceny. Are all of these “outdated relics” subject to retroactive judicial rescission? Or perhaps the fair waming consisted of the fact that “the year and a day rule has been legislatively or judicially abolished in the vast majority of jurisdic-
tions recently to have addressed the issue.” But why not count in petitioner's favor . . . (rather than against him) those jurisdictions that have abolished the rule legislatively, and those jurisdictions that have abolished it through prospective rather
than retroactive judicial rulings (together, a large majority of the abolitions)? [E]ven if it was predictable that the rule would be changed, it was not predictable that it would be changed retroactively. .. .

[he only “fair warning” relevant to the issue before us . .. is fair warning of what the law is. [Petitioner had nothing that could fairly be called a “warning” that the Supreme Court of Tennessee would retroactively eliminate one of the
elements of the crime of murder. . . .

NOTE

Subsequent to Rogers, several states that abolished their common-law yeat-and-a-day requirements invoked rule-of-law concerns and refused to apply their decisions retroactively.¢ In light of these cases, is it still reasonably foresee-
able that a state court will change its year-and-a-day requirement retroactively? State courts have also been sympathetic to due-process/ex-post-facto objections when abolishing other long-settled common-law doctrines. E.g., State v. Jones,
216 A.3d 907 (Md. 2019) (refusing to retroactively apply its decision abrogating the common-law rule requiring corroboration of accomplice testimony, even though many other states had previously eliminated the rule); State v. Plastow, 873
N.W.2d 222 (S.D. 2015) (refusing to retroactively apply the court's abrogation

p.216
p.216
of the corpus delecti rule, which requires the prosecution to prove that a crime occurred with evidence other than a defendant's confession). But in Texas, the Court of Criminal Appeals allowed retroactive application of a new exception to the
corpus delecti rule, holding that the exception (which favored the prosecution) was “not so unexpected and indefensible.” Miller v. State, 457 S.W.3d 919, 928 (Tex. Crim. App. 2015). And similarly, the Supreme Court upheld a Michigan decision
retroactively abolishing the state’s common-law “diminished capacity” defense to first-degree murder; the Court concluded that elimination of the defense was not “unexpected and indefensible.” Metrish v. Lancaster, 569 U.S. 351 (2013).
City of Chicago v. Morales
Supreme Court of the United States
527 U.S. 41 (1999)

Justice STEVENS announced the judgment of the Court and delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to Parts |, Il, and V, and an opinion with respect to Parts Ill, IV, and VI, in which Justice Souter and Justice GiNsBuRG join.

In 1992, the Chicago City Council enacted the Gang Congregation Ordinance, which prohibits “criminal street gang members” from “loitering” with one another or with other persons in any public place. [In numerous cases, Illinois trial
courts dismissed charges against defendants arrested under the ordinance, on the ground that the law was unconstitutionally vague. In a consolidated appeal from several of those rulings, the Illinois Supreme Court agreed with the trial courts and
affirmed the dismissal of the charges against all the defendants. The U.S. Supreme Court granted review] The question presented is whether the Supreme Court of Illinois correctly held that the ordinance violates the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment. . ..

The [city] council found that a continuing increase in criminal street gang activity was largely responsible for the city’s rising murder rate, as well as an escalation of violent and drug related crimes. . . . Furthermore, the council stated

that gang members “establish control over identifiable areas . . . by loitering in those areas and intimidating others from entering those areas; and . . . members of criminal street gangs avoid arrest by committing no offense punishable under exist-
ing laws when they know the police are present. ...”
The ordinance creates a criminal offense punishable by a fine of up to $500, imprisonment for not more than six months, and a requirement to perform up to 120 hours of community service. Commission of the offense involves four
predicates. First, the police officer must reasonably believe that at least one of the two or
p.216
p.2i7
more persons present in a “public place” is a “criminal street gang member.” Second, the persons must be “loitering,” which the ordinance defines as “remaining in any one place with no apparent purpose.” Third, the officer must then order “all”
of the persons to disperse and remove themselves “from the area.” Fourth, a person must disobey the officer's order. If any person, whether a gang member or not, disobeys the officer's order, that person is guilty of violating the ordinance. . ..2
I
During the three years of its enforcement, the police issued over 89,000 dispersal orders and arrested over 42,000 people for violating the ordinance.
p.2i7
p21
The Illinois Supreme Court . . . held “that the gang loitering ordinance violates due process of law in that it is impermissibly vague on its face® and an arbitrary restriction on personal liberties.” . .. We granted certiorari, and now affirm.
Like the Illinois Supreme Court, we conclude that the ordinance enacted by the city of Chicago is unconstitutionally vague.
pare
The basic factual predicate for the city's ordinance is not in dispute. As the city argues in its brief, “the very presence of a large collection of obviously brazen, insistent, and lawless gang members and hangers-on on the public ways
intimidates residents, who become afraid even to leave their homes and go about their business. That, in turn, imperils community residents’ sense of safety and security, detracts from property values, and can ultimately destabilize entire neigh-
borhoods.” . .. We have no doubt that a law that directly prohibited such intimidating conduct would be constitutional, but this ordinance broadly covers a significant amount of additional activity. Uncertainty about the scope of that additional cov-
erage provides the basis for respondents’ claim that the ordinance is too vague. . . .
Vagueness may invalidate a criminal law for either of two independent reasons. First, it may fail to provide the kind of notice that will enable ordinary people to understand what conduct it prohibits; second, it may authorize and even
encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement. See Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. at 357. Accordingly, we first consider whether the ordinance provides fair notice to the citizen and then discuss its potential for arbitrary enforcement.
Iv
“Its established that a law fails to meet the requirements of the Due Process Clause if it is so vague and standardless that it leaves the public uncertain as to the conduct it prohibits. . ..” Giaccio v. Pennsylvania, 382 U.S. 399, 402-403
(1966). The Illinois Supreme Court recognized that the term “loiter” may have a common and accepted meaning, but the definition of that term in this ordinance — “to remain in any one place with no apparent purpose” — does not. It is difficult to
imagine how any citizen of the city of Chicago standing in a public place with a group of people would know if he or she had an “apparent purpose.” If she were talking to another person, would she have an apparent purpose? If she were frequently
checking her watch and looking expectantly down the street, would she have an apparent purpose?
p21

p.219

Since the city cannot conceivably have meant to criminalize each instance a citizen stands in public with a gang member, the vagueness that dooms this ordinance is not the product of uncertainty about the normal meaning of “loiter-
ing,” but rather about what loitering is covered by the ordinance and what is not. . . . 24

A] number of state courts [have] upheld ordinances that criminalize loitering combined with some other overt act or evidence of criminal intent. However, state courts have uniformly invalidated laws that do not join the term “loitering”
with a second specific element of the crime.

The city’s principal response to this concern about adequate notice is that loiterers are not subject to sanction until after they have failed to comply with an officer's order to disperse. . . . We find this response unpersuasive for at least
two reasons.

First, the purpose of the fair notice requirement is to enable the ordinary citizen to conform his or her conduct to the law. “No one may be required at peril of life, liberty or property to speculate as to the meaning of penal statutes.”
Lanzetta v. New Jersey, 306 U.S. 451, 453 (1939). Although it is true that a loiterer is not subject to criminal sanctions unless he or she disobeys a dispersal order, the loitering is the conduct that the ordinance is designed to prohibit. If the loitering
is in fact harmless and innocent, the dispersal order itself is an unjustified impairment of liberty. If the police are able to decide arbitrarily which members of the public they will order to disperse, then the Chicago ordinance becomes indistinguish-
able from the law we held invalid in Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 382 U.S. 87, 90 (1965).22 Because an officer may issue an order only after prohibited conduct has already occurred, [the order] cannot retroactively give adequate warning of the
boundary between the permissible and the impermissible applications of the law.

Second, the terms of the dispersal order compound the inadequacy of the notice afforded by the ordinance. It provides that the officer “shall order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from the area.” This vague phras-
ing raises a host of questions. After such an order issues, how long must the loiterers remain apart? How far must they move? If each loiterer walks around the block and they meet again at the same location, are they subject to arrest or merely to
being ordered to disperse again? . ..

p.219
p.220

Lack of clarity in the description of the loiterer’s duty to obey a dispersal order might not render the ordinance unconstitutionally vague if the definition of the forbidden conduct were clear, but it does buttress our conclusion that the
entire ordinance fails to give the ordinary citizen adequate notice of what is forbidden and what is permitted. The Constitution does not permit a legislature to “set a net large enough to catch all possible offenders, and leave it to the courts to step
inside and say who could be rightfully detained, and who should be set at large.” United States v. Reese, 92 U.S. 214, 221 (1876). This ordinance is therefore vague “not in the sense that it requires a person to conform his conduct to an imprecise
but comprehensible normative standard, but rather in the sense that no standard of conduct is specified at all.” Coates v. Cincinnati, 402 U.S. 611, 614 (1971).

Vv

The broad sweep of the ordinance also violates “‘the requirement that a legislature establish minimal guidelines to govern law enforcement.” Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. at 358. There are no such guidelines in the ordinance. In any
public place in the city of Chicago, persons who stand or sit in the company of a gang member may be ordered to disperse unless their purpose is apparent. The mandatory language in the enactment directs the police to issue an order without first
making any inquiry about their possible purposes. It matters not whether the reason that a gang member and his father, for example, might loiter near Wrigley Field is to rob an unsuspecting fan or just to get a glimpse of Sammy Sosa leaving the
ballpark; in either event, if their purpose is not apparent to a nearby police officer, she may — indeed, she “shall” — order them to disperse.

Recognizing that the ordinance does reach a substantial amount of innocent conduct, we turn, then, to its language to determine if it “necessarily entrusts lawmaking to the moment-to-moment judgment of the policeman on his beat.”
Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. at 359. . .. The principal source of the vast discretion conferred on the police in this case is the definition of loitering as “to remain in any one place with no apparent purpose.”

As the Illinois Supreme Court interprets that definition, it “provides absolute discretion to police officers to determine what activities constitute loitering.” We have no authority to construe the language of a state statute more narrowly
than the construction given by that State's highest court. . . .

[The requirement that the officer reasonably believe that a group of loiterers contains a gang member does place a limit on the authority to order dispersal. That limitation would no doubt be sufficient if the ordinance only applied to
loitering that had an apparently harmful purpose or effect, or possibly if it only applied to loitering by persons reasonably believed to be criminal gang members. But this ordinance . . . applies to [flriends, relatives, teachers, counselors, or even total
strangers [who] might unwittingly engage in forbidden loitering if they happen to engage in idle conversation with a gang member.

Ironically, the definition of loitering in the Chicago ordinance . . . has the perverse consequence of excluding from its coverage much of the intimidating conduct that motivated its enactment. As the city council's findings demonstrate,
the most harmful gang loitering is motivated either by an apparent purpose to publicize the gang's dominance of certain territory, thereby intimidating nonmembers, or by

p.220
p.221
an equally apparent purpose to conceal ongoing commerce in illegal drugs. . . . The relative importance of its application to harmless loitering is magnified by its inapplicability to loitering that has an obviously threatening or illicit purpose. . . .
VI

. .. We recognize the serious and difficult problems . . . that led to the enactment of this ordinance. “We are mindful that the preservation of liberty depends in part on the maintenance of social order.” Houston v. Hill, 482 U.S. 451,
471-472 (1987). However, in this instance the city has enacted an ordinance that affords too much discretion to the police and too little notice to citizens who wish to use the public streets.

Accordingly, the judgment of the Supreme Court of Illinois is affirmed.

Justice O'Connor, with whom Justice BREYER joins, concurring: . ..

I share Justice Thomas’ concern about the consequences of gang violence, and | agree that some degree of police discretion is necessary. . . . A criminal law, however, must not permit policemen, prosecutors, and juries to conduct “ ‘a
standardless sweep ... . to pursue their personal predilections.’ ” Kolender v. Lawson, supra, at 358.

. .. Chicago's gang loitering ordinance is unconstitutionally vague because it lacks sufficient minimal standards to guide law enforcement officers. In particular, it fails to provide police with any standard by which they can judge whether
an individual has an “apparent purpose.” Indeed, because any person standing on the street has a general “purpose” — even if it is simply to stand — the ordinance permits police officers to choose which purposes are permissible. Under this
construction the police do not have to decide that an individual is “threatening the public peace” to issue a dispersal order. [Infra, Thomas, J., dissenting.] Any police officer in Chicago is free, under the Illinois Supreme Court's construction of the
ordinance, to order at his whim any person standing in a public place with a suspected gang member to disperse.

Nevertheless, there remain open to Chicago reasonable alternatives to combat the very real threat posed by gang intimidation and violence. For example, the Court properly and expressly distinguishes the ordinance from laws that
require loiterers to have a “harmful purpose,” from laws that target only gang members, and from laws that incorporate limits on the area and manner in which the laws may be enforced. In addition, the ordinance here is unlike a law that “directly
prohibits” [the kind of behavior described in the city’s brief — the] “presence of a large collection of obviously brazen, insistent, and lawless gang members and hangers-on on the public ways.” .. .

[The] ordinance could have been construed more narrowly. The term “loiter” might possibly be construed . . . to mean “to remain in any one place with no apparent purpose other than to establish control over identifiable areas, to intim-
idate others from entering those areas, or to conceal illegal activities.” Such a definition would be consistent with the Chicago City Council's findings and would avoid the vagueness problems of the ordinance as construed by the Illinois Supreme
Court. [S]o would limitations that restricted the ordinance’s criminal penalties to gang members or that more carefully delineated the circumstances in which those penalties would apply to nongang members. . . .

p.221
p.202
Justice THomas, with whom THE CHIEF Justice and Justice ScaLia join, dissenting. ...

[he ordinance does not criminalize loitering per se. Rather, it penalizes a loiterer's failure to obey a police officer's order to move along. . . . Far from according officers too much discretion, the ordinance merely enables police officers
to fulfill one of their traditional functions. Police officers are not, and have never been, simply enforcers of the criminal law. They wear other hats — importantly, they have long been vested with the responsibility for preserving the public peace. . . .
In their role as peace officers, the police long have had the authority and the duty to order groups of individuals who threaten the public peace to disperse. . . .

In order to perform their peace-keeping responsibilities satisfactorily, the police inevitably must exercise discretion. . . . That is not to say that the law should not provide objective guidelines for the police, but simply that it cannot rigidly
constrain their every action. By directing a police officer not to issue a dispersal order unless he “observes a person whom he reasonably believes to be a criminal street gang member loitering in any public place,” Chicago's ordinance strikes an
appropriate balance between those two extremes. Just as we trust officers to rely on their experience and expertise in order to make spur-of-the-moment determinations about amorphous legal standards such as “probable cause” and “reason-
able suspicion,” so we must trust them to determine whether a group of loiterers contains individuals (in this case members of criminal street gangs) whom the city has determined threaten the public peace. . . . In sum, the Court's conclusion that
the ordinance is impermissibly vague because it “ ‘necessarily entrusts lawmaking to the moment-to-moment judgment of the policeman on his beat,’ ” cannot be reconciled with common sense [and] longstanding police practice... .

Ido not . . . overlook the possibility that a police officer, acting in bad faith, might enforce the ordinance in an arbitrary or discriminatory way. But . . . instances of arbitrary or discriminatory enforcement of the ordinance, like any other
law, are best addressed when (and if) they arise. . ..

The plurality's conclusion that the ordinance “fails to give the ordinary citizen adequate notice of what is forbidden and what is permitted,” is similarly untenable. There is nothing “vague” about an order to disperse.? [T]he vast majority
of people who are ordered by the police to “disperse and remove themselves from the area” will have little difficulty understanding how to comply.

[Respondents in this facial challenge bear the weighty burden of establishing that the statute is vague in all its applications. . . . “If any fool would know that a particular category of conduct would be within the reach of the statute, if
there is an unmistakable core that a reasonable person would know is forbidden by the law, the enactment is not unconstitutional on its face.” Kolender, 461 U.S. at 370-371 (dissenting opinion). This is certainly such a case.

p.202
p.228

[)he ordinance does not proscribe constitutionally protected conduct — there is no fundamental right to loiter. It is also anomalous to characterize loitering as “innocent” conduct when it has been disfavored throughout American his-
tory... . The term “loiter” is no different from terms such as “fraud,” “bribery,” and “perjury.” We expect people of ordinary intelligence to grasp the meaning of such legal terms despite the fact that they are arguably imprecise. . . .

The plurality underestimates the intellectual capacity of the citizens of Chicago. Persons of ordinary intelligence are perfectly capable of evaluating how outsiders perceive their conduct, and here “it is self-evident that there is a whole
range of conduct that anyone with at least a semblance of common sense would know is [loitering] and that would be covered by the statute.” See Smith v. Goguen, 415 U.S. 566, 584 (1974) (White, J., concurring in judgment). Members of a group
standing on the comer staring blankly into space, for example, are likely well aware that passersby would conclude that they have “no apparent purpose.” .. .

Today, the Court focuses extensively on the “rights” of gang members and their companions. It can safely do so — the people who will have to live with the consequences of today's opinion do not live in our neighborhoods. Rather, the
people who will suffer from our lofty pronouncements are . .. people who have seen their neighborhoods literally destroyed by gangs and violence and drugs. They are good, decent people who must struggle to overcome their desperate situation,
against all odds, in order to raise their families, ear a living, and remain good citizens. As one resident described, “There is only about maybe one or two percent of the people in the city causing these problems maybe, but it’s keeping 98 percent
of us in our houses and off the streets and afraid to shop.” By focusing exclusively on the imagined “rights” of the two percent, the Court today has denied our most vulnerable citizens the very thing that Justice Stevens elevates above all else —
the “freedom of movement.” And that is a shame. I respectfully dissent.

STEVE CHAPMAN, COURT UPHOLDS AMERICA’S RIGHT TO HANG OUT, CHI. TRIB., JUNE 13, 1999, p.19: It would be interesting to transport James Madison to a street corner on Chicago's Southwest Side to engage a Latin King in a discussion of
where a free society should draw the line between protecting liberties and upholding public safety. Under the city ordinance, though, Madison could have found himself ordered by a police officer to terminate the conversation and leave the vicin-
ity, of else see how he liked talking law with fellow inmates of the Cook County Jail.

Madison was never affected by the ordinance, but plenty of Chicagoans were. In the three years the law was in force, before being invalidated by the courts, police [dispersed] some 89,000 [people at] public gatherings and arrested
42,000 people who didn’t move fast enough or far enough to suit the cops. Not all were gang members, since the ordinance gives police the authority to disperse a group of 10, 20, or 100 if a single person present is even suspected of belonging

to a gang. [T]hough most police are decent and well-intentioned, many are not, and giving them dictatorial powers over the streets inevitably means that many law-abiding people taking part in innocent activities will be coerced, inconvenienced or
even hauled off to jail.
Justice Clarence Thomas, in a dissent, excoriated the six justices who voted to overturn the ordinance. “The people who will have to live with the consequences
p.208
p. 228
of today's opinion do not live in our neighborhoods,” he snarled. True — and Clarence Thomas, ensconced in well-to-do Fairfax County, Va., will never be ordered to leave his front sidewalk for chatting with someone who, unknown to him, is a
gang member.
Thomas failed to mention that the long-suffering people who do have to live with the consequences didn’t all see the law as their friend. The ordinance had the support of most white aldermen, but only six of the council's 18 black
members voted for it. They knew that some white cops enforcing the law would create a new crime of “standing around while black” to go with the old one of “driving while black.” . . .
Part of life in a non-totalitarian country is the freedom of people to congregate in public for idle purposes without having to ask permission from the government. The City of Chicago can attack its gang problem without trampling that
right.
NOTES
1. Constitutional foundations. In Sessions v. Dimaya, 138 S. Ct. 1204 (2018), the Supreme Court held that language in the immigration laws that made Dimaya eligible for deportation was void for vagueness. Justice Gorsuch, con-
curring, elaborated on the constitutional foundations of the vagueness doctrine (jd. at 1224-1228):
[Properly conceived, [the doctrine] serves as a faithful expression of ancient due process and separation of powers principles the framers recognized as vital to ordered liberty under our Constitution. . .. What history
suggests, the structure of the Constitution confirms. Many of the Constitution's other provisions presuppose and depend on the existence of reasonably clear laws. Take . . . the Sixth Amendment's mandate that a defendant
must be informed of the accusations against him and allowed to bring witnesses in his defense, and consider what use those rights would be if the charged crime was so vague the defendant couldn't tell what he's alleged to
have done and what sort of witnesses he might need to rebut that charge. Without an assurance that the laws supply fair notice, so much else of the Constitution risks becoming only a “parchment barrie[t]” against arbitrary
power. The Federalist No. 48, p. 308 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961) (J. Madison).
[M)he doctrine [has an] equal debt to the separation of powers. . . . For “if the legislature could set a net large enough to catch all possible offenders, and leave it to the courts to step inside and say who could be
rightfully detained, and who should be set at large[] [t]his would, to some extent, substitute the judicial for the legislative department of government.” Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U.S. 352, 358, n. 7 (1983). .. . Vague laws also
threaten to transfer legislative power to police and prosecutors, leaving to them the job of shaping a vague statute's contours through their enforcement decisions. . . . [T]he adoption of new laws restricting liberty is sup-
posed to be a hard business, the product of an open and
p.206
p. 206
public debate among a large and diverse number of elected representatives. Allowing the legislature to hand off the job of lawmaking risks substituting this design for one where legislation is made easy, with a mere handful
of unelected judges and prosecutors free to “condemfn] all that [they] personally disapprove and for no better reason than [they] disapprove it.”

2. The discriminatory-enforcement prong of vagueness. Justice Thomas in dissent argues that “instances of arbitrary or discriminatory enforcement of the ordinance, like any other law, are best addressed when (and if) they arise.”
Here Justice Thomas appears to be referring to the possibility of challenging improper enforcement by raising a constitutional claim under the Equal Protection Clause. It is important to see how the discriminatory-enforcement prong of a vague-
ness challenge differs from this kind of Equal Protection Clause claim. The latter cannot be established merely by proof of differences in treatment. For example, and contrary to a common intuition, evidence that some Blacks who were loitering
were arrested while some whites who were loitering were not arrested is not sufficient to establish a constitutional violation under the currently prevailing interpretation of the Equal Protection Clause. Instead, current equal protection doctrine re-
quires proof that a government official or state policy purposely discriminated, for example treating people differently because of their race or political views, rather than for a permissible reason. See McCleskey v. Kemp, discussed at pp. 1192-1199
infra.

This understanding of the Equal Protection Clause means that an equal protection challenge can rarely succeed in a law enforcement context unless either (a) an official admits to deliberately treating similarly situated individuals
differently; or (b) comparison of large numbers of cases excludes every legitimate explanation for the variations in treatment. Thus, an equal protection challenge to discrimination against suspects who are Black requires proof that those suspects
were treated differently because of their race and not, for example, because Blacks arrested for loitering allegedly committed intimidating acts while whites who were loitering but not arrested did not do similar things. As a practical matter, an equal
protection objection to a person's arrest therefore is virtually impossible to establish in the individual case in which that person is prosecuted. An equal protection challenge to patterns of law enforcement over a range of cases is possible, but it
makes daunting demands on the time and resources of lawyers who seek to substantiate that claim, because they must present evidence legally sufficient to rule out any valid law enforcement reason for distinguishing between people who were
arrested and people who were not. These practical obstacles to effectively enforcing the Equal Protection Clause mean that traditional doctrines of criminal law, reflecting principles of just punishment applicable in any society, take on added im-
portance in contemporary America as potential grounds for objection to law enforcement practices that involve racial injustice and other discrimination.

In contrast to a discriminatory-enforcement challenge under the Equal Protection Clause, the discriminatory-enforcement prong of vagueness doctrine focuses on the wording of the law itself. As the Morales plurality notes, a law is un-
constitutionally vague if it “may authorize and even encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement” (emphasis added). Justice O'Connor, concurring, agrees that a criminal law “must not permit policemen, prosecutors, and juries to conduct

p.206

p. 226
‘a standardless sweep ... . to pursue their personal predilections.’ . . . [Criminal laws must have] sufficient minimal standards to guide law enforcement officers” (emphasis added). In other words, vagueness doctrine turns on the law as written, and
does not require amassing evidence on how the law is implemented in a group of many similar cases.

3. Vagrancy laws. The long history of governments using open-ended “vagrancy” laws to control African Americans and the poor is insightfully examined in Risa Goluboff, Vagrant Nation (2016). Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville,
405 U.S. 156 (1972), is usually considered the leading case on the constitutionality of these types of laws. The issue in Papachristou was the constitutionality of the following ordinance:

Rogues and vagabonds, or dissolute persons who go about begging, common gamblers, . .. common drunkards, common night thieves, . . . lewd, wanton and lascivious persons, . . . persons wandering or strolling around

from place to place without any lawful purpose or object, habitual loafers, disorderly persons, persons neglecting all lawful business and habitually spending their time by frequenting houses of ill fame, gaming houses, or

places where alcoholic beverages are sold or served, persons able to work but habitually living upon the earnings of their wives or minor children shall be deemed vagrants and, upon conviction in the Municipal Court shall be

punished as provided for Class D offenses [punishable by 90 days’ imprisonment, $500 fine, or both].

Among those challenging the ordinance were four defendants (described as two Black males and two white females) who had been stopped by Jacksonville, Florida, police while riding together in a car; they were supposedly consid-
ered suspicious for having paused near a used car lot that had been the scene of frequent thefts. Other defendants had been arrested when police who observed them walking down the street or waiting for a friend refused to accept their explana-
tions for their behavior.

In aunanimous opinion by Justice Douglas, the Court held the ordinance unconstitutional:

The Jacksonville ordinance makes criminal activities which by modern standards are normally innocent. . . . [S]leepless people often walk at night, perhaps hopeful that sleep-inducing relaxation will result. [A] former Gover-

nor... commented once that “loafing” was a national virtue . . . and that it should be encouraged. It is, however, a crime in Jacksonville. “Persons able to work but habitually living upon the earnings of their wives or minor

children” [might implicate] unemployed people out of the labor market, by reason of a recession. . . . Persons “neglecting all lawful business and habitually spending their time by frequenting . . . places where alcoholic bev-

erages are sold or served” would literally embrace many members of golf clubs. . . .

Walkers and strollers and wanderers may be going to or coming from a burglary. Loafers or loiterers may be “casing” a place for a holdup. .. . The difficulty is that these activities are historically part of the ameni-

ties of life as we have known them. They are not mentioned in the
p.206
p.207

Constitution or in the Bill of Rights. These unwritten amenities have been in part responsible for giving our people the feeling of independence and self-confidence, the feeling of creativity. These amenities have dignified the

right of dissent and have . . . encouraged lives of high spirits rather than hushed, suffocating silence. . .

Another aspect of the ordinance’s vagueness appears when we focus, not on the lack of notice given a potential offender, but on the effect of the unfettered discretion it places in the hands of the Jacksonville po-

lice. [Ploor people, nonconformists, dissenters, idlers may be required to comport themselves according to the lifestyle deemed appropriate by the Jacksonville police and the courts. Where, as here, there are no standards

governing the exercise of the discretion granted by the ordinance, the scheme permits and encourages an arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement of the law. . .. It results in a regime in which the poor and the unpopular are

permitted to “stand on a public sidewalk . . . only at the whim of any police officer.” Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 382 U.S. 87, 90. . ..

The implicit presumption in these generalized vagrancy standards — that crime is being nipped in the bud — is too extravagant to deserve extended treatment. Of course, vagrancy statutes are useful to the
police. Of course, they are nets making easy the roundup of so-called undesirables. But the rule of law . . ., evenly applied to minorities as well as majorities, to the poor as well as the rich, is the great mucilage that holds so-
ciety together.

The Jacksonville ordinance cannot be squared with our constitutional standards and is plainly unconstitutional.

None of the Morales opinions cited Papachristou one way of the other. The justices voting down the Chicago ordinance did not cite it for support, and the dissenters did not question its continued authority. Why not? Under Papachris-
tou, are laws aimed at nipping crime in the bud always unconstitutional if their terms permit discriminatory enforcement or an unequal impact on the poor and minorities? Should such laws be unconstitutional? The justices in the Morales majority
may have been reluctant to reaffirm the broadest implications of Papachristou, but the dissenters may have been reluctant to question them. Why the reticence on both sides?

4, The Chicago response to Morales. In February 2000, the Chicago City Council passed a new anti-gang ordinance to replace the one struck down in Morales. The new ordinance (Chi. Mun. Code §8-4-015) again directs police
officers to disperse all persons engaged in “gang loitering” in a public place, whenever they believe that one or more of those present are members of a criminal street gang. This time, the ordinance specifies that dispersal, in compliance with the
order, means “remov[ing] themselves from within sight and hearing of the place at which the order was issued.” It requires the police superintendent to designate particular areas within the city in which the ordinance will be enforced; dispersal or-
ders can be issued only when gang loitering occurs within these areas, but the location of the designated areas is publicly disclosed. The ordinance defines gang loitering as

remaining in any one place under circumstances that would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect of that behavior is to enable a criminal street gang to establish control over identifiable areas, to

intimidate others from entering those areas, or to conceal illegal activities.

p.207

p. 228
QUESTIONS: Does the new ordinance meet the objections of Justices Stevens and O'Connor? Suppose that on a hot night, three teenagers hang out on a street corner, talking loudly and listening to music blaring from a nearby car radio. An
elderly neighbor calls the police and asks them to disperse the group, saying that they are treating the comer as their private turf and that the caller feels intimidated from walking by in order to get to the corer store. If police reasonably believe
that one of the youths is a gang member, are the teenagers subject to being dispersed under the ordinance? If the ordinance applies in this situation, should it be upheld under Morales?

5. Other anti-gang and anti-loitering legislation. (a) The Model Penal Code. The MPC prohibits “loiter[ing] in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the
safety of persons or property in the vicinity.” See MPC §250.6, in the Appendix to this book. The ordinance raises both practical and constitutional concerns. First, does it address the kind of gang activity that troubled the Chicago City Council?
Would it permit police to arrest gang members who stake out their “turf” by congregating in parks and on street corners?

Second, if the MPC provision provides authority to address gang efforts to control “turf,” is it constitutional after Morales? An ordinance in Athens, Georgia, similar to the MPC provision, prohibited loitering, defined as being “in a place
ata time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals . . . under circumstances which cause a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern that such person is involved in unlawful drug activity.” Relying on Morales, the Georgia
Supreme Court held this ordinance unconstitutionally vague. The court explained that “[t]here are no overt acts necessary to trigger criminal liability under the statute, and no specific guidelines to inform law enforcement officers of what behavior
might legitimately bring the officer to believe a person was ‘involved in unlawful drug activity.’ ” Johnson v. Athens-Clarke County, 529 S.E.2d 613, 617 (Ga. 2000).

(b) Reconsidering discriminatory enforcement. Because public order offenses like loitering typically carry relatively low misdemeanor penalties, police may be less interested in winning convictions than in simply imposing the
“process costs” of the arrest itself. If so, they may pay little attention to the precise wording of these ordinances, and this may be especially true when the ordinance has not been struck down “on its face,” and judicial review is limited to “as ap-
plied” challenges. See Alexandra Natapoff, Punishment Without Crime (2018); Charlie Gerstein & J.J. Prescott, Process Costs and Police Discretion, 128 Harv. L. Rev. F. 268, 273, 281 (2015). As long as the law remains enforceable at all, police can
invoke it to make forcible stops and arrests on grounds that would not justify police intervention for any other crime. See Anna Lvovsky, The Judicial Presumption of Police Expertise, 130 Harv. L. Rev. 1995, 2051 (2017).

6. The notice prong of vagueness. As the plurality opinion in Morales notes, there are two independent grounds on which a statute can be unconstitutionally vague. The second, the notice prong, asks whether the statute in question
will “enable ordinary people to understand what conduct it prohibits.” A plurality of the Court in Morales thought the Chicago ordinance violated this fair-notice requirement.

In Nash v. United States, 229 U.S. 373 (1912), the Supreme Court upheld a conviction for unduly obstructing trade in violation of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act. The defendant had objected that the crime “contains in its definition an
element

p.208
p.220
of degree as to which estimates may differ, with the result that a man might find himself in prison because his honest judgment did not anticipate that of a jury.” Writing for the Court, Justice Holmes replied:

[T]he law is full of instances where a man’s fate depends on his estimating rightly, that is, as the jury subsequently estimates it, some matter of degree. If his judgment is wrong, not only may he incur a fine or a short impris-

‘onment, as here; he may incur the penalty of death. “An act causing death may be murder, manslaughter, or misadventure, according to the degree of danger attending it” by common experience in the circumstances known

to the actor. ... Ifaman ... did no more than drive negligently through a street, he might get off with manslaughter or less. [And] he might be held although he himself thought that he was acting as a prudent man should. . ..

[M)here is no constitutional difficulty in the way of enforcing the criminal part of the act...

Statutes that turn on “some matter of degree” are pervasive in the criminal law, and the Court has repeatedly endorsed their validity. See, e.g., United States v. Johnson, 576 U.S. 591, 603-604 (2015), noting that “we do not doubt the
constitutionality of laws that call for the application of a qualitative standard such as ‘substantial risk’ to real-world conduct.” Thus, in United States v. Ragen, 314 U.S. 513, 523 (1941), the Court sustained a criminal conviction for willfully taking an
unreasonable deduction on an income tax return, stating: “The mere fact that a penal statute is so framed as to require a jury upon occasion to determine a question of reasonableness is not sufficient to make it too vague to afford a practical guide
to permissible conduct.”

In Coates v. City of Cincinnati, 402 U.S. 611 (1971), the Court held that an ordinance proscribing conduct “annoying” to others was unconstitutionally vague. Does that result make sense? Of course, what's annoying isn’t entirely
precise; it's a matter of degree. But the Court insists that this isn’t a sufficient reason to hold a law unconstitutionally vague. And the key point in Coates (what's annoying) is much more widely understood than the key point in Ragen (what's an
unreasonable income-tax deduction). So how can the Coates ordinance be unconstitutional when the law in Ragen is not? Should it matter that the meaning of “annoying,” like the meaning of “loitering,” depends on the personal sensibilities of the
observer? Consider State v. Pomianek, 110 A.3d 841 (N.J. 2015), where the New Jersey Supreme Court struck down part of the state’s bias-intimidation statute, which permits conviction of a person who commits specified crimes “under circum-
stances that caused any victim of the underlying offense to be intimidated and the victim, considering the manner in which the offense was committed, reasonably believed” the defendant committed the offense based on the victim's race, whether

or not the defendant was actually motivated by racial bias. The court held that, “[iJn focusing on the victim's perception and not the defendant's intent, the statute does not give a defendant sufficient guidance or notice on how to conform to the
law.” Id. at 843. Is Pomianek distinguishable from Ragen?

In United States v. Johnson, supra, the Supreme Court struck down part of the Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA) known as the residual clause. The ACCA imposes a mandatory minimum sentence of 15 years and up to a maximum of
life when a defendant is convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm and also

p.220

280
has three or more previous convictions for a “violent felony.” The residual clause, 18 U.S.C. §924(e)(2)(B), defines “violent felony” to include any felony that “otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to
another.” While acknowledging the validity of “laws that call for the application of a qualitative standard,” the Court concluded that “[bly combining indeterminacy about how to measure the risk posed by a crime with indeterminacy about how
much tisk it takes for the crime to qualify as a violent felony, the residual clause produces more unpredictability and arbitrariness than the Due Process Clause tolerates.” 576 U.S. at 598, 604.

Can these cases be reconciled? Or is the case law that determines when statutes give sufficient notice itself exceedingly vague? For a thorough discussion, see John Calvin Jeffries, Jr., Legality, Vagueness, and the Construction of
Penal Statutes, 71 Va. L. Rev. 189 (1985).

7. Challenges for effective crime control. Because the Morales Court held that Chicago's gang-loitering ordinance was unconstitutionally vague, police may turn to other strategies to tackle high rates of crime. One popular alter-
native, commonly referred to as “broken windows’ policing, rests on the idea that unrepaired damage in decaying neighborhoods (“broken windows”) and “quality of life” offenses like spitting, littering, and public drinking are not trivial matters.
According to this view, effective control of major crime, not to mention maintaining decent urban environments, requires police to vigorously enforce quality-of-life laws, even though such enforcement inevitably involves considerable discretion.
See, e.g., Debra Livingston, Police Discretion and the Quality of Life in Public Spaces, 97 Colum. L. Rev. 551 (1997).

One aspect of this argument — the claimed connection between order maintenance and reduction of the most serious crimes — has intuitive appeal, but empirical evidence on the issue is mostly to the contrary. During the 1990s,
crime fell dramatically in cities that practiced vigorous quality-of-life policing, but crime also fell dramatically in cities that introduced other police initiatives and in cities that simply followed traditional policing practices. Professor Bernard Harcourt
examined the data in detail and concluded that quality-of-life enforcement and fixing “broken windows” had no significant effect on the level of serious crime. Harcourt, Reflecting on the Subject: A Critique of the Social Influence Conception of De-
terrence, the Broken Windows Theory, and Order-Maintenance Policing New York Style, 97 Mich. L. Rev. 291 (1998).

Arelated strategy (“hot-spot policing’) involves concentrating police officers in high-crime areas. According to some studies, this strategy may reduce crime in the targeted areas,° but it raises other questions. It often involves the
intense use of “stop-and-frisk,” a tactic that permits a police officer to stop and briefly detain anyone when the officer has “reasonable suspicion” that the person may be engaged in criminal activity.° Don’t these strategies permit the same dis-
criminatory-enforcement practices that led the Morales Court to strike down the Chicago gang-loitering

290

p.231
ordinance? For that matter, doesn’t police authority to make an arrest for littering permit discriminatory enforcement as well? What rules tell the police which litter-bugs to arrest and which to ignore? Critics of broken windows and stop-and-frisk
policing point out that these strategies, like the Chicago gang-loitering ordinance, give too much discretion to police officers. See Jeffrey Bellin, The Inverse Relationship Between the Constitutionality and Effectiveness of New York City “Stop and
Frisk,” 94 B.U. L. Rev. 1495 (2014); William A Margeson, Bringing the Gavel Down on Stops and Frisks: The Equitable Regulation of Police Power, 51 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 739 (2014).

For many years, the New York City Police Department heavily relied on stop-and-frisk, making 4.4 million stops between January 2004 and June 2012. More than 80 percent of the people stopped were Black or Latinx. In 88 percent of
the stops, no further law enforcement action was taken, indicating that in fact no criminal activity was afoot. The police conducted frisks for weapons in 52 percent of the stops, but in 98.5 percent of those frisks, no weapon was found. Based on
these statistics, a district court found that the New York stop-and-frisk program was purposely discriminatory, in violation of the Equal Protection Clause. Floyd v. City of New York, 959 F. Supp. 2d 540 (S.D.N.Y. 2013).

The judge in Floyd stressed the constitutional limits on tactics the police may use in responding to high rates of street crime in particular neighborhoods:

I recognize that the police will deploy their limited resources to high crime areas. This benefits the communities where the need for policing is greatest. But the police are not permitted to target people for stops based on their
race. Some may worry about the implications of this decision. They may wonder: if the police believe that a particular group of people is disproportionately responsible for crime in one area, why should the police not target
that group with increased stops? . . . [T]he Equal Protection Clause prohibits the practices described in this case. A police department may not target a racially defined group for stops in general — that is, for stops based on
suspicions of general criminal wrongdoing — simply because members of that group appear frequently in the police department's suspect data. The Equal Protection Clause does not permit the police to target a racially de-
fined group as a whole because of the misdeeds of some of its members.
Stops in New York City declined precipitously in the wake of the Floyd litigation. From a peak of more than 685,000 stops in 2011, police recorded less than 46,000 stops in 2014, and from 2016 through 2020, stops averaged less than
12,000 per year, with only 9,544 stops in 2020, less than 2 percent of the 2011 total.2 Despite some concern that patrol officers may fail to record all stops and that reported statistics therefore may understate actual use of the tactic, stop-and-frisk
in New York
p.231
p. 282
City unquestionably has dramatically declined. Yet the city’s crime rates remained at historically low levels,2 and there is little evidence that the intensive use of stop-and-frisk before 2013 significantly reduced crime in New York City.12
8. Race. Concerns with police discretion are inexorably tied to concerns about racial discrimination, as the Morales and the Floyd cases make clear. But those who favor proactive policing often suggest that racial-justice concerns
justify these policing tactics because people of color bear the brunt of crime and disorder in poor urban neighborhoods. Some of the writing in support of order-maintenance policing also claims that because African-American political power has
grown (compared to its very low baseline before the 1960s) and because the ranks of the urban police now include more African-American officers, courts no longer need to impose such tight constraints on police discretion. See, e.g., Dan M.
Kahan & Tracey L. Meares, The Coming Crisis of Criminal Procedure, 86 Geo. L.J. 1153, 1153-1154, 1169-1170 (1998):
[)he constitutional standards used to evaluate discretionary community policing . . . have outlived their utility. [T]he unmistakable premise of these doctrines was the assumption that communities could not be trusted to
police their own police because of the distorting influence of racism. . . .
In a world in which the coercive incidence of community policing was concentrated on a powerless and despised minority, it made perfect sense for courts to assume that communities would systematically
overvalue the benefits of discretion and undervalue the costs of it. [T]hat assumption makes much less sense in settings, such as today’s inner-city, in which the citizens who support giving more discretion to the police are
the same ones who are exposed to the risk that discretion will be abused. [T]he assumption that white political establishments can’t be relied on to punish — and can in fact be expected to reward — law enforcers who abuse
discretion to harass minorities . . . is less well founded now that law enforcers in America’s big cities are accountable to political establishments that more fairly represent African-Americans. Uncompromising hostility to dis-
cretion is therefore inappropriate.
See also Tracey L. Meares & Dan M. Kahan, The Wages of Antiquated Procedural Thinking: A Critique of Chicago v. Morales, 1998 U. Chi. Legal F. 197, 207-208 (arguing that because Blacks are “no longer excluded from the nation’s democratic
political life,” courts should defer to local political choices about policing strategy).
p.282
p. 288
Even at the time of these writings (1998), many commentators were skeptical. See, e.g., Dorothy E. Roberts, Foreword: Race, Vagueness, and the Social Meaning of Order-Maintenance Policing, 89 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 775 (1999).
And needless to say, the relationship between policing and racial justice remains extremely fraught. Why have the political changes that Meares and Kahan stress not had more impact? Are they right in claiming that “political establishments [now]
more fairly represent African-Americans”? Does political support for broad police discretion reflect or disregard these voters’ preferences?

The video-recording capabilities of smartphones have made street policing practices increasingly visible, resulting in widespread awareness of incidents in which police have used excessive force against unarmed people of color. Vic-
tims like Tamir Rice, Freddie Gray, Michael Brown, Eric Gamer, Philando Castile, George Floyd, and many others now have widely recognized names," fueling deep distrust between the police and many communities. A Washington Post database
reports that as of June 2021, police had fatally shot 948 people in the previous year; about half of the victims were white, but Black Americans (representing roughly 13 percent of the U.S. population) were shot at a greatly disproportionate rate.12
Many police departments lack diversity — in Ferguson, Missouri, site of the notorious police shooting of Michael Brown, two-thirds of the community is Black, but the police force at the time was 94 percent white. Yet distrust remains intense even
where police departments have diversified. In Baltimore, where 63 percent of the residents are Black, 44 percent of the police force is Black.!3 In Los Angeles, 67 percent of the police are people of color, and the percentage is almost as high in
Houston (55%), Chicago (48%), and New York City (48%). See Devon W. Carbado & L. Song Richardson, The Black Police: Policing Our Own, 131 Harv. L. Rev. 1979, 1989-1990 (2018), for discussion of the complex reasons why racial integration
of the police often fails to dampen racial discrimination in law enforcement.

Do concerns about excessive police discretion and discriminatory law enforcement also exist in places where there is little to no danger of racial or ethnic discrimination? Some American towns and small cities have no significant
African-American population. Should such municipalities be permitted to enact ordinances like those challenged in Morales and Papachristou? What problems for the rule of law might still arise under such ordinances, even in a racially and ethni-
cally homogeneous community?

p.289
p. 284
C. PROPORTIONALITY
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The requirement that punishment be proportional to the seriousness of the offense is a core principle of punishment, both as a central limit dictated by the Eighth Amendment, and as a statutory statement of purpose in modern criminal
codes. The MPC (§1.02(1)(e)) includes among its purposes the aim “to differentiate on reasonable grounds between serious and minor offenses.” The New York Penal Law similarly aims “[tJo differentiate on reasonable grounds between serious
and minor offenses and to prescribe proportionate penalties therefor.” N.Y. Penal Law §1.05 (2021). The California Penal Code declares that “[w]hen a sentence includes incarceration, this purpose is best served by terms proportionate to the seri-
ousness of the offense.” Cal. Penal Code §1170 (2020).

What is the basis for this concern with proportionality? If we believe excessive punishment is unjust, what constitutes excessive punishment? In his classic exposition of the justification for punishment (see Chapter 1, p. 32 supra), Kant
argued that there is a precise kind and degree of punishment appropriate to every criminal wrong. Is that convincing? Can it be translated into conerete sentencing decisions?

Is the point that certain crimes cannot be punished with more than a given quantum of punishment? Or is it simply that less serious crimes must be punished less severely than more serious crimes?

Some believe that the aim of punishment is not justice and fairness (however defined), but a strictly utilitarian goal. If we hold this view, must we accept that any amount of punishment, no matter how severe, is justifiable if, in the cir-
cumstances, it yields net benefits?

These are the principal issues addressed in the material that follows. Given widespread concern about America’s vast prison population and overreliance on incarceration, it is worth asking whether the principle of proportionality should
be doing more work to rein in sentences.

Jeremy Bentham
Principles of Penal Law

in 1 J. Bentham's Works, Pt. Il, bk. 1 at 399-402
(J. Bowring ed., 1843)

Punishments may be too small or too great; and there are reasons for not making them too small, as well as not making them too great. The terms minimum and maximum may serve to mark the two extremes of this question.

[O]n the side of the first of these extremes, we may lay it down as a rule —

|. That the value of the punishment must not be less in any case than what is sufficient to outweigh that of the profit of the offence. [If] a man, having reaped the profit of a crime, and undergone the punishment, finds the former more
than equivalent to the latter, he will go on offending for ever; there is nothing to restrain him. If those, also, who behold him, reckon that the balance of gain is in favour of the delinquent, the punishment will be useless for the purposes of exam-
ple...

p. 204
p. 285

Rule Ill. When two offences come in competition, the punishment for the greater offence must be sufficient to induce a man to prefer the less.

Two offences may be said to be in competition, when it is in the power of an individual to commit both. When thieves break into a house, they may execute their purpose in different manners; by simply stealing, by theft accompanied
with bodily injury, or murder, or incendiarism. If the punishment is the same for simple theft, as for theft and murder, you give the thieves a motive for committing murder, because this crime adds to the facility of committing the former, and the
chance of impunity when it is committed.

The great inconvenience resulting from the infliction of great punishments for small offences, is, that the power of increasing them in proportion to the magnitude of the offence is thereby lost.

Rule IV. The punishment should be adjusted in such manner to each particular offence, that for every part of the mischief there may be a motive to restrain the offender from giving birth to it.

Thus, for example, in adjusting the punishment for stealing a sum of money, let the magnitude of the punishment be determined by the amount of the sum stolen. If for stealing ten shillings an offender is punished no more than for
stealing five, the stealing of the remaining five of those ten shillings is an offence for which there is no punishment at all.

Rule V. The punishment ought in no case to be more than what is necessary to bring it into conformity with the rules here given. . ..

What is not sufficient is easily seen, but it is not possible so exactly to distinguish in excess: an approximation only can be attained. The irregularities in the force of temptations compel the legislator to increase his punishments, tll they
are not merely sufficient to restrain the ordinary desires of men, but also the violence of their desires when unusually excited.

[Aln error on the minimum side . . . is least likely to occur, a slight degree of attention sufficing for its escape; and when it does exist, it is at the same time clear and manifest, and easy to be remedied. An error on the maximum side, on
the contrary, is that to which legislators and men in general are naturally inclined: antipathy, or a want of compassion for individuals who are represented as dangerous and vile, pushes them onward to an undue severity. It is on this side, therefore,
that we should take the most precautions, as on this side there has been shown the greatest disposition to err. . .

Rule VIl. That the value of the punishment may outweigh the profit of the offence, it must be increased in point of magnitude, in proportion as it falls short in point of certainty.

Rule VIII. Punishment must be further increased in point of magnitude, in proportion as it falls short in points of proximity.

The profit of a crime is commonly more certain than its punishment; or, what amounts to the same thing, appears so to the [perpetrator]. It is generally more immediate: the temptation to offend is present; the punishment is at a dis-
tance. Hence there are two circumstances which weaken the effect of punishment, its uncertainty and its distance.

HYMAN GROSS, A THEORY OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE 436 (1979): [T]he requirement that punishment not be disproportionately great . . . is dictated by the same principle that does not allow punishment of the innocent, for any punishment in excess
of what is deserved for the criminal conduct is punishment without guilt.
p. 286

p. 296
HLL.A. HART & A. HONORE, CAUSATION IN THE LAW 395-396 (2D ED. 1985): On a deterrent theory the rationale of the differential severity of punishments is complex. First, one crime if unchecked may cause greater harm than another, and hence
on general utilitarian grounds greater severity may be used in its repression than in the repression of the less harmful crime. Secondly, the temptation to commit one sort of crime may be greater than another and hence a more severe penalty is
needed to deter. Thirdly, the commission of one crime may be a sign of a more dangerous character in the [perpetrator] needing longer sentence for incapacitation or reform.
A.C. EWING, A STUDY OF PUNISHMENT II: PUNISHMENT AS VIEWED BY THE PHILOSOPHER, 21 CAN. B. REV. 102, 115-116 (1943): [I]f a man is very severely punished for a comparatively slight offence, people will be liable to forget about his crime
and think only of his sufferings, so that he appears a victim of cruel laws, and the whole process, instead of reaffirming the law and intensifying men’s consciousness that the kind of act punished is wrong, will have the opposite effect of casting
discredit on the law and making the action of the lawbreaker appear excusable or even almost heroic. These punishments are specially liable to produce an effect of this sort on their victim. He will be likely to think the penalty excessive in any case,
and the great danger of punishment is that this will lead to self-pity and despair, or anger and bitterness, instead of repentance, but if he has really good grounds for complaint, this danger will be doubled. The primary object of punishment is to
lead [the perpetrator] and others to realize the badness of the act punished; but, if great severity is shown, they are much more likely to realize instead the cruelty of the punishment.
HLL.A. HART, LAW, LIBERTY AND MORALITY 36-37 (1963): There are many reasons why we might wish the legal graduation of the seriousness of crimes, expressed in its scale of punishments, not to conflict with common estimates of their
comparative wickedness. One reason is that such a conflict is undesirable on simple utilitarian grounds: it might either confuse moral judgments or bring the law into disrepute, or both. Another reason is that principles of justice or fairness between
different [perpetrators] require morally distinguishable offences to be treated differently and morally similar offences to be treated alike. These principles are still widely respected, although it is also true that there is a growing disinclination to
insist on their application where this conflicts with the forward-looking aims of punishment, such as prevention or reform. But those who concede that we should attempt to adjust the severity of punishment to the moral gravity of offences are not
thereby committed to the view that punishment merely for immorality is justified. For they can in perfect consistency insist on the one hand that the only justification for having a system of punishment is to prevent harm and only harmful conduct
should be punished, and, on the other, agree that when the question of the quantum of punishment for such conduct is raised, we should defer to principles which make relative moral wickedness of different [perpetrators only] a partial determi-
nant of the severity of punishment.
ANDREW VON HIRSCH & ANDREW ASHWORTH, PROPORTIONATE SENTENCING: EXPLORING THE PRINCIPLES 132-135 (2005): The first account of the principle of proportionate sanctions was utilitarian. [But w]hen the proportionality principle is
thus defended on grounds of crime-preventive efficacy and nothing

p. 296

297
more, it loses its status as an independent ethical requirement and remains subject to whatever dilutions appear to be needed in the name of crime control. .. .

[Other proponents of proportionality] have stressed the role of punishment as a reinforcement of citizens’ moral inhibitions against crime. . . . The idea, ultimately, remains one of crime prevention. It involves the assertion that if sen-
tences are made proportionate, the citizenry's moral inhibitions will better be reinforced, which in turn will enable the criminal law to carry out its crime-restraining role more successfully. [In contrast, w]e feel there is something wrong, not simply
counterproductive . . . , about inflicting punishments that are not fairly commensurate with the gravity of offences... .

Punishing someone consists of inflicting a deprivation on him, because he has purportedly committed a wrong, under circumstances and in a manner that conveys disapprobation of the [perpetrator] for his wrong. . .. Once one has
created an institution with the condemnatory implications that punishment has, then it is a requirement of justice, not merely of efficient crime prevention, to punish [perpetrators] according to the degree of reprehensibleness of their conduct . .
[so that the allocation of sanctions] comports fairly with the degree of reprehensibleness of those acts.

Harmelin v. Michigan
United States Supreme Court
501 U.S. 957 (1991)

Justice ScALIA announced the judgment of the Court and delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to Part IV, and an opinion with respect to Parts |, Il, and Ill, in which THe CxleF Justice joins.

ScaLiA, J. [This excerpted portion of the opinion was joined only by Chief Justice Rehnquist] Petitioner was convicted of possessing 672 grams of cocaine and sentenced to a mandatory term of life in prison without possibility of
parole. . . . Petitioner claims that his sentence is unconstitutionally “cruel and unusual” for two reasons: first, because it is “significantly disproportionate” to the crime he committed; second, because the sentencing judge was statutorily required to
impose it, without taking into account the particularized circumstances of the crime and of the criminal. .. .

The Eighth Amendment . . . provides: “Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.” In Rummel v. Estelle, 445 U.S. 263 (1980), we held that it did not constitute “cruel
and unusual punishment” to impose a life sentence, under a recidivist statute, upon a defendant who had been convicted, successively, of fraudulent use of a credit card to obtain $80 worth of goods or services, passing a forged check in the
amount of $28.36, and obtaining $120.75 by false pretenses. We said that one could argue without fear of contradiction by any decision of this Court that for crimes concededly classified and classifiable as felonies, that is, as punishable by sig-
nificant terms of imprisonment in a state penitentiary, the length of the sentence actually imposed is purely a matter of legislative prerogative. We specifically rejected the proposition asserted by the dissent, that unconstitutional disproportionality
could be established by weighing three factors: (1) gravity of the offense compared to severity of the

p.297

p. 208
penalty, (2) penalties imposed within the same jurisdiction for similar crimes, and (3) penalties imposed in other jurisdictions for the same offense. A footnote in the opinion, however, said: “This is not to say that a proportionality principle would not
come into play in the extreme example mentioned by the dissent, . .. if a legislature made overtime parking a felony punishable by life imprisonment.”

Two years later, in Hutto v. Davis, 454 U.S. 370 (1982), we similarly rejected an Eighth Amendment challenge to a prison term of 40 years and fine of $20,000 for possession and distribution of approximately nine ounces of marijuana. .. .
And we again explicitly rejected application of the three factors discussed in the Rummel dissent. . . .

Ayear and a half after Davis we uttered what has been our last word on this subject to date. Solem v. Helm, 463 U.S. 277 (1983), set aside under the Eighth Amendment, because it was disproportionate, a sentence of life imprisonment
without possibility of parole, imposed under a South Dakota recidivist statute for successive offenses that included three convictions of third-degree burglary, one of obtaining money by false pretenses, one of grand larceny, one of third-offense
driving while intoxicated, and one of writing a “no account” check with intent to defraud. In the Solem account, the “general principle of proportionality” . .. was “deeply rooted and frequently repeated in common-law jurisprudence,” [and] had been
embodied in the English Bill of Rights “in language that was later adopted in the Eighth Amendment,” and had been “recognized explicitly in this Court for almost a century.” . .. Having decreed that a general principle of disproportionality exists,
the Court used as the criterion for its application the three-factor test that had been explicitly rejected in both Rummel and Davis... .

[Justice Scalia’s opinion went on to assert that Solem was wrongly decided. It claimed, based on Justice Scalia’s review of the constitutional text and the relevant history, that the Eighth Amendment contains no proportionality
guarantee]

We think it enough that those who framed and approved the Federal Constitution chose, for whatever reason, not to include within it the guarantee against disproportionate sentences that some State Constitutions contained. It is worth
noting, however, that there was good reason for that choice — a reason that reinforces the necessity of overruling Solem. While there are relatively clear historical guidelines and accepted practices that enable judges to determine which modes of
punishment are “cruel and unusual,” proportionality does not lend itself to such analysis. Neither Congress norany state legislature has ever set out with the objective of crafting a penalty that is “disproportionate”; yet as some of the examples
mentioned above indicate, many enacted dispositions seem to be so — because they were made for other times or other places, with different social attitudes, different criminal epidemics, different public fears, and different prevailing theories of
penology. This is not to say that there are no absolutes; one can imagine extreme examples that no rational person, in no time or place, could accept. But for the same reason these examples are easy to decide, they are certain never to occur.
The real function of a constitutional proportionality principle, if it exists, is to enable judges to evaluate a penalty that some assemblage of men and women has considered proportionate — and to say that it is not. For that real-world enterprise, the
standards seem so inadequate that the proportionality principle becomes an invitation to imposition of subjective values.

p. 208
p. 239

This becomes clear, we think, from a consideration of the three factors that Solem found relevant to the proportionality determination: (1) the inherent gravity of the offense, (2) the sentences imposed for similarly grave offenses in the
same jurisdiction, and (3) sentences imposed for the same crime in other jurisdictions. As to the first factor: Of course some offenses, involving violent harm to human beings, will always and everywhere be regarded as serious, but that is only half
the equation. The issue is what else should be regarded to be as serious as these offenses, or even to be more serious than some of them. On that point, judging by the statutes that Americans have enacted, there is enormous variation — even
within a given age, not to mention across the many generations ruled by the Bill of Rights. .. .

The difficulty of assessing gravity is demonstrated in the very context of the present case: Petitioner acknowledges that a mandatory life sentence might not be “grossly excessive” for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute.
But surely whether it is a “grave” offense merely to possess a significant quantity of drugs — thereby facilitating distribution, subjecting the holder to the temptation of distribution, and raising the possibility of theft by others who might distribute
— depends entirely upon how odious and socially threatening one believes drug use to be. Would it be “grossly excessive” to provide life imprisonment for “mere possession” of a certain quantity of heavy weaponry? If not, then the only issue is
whether the possible dissemination of drugs can be as “grave” as the possible dissemination of heavy weapons. Who are we to say no? The members of the Michigan Legislature, and not we, know the situation on the streets of Detroit.

The second factor suggested in Solem fails for the same reason. One cannot compare the sentences imposed by the jurisdiction for “similarly grave” offenses if there is no objective standard of gravity. Judges will be comparing what
they consider comparable. . . . [E]ven if “similarly grave” crimes could be identified, the penalties for them would not necessarily be comparable, since there are many other justifications for a difference. For example, since deterrent effect depends
not only upon the amount of the penalty but upon its certainty, crimes that are less grave but significantly more difficult to detect may warrant substantially higher penalties. Grave crimes of the sort that will not be deterred by penalty may warrant
substantially lower penalties, as may grave crimes of the sort that are normally committed once in a lifetime by otherwise law-abiding citizens who will not profit from rehabilitation. Whether these differences will occur, and to what extent, depends,
of course, upon the weight the society accords to deterrence and rehabilitation, rather than retribution, as the objective of criminal punishment (which is an eminently legislative judgment). In fact, it becomes difficult even to speak intelligently of
“proportionality,” once deterrence and rehabilitation are given significant weight. Proportionality is inherently a retributive concept, and perfect proportionality is the talionic law.

[M)he third factor mentioned by Solem — the character of the sentences imposed by other States for the same crime — . . . can be applied with clarity and ease. The only difficulty is that it has no conceivable relevance to the Eighth
Amendment. That a State is entitled to treat with stern disapproval an act that other States punish with the mildest of sanctions follows a fortiori from the undoubted fact that a State may criminalize an act that other States do not criminalize at
all...

Justice KENNEDY, with whom JusTice O'Connor and Justice Souter join, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. | write this separate opinion
p.299
p. 240
because my approach to the Eighth Amendment proportionality analysis differs from Justice Scalia’s. . . . Though our decisions recognize a proportionality principle, its precise contours are unclear. . .. Despite these tensions, close analysis of our
decisions yields some common principles that give content to the uses and limits of proportionality review.

The first of these principles is that the fixing of prison terms for specific crimes involves a substantive penological judgment that, as a general matter, is “properly within the province of legislatures, not courts.” Determinations about the
nature and purposes of punishment for criminal acts implicate difficult and enduring questions respecting the sanctity of the individual, the nature of law, and the relation between law and the social order. “As a moral or political issue [the punish-
ment of offenders] provokes intemperate emotions, deeply conflicting interests, and intractable disagreements.” D. Garland, Punishment and Modern Society 1 (1990). The efficacy of any sentencing system cannot be assessed absent agreement
on the purposes and objectives of the penal system. And the responsibility for making these fundamental choices and implementing them lies with the legislature. Thus, “reviewing courts . .. should grant substantial deference to the broad author-
ity that legislatures necessarily possess in determining the types and limits of punishments for crimes.” . . .

The second principle is that the Eighth Amendment does not mandate adoption of any one penological theory. . . .The federal and state criminal systems have accorded different weights at different times to the penological goals of
retribution, deterrence, incapacitation and rehabilitation. ..

Third, marked divergences both in underlying theories of sentencing and in the length of prescribed prison terms are the inevitable, often beneficial, result of the federal structure. . . . State sentencing schemes may embody different
penological assumptions, making interstate comparison of sentences a difficult and imperfect enterprise. And even assuming identical philosophies, differing attitudes and perceptions of local conditions may yield different, yet rational, conclu-
sions regarding the appropriate length of prison terms for particular crimes. Thus, the circumstance that a State has the most severe punishment for a particular crime does not by itself render the punishment grossly disproportionate. . . .

The fourth principle at work in our cases is that proportionality review by federal courts should be informed by “objective factors to the maximum possible extent.”” The most prominent objective factor is the type of punishment
imposed. . .

All of these principles — the primacy of the legislature, the variety of legitimate penological schemes, the nature of our federal system, and the requirement that proportionality review be guided by objective factors — inform the final
one: The Eighth Amendment does not require strict proportionality between crime and sentence. Rather, it forbids only extreme sentences that are “grossly disproportionate” to the crime. .. .

With these considerations stated, it is necessary to examine the challenged aspects of petitioner's sentence: its severe length and its mandatory operation. . . . Petitioner's life sentence without parole is the second most severe penalty
permitted by law. It is the same sentence received by the petitioner in Solem... .

The crime of uttering a no account check at issue in Solem was “‘one of the most passive felonies a person could commit.” . . . Petitioner was convicted of possession of more than 650 grams (over 1.5 pounds) of cocaine. This amount
of pure

p.240

p.2at
cocaine has a potential yield of between 32,500 and 65,000 doses. . . From any standpoint, this crime falls in a different category from the relatively minor, nonviolent crime at issue in Solem. . . . [Pletitioner’s crime threatened to cause grave harm
to society... .

[he pernicious effects of the drug epidemic in this country do not establish that Michigan's penalty scheme is correct or the most just in any abstract sense. But they do demonstrate that the Michigan Legislature could with reason
conclude that the threat posed to the individual and society by possession of this large an amount of cocaine — in terms of violence, crime, and social displacement — is momentous enough to warrant the deterrence and retribution of a life sen-
tence without parole.

. . . Petitioner and amici contend that our proportionality decisions require a comparative analysis between petitioner's sentence and sentences imposed for other crimes in Michigan and sentences imposed for the same crime in other
jurisdictions. Given the serious nature of petitioner's crime, no such comparative analysis is necessary. . .

A better reading of our cases leads to the conclusion that intrajurisdictional and interjurisdictional analyses are appropriate only in the rare case in which a threshold comparison of the crime committed and the sentence imposed leads
to an inference of gross disproportionality. .. .

Petitioner also attacks his sentence because of its mandatory nature. Petitioner would have us hold that any severe penalty scheme requires individualized sentencing so that a judicial official may consider mitigating circumstances.
Our precedents do not support this proposition, and petitioner presents no convincing reason to fashion an exception or adopt a new rule in the case before us. . . . To set aside petitioner's mandatory sentence would require rejection not of the
judgment of a single jurist, as in Solem, but rather the collective wisdom of the Michigan Legislature and, as a consequence, the Michigan citizenry. We have never invalidated a penalty mandated by a legislature based only on the length of sen-
tence, and, especially with a crime as severe as this one, we should do so only in the most extreme circumstance.

. .. Apenalty as severe and unforgiving as the one imposed here would make this a most difficult and troubling case for any judicial officer. [lt is far from certain that Michigan's bold experiment will succeed. The accounts of pickpock-
ets at Tyburn hangings are a reminder of the limits of the law's deterrent force, but we cannot say the law before us has no chance of success and is on that account so disproportionate as to be cruel and unusual punishment. . . . | conclude that
petitioner's sentence of life imprisonment without parole for his crime of possession of more than 650 grams of cocaine does not violate the Eighth Amendment.

Justice Waite, with whom Justice BLACKMUN and JUSTICE STEVENS join, dissenting. . .. The first Solem factor requires a reviewing court to assess the gravity of the offense and the harshness of the penalty. . . . Although these factors are “by no
means exhaustive,” in evaluating the gravity of the offense, it is appropriate to consider “the harm caused or threatened to the victim or society,” based on such things as the degree of violence involved in the crime and “[tJhe absolute magnitude
of the crime,” and “the culpability of the offender,” including the degree of requisite intent and the offender’s motive in committing the crime.

Drugs are, without doubt, a serious societal problem. To justify such a harsh mandatory penalty as that imposed here, however, the offense should be one which

p.2at

p.242
will always warrant that punishment. Mere possession of drugs — even in such a large quantity — is not so serious an offense that it will always warrant, much less mandate, life imprisonment without possibility of parole. Unlike crimes directed
against the persons and property of others, possession of drugs affects the criminal who uses the drugs most directly. . .

To be constitutionally proportionate, punishment must be tailored to a defendant's personal responsibility and moral guilt. Justice Kennedy attempts to justify the harsh mandatory sentence imposed on petitioner by focusing on the
subsidiary effects of drug use, and thereby ignores this aspect of our Eighth Amendment jurisprudence. While the collateral consequences of drugs such as cocaine are indisputably severe, they are not unlike those which flow from the misuse of
other, legal substances [such as alcohol]. . . .

The “absolute magnitude” of petitioner's crime is not exceptionally serious. Because possession is necessarily a lesser included offense of possession with intent to distribute, it is odd to punish the former as severely as the latter. .. . In
addition, while there is usually a pecuniary motive when someone possesses a drug with intent to deliver it, such a motive need not exist in the case of mere possession. Finally, this statute applies equally to first-time offenders, such as petitioner,
and recidivists. Consequently, the particular concerns reflected in recidivist statutes such as those in Rummel and Solem are not at issue here.

. .. The second prong of the Solem analysis is an examination of “the sentences imposed on other criminals in the same jurisdiction.” [T]here is no death penalty in Michigan; consequently, life without parole, the punishment mandated
here, is the harshest penalty available. It is reserved for three crimes: first-degree murder; manufacture, distribution, or possession with intent to manufacture or distribute 650 grams or more of narcotics; and possession of 650 grams or more of
narcotics. Crimes directed against the persons and property of others — such as second-degree murder; rape; and armed robbery — do not carry such a harsh mandatory sentence, although they do provide for the possibility of a life sentence in
the exercise of judicial discretion. It is clear that petitioner “has been treated in the same manner as, or more severely than, criminals who have committed far more serious crimes.”

The third factor set forth in Solem examines “the sentences imposed for commission of the same crime in other jurisdictions.” No other jurisdiction imposes a punishment nearly as severe as Michigan's for possession of the amount of
drugs at issue here. Of the remaining 49 States, only Alabama provides for a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole for a first-time drug offender, and then only when a defendant possesses ten kilograms or more of
cocaine. ...

NOTES

1. Proportionality and the purposes of punishment. The justifications for punishment explored in Chapter 1 also inform the question whether a given punishment is proportionate. Should the prospect of large benefits in deterrence
or incapacitation (that is, utilitarian concerns) suffice to render a punishment “proportionate,” or should proportionality be viewed as requiring punishment that is

p.242

p. 249
commensurate with (or at least not greater than) culpability and the gravity of the crime for which an offender is being sentenced (that is, retributive justice)?

2. Who should decide questions of proportionality? A second fundamental question is an institutional one, which asks whether the proportionality judgment is best made by the people, through the laws enacted by legislatures, or
whether the courts must play a more robust role. Notice how Justice Kennedy uses the multiplicity of punishment purposes to endorse a deferential test for assessing whether a punishment is cruel and unusual and therefore unconstitutional. lan
Farrell disputes the claim that proportionality review is impossible once the Court accepts deterrence, rehabilitation, and incapacitation as legitimate goals of punishment. lan P. Farrell, Gilbert & Sullivan and Scalia: Philosophy, Proportionality, and
the Eighth Amendment, 55 Vill. L. Rev. 321 (2010). What are the relative advantages of courts and legislatures in making judgments on those pragmatic grounds?

Justice Kennedy's approach is the currently prevailing view in the Supreme Court's approach to applying the Eighth Amendment. It is hard to imagine a punishment that cannot be justified under at least one of the classic justifications
for punishment. For that reason, the Eighth Amendment has largely been a dead letter when it comes to federal constitutional challenges to individual punishments on proportionality grounds, outside of a few discrete contexts, most notably the
death penalty (see Chapter 10, infra), the sentencing of juveniles to life imprisonment without possibility of parole (see Chapter 10, infra), and significant but relatively infrequent state court rulings (see Note 6, infra).

Professor Youngjae Lee frames the debate about “popular” understandings of proportionality as follows (Desert and the Eighth Amendment, 11 U. Pa. J. Const. L. 101, 103-104 (2008)):

[O]ne may believe that the questions of what people deserve or do not deserve are matters of objective moral reality, and “the people,” or its frequent proxy, the democratic process, may come out with a wrong answer at

times. According to this view, the purpose of the Eighth Amendment is to enforce the retributivist constraint, the content of which does not change with the whims of the democratic majority. This understanding of retribution

coheres well with a common image of constitutional rights in general and of the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause in particular, as the Clause is typically understood as playing the role of holding the excessive, and fre-

quently irrational, punitive instincts of “the people” in check by imposing a moral constraint.

[Alternatively, one] may believe that . .. what an offender deserves is equivalent to what “the people” believe he deserves, and [that] it is a misunderstanding of desert to believe that theorists can second-guess

desert determinations made by “the people.” If “the people,” or their democratically elected representatives, think that child molesters deserve to be punished with death, on what possible grounds can a philosopher or a

judge decide that their desert judgment is “incorrect”?

If courts do second-guess the judgment of “the people” on questions of proportionality, on what basis can they do so? Is Justice White's analysis of the Michigan law a sound approach? Or is Justice Scalia correct that assessing the
gravity of an offense gives judges too much discretion to impose their own views?

p.249
p. 244

In these debates about the relative responsibilities of courts and “the people,” the latter are largely equated with the legislature. A different means for the voice of “the people” to be expressed is through the jury, but the great majority of
American states exclude the jury from any role in non-capital sentencing. See Chapter 2, pp. 183-184 supra. For a way to tap into public attitudes about excessive severity, without leaving that judgment in the hands of distant legislators or profes-
sionally trained judges, Professor Meghan Ryan suggests empaneling a special jury after conviction, in order to ascertain “the people's view” on the issues of proportionality and desert. See Ryan, The Missing Jury: The Neglected Role of Juries in
Eighth Amendment Punishments Clause Determinations, 64 Fla. L. Rev. 549, 589 (2012), noting that “jury members are more representative of the vicinage in which the crime occurred and are much more likely to be representative of the nation as
a whole than are the predominantly well-educated, upper class Caucasian male judges in both the federal and state systems.”

Another concern is whether particularly severe sentencing regimes only reflect immediate emotional responses to compelling tragedies, rather than the kind of considered public reflection that deserves deference. Describing the
background of the California “three strikes” law that imposes long mandatory terms of imprisonment on persons convicted of a serious offense after two prior convictions, Professor Michael Vitiello notes (California's Three Strikes and We're Out:
Was Judicial Activism California's Best Hope?, 37 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1025, 1071 (2004)):

[Almple evidence demonstrates widespread [public] confusion about the scope of Three Strikes. Indeed, the law would not have passed but for the kidnapping and murder of Polly Klaas. Passions ran so high in favor of the

law that no one seemed to notice that the Klaas family withdrew their support for the law because they found it too extreme. [I]t is exactly that kind of law, one enacted in the passion of the moment, that may trigger the need

for judicial review.

Erik Luna similarly describes the three-strikes law in California as a “prime example of a moral panic.” Erik Luna, Criminal Justice and the Public Imagination, 7 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 71, 84 (2009). But can courts effectively identify when a
law is the product of “passion” or “panic” and thus does not deserve deference? Or should courts be guided by Bentham's point that the public and the legislature are “naturally inclined” to “undue severity” and therefore “we should take the most
precautions” to guard against excessive punishments because “there has been shown the greatest disposition to err”? Is excessive reliance on incarceration inevitable if courts do not take precautions against “panic”?

Justice Scalia’s view (joined only by Chief Justice Rehnquist at the time, but later endorsed by Justice Thomas as well), that the Eighth Amendment contains no proportionality requirement was based on Justice Scalia’s reading of the
historical background of the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause. John Stinneford argues that proportionality was part of the original understanding of the Eighth Amendment and that Justice Scalia’s analysis was in error. Stinneford, Rethinking
Proportionality Under the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause, 97 Va. L. Rev. 899 (2011).

3. Proportionality and the war on drugs. Even though Justice Kennedy accepts a limited proportionality principle under the Eighth Amendment, he did not find Harmelin’s sentence (life without parole for possessing 672 grams of

p. 246

p. 246
cocaine) to be disproportionate. Is his analysis of that issue convincing? If a legislature is free to consider subsidiary effects of a particular offense, is there any limit to how much punishment a legislature can impose? Consider Kelly A. Patch,
Harmelin v. Michigan: ls Proportionate Sentencing Merely Legislative Grace?, 1992 Wis. L. Rev. 1697, 1723:

Ironically, had Harmelin panicked when the police officers pulled him over, shot and killed the two officers without premeditation, ditched the cocaine, and then been arrested, he would have been subject to any term of years

sentence up to life and if sentenced to life, he would be eligible for parole in ten years.

Does Patch’s point suggest that proportionality analysis is inherently relative and that comparing sentences for different crimes is a necessary part of the analysis? Or are relative comparisons themselves too subjective, as Justice Scalia suggests?

4, Proportionality and recidivism. Lockyer v. Andrade, 538 U.S. 63 (2003), was a case arising from California's three-strikes law, discussed at pp. 1151-1156 infra. Andrade had stolen from a Kmart on two occasions, taking video-
tapes worth $84.70 the first time and $68.84 the second. Because both amounts were under $200, the offenses were classified as petty thefts, normally a misdemeanor. But because Andrade had previous convictions (two misdemeanor thefts, two
counts of transporting marijuana, and three counts of residential burglary), the three-strikes statute applied. As a result, for each of the petty thefts, he was sentenced to a term of 25 years to life, the terms to run consecutively. The Court refused to
overturn the sentence.15 Justice Souter, for the four dissenters, said that “if Andrade’s sentence is not grossly disproportionate, the principle has no meaning.” Id. at 83.

While the sentence in Andrade seems severe in relation to the two crimes charged, the decision raises the distinct problem of how proportionality should be affected by a defendant's prior criminal conduct. Utilitarians consider longer
punishments necessary because the defendant was not deterred by the initial sanction. But does the enhanced punishment violate the principles of retributivism? For an argument that longer sentences are not disproportionate to culpability be-
cause people have a greater duty to avoid committing a new crime after being convicted the first time, see Youngjae Lee, Recidivism as Omission: A Relational Account, 87 Tex. L. Rev. 571, 610 (2009). Do you agree? Does this reasoning suffice to
justify the life sentences imposed on Andrade for his two petty thefts?

5. Proportionality in other contexts. The Supreme Court has enforced a proportionality requirement for fines (where the Eighth Amendment expressly prohibits “excessive[ness]”) and forfeitures, United States v. Bajakajian, 524
U.S. 321 (1998), as well as for punitive damages. Review of punitive damage awards has been searching. For example, in punitive damage challenges, the Court examines proportionality issues de novo, rather than under a deferential standard of
review.

p. 246

p. 246
Cooper Industries, Inc. v. Leatherman Tool Group, Inc., 582 U.S. 424 (2001). The Court has held that states may not impose punitive damage awards to punish a defendant for harms to non-parties. Phillip Morris USA v. Williams, 549 U.S. 346, 349
(2007). And it closely scrutinizes awards, striking them down when “a more modest punishment for [the] reprehensible conduct could have satisfied the State's legitimate objectives.” State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. v. Campbell, 538
U.S. 408, 419-420 (200) (emphasis added).

Contrasting the Court’s approaches to punitive damages and prison sentences, Professor Richard Frase observes (Excessive Prison Sentences, Punishment Goals, and the Eighth Amendment: “Proportionality” Relative to What?, 89
Minn, L. Rev. 571, 608-609 (2008)):

[he Court [has not] required a “threshold” showing of gross disproportionality before subjecting punitive damages awards to comparative analysis. [And] in assessing punitive damages awards, the Court has added a

limitation on the relevance of the defendant's “prior record”: only violations of a similar nature may be considered. Thus, in at least three respects — de novo review, more frequent use of comparative analysis, and more le-

nient treatment of recidivists — the Court seems to be much more protective of civil defendants’ bank accounts than it has been of criminal defendants’ liberty.

QUESTION: Is there a legitimate basis for more searching review of punitive damage awards than of prison terms? In State Farm, Justice Kennedy sought to justify the difference as follows (538 U.S. at 417-418):

[DJefendants subjected to punitive damages in civil cases have not been accorded the protections applicable in a criminal proceeding. This increases our concerns over the imprecise manner in which punitive damages
systems are administered. “[Plunitive damages pose an acute danger of arbitrary deprivation of property. Jury instructions typically leave the jury with wide discretion in choosing amounts, and the presentation of evidence
of a defendant's net worth creates the potential that juries will use their verdicts to express biases against big businesses, — particularly those without strong local presences.” . . . Exacting appellate review ensures that an
award of punitive damages is based upon an “application of law, rather than a decisionmaker's caprice.”
Is this analysis persuasive? Many commentators (e.g., Frase, supra) question whether the safeguards applicable at the criminal trial on the question of guilt suffice to protect against caprice in sentencing. All things considered, is there less need for
“{e]xacting appellate review” of prison sentences than of money damage awards?
6. Proportionality review outside the U.S. Supreme Court. (a) Eighth Amendment review. Despite the high bar that Harmelin sets for proportionality claims, successful Eighth Amendment challenges are not unheard of. In State
v. Bruce, 796 N.W.2d 397, 409 (S.D. 2011), the court struck down a 100-year sentence for possessing child pornography. The defendant, a veteran who had served during Operation Desert Storm, had no prior criminal history, and there was no ev-
idence of
p. 246
p.247
any sexual contact with a child; the court concluded that the sentence was grossly disproportionate to the “particulars of the offense and the offender.” Similarly, in People v. Carmony, 127 Cal. App. 4th 1066 (2005), the court struck down a sen-
tence of 25 years to life, imposed on a person who had been previously convicted of a sexual offense, for the “harmless technical violation” of failing to update his sex-offense registration as required. State v. Davis, 79 P.3d 64 (Ariz. 2003), struck
down a mandatory minimum sentence of 52 years without possibility of parole, imposed on a 20-year-old male for four counts of having had voluntary sex with an underage teenaged girl. But in contrast, State v. Berger, 134 P.3d 378 (Ariz. 2006),
upheld a sentence of 200 years’ imprisonment without possibility of parole (consecutive 10-year sentences on each of 20 counts) imposed on a first-time offender for possession of 20 images of child pornography downloaded from the Internet. A
dissenting justice observed:
Arizona's mandatory minimum 200-year sentence . . . exceeds that imposable in any other state. It is the unique combination of long mandatory minimum sentences, coupled with the requirements that each image be
charged separately and that the terms be served consecutively and fully — that is, without possibility of early release — that renders Arizona’s sentences extraordinarily long. Indeed, the minimum ten-year sentence in Ari-
zona for possession of one image [equals or exceeds] the maximum sentence for possession of child pornography in [45] states. . . . Moreover, the sentence at issue is longer than that imposed in Arizona for many crimes
involving serious violence. [T]he minimum sentence for possession of an image of child pornography is longer than the presumptive [.e., midrange] sentence for rape or aggravated assault. [The minimum] sentence for pos-
session of five images (fifty years) amounts as a practical matter to a life sentence without parole, more serious than the sentence imposed for virtually any [other] crime in the state.
(b) Proportionality review under state constitutional law. Many state constitutions contain provisions similar to the Eighth Amendment, but as Richard Frase notes, even when state constitutions are worded identically to the
Eighth Amendment, “many state courts . . . interpret state constitutional law more favorably” to defendants. Richard S. Frase, Limiting Excessive Prison Sentences Under Federal and State Constitutions, 11 U. Pa. J. Const. L. 39, 40 (2008). For
example, the Georgia Supreme Court, purporting to apply Harmelin, condemned as cruel and unusual a 10-year prison sentence for a 17-year-old defendant who had consensual oral sex with a 15-year-old. Humphrey v. Wilson, 652 S.E.2d 501
(Ga. 2007).
Annumber of state constitutions have wording that provides a basis for greater judicial oversight, requiring, for example, that “alll penalties shall be proportioned to the nature of the offense.” Ind. Const. art. 1, §16; see also Me. Const.
art. 1, §9; Neb. Const. art. 1, §15; N.H. Const. pt. 1, art. 18; Or. Const. art. |, §16. In People v. Bullock, 485 N.W.2d 866 (Mich. 1992), the Michigan Supreme Court overturned on state constitutional grounds the Michigan statute that the U.S.
Supreme Court had upheld in Harmelin. The Michigan court emphasized the textual difference between the Eighth Amendment's prohibition of “cruel and unusual punishment” and the Michigan Constitution's prohibition of “cruel or unusual
punishment”
p.247

p. 248
{italics added). The court held that under the Michigan Constitution, courts must apply a three-prong test, identical to that advanced in Solem, to determine whether a punishment is “cruel or unusual.”

For a description of state proportionality review, see Thomas A. Balmer, Some Thoughts on Proportionality, 87 Or. L. Rev. 783 (2008). Some commentators suggest that experience with state proportionality review establishes that more
robust proportionality review is readily administrable. See Julia Fong Sheketoff, Note, State Innovations in Noncapital Proportionality Doctrine, 85 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 2209 (2010).

7. Proportionality and culpability. The preceding material focuses on offenders who were unquestionably guilty of committing serious offenses. In all such cases, some punishment is unquestionably deserved; concern arises only
because a portion of the punishment imposed arguably exceeds the offender’s just deserts. That concem can arise in an even more fundamental way when circumstances suggest that the alleged offender may not be morally blameworthy at all.
The next section deals in depth with this foundational issue — the constituent elements of culpability and the question of whether or to what extent culpability should always be a prerequisite for just punishment.

D. CULPABILITY

1. Actus Reus — Culpable Conduct

a. The Requirement of Voluntary Action
Martin v. State

‘Alabama Court of Appeals

17 So. 2d 427 (Ala. Ct. App. 1944)

Simson, J. Appellant was convicted of being drunk on a public highway, and appeals. Officers of the law arrested him at his home and took him onto the highway, where he allegedly committed the proscribed acts, viz., manifested a
drunken condition by using loud and profane language.

The pertinent provisions of our statute are: “Any person who, while intoxicated or drunk, appears in any public place where one or more persons are present, . .. and manifests a drunken condition by boisterous or indecent conduct, or
loud and profane discourse, shall, on conviction, be fined,” etc. Code 1940, Title 14, Section 120.

Under the plain terms of this statute, a voluntary appearance is presupposed. The rule has been declared, and we think it sound, that an accusation of drunkenness in a designated public place cannot be established by proof that the
accused, while in an intoxicated condition, was involuntarily and forcibly carried to that place by the arresting officer. . . . Conviction of appellant was contrary to this announced principle and, in our view, erroneous. .. .

Reversed. . . .

p. 248
p.249
NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. The rationale of Martin. The reversal of Martin's conviction seems intuitively fair. But what principle explains that result? Is it simply the need to respect the statutory definition of the offense? The court says that “[ulnder the plain
terms of the statute, a voluntary appearance is presupposed.”

Is this explanation convincing? The court's account raises two problems. First, if we focus solely on the text of the statute, where is there any hint that the appearance must be voluntary? Second, if a conviction under the circumstances
of Martin is troubling, it would presumably remain troubling even if the statutory wording had not specifically required that the accused “appear.” For example, suppose that the Alabama statute had been re-worded to provide: “Any person who,
while drunk, is found in a public place is guilty of an offense.” If Martin's conviction is troublesome, shouldn't it be equally troublesome under this statute as well?

2. The actus reus requirement. Notice that in a prosecution under the re-worded statute just mentioned, a person (Perry Passive) forced to swallow alcohol and then carried into public by the police would seem to meet the statutory
requirements for conviction, even without engaging in any conduct at all. But a conviction under those circumstances would violate the fundamental principle that criminal liability always requires an “actus reus,” that is, the commission of some
voluntary act that is prohibited by law. For one statutory statement of this principle, see Model Penal Code §2.01(1), in the Appendix to this book. Presumably, the Alabama court's understanding of this background principle played a large role in
its approach to interpreting the statute.

3. Testing the result in Martin. Martin, unlike Perry Passive, cannot claim that he engaged in no voluntary conduct at all. Martin presumably drank, and once in public he used loud and profane language. Is the Martin court in effect
requiring that all the proscribed acts be committed voluntarily? Consider whether a requirement of that sort is really desirable. If Martin voluntarily used loud and profane language in public, wouldn't it be fair to punish him, regardless of how he
came to be in public? How would that situation be handled under MPC §2.01(1)?

4, Contemporary applications. American courts widely acknowledge Martin's status as a leading case but disagree about its application to common situations. Consider the following problems:

(a) In People v. Low, 232 P.3d 635 (Cal. 2010), the defendant was arrested for driving a stolen vehicle and taken to jail, where a search found drugs hidden in one of his socks. He was convicted not only of the stolen vehicle offense
but also of “knowingly bring[ing] [a] controlled substance” into a county jail. He conceded knowing possession but invoked Martin to argue that since he had been taken to jail against his will, he had not voluntarily committed the required act
of “bring[ing]” the drug into the jail. The California Supreme Court distinguished Martin and upheld the conviction on the ground that the defendant had “a clear opportunity to avoid [the prohibited act] by voluntarily relinquishing the forbidden
object . . . before entering the premises.” Id. at 644. The Washington Supreme Court reached the opposite conclusion on largely identical facts; it found Martin controlling and reversed the defendant's conviction for “possess[ing] a controlled sub-
stance . . . while in a county jail.” State v. Eaton, 229 P.3d 704 (Wash. 2010).

p.249

p.250
Responding to the state's argument that “the plain language of the statute does not contain a volitional element,” the court noted that the defendant had no available choice other than to surrender evidence that would convict him of another crime,
and therefore failing to read a voluntariness requirement into the statute would produce “absurd” results incompatible with the principles of criminal responsibility. Id. at 706-708. Courts remain divided on the issue. See TaLise Hansen, Note, Be-
tween a Rock and a Hard Place: The Wyoming Supreme Court's Approach to Arrestees Taking Controlled Substances into Jails, 20 Wyo. L. Rev. 149 (2020). How should these cases be decided?!®

(b) A Los Angeles ordinance makes it an offense for any person to “sit, lie or sleep in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public way.” L.A. Mun. Code §41.18(d). Thousands of homeless people in Los Angeles brought suit to enjoin
enforcement of the ordinance against them during nighttime hours. They proved that the city had an insufficient number of beds available to accommodate them and argued that convicting them under these circumstances would simply punish
them for the “universal and unavoidable consequences of being human.” The U.S. Court of Appeals agreed, holding that “the state may not criminalize ‘being’; that is, the state may not punish a person for who he is, independent of anything he has
done.” Jones v. City of Los Angeles, 444 F.3d 1118, 1133 (9th Cir. 2006). A dissenting judge argued that the ordinance “does not punish people simply because they are homeless. It targets conduct — sitting, lying or sleeping on city sidewalks.” Id.
at 1139 (Rymer, J., dissenting)."2 Which is the better view?

Situations like this raise constitutional issues that we examine starting at p. 990 infra. For the moment, we can assume that constitutional law would not always afford a reliable basis for a defense, so it is important to consider the prob-
lem solely in terms of ordinary criminal law principles. Do these principles permit a criminal conviction in a case like Jones?

Courts have permitted the enforcement of similar ordinances when homeless shelters have not reached capacity, e.g., Joel v. City of Orlando, 232 F.3d 1353, 1362 (11th Cir. 2000), but have held that such ordinances cannot be enforced
against people who lack stable living arrangements when shelter beds are unavailable, e.g., Martin v. City of Boise, 920 F.3d 584 (Sth Cir. 2019); Phillips v. City of Cincinnati, 479 F. Supp. 3d 611 (S.D. Ohio 2020). Similarly, in Murphy v. Raoul, 380

F. Supp. 3d 731 (N.D. Ill. 2019), the court held that an incarcerated person eligible for release on parole could not be denied release because of an inability to find an acceptable place to live; the court held that continuing imprisonment in these cir-
cumstances amounted to punishment not for acts but for a status outside the incarcerated person's control.

How should these cases be decided under Model Penal Code §2.01(1)?

250
p.251

(c) In United States v. Macias, 740 F.3d 96, 97 (2d Cir. 2014), the defendant, a Honduran citizen who had been in the United States without authorization, attempted to enter Canada from New York. Canadian officials denied him entry
because he did not have valid documents. After the Canadian officers “forcibly returned” him to U.S. customs officials in handcuffs, the defendant was charged and convicted of being “voluntarily present and found in the United States.” Id. at 98.
The Second Circuit reversed the conviction because when the defendant was “found in” the United States, he had “been returned involuntarily.” Id. at 102.

5. When is an act considered voluntary? The MPC defines an “act” as a “bodily movement whether voluntary or involuntary.” §1.13(2). By this definition, Martin's use of profane language certainly qualifies as an act. But should that
act be considered legally “involuntary,” on the ground that his drunkenness impeded his ability to control what he said? Consider the material that follows.

People v. Newton
California District Court of Appeal
87 Cal. Rptr. 394 (Dist. Ct. App. 1970)

RatTiaan, J. Huey P. Newton appeals from a judgment convicting him of voluntary manslaughter.

[Newton was charged with the murder of John Frey, a police officer who died of bullet wounds received in a struggle with defendant. A jury found him guilty of voluntary manslaughter.

[Frey stopped a car driven by Newton and ordered him out of the car, and an altercation ensued. From the testimony of the prosecution's witnesses, it appeared that Newton had drawn a gun, and, in the struggle for its possession, the
gun went off and wounded Heanes, another police officer. The struggle continued, and Heanes fired a shot at Newton's midsection. At some point, Newton wrested the gun away and fired several fatal shots point-blank at Frey. He then ran away.
Shortly afterward, Newton appeared at a hospital emergency room, seeking treatment for a bullet wound in the abdomen.

[Newton testified that he had carried no gun. According to his account, the struggle began when Frey struck him for protesting his arrest. As he stumbled backwards, Frey drew a revolver. At this point, he felt a “sensation like . . . boiling
hot soup had been spilled on my stomach,” and heard an “explosion,” then a “volley of shots.” He remembered “crawling . . . a moving sensation,” but nothing else until he found himself at the entrance of Kaiser Hospital with no knowledge of how
he arrived there. He expressly testified that he was “unconscious or semiconscious” during this interval, that he was “still only semiconscious” at the hospital entrance, and that — after recalling some events at Kaiser Hospital — he later “regained
consciousness” at another hospital.]

The defense called Bernard Diamond, M.D., who testified that defendant's recollections were “compatible” with the gunshot wound he had received; and that

[al gunshot wound which penetrates in a body cavity, the abdominal cavity or the thoracic cavity is very likely to produce a profound reflex shock reaction, that is quite different than a gunshot wound which penetrates

p.251
p. 252
only skin and muscle and it is not at all uncommon for a person shot in the abdomen to lose consciousness and go into this reflex shock condition for short periods of time up to half an hour or so.

Defendant asserts prejudicial error in the trial court's failure to instruct the jury on the subject of unconsciousness as a defense to a charge of criminal homicide. . . .

Although the evidence of the fatal affray is both conflicting and confused as to who shot whom and when, some of it supported the inference that defendant had been shot in the abdomen before he fired any shots himself. Given this
sequence, defendant's testimony of his sensations when shot — supplemented to a degree, as it was, by Dr. Diamond's opinion based upon the nature of the abdominal wound — supported the further inference that defendant was in a state of un-
consciousness when Officer Frey was shot.

Where not self-induced, as by voluntary intoxication or the equivalent (of which there is no evidence here . . . ), unconsciousness is a complete defense to a charge of criminal homicide. (Pen. Code, §26, subd. 5; . . .) “Unconscious-
ness,” as the term is used in the rule just cited, need not reach the physical dimensions commonly associated with the term (coma, inertia, incapability of locomotion or manual action, and so on); it can exist — and the above-stated rule can apply
— where the subject physically acts in fact but is not, at the time, conscious of acting. The statute underlying the rule makes this clear!1. . . . Thus, the rule has been invoked in many cases where the actor fired multiple gunshots while inferably in
asstate of such “unconsciousness” ... . including some in which the only evidence of “unconsciousness” was the actor's own testimony that he did not recalll the shooting. . .

Where evidence of involuntary unconsciousness has been produced in a homicide prosecution, the refusal of a requested instruction on the subject, and its effect as a complete defense if found to have existed, is prejudicial error. ..

[Rleversed.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. The rationale of the voluntary act requirement. The reason for excluding criminal liability in the absence of voluntary action is explained as follows (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.01 at 214-215 (1985)):

[he law cannot hope to deter involuntary movement or to stimulate action that cannot physically be performed; the sense of personal security would be undermined in a society where such movement or inactivity could

lead to formal social condemnation of the sort that a conviction necessarily entails. People whose involuntary movements threaten harm to others may present a public health or safety problem, calling for therapy or even for

custodial commitment; they do not present a problem of correction.

p.252
p. 259

2. Distinguishing between voluntary and involuntary acts. The MPC defines voluntariness indirectly, by simply listing examples of involuntary acts. The examples are consistent with the general approach at common law, but they
do not include many types of conduct that are often described as “involuntary” in ordinary speech — such as an act that is the product of an “irresistible impulse.” See MPC §2.01(2). To add further confusion, the term “involuntary” does not have
aconsistent meaning even within the criminal law: Many types of conduct that are considered “involuntary” for purposes of some criminal law rules are not considered “involuntary” for purposes of others. One example is the case of a motorist
who drives too fast, goes through a stop sign, and unintentionally kills a pedestrian. In everyday speech and in the criminal law itself, this offense is usually described as “involuntary manslaughter.” (We explore the offense in detail in Chapter 5, pp.
506-524 infra.) Yet the motorist’s actions are not considered “involuntary” for purposes of either the common-law actus reus requirement or MPC §2.01(2).

QUESTION: Why should the definition of an involuntary act, for purposes of the actus reus requirement, be narrower than the ordinary person's understanding of what counts as an involuntary act? Consider Bratty v. Attorney-General [1963] A.C.
386, 409-410 (H.L. 1961):

No act is punishable if it is done involuntarily: and an involuntary act in this context — some people nowadays prefer to speak of it as “automatism” — means an act which is done by the muscles without any control by the

mind such as a spasm, a reflex action or a convulsion; or an act done by a person who is not conscious of what he is doing such as an act done whilst suffering from concussion or whilst sleep-walking. . . . The term “involun-

tary act” is, however, capable of wider connotations: and to prevent confusion it is to be observed that in the criminal law an act is not to be regarded as an involuntary act simply because the doer does not remember it... .

Nor is an act to be regarded as an involuntary act simply because the doer could not control his impulse to do it. When a man is charged with murder, and it appears that he knew what he was doing, but he could not resist it,

then his assertion “I couldn't help myself” is no defence in itself. . .. Nor is an act to be regarded as an involuntary act simply because it is unintentional or its consequences are unforeseen. When a man is charged with dan-

gerous driving, it is no defence for him to say, however truly, “I did not mean to drive dangerously.”

3. Distinguishing between voluntary acts and blameworthy acts. Involuntary acts are never blameworthy. But the opposite is not true. We cannot say that voluntary acts are always blameworthy, because the law and ordinary
morality impose blame only when a number of additional requirements are met. Thus a voluntary act is necessary, but not sufficient for criminal liability. For example, a person may act voluntarily by driving carefully to work, but may have an acci-
dent and injure someone unintentionally. Accident and mistake relate to the effects that one has in mind as possible results of one’s voluntary actions; the normal assumption that blame entails some awareness that one's actions can cause harm
is called the mens rea requirement, and we examine it in detail in Section D.2, pp. 284-375 infra.

p.259

p.254
Another example involves persons who choose to act in a certain way because an overwhelming external threat of force or a mental disorder leads them to believe they have no choice; these defenses, such as duress and insanity, are called ex-
cuses, and we examine them in detail in Chapter 8.C, pp. 904-1012 infra.

Although we are only beginning our consideration of the different categories of defenses, it is worth pausing to consider why the law might distinguish between the various reasons why a person who causes harm can avoid blame. Pro-
fessor J.G. Murphy (Involuntary Acts and Criminal Liability, 51 Ethics 332 (1971)) points out that there are two situations in which human actions “misfire.” One is where actions are done accidentally or under duress. The other is where the action
misfires in a more basic way — such as in cases of convulsions, reflex movements, or somnambulism. In the first group of cases, we speak of mitigating the actor's responsibility or of excusing the act. In the second group of cases, however, we do
not think of excuse but rather believe that no human action occurred at all — “talk of excuse here seems to make no more sense than would talk of excusing a rock for falling on one’s head.” For in-depth discussion of these issues, see Michael S.
Moore, Act and Crime (1993); Douglas Husak, Rethinking the Act Requirement, 28 Cardozo L. Rev. 2437 (2007).

The differences between these two types of cases are more than semantic or theoretical. Even though most defenses, whatever their label, result in an acquittal, important legal differences depend on whether we put a defense into the
category of actus reus, mens rea, or excuse. One difference concerns the burden of proof. Since a voluntary act is a necessary element of every crime, the prosecution bears the burden of proving that act — and typically its voluntary character —
beyond a reasonable doubt. That burden, the burden of proving the actus reus of the offense, cannot be shifted to the defendant.1 But, as we saw in Chapter 2, pp. 151-160 supra, the legislature has some flexibility to convert mens rea require-
ments from “elements” of an offense to affirmative defenses on which the prosecution need not bear the burden of proof. And the burden of proving excuses such as insanity often is placed upon the defendant. (See pp. 948-949 infra.) Another
important practical consequence concerns the disposition of the defendant. When defendants are acquitted on grounds of insanity, they are often subject to civil commitment or other therapeutic protocols. (See pp. 945-947 infra.) In contrast, if a
defendant like Newton is acquitted on the ground that his act was involuntary, he is immediately discharged without further supervision over his conduct.

QUESTION: When defendants are acquitted for lack of a voluntary act, is it always wise to release them without further supervision? What if, for example, a defendant is prone to spasms and seizures? Consider the problems that follow.
4, Problems. (a) Habit. The MPC treats habitual action done without thought as voluntary. Why should this be so? Suppose, for example, that a person firmly resolves to stop saying “like” in the middle of every sentence, but then
continues to do so. Why is this slip-up treated as a voluntary act? Suppose that a person
p.254
p. 255
is driving on an interstate when the cell phone rings; without thinking, the person reaches for the phone, causing an accident and violating a traffic-safety regulation against using cell phones while driving. This act of reaching for the phone does
not qualify as a “reflex” within the meaning of the MPC. (Do you see why?) But why should a movement like this be treated as a voluntary act? See Kimberly Kessler Ferzan, Opaque Recklessness, 91 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 597, 646-647 (2001).

(b) Hypnosis. Under the MPC, the acts of a hypnotized subject are not considered voluntary. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.01 at 221 (1985):

The widely held view that the hypnotized subject will not follow suggestions which are repugnant to him was deemed insufficient to warrant treating his conduct while hypnotized as voluntary; his dependency and helpless-

ness are too pronounced.

QUESTION: If habitual actions that a person has great difficulty controlling are considered voluntary, why should actions under hypnosis, which the subject apparently can control, be considered involuntary? The MPC view seems to be that
habitual action, even when unintentional, is nonetheless “a product of the effort or determination of the actor.” §2.01(2)(d). Isn't that also true of actions under hypnosis? Scientific disagreement over the hypnotized subject's ability to exercise self-
control, together with the difficulty of distinguishing normal from hypnotized actions, apparently have led most jurisdictions not to adopt a statutory hypnosis defense like the one in the MPC. See Paul H. Robinson et al., 2 Criminal Law Defenses
§191 (2010). Is it fair to preclude a defendant from raising this defense and seeking to persuade the jury of its validity?
(c) Somnambulism. (1) The Cogdon case. Consider Norval Morris, Somnambulistic Homicide: Ghosts, Spiders, and North Koreans, 5 Res Judicatae 29, 29-30 (1951):
Mrs. Cogdon was charged with the murder of her only child, a daughter called Pat, aged nineteen. . . . Describing the relationship between Pat and her mother, Mr. Cogdon testified: “I don’t think a mother could have thought
any more of her daughter. | think she absolutely adored her.” On the conscious level, at least, there was no reason to doubt Mrs. Cogdon’s deep attachment to her daughter.
To the charge of murdering Pat, Mrs. Cogdon pleaded not guilty. Her story, though somewhat bizarre, was not seriously challenged by the Crown, and led to her acquittal. She told how, on the night before her
daughter's death she had dreamt that their house was full of spiders and that these spiders were crawling all over Pat. In her sleep, Mrs. Cogdon left the bed she shared with her husband, went into Pat's room and awakened
to find herself violently brushing at Pat's face, presumably to remove the spiders. . .
The morning after the spider dream she told her doctor of it. He gave her a sedative and, because of the dream and certain previous difficulties she had reported, discussed the possibility of psychiatric treatment.
That evening [there] was some desultory conversation . . . about the war in Korea, and just before she put out her light Pat called out to her mother, “Mum, don't be so silly worrying about the war, it’s not on our front door
step yet.”
p.255
p. 256
Mrs. Cogdon went to sleep. She dreamt that “the war was all around the house,” that the soldiers were in Pat's room, and that one soldier was on the bed attacking Pat. This was all of the dream that she could
later recapture. Her first “waking” memory was of running from Pat's room, out of the house to the home of her sister who lived next door. When her sister opened the front door Mrs. Cogdon fell into her arms crying, “I think
I've hurt Pattie.”
In fact Mrs. Cogdon had, in her somnambulistic state, left her bed, fetched an axe from the woodheap, entered Pat's room, and struck her two accurate forceful blows on the head with the blade of the axe, thus
killing her.
Mrs. Cogdon’s story was supported by the evidence of her physician, a psychiatrist, and a psychologist. The burden of the evidence of all three, which was not contested by the prosecution, was that Mrs. Cog-
don was suffering from a form of hysteria with an overlay of depression and that she was of a personality in which such dissociated states as fugues, amnesias, and somnambulistic acts are to be expected. They agreed that
she was not psychotic and that if she had been awake at the time of the killing no defence could have been spelt out under the M’Naughten Rules [defining the terms of the defense of legal insanity]. They hazarded no state-
ment as to her motives, the idea of defence of the daughter being transparently insufficient. However, the psychologist and the psychiatrist concurred in hinting that the emotional motivation lay in an acute conflict situation
in her relations with her own parents; that during marital life she suffered very great sexual frustration; and that she over-compensated for her own frustration by over-protection of her daughter. Her exaggerated solicitude for
her daughter was a conscious expression of her subconscious emotional hostility to her, and the dream ghosts, spiders, and Korean soldiers were projections of that aggression. . . .
At all events the jury believed Mrs. Cogdon’s story. [S]he was acquitted because the act of Killing itself was not, in law, regarded as her act at all.
(2) The traditional rule. The common law and the MPC are in accord with the result in Cogdon; on her version of the events, her act would be considered involuntary. See MPC §2.01(2)(c). But does it make sense for a person like Mrs.
Cogdon to be acquitted outright and released? The Supreme Court of Canada has ruled that sleepwalking is properly treated as a defense of involuntary act, rather than insanity, because the law's concer, for purposes of punishment, is with
the conscious mind. R. v. Parks, 95 D.L.R.4th 27 (1992). But then how should the law deal with its concern for social protection? One possibility is involuntary civil commitment of the mentally ill. But what should happen in cases of this sort if the

evidence of somnambulism raises a reasonable doubt about whether the person's actions were voluntary, but is not strong enough to justify involuntary confinement in a mental hospital or other care facility? (We consider related dispositional is-
sues that arise under the insanity defense at pp. 945-947 infra.)
(3) Related developments. There is an extensive medical literature on “sleep-related violence,” and a growing effort to use medical testimony to buttress the defense. See James R. Acker & Sishi Wu, “I Did It, But I Didn't”: When Re-
jected Affirmative Defenses Produce Wrongful Convictions, 98 Neb. L. Rev. 578 (2020);
p.256
p.257
Brendan J. McKenna, Automatism: A Complete Yet Imperfect Defense, 227 Mil. L. Rev. 46 (2019). Indeed, in Yun Hseng Liao v. Junious, 817 F.3d 678 (9th Cir. 2016), the court found ineffective assistance of counsel because defense counsel failed
to seek expert testimony to buttress an attempted sleepwalking defense.12
In a Canadian case, a defendant was acquitted on charges of forcible rape, after a doctor specializing in sleep disorders testified that the defendant's prior history of sleepwalking, together with studies of his brain waves during sleep
and other circumstances corroborated his claim to have acted involuntarily during a state of “sexsomnia.” R. v. Luedecke, [2005] 35 C.R. 6th 205. Several American defendants have also raised “sexsomnia” as an involuntary-act defense but were
unsuccessful at trial. E.g., State v. Pratt, 454 P.3d 875, 882 (Wash. Ct. App. 2019).
(d) Epilepsy. A person's movements during an epileptic seizure are indisputably involuntary. Can the prosecution nonetheless establish liability by pointing to earlier acts that were voluntary? Consider People v. Decina, 138 N.E.2d 799,
803-804 (1956):
The indictment states essentially that defendant, knowing “that he was subject to epileptic attacks or other disorder rendering him likely to lose consciousness for a considerable period of time,” was culpably negligent “in
that he consciously undertook to and did operate his Buick sedan on a public highway” (emphasis supplied) and “while so doing” suffered such an attack which caused said automobile “to travel at a fast and reckless rate of
speed, jumping the curb and driving over the sidewalk” causing the death of 4 persons. In our opinion, this clearly states a violation of section 1053-a of the Penal Law... . [“A person who operates or drives any vehicle of any
kind in a reckless or culpably negligent manner, whereby a human being is killed is guilty of criminal negligence in the operation of a vehicle resulting in death.”]
Assuming the truth of the indictment, as we must on a demurrer, this defendant knew he was subject to epileptic attacks and seizures that might strike at any time. He also knew that a moving motor vehicle
uncontrolled on a public highway is a highly dangerous instrumentality capable of unrestrained destruction. With this knowledge, and without anyone accompanying him, he deliberately took a chance by making a conscious
choice of a course of action, in disregard of the consequences which he knew might follow from his conscious act, and which in this case did ensue. How can we say as a matter of law that this did not amount to culpable
negligence within the meaning of section 1053-a?
To hold otherwise would be to say that a man may freely indulge himself in liquor in the same hope that it will not affect his driving, and if it later develops that ensuing intoxication causes dangerous and reckless
driving resulting in death, his unconsciousness or involuntariness at that time would relieve him from prosecution under the statute. His awareness
p.257
p. 258
of a condition which he knows may produce such consequences as here, and his disregard of the consequences, renders him liable for culpable negligence, as the courts below have properly held. To have a sudden sleep-
ing spell, an unexpected heart or other disabling attack, without any prior knowledge or warning thereof, is an altogether different situation.
QUESTION: If the prosecution can defeat the voluntary act requirement by expanding the time frame in this way, how far back in time should the prosecution be permitted to go? Consider the following comments:
MARK KELMAN, INTERPRETIVE CONSTRUCTION IN THE SUBSTANTIVE CRIMINAL LAW, 33 STAN. L. REV. 591, 600-605 (1991): [I]f we interpret the relevant legal material as including earlier decisions . . . , we can interpret the course of the conduct
that culminates in criminal harm as chosen. . . . The hidden interpretive time-framing construct becomes visible when one tries to square Martin with Decina. [Like the defendant in Decina,] the defendant in Martin . . . may have done something

voluntarily (before the police came) that posed a risk that he would get arrested and carried into public in his drunken state . . . for instance, beating his wife. Why did the court not consider saying that the voluntary act at time one (wife beating)
both posed a risk of and caused a harmful involuntary act at time two (public drunkenness) and assessing the voluntariness of the alleged criminal act with reference to the wider time-framed scenario? It cannot be that the involuntary, harmful act
at time two was unforeseeable. The probability of an epileptic black-out is almost certainly far lower than the probability of ending up in public after engaging in behavior likely to draw police attention. . . . Ultimately, the Martin finding of voluntari-
ness “works” not because it is “right,” but because all the hard points disappear in the initial interpretive construction of the potentially relevant facts.

MICHAEL MOORE, ACT AND CRIME 35-37 (1993): If there were a “time-framing” choice to be made in criminal cases, Kelman is right in his observation that there would be no principled way to make it. But where did Kelman get his assumption
that there is such a choice to be made? [If] the court can find a voluntary act by the defendant, accompanied at that time by whatever culpable mens rea [state of mind] is required, which act in fact and proximately causes some legally prohibited
state of affairs, then the defendant is prima facie liable for that legal harm. There is no “time-framing” choice here. If there is any point in time where the act and mens rea requirements are simultaneously satisfied, and from which the requisite
causal relations exist to some legally prohibited state of affairs, then the defendant is prima facie liable. . .. What Kelman overlooks is that those earlier acts by Martin were not the proximate cause of being drunk in public. . . . In addition, had the
Alabama statute required any mens rea with respect to the element of public place, as it should have, Martin’s earlier acts of drinking in his home were unaccompanied by such mens rea and were thus ineligible to be the basis for his conviction for
that reason too.

NOTE ON THE CONCURRENCE REQUIREMENT

As Professor Moore notes, the actus reus and mens rea of an offense must be met simultaneously. This concurrence requirement is universally accepted, and it is essential to give the actus reus requirement its significance. After all,

every defendant
p. 258
p.259
has committed some voluntary act at some point in life. Obviously, the actus reus requirement cannot be met simply because the defendant voluntarily got out of bed in the morning or ate breakfast. The concurrence requirement mandates a link
between all three elements of an offense — its actus reus (a voluntary act or culpable omission), its mens rea (the defendant's state of mind) at the time of that actus reus, and the result (if one is required) caused by that actus reus.

Consider State v. 5 Star Feediot, Inc., 486 P.3d 250 (Colo. 2021). Defendant (5 Star) operated wastewater containment ponds in a cattle feediot. In the spring of 2015, a three-day storm deluged the area with over six inches of rain,
described as a once-in-half-a-century occurrence. During the storm, wastewater overflowed from one of 5 Star's containment ponds, crossed several miles of land and flowed into a river system, killing an estimated 15,000 fish. The State charged
that 5 Star had violated criminal statutes that prohibit killing wildlife without authorization. (If able to establish those criminal offenses, the State would also be able to recover more than $600,000 in damages.) Did 5 Star or its employees violate the
criminal statutes? What “time frame” should be used to answer this question? In the Colorado Supreme Court, a plurality of three justices addressed the issue as follows:

[The State was required to prove that 5 Star performed the voluntary act proscribed by the [criminal statutes] (the actus reus). Consequently, the State had to prove that 5 Star, consciously and as a result of effort or deter-

mination, performed a voluntary act by which it killed [the fish]. The only evidence presented by the State of a voluntary act performed by 5 Star was the lawful, years-long operation of wastewater containment ponds. But

[that] wasn’t . .. an act through which § Star Killed . . . the fish. Rather, . . . it was the discharge [of wastewater] . . . triggered by an act of God — the rainstorm — not an act voluntarily performed. . . . Since the State failed to

formally allege, never mind present proof, that 5 Star's lawful, years-long operation of wastewater containment ponds killed . .. the fish, it could not satisfy the voluntary act or actus reus requirement of the [criminal statutes].

Do you agree? Why isn’t this situation analogous to Decina? The events at “time two” (the flooding in 5 Star, the epileptic seizure in Decina) were not voluntary acts, but both defendants committed voluntary acts at “time one” (6 Star's
operation of the containment ponds, Decina’s initial act of driving). In that framework, however, the concurrence requirement makes two other issues crucial: (1) the defendant's culpable awareness (mens rea) at “time one”, and (2) the causal link
between the actus reus at “time one” and the harmful result. These concurrence requirements were met in Decina. Were they met in the 5 Star case?20

p.259

Cnn 260
NOTE ON CULPABLE THOUGHTS
In the Newton case, p. 251 supra, even if the defendant's physical movements killed Officer Frey, the lack of a voluntary act (according to Newton's version of the events) signaled the complete absence of culpability. There was no
mental disposition to commit any act, much less a harmful one. But suppose that a person decides to burn down a building and then makes a “to do” list saying “formulate a detailed plan to burn down the building and figure out the necessary
supplies.” Now assume that police discover the list and make an arrest before the person formulates the plan or purchases any supplies for it. Here there is a mental disposition to take harmful action; the defendant appears to be both culpable
and dangerous. Should the absence of a voluntary act nonetheless preclude liability? The law is unequivocal on this point. MPC §2.01(1) would afford a full defense, and a long-honored maxim of the criminal law states: cogitationis poenam nemo
patitur — no one is punishable solely for his thoughts. Though the law of attempt will allow criminal liability if a defendant moves beyond thoughts to some actions, even if they do not result in a completed offense, attempt still requires an act of
some kind. See Chapter 6, pp. 611-621 infra. But why should this be so? Consider the following comments:
4 WILLIAM BLACKSTONE, COMMENTARIES “21: [T]o make a complete crime, cognizable by human laws, there must be both a will and an act. For though . . . a fixed design or will to do an unlawful act is almost as heinous as the commission of it,
yet, as no temporal tribunal can search the heart, or fathom the intentions of the mind, otherwise than as they are demonstrated by outward actions, it therefore cannot punish for what it cannot know. For which reason in all temporal jurisdictions
an overt act, or some open evidence of an intended crime, is necessary, in order to demonstrate the depravity of the will, before the man is liable to punishment.
2 JAMES FITZJAMES STEPHEN, A HISTORY OF THE CRIMINAL LAW OF ENGLAND 78 (1883): Sinful thoughts and dispositions of mind might be the subject of confession and of penance, but they were never punished in this country by ecclesiasti-
cal criminal proceedings. The reasons for imposing this great leading restriction upon the sphere of criminal law are obvious. If it were not so restricted it would be utterly intolerable; all mankind would be criminals, and most of their lives would be
passed in trying and punishing each other for offences which could never be proved.
G. DWORKIN & G. BLUMENFELD, PUNISHMENTS FOR INTENTIONS, 75 MIND 396, 401 (1966): What would a system of laws embodying a rule providing for the punishment of intentions look like? When would punishment be administered? As soon
as we find out the agent's intentions? But how do we know he will not change his mind? Furthermore, isn’t the series — fantasying, wishing, desiring, wanting, intending — a continuum, making it a rather hazy matter to know just when a person is
intending rather than wishing? This last objection has two aspects, the difficulty of the authorities distinguishing between fantasying, wishing, etc. and even more importantly the difficulties the individual would have in identifying the nature of his
emotional and mental set. Would we not be constantly worried about the nature
p.260
p.261
of our mental life? . .. The resultant guilt would tend to impoverish and stultify the emotional life.
GLANVILLE WILLIAMS, CRIMINAL LAW: THE GENERAL PART 2 (2d ed. 1961): Better reasons for the rule would be (1) the difficulty of distinguishing between daydream and fixed intention in the absence of behavior tending towards the crime
intended, and (2) the undesirability of spreading the criminal law so wide as to cover a mental state that the accused might be too irresolute even to begin to translate into action.
ABRAHAM GOLDSTEIN, CONSPIRACY TO DEFRAUD THE UNITED STATES, 68 YALE L.J. 405, 405-406 (1959): [T]he act requirement serves a number of closely-related objectives: it seeks to assure that the evil intent of the man branded a criminal
has been expressed in a manner signifying harm to society; that there is no longer any substantial likelihood that he will be deterred by the threat of sanction; and that there has been an identifiable occurrence so that multiple prosecution and pun-
ishment may be minimized.
b. Omissions

Jones v. United States
United States Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit
308 F.2d 307 (1962)

Wrieit, J. [Defendant was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter through failure to provide for Anthony Lee Green, which failure resulted in his death, The deceased was the ten-month-old baby of Shirley Green. He was placed with
the defendant, a family friend. Shirley Green lived in the house with defendant for some of the time, but there was conflicting evidence as to how long. There was also conflict as to whether or not the defendant was paid for taking care of the baby.
The evidence was uncontested that the defendant had ample means to provide food and medical care] Appellant . .. takes exception to the failure of the trial court to charge that the jury must find beyond a reasonable doubt, as an element of the
crime, that appellant was under a legal duty to supply food and necessities to Anthony Lee. . .. The most commonly cited statement of the rule is found in People v. Beardsley, 150 Mich. 206, 113 N.W. 1128, 1129:

The law recognizes that under some circumstances the omission of a duty owed by one individual to another, where such omission results in the death of the one to whom the duty is owing, will make the other chargeable

with manslaughter. . .. This rule of law is always based upon the proposition that the duty neglected must be a legal duty, and not a mere moral obligation. It must be a duty imposed by law or by contract, and the omission

to perform the duty must be the immediate and direct cause of death. .. .

There are at least four situations in which the failure to act may constitute breach of a legal duty. One can be held criminally liable: first, where a statute

p.261

.262
imposes a duty to care for another; second, where one stands in a certain status relationship to another;® third, where one has assumed a contractual duty to care for another; and fourth, where one has voluntarily assumed the care of another and
so secluded the helpless person as to prevent others fromrendering aid. EEE EEE AAAS
~~" """""'Itis the contention of the Government that either the third or the fourth ground is applicable here. However, it is obvious that in any of the four situations, there are critical issues of fact which must be passed on by the jury — specifically
in this case, whether appellant had entered into a contract with the mother for the care of Anthony Lee or, alternatively, whether she assumed the care of the child and secluded him from the care of his mother, his natural protector. On both of
these issues, the evidence is in direct conflict, appellant insisting that the mother was actually living with appellant and Anthony Lee, and hence should have been taking care of the child herself, while Shirley Green testified she was living with her
parents and was paying appellant to care for both children.

In spite of this conflict, the instructions given in the case failed even to suggest the necessity for finding a legal duty of care. The only reference to duty in the instructions was the reading of the indictment which charged, inter alia, that
the [defendant] “failed to perform [her] legal duty.” A finding of legal duty is the critical element of the crime charged and failure to instruct the jury concerning it was plain error. . .

Reversed and remanded.

NOTES

1. Finding a legal duty. Jones reflects the general Anglo-American position that unless a penal statute specifically requires a particular action to be performed, criminal liability for an omission arises only when the law of torts or some

other law imposes a duty to act. This is a position also taken in Model Penal Code §2.01(3) (recognizing liability for an omission only when “a duty to perform the omitted act is otherwise imposed by law’).

2. Omissions and homicide. Most cases where liability for homicide is imposed for a failure to act are, like the Jones case, cases of involuntary manslaughter because the defendant does not have an intent to kill. See Chapter 5, pp.
506-524 infra. Such a case might be murder, however, if the defendant refused aid with the intention of causing death, or with full knowledge of a great risk that the decedent would die. For example, in Commonwealth v. Pestinikas, 617 A.2d 1339
(Pa. Super. Ct. 1992), the defendant permitted a 92-year-old man to die of starvation after agreeing to feed him and knowing that there was no other way for him to obtain food. The defendant was convicted of murder in the third degree.

3. Interpreting the scope of a duty. The rule that there is generally no legal duty to act is inapplicable, of course, when statutory language or common-law doctrines create such a duty. But social resistance to imposing liability for
omissions makes itself felt even when statutes and precedents could be interpreted to establish a duty to aid. Consider the material that follows.

p.262
p. 268
Pope v. State
Maryland Court of Appeals
396 A.2d 1054 (Md. 1979)

OTH, J. [Joyce Lillian Pope was found guilty under the 3rd and 5th counts of a nine-count indictment. The 3rd count charged child abuse, presenting that “on or about April 11, 1976, . . . while having the temporary care, custody and re-
sponsibility for the supervision of Demiko Lee Norris, a minor child under the age of eighteen years, [she] did unlawfully and feloniously cause abuse to said minor child in violation of Article 27, Section 36A of the Annotated Code of Maryland. . ..”
The 5th count charged misprision of felony under the common law, alleging that on the same date she “did unlawfully and willfully conceal and fail to disclose a felony to wit: the murder of Demiko Lee Norris committed by Melissa Vera Norris on
April 11, 1976, having actual knowledge of the commission of the felony and the identity of the felon, with the intent to obstruct and hinder the due course of justice and to cause the felon to escape unpunished. .. .”

[Melissa Norris, a young mother with a three-month-old infant, was suffering from a serious mental illness and given to episodes of violent religious frenzy. The defendant (Mrs. Pope) took Norris and her child into her house one Friday
night after church services because they had no other place to go. During the weekend Mrs. Pope fed them both and looked after the child in a variety of ways. On Sunday afternoon Melissa went into a frenzy, claiming she was God and that
Satan had hidden himself in the body of her child. In Mrs. Pope's presence she savagely beat the infant. During this prolonged period, Mrs. Pope did not try to protect the child, call the authorities, seek medical assistance. She went to church with
Melissa and later brought her back to her home where they both spent the night. At some point in the evening the infant died from the beating.]

IA] person may be convicted of the felony of child abuse created by §35A? as a principal in the first degree upon evidence legally sufficient to establish that the person

(1) was (a) the parent of, or (b) the adoptive parent of, or (c) in loco parentis to, or (d) responsible for the supervision of a minor child under the age of eighteen years, AND
(2) caused, by being in some manner accountable for, by act of commission or omission, abuse to the child in the form of (a) physical injury or injuries sustained by the child as the result of (i) cruel or inhumane treatment, or
(ii) malicious act or acts by such person, . . .
p.268
p.264

. .. Pope's lack of any attempt to prevent the numerous acts of abuse committed by the mother . . . and her failure to seek medical assistance for the child, although the need therefor was obviously compelling and urgent, could consti-
tute a cause for the further progression and worsening of the injuries which led to the child's death. In such circumstances, Pope's omissions constituted in themselves cruel and inhumane treatment within the meaning of the statute. It follows that
Pope would be guilty of child abuse if her status brought her within the class of persons specified by the statute. It being clear that she was neither the child's parent nor adoptive parent, and there being no evidence sufficient to support a finding
that she had “the permanent or temporary care or custody” of the child so as to be in loco parentis to the child, the sole question is whether she had “responsibility for the supervision of” the child in the circumstances. If she had such responsibil-
ity the evidence was legally sufficient to find her guilty of child abuse as a principal in the first degree.

The State would have us translate compassion and concern, acts of kindness and care, performance of maternal functions, and general help and aid with respect to the child into responsibility for the supervision of the child. The crux of
its argument is that although Pope was not under any obligation to assume responsibility for the supervision of the child at the outset, “once she undertook to house, feed, and care for [the mother and child], she did accept the responsibility and
came within the coverage of the statute.” But the mother was always present. Pope had no right to usurp the role of the mother even to the extent of responsibility for the child's supervision. . . . It would be most incongruous that acts of hospital-
ity and kindness, made out of common decency and prompted by sincere concern for the well-being of a mother and her child, subjected the Good Samaritan to criminal prosecution for abusing the very child he sought to look after. ..

The evidence does not show why Pope did not intervene when the mother abused the child or why she did not, at least, timely seek medical assistance, when it was obvious that the child was seriously injured... . But Pope's conduct,
during and after the acts of abuse, must be evaluated with regard for the rule that although she may have had a strong moral obligation to help the child, she was under no legal obligation to do so unless she then had responsibility for the super-
vision of the child as contemplated by the child abuse statute. She may not be punished as a felon under our system of justice for failing to fulfill a moral obligation, and the short of it is that she was under no legal obligation. . . . We hold that the
evidence was not sufficient in law to prove that Pope fell within that class of persons to whom the child abuse statute applies. . . .

The mental or emotional state of the mother, whereby at times she held herself out as God, does not change the result. We see no basis in the statute for an interpretation that a person “has” responsibility for the supervision of a child,
if that person believes or may have reason to believe that a parent is not capable of caring for the child. There is no right to make such a subjective judgment in order to divest parents of their rights and obligations with respect to their minor chil-
dren, and therefore, no obligation to do so... .

There is an understandable feeling of outrage at what occurred, intensified by the fact that the mother, who actually beat the child to death, was held to be not responsible for her criminal acts. But it is the law, not indignation, which
governs. The law requires that Pope's conviction of the felony of child abuse be set aside as clearly erroneous due to evidentiary insufficiency. . . .

p.264
p. 265

We assume, arguendo, that misprision of felony was a crime under the common law of England, and that it became the law of this State pursuant to Art. 5 of the Declaration of Rights. The question is whether it is to be deemed an
indictable offense in Maryland today. . . .

We are satisfied, considering its origin, the impractical and indiscriminate width of its scope, its other obvious deficiencies, and its long non-use, that it is not now compatible with our local circumstances and situation and our general
code of laws and jurisprudence. . .. If the Legislature finds it advisable that the people be obligated under peril of criminal penalty to disclose knowledge of criminal acts, it is, of course, free to create an offense to that end, within constitutional
limitations, and, hopefully, with adequate safeguards. We believe that the common law offense is not acceptable by today's standards, and we are not free to usurp the power of the General Assembly by attempting to fashion one that would be.
We hold that misprision of felony is not a chargeable offense in Maryland.

NOTES

1. Bystander indifference. Consider Diane Kiesel, Who Saw This Happen?, 69 A.B.A. J. 1208 (1983):

Shocking news accounts of the alleged gang rape of a woman in a Massachusetts tavern, while patrons gaped and cheered, have caused some state legislatures to consider making it a crime for witnesses to rapes and

other felonies not to report them to police. . . .

In May, Rhode Island enacted a law making it a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in jail, a $500 fine or both for anyone, other than the victim, to fail to report to police a rape that takes place in his or her
presence. ...
If the gang rape in March at the New Bedford, Mass., tavern happened as the witnesses said, it was unquestionably heinous and revolting. But some say the answer does not lie in laws like the one passed in

Rhode Island. That measure was opposed by, surprisingly enough, the Rhode Island Rape Crisis Center, which raised questions about rape victims’ privacy. The Rhode Island chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union

also opposed it, citing constitutional and practical objections. Others think such statutes may be valid but ineffective. “These statutes will be no more effective than jaywalking laws,” said Arthur Miller, Harvard law professor

and television law commentator. “But that doesn’t mean we shouldn't legislate in this area. It would give legal effect to a moral principle that we are our brother's keeper.”

The public outcry in the New Bedford situation recalled the uproar that followed the 1964 murder of Catherine “Kitty” Genovese in Queens, N.Y. The young bar manager was stabbed to death on the street in her
middle-class neighborhood in an attack that lasted some 35 minutes. Witnesses peered through their curtains and did nothing. The assailant followed Genovese from her parking lot toward her apartment building as she

came home from work about 3:20 a.m, He started stabbing her, then

p. 266
p. 266

fled when she screamed for help. But when her calls went unheeded, he returned to strike again. After the second assault he headed for his car and drove away while Genovese slowly crawled to her apartment doorway.

Amazingly, the killer returned a third time, repeated his attack, and Genovese died. The first call to police was not made until 3:40 a.m. The man who finally called said he waited because he “didn't want to get involved.”

Kiesel’s recounting of the Genovese killing reflects journalistic accounts of the case at the time. But later investigations showed that claims of bystander apathy in that case were greatly overstated. Few people saw the attacks, two
who did called the police, and one neighbor heroically went to Genovese and was holding her when the police arrived, even though she did so at great risk, without knowing that the killer had fled. Nicholas Lemann, A Call for Help: What the Kitty
Genovese Story Really Means, The New Yorker, Mar. 10, 2014. The original portrayal of the Genovese killing nonetheless prompted a great deal of social psychology research. Much of it seems to confirm that witnesses hesitate to intervene, and
that they are even less likely to do so when they believe others are also able to help. But a recent study found the opposite. Analyzing CCTV camera footage of “public conflicts” in Britain, the Netherlands, and South Africa, the study determined
that in nine of ten cases, at least one bystander, and typically several, offered some assistance, and the presence of more bystanders increased the likelihood that someone would intervene.2 Even on this more optimistic view of human nature,
however, it remains important to understand why bystanders often hesitate to help in these situations.

2. How to explain bystander indifference? Consider Daniel B. Yeager, A Radical Community of Aid: A Rejoinder to Opponents of Affirmative Duties to Help Strangers, 71 Wash. U. L.Q. 1, 15 (1993):

Why those who see others in danger so often do nothing is unclear. In the case of witnesses to crimes, danger — real or imagined — and fear of retaliation account for some failures to intervene or notify authorities. In addi-

tion, . . .a bystander's lack of opportunity for planning and rehearsal and the difficulty of quickly selecting the appropriate type of intervention might make her assistance less likely. . ..

The presence of other bystanders may reduce each potential rescuer's individual sense of responsibility to the imperiled, and increase the probability of free-riding. Each is lulled into a state of “pluralistic igno-
rance,” which induces multiple bystanders to interpret others’ nonaction as a sign of no danger. [Blecause of social inhibitions that arise in groups, people are more prone to respond to another's distress when alone than
when accompanied by other witnesses.

Bystanders thus face a “choice of nightmares”: fail to intervene and experience the empathic distress of watching another human being suffer, the guilt of failing to live up to a minimal threshold of decency, and

p. 266
p.267

the shame of having that failure witnessed by others; or, intervene and risk retaliation by an assailant, the ridicule and derision of nonintervening bystanders, and the threat of being mistaken for the cause of the harm.

Moreover, the victim may spurn, attack, or become completely dependent on the rescuer, while the legal system may enlist the rescuer as a witness subject to innumerable encounters with police, lawyers and judges. The

nightmare then may be most easily resolved by convincing oneself that the victim is not imperiled.

3. Questions. If the factors identified by Professor Yeager explain bystander indifference, are they also sufficient to justify that behavior? Professor Yeager does not think so; he argues that the law should make it a criminal offense
for a bystander to fail to assist a person in peril. See Yeager, supra, at 38-58. For a defense of the opposing view, see Melody J. Stewart, How Making the Failure to Assist Illegal Fails to Assist, 25 Am. J. Crim. L. 385 (1998).22 For discussion of

legislative resistance even to imposing a limited obligation to call 911, see Amos N. Guiora & Jessie E. Dyer, Bystander Legislation: He Ain't Heavy, He's My Brother, 29 Kan. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 291 (2020). The authors identify (and respond to) a num-
ber of criticisms of that proposal — including that it would “legislate morality,” create a “nanny state,” and enable abuses of discretion by police and prosecutors.

4, What if the bystander benefits from the victim's peril? Much of the debate about a duty to rescue focuses on the bystander who is merely indifferent. But some bystanders actually benefit by declining to aid an endangered
victim. For example, a news photographer at the scene of a car accident, fire, or assault may take time to film the incident before calling for help. The photographer's failure to aid in effect exploits the victim's peril, but in nearly all states it isn’t a
crime. Should it be?

A bystander’s benefit can be intangible rather than financial. Sometimes a bystander takes cruel pleasure in a victim's distress. The video-recording capability of smartphones has greatly intensified this problem.2° In a notorious
incident in Steubenville, Ohio, a 16-year-old girl was repeatedly raped while onlookers texted jokingly about what was happening and took photos and videos of it, posting some of them on YouTube.2# None of the onlookers tried to stop the abuse.
If onlookers help the attackers or cheer them on, they can be convicted as accomplices.2° And a few states (Ohio among them) require witnesses to notify law enforcement about a sexual offense or any felony. See p. 272, Note 5 infra. But if by-
standers go no

p.267
p. 268
further than observing, recording, and joking among themselves about an ongoing sexual assault, in most states they face no criminal liability for failing to intervene or call 911 at the time of the attack.

Ifa life-threatening predicament is not the result of criminal conduct, bystander duties are even narrower. In July 2017, a disabled man, Jamel Dunn, fell into a pond in Cocoa Beach, Florida, and began to go under water. Five teenagers
at the scene taunted him while they recorded a video of his struggles to stay afloat. They made no effort to call for help; instead they continued to laugh, joke, and jeer him as he drowned, and then posted their video of his death on YouTube,
complete with their clearly audible mockery and amusement. Even after Dunn's death, they did nothing to report it. Yet Florida authorities concluded that none of the teens (at least one of whom was 18 years old) could be charged with any crimi-
nal offense.2° This also would be the result in almost all American states. What policy considerations could possibly justify that outcome?

If the criminal law should sometimes punish the failure to render assistance, what circumstances should trigger the duty to aid? Is there a special case for punishing the failure to summon help when a bystander records a life-threaten-
ing incident for personal enjoyment or gain? See Patricia Grande Montana, Watch or Report? Livestream or Help? Good Samaritan Laws Revisited: The Need to Create a Duty to Report, 66 Clev. St. L. Rev. 533 (2018). Should a legally enforceable
duty to aid extend beyond that narrow situation? Consider the following comment.

John Kleinig
Good Samaritanism
5 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 382 (1976)

In the Russian Criminal Code of 1845 and, since then, in almost every continental European country, the failure to be a Good Samaritan has been declared a criminal offense. The glaring exceptions to this trend have been those coun-
tries within the Anglo-American legal tradition. .. . Though the position is slowly changing in torts, the criminal law situation remains substantially the same. “The law does not compel active benevolence between man and man. It is left to one’s
conscience whether he shall be the Good Samaritan or not.” . . . In attempting to understand the current Anglo-American position with regard to Good Samaritan legislation, it is instructive to look at some of the debate which has led to it, since it
has not come about without opposition. . . .

Bentham ... . in his Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, asked the question: “In cases where the person is in danger, why should it not be made the duty of every man to save another from mischief, when it can be
done without prejudicing himself . . . 2” Undoubtedly, he felt that no satisfactory answer could be given. .. .

p.268
p. 269

Mill, who on matters of social policy remained close to Bentham, . . . points out that there are also “many positive acts for the benefit of others” which a person may “rightly be compelled to perform.” Among these he includes

certain acts of individual beneficence, such as saving a fellow creature's life, or interposing to protect the defenceless against ill-usage, things which whenever it is obviously a man’s duty to do, he may rightfully be made

responsible to society for not doing. A person may cause evil to others not only by his actions but by his inaction, and in either case he is justly accountable to them for the injury.

On Mill's view, it is our duty to render aid because, by not doing so, we harm another. .. .

The most influential reaction came from Lord Macaulay et al. In their Notes on the Indian Penal Code, . . . Macaulay criticized [a proposed] offense of homicide by omission. . . . The problem as Macaulay sees it is to draw the line between
harm-producing omissions which ought to be legally proscribed, and those which ought not. He has no doubt that there are cases of each, even where the imperiled person dies. If a gaoler omits to supply a prisoner with food; if an official omits to
warn travelers that the river is too high to ford; if the owner of a dog which is attacking someone omits to call it off; and death results, the person who failed to act is guilty of murder. But, if a man omits to give alms to a starving beggar; if a surgeon
refuses to go from Calcutta to Meerut to perform a life-saving operation; if one traveler omits to wam others that the river is too high to ford; if a passer-by omits to call off the attacking dog; and death results, the person who failed to act is not
guilty of murder. Macaulay .... [is] prepared to grant that a rich man who lets a beggar die at his feet is morally worse than some for whom severe punishment was prescribed. “But we are unable to see where, if we make such a man legally pun-
ishable, we can draw the line.” How rich is rich enough, and how much can be required? If it takes a thousand rupees to save the beggar's life, should the rich man be required to provide it? If not, where is the line to be drawn? And if the potential
Good Samaritan is not a rich man, how much should he be required to give? Macaulay therefore proposes that omissions which cause or threaten harm be punishable only where they are, “on other grounds, illegal.” In other words, only where
there are already existing legal duties to aid should the failure to aid be indictable. . . .

What are the consequences of Good Samaritan legislation so feared by Macaulay and other opponents? On the surface it looks like a problem of legal draftsmanship. Such are the differences between men and circumstances that no
workable formula for specifying those occasions on which a Samaritan ought to be legally required to render aid can be produced. . . . Livingston’s criterion,? that aid ought to be mandatory when it can be given “without personal danger or pecu-
niary loss,” is considered to be open to serious objection. The surgeon summoned from

p.269

p.270
Calcutta to Meerut might profit financially, and the trip might present no greater dangers than staying in Bengal, but it might still be extremely inconvenient for him: “He is about to proceed to Europe immediately, or he expects some members of
his family by the next ship, and wishes to be at the presidency to receive them.” If he refuses to go, he is no “murderer,” and a good sight better than another who, “enjoying ample wealth, should refuse to disburse an anna to save the life of an-
other.” On Livingston's criterion, the latter but not the former should go free.

About the best that could be said for this argument is that it shows the inadequacy of Livingston's criterion. . . . It does nothing to show that if Good Samaritan legislation is introduced, unreasonable sacrifices of welfare and interests will
be demanded of Samaritans. As is the case with Good Samaritan provisions in those countries that already have them, the Samaritan will be required only to take reasonable steps to give or procure aid for the imperiled person. Judgments of rea-
sonableness are not impossible of determination, and are the bread and butter of the courts. ...

However, I think another, rather different fear underlies Macaulay's opposition to Good Samaritan legislation. [I]t is basically the fear that Good Samaritan legislation will substantially diminish freedom. In a culture steeped in individual-
ism, nothing produces more hysteria than measures which encroach on individual liberty. “You owe me nothing; | owe you nothing. You stay out of my way, and I'll stay out of yours.” That is an extreme expression, but it constitutes an important
thread within the Anglo-American sociomoral fabric. .. .

The freedom to pursue one’s interests is not, as Mill and Bentham clearly saw, unlimited. Where the pursuit of one’s interests is a causal factor in another's harm, or threatens additional harm, as in Bad Samaritanism, we have the impor-
tant beginnings of a case for justifiable state interference. . ..

NOTES ON THE DUTIES OF A BYSTANDER

1, Statutory duties to rescue. Three American states, Minnesota, Rhode Island, and Vermont, make it a criminal offense to fail to render aid to a person in peril. See Gabriel D.M. Ciociola, Misprision of Felony and Its Progeny, 41
Brandeis L.J. 697, 735-738 (2003). The Vermont statute (Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 12, §519 (2016)) provides:

A person who knows that another is exposed to grave physical harm shall, to the extent that the same can be rendered without danger or peril to himself or without interference with important duties owed to others, give

reasonable assistance to the exposed person unless that assistance or care is being provided by others. [Penalty $100 fine.]

The Rhode Island statute is similar but imposes the duty only at the scene of an “emergency” and provides a penalty of up to six months’ imprisonment and a $500 fine. R.1. Gen. Laws §11-56-1 (2016).

Three additional states, Florida, Hawaii, and Wisconsin, also require bystanders to be Good Samaritans, but only in more limited situations. In all three states, the duty to assist is not triggered by natural disasters but only when the
person

p.270

port
in peril is the victim of a crime. The Wisconsin and Hawaii duties to render aid extend to the victims of all violent crime, but Florida imposes a duty to assist only on persons who personally observe the commission of a sexual battery. See Ciociola,
supra, at 738-742. What, if anything, explains these limitations? Isn't the justification for requiring assistance at least as strong when the peril does not result from criminal conduct?

In all six “Good Samaritan” states, a violation of the duty to rescue is only a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor. Even so, prosecutions are rare. See Ciociola, supra, at 739. See also David A. Hyman, Rescue Without Law: An Empirical
Perspective on the Duty to Rescue, 84 Tex. L. Rev. 653 (2006).

Professor Ken Levy proposes that citizens not in a special relationship with the victim should have a duty to assist when (but only when) they are in close proximity to a person in grave danger and know that it will be “easy and safe” to
render assistance. See Levy, Killing, Letting Die, and the Case for Mildly Punishing Bad Samaritanism, 44 Ga. L. Rev. 607, 690 (2010). The proposed duty to aid is thus narrower than that imposed by the Vermont statute, for example. Is the pro-
posed duty too narrow, or is it still too broad to be widely acceptable in American jurisdictions?

2. The European contrast. European countries have long used the criminal law to enforce a duty to aid a person in distress. See Jacobo Gémez-Aller, Criminal Omissions: A European Perspective, 11 New Crim. L. Rev. 419 (2008). An
example is Article 323c of the German Criminal Code:

Whoever does not render help in cases of accident, common danger or necessity although help is needed and can be provided in the circumstances without danger of serious injury to the person and without violation of

other important duties, will be punished by imprisonment up to one year or by fine.

France was slower than other continental countries to recognize a general duty to rescue, but a provision similar to that of German law (art. 63(2) of the French Penal Code) was added in 1945. It carries a penalty of up to five years’
imprisonment, and it has been enforced with some frequency. For example, motorists have often been prosecuted and convicted for failure to stop and assist the victims of vehicle accidents caused by others. See Edward A. Tomlinson, The
French Experience with a Duty to Rescue, 20 N.Y.L. Sch. J. Int'l & Comp. L. 451 (2000).

3. The penalty for violating a duty to rescue. Existing “Good Samaritan” offenses carry relatively minor misdemeanor penalties (typically less than a year in jail or a small fine). But the “Good Samaritan” duty can trigger liability for
much more serious crime. Consider State v. Martinez, 68 P.3d 606 (Haw. 2003). The defendant failed to seek medical assistance after his girlfriend severely beat her daughter, inflicting fatal injuries. The Hawaii Good Samaritan statute gave him
a duty to aid, and violations of that statute are classified as petty misdemeanors. Nonetheless, he was convicted of reckless manslaughter and sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment. The court correctly upheld the manslaughter conviction, on the
theory that his failure to aid when he had a duty to do so caused the child’s death, and that this omission, with awareness of the danger to the child, was equivalent to causing the same result by an affirmative act.

port
p.272

4, Bystander intervention programs. Many observers believe that a mind-your-own-business attitude is deeply embedded in American culture. Accordingly, they are skeptical that statutory duties to intervene can influence actual
behavior or be effectively enforced. Professor David Hyman, for example, finds that “[s]tates that have adopted a duty to rescue rule have not seen an increase or decrease in the number of non-tisky rescues or the number of accidental deaths.”
Hyman, Rescue Without Law: An Empirical Perspective on the Duty to Rescue, 84 Tex. L. Rev. 653, 657 (2006).

This phenomenon illustrates a more general problem: Often the criminal law can do little by itself to prevent harmful conduct that is supported by social norms many people accept. Partly in recognition of this dynamic, an increasingly
important initiative aims to reduce the incidence of bullying, workplace harassment, sexual assault, and other harms by formal programs for encouraging people to intervene if they witness these behaviors and for training them how to intervene
safely and effectively. When social willingness to tolerate the underlying actions is pervasive, making that conduct difficult to prosecute and deter directly, programs of this sort can have a double payoff; they not only encourage intervention but
also strengthen social disapproval of the harmful acts themselves. On that understanding, federal law, the Campus SaVE Act, requires colleges that receive federal funding to offer bystander intervention programs to their students and employ-
ees,27 and intervention training programs are now common in schools, colleges, workplaces, and other settings. See Sarah L. Swan, Bystander Interventions, 2015 Wis. L. Rev. 975.

Are citizen education programs and other non-punitive efforts to shape social norms preferable to the “heavy hand” of criminal law enforcement? Or does each need support from the other? Professor Swan finds that “the lack of a
legal duty to [intervene] contributes to a strong norm of non-intervention” and that this in turn “creates a competing norms problem”; bystander intervention programs cannot be sufficiently effective, she argues, because “[t]he no-duty-to-rescue
rule advances the view that people can and should ‘stay out of other people's business.”” Swan, supra, at 1002-1003. Professor Swan therefore concludes that the norm-signaling functions of the criminal law play an essential role in enabling non-
punitive strategies to succeed. Do you agree? This is partly an empirical question, on which (for the moment) we have little evidence. But more broadly, how should we weigh criminal law's ability to communicate acceptable social norms against
the risks of overcriminalization and discriminatory law enforcement?

5. Aduty to report? The common-law offense of misprision of felony, discussed in Pope, was abolished in England in 1967, and most American jurisdictions have likewise abolished or refused to recognize the offense. See Ciociola,
supra Note 1, at 710-718. Congress enacted a misprision-of-felony statute in 1909, 18 U.S.C. §4, but this offense requires active concealment of a known felony; merely failing to report is not sufficient. United States v. Brantley, 803 F.3d 1265,
1277 (11th Cir. 2015). Only a few American decisions still recognize the common-law

p.272

p.278
offense. E.g., State v. Smith, 592 S.E.2d 302 (S.C. 2004). But in a recent survey, Professor Zachary Kaufman finds that nine state statutes now require reporting by a witness to any of a broad array of serious crimes, and nineteen additional states
impose a duty to report on witnesses to particular types of crimes. Kaufman, Protectors of Predators or Prey: Bystanders and Upstanders Amid Sexual Crimes, 92 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1317, 1346-1347 (2019).

All American jurisdictions require members of certain designated professions to report suspected cases of child abuse; usually the failure to do so is a misdemeanor. In recent years the duty to report in such situations has been
expanded from doctors, nurses, and teachers to include clergy, optometrists, psychotherapists, and (in some jurisdictions) attorneys. See Sandra Guerra Thompson, The White Collar Police Force: “Duty to Report” Statutes in Criminal Law Theory,
11 Wm. & Mary Bill Rts. J. 3 (2002). Building on that model, Congress and state legislatures have required individuals to report suspicions concerning a variety of other crimes, such as elder abuse, domestic violence, environmental crimes, and
certain financial crimes. In many professions, the web of reporting obligations is now quite dense, creating tensions with the duty to respect client confidentiality and the traditional conception of the individual's right to “mind his own business.”
See Thompson, supra.

QUESTIONS: Are there legitimate objections to requiring witnesses to report any felony? One concern may be that such a duty would pose an unacceptable threat to the privacy of victims, especially in the case of sexual offenses. Another
concern may be the bystander’s reluctance to become obliged to testify in court, for fear of retaliation by the person reported. Is resistance to a reporting obligation justified if it is based not on protecting the victim’s privacy but instead on preserv-
ing the bystander’s autonomy right to remain uninvolved? For a nuanced proposal to require witnesses to report sexual crimes and possibly other serious offenses, but exempting bystanders in a variety of circumstances, see Kaufman, supra, at
1383-1396.

Should a duty to report known felonies apply to people who may be aware that drug sellers are operating in their neighborhoods? Even if drug offenses are excepted from the duty to report, will people living in high-crime neighborhoods
be unfairly burdened by a general duty to report serious felonies?

NOTES ON DUTIES TRIGGERED BY SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES

1. Family members. As the court notes in the Jones case, it is well settled that a duty to aid arises “where one stands in a certain status relationship to another.” But not every significant status relationship will do. Parents have a duty
to aid and protect their minor children, and spouses have a similar duty to each other. But duties are not automatically imposed on siblings to aid each other, on parents to aid their adult children, or on adult children to aid their parents — even
when the parents are elderly and unable to care for themselves. Jurisdictions will sometimes recognize broader family duties, however. See, e.g., Bartley v. Commonwealth, 400 S.W.3d 714, 729 (Ky. 2013) (parent has duty under Kentucky statutory
law to provide for an adult child who is “wholly dependent” because of a “permanent physical

p.278
p.274
or mental disability”); State v. Gargus, 462 S.W.3d 417, 423 (Mo. Ct. App. 2013) (adult child has duty to care for elderly, vulnerable parent who could not care for herself when child has assumed that responsibility).

2. De facto family members. Traditionally, the categories of spouse and parent would trigger a duty to aid only in the case of formal legal relationships. Consider People v. Beardsley, 113 N.W. 1128 (Mich. 1907). Beardsley, who was
married, apparently was having an affair with Blanche Burns, and he spent a weekend with her at his home, while his wife was out of town. At the end of the weekend, Burns took a fatal dose of morphine tablets. Beardsley failed to call a physician
to help her. She died, and he was convicted of manslaughter. The court reversed the conviction because the defendant owed the deceased no legal duty (id. at 1131):

Itis urged by the prosecutor that the respondent “stood towards this woman for the time being in the place of her natural guardian and protector, and as such owed her a clear legal duty which he completely failed to

perform.” The fact that this woman was in his house created no such legal duty as exists in law and is due from a husband towards his wife, as seems to be intimated by the prosecutor's brief. Such an inference would be

very repugnant to our moral sense.

Do you agree? Beardsley has been widely criticized. One commentator concludes that Beardsley “proclaims a morality which is smug, ignorant and vindictive” (Graham Hughes, Criminal Omissions, 67 Yale L.J. 590, 624 (1958)), and courts have
described its holding as “outmoded.” State ex rel. Kuntz v. District Court, 995 P.2d 951, 956 (2000). See Arthur Leavens, A Causation Approach to Criminal Omissions, 78 Cal. L. Rev. 547, 561 (1988). But on facts like Beardsley, should the result be
different today? Few contemporary courts (if any) would say that a formal marriage is always necessary to establish a familial duty. But is a de facto marriage required, or is a more casual relationship (like that in Beardsley) sufficient? If any roman-
tic liaison will suffice, isn’t a duty to aid equally justified for other personal relationships, even without a sexual dimension? Isn't the result in Pope (no duty to aid a helpless infant) even harder to defend than the result in Beardsley?

The cases are beginning to expand — but only slightly — the notion of who qualifies as a spouse or parent. In People v. Carroll, 715 N.E.2d 500 (N.Y. 1999), a stepmother was charged with child endangerment for failing to prevent her
husband from killing his daughter during a week when the daughter was temporarily visiting them. The New York Court of Appeals upheld the indictment, ruling that the stepmother owed a duty of care to her husband’s children (715 N.E.2d at 500):

IA] person who acts as the functional equivalent of a parent in a familial or household setting is . .. legally responsible for a child's care. By expanding the bounds of who is legally responsible for children beyond the realm of

the traditional family and legal guardian, this standard takes into account the modern-day reality that parenting functions are not always performed by a parent.

Other states have imposed duties on any adult residing with a child who assumes a parent-like role and “substantial responsibility for such necessities as food, shelter, and protection.” Staples v. Commonwealth, 454 S.W.3d 803, 818 (Ky. 2014).
p.274
p.276

Not every jurisdiction takes this approach. Consider State v. Miranda, 878 A.2d 1118 (Conn. 2005). Miranda, a live-in boyfriend, failed to protect a four-month-old child from a fatal beating inflicted by his girlfriend, the child's mother.
While residing with the family, he had taken care of the child and considered himself to be her stepfather. He was convicted of first-degree assault, and in his initial appeal the Connecticut Supreme Court upheld the conviction, ruling that because
he had a family-like relationship with the mother and had assumed responsibility for the welfare of her children, he was under a duty to protect the baby girl from her mother’s abuse. 715 A.2d 680 (Conn. 1998). In a subsequent appeal, however, the

court overruled its original decision. This time (with one of the judges who had voted to uphold the conviction now changing his vote), the court set aside the assault conviction. Writing for a plurality, the judge who changed his vote explained (878
A.2d at 1130-1131):
[Plarental liability should [not] be extended, on a case-by-case basis, beyond the clearly established legal categories of a parent or legal guardian. . . . It will be difficult to cabin this precedent to these precise facts, and the
temptation will always be there, in a case of egregious injuries — as this case is — to extend it to . . . others with regular and extended relationships with the abusing parent and the abused victim.
[T]he emerging demographic trend toward nontraditional alternative family arrangements, which we cited as support in Miranda I, now strikes me as a counter argument. Precisely because of that trend, and the
concomitant difficulty of determining in advance where it will lead and what its ultimate contours will be, the boundaries of this duty-based criminal liability will be too amorphous, and too fact-based and based on hindsight,
to fit comfortably within our Penal Code. [T]he children who are the most at risk for abuse are likely to suffer the greatest harm from this amorphous criminal liability, because it will discourage well-meaning relatives, friends
of the family and other members of the community from taking an active and intense interest in them, for fear of being caught in a web of criminal liability for the egregious conduct of another.
Finally, | think that Miranda I places too much power in the hands of the state to use as a bargaining chip in plea negotiations. Precisely because its boundaries are so amorphous, it gives the state the power to
threaten its use in a different but similar case, in order to extract a plea that the state might not otherwise be able to secure.
A dissenting judge responded (id. at 1154):
[Plersons inclined to enter relationships that involve children will [not] consciously decide against such involvement for fear of being held responsible if and when a child is abused or neglected. [A}ffording protection only to
those children whose adult caregivers have chosen to have their relationships officially recognized hardly advances the public policy of protecting children from abuse.
For in-depth analysis of these issues, see Dan Markel, Jennifer M. Collins & Ethan J. Lieb, Privilege or Punish (2009). The authors criticize the law's reliance on formal categories rather than functional relationships as the basis for
triggering
p.276
p.276
duties of care. They propose creation of a registry through which siblings, cousins, roommates, and others could opt in to reciprocal obligations of care if they wished. For a probing critique of this approach, see Michael O’Hear, Yes to Nondiscrim-
ination, No to New Forms of Criminal Liability, 88 B.U. L. Rev. 1437 (2008).
3. When the parent herself is a victim. There is no doubt, of course, that parents have a duty to protect their minor children from abuse by a third party. Mothers are frequently prosecuted and convicted on child-abuse or homicide
charges, including murder, when their children are the victims of assault perpetrated by a male member of the household. See Jennifer M. Collins, Ethan J. Lieb & Dan Markel, Punishing Family Status, 88 B.U. L. Rev. 1327, 1329-1330, 1335 (2008).
Although — in theory — her duty to take protective actions is clear, culpability and the appropriate targets of criminal law enforcement become clouded when the context is infected by pervasive domestic violence. Consider Commonwealth v.
Cardwell, 515 A.2d 311 (Pa. Super. 1986). Defendant Julia Cardwell lived with her daughter, Alicia, and Clyde Cardwell, who was Julia’s husband and Alicia’s stepfather. For four years, beginning when Alicia was about 11 years old, Clyde sexually
abused Alicia. In October 1983, Alicia told her mother Julia about the assaults. Ten months later, Alicia ran away from home. Julia was convicted of child abuse for failing to take sufficient steps in the interim to protect her daughter:
In those ten months, Julia's only actions directed at protecting her daughter consisted of writing two letters to Clyde that did little more than express her knowledge of and anger at his abuse of Alicia; applying for Alicia to
transfer schools; and moving some of her and Alicia’s clothing to Julia's mother’s house. We note that the remedy of moving to Julia’s mother's house was tragically frustrated by the destruction by fire of that house in May
1984, but the fact remains that Julia took no further steps to relieve her daughter's desperate situation in the four months that ensued from May 1984 until Alicia ran away from home in September 1984.
The court’s opinion mentioned, without comment, several further details:

Alicia testified that she and Julia were afraid of Clyde, that Clyde beat up Julia on one occasion, that he threw and broke things in the house, that he had punched a number of holes in the walls of the house, and that he

carried a .357 magnum pistol, which he kept on the mantelpiece.

Nonetheless the court upheld the conviction, noting:

The affirmative performance required . . . cannot be met simply by showing any step at all toward preventing harm, however incomplete or ineffectual. An act which will negate intent is not necessarily one which will provide

a successful outcome. However, the person charged with the duty of care is required to take steps that are reasonably calculated to achieve success. Otherwise, the meaning of “duty of care” is eviscerated.

A concurring judge conceded that “Julia's real choices in view of her not unreasonable fear of her husband were limited and difficult — she could report her husband to the authorities, she could take her daughter and leave the marital

p.276

p.2r7
home, or she could send her daughter away.” The judge nonetheless concurred in affirming the conviction because Julia “unquestionably endangered her daughter's welfare by doing nothing to prevent the child's continued abuse.”
QUESTIONS: How should Clyde's violence toward Julia affect the extent of her duty to prevent him from harming her child? The strict requirements for a duress defense are not met, as we shall see, infra pp. 906-922. See also Michelle S. Jacobs,
Requiring Battered Women [to] Die: Murder Liability for Mothers Under Failure to Protect Statutes, 88 J. Crim. & Criminology 579 (1998). To what extent should a mother be forced to risk her own life in order to avoid criminal liability for injuries in-
flicted intentionally by her spouse or boyfriend? Consider Dorothy E. Roberts, Motherhood and Crime, 79 lowa L. Rev. 95, 111-113 (1993):

Women who fail to protect their children from violence are often victims of violence themselves. . . . Courts, however, . .. presume that a woman's obligation to her children always takes precedence over her own interest in

independence and physical safety. Feminists have criticized people who ask battered women “Why didn’t you leave?” because this question fails to recognize the physical, social, and legal constraints that keep women in

violent homes. Courts slowly are beginning to acknowledge these constraints in self-defense cases. These impediments do not seem to matter, however, when mothers [fail to protect] abused children. Judges assume that

a woman's maternal instinct to protect her children from harm overcomes any barriers to escape.

4. The duty of one who creates another person's peril. The law has long specified that “one who by his overpowering criminal act has put another in danger of drowning has a duty to preserve her life. . ..” Jones v. State, 43 N.E.2d
1017, 1018 (Ind. 1942). See also United States v. Conatser, 514 F.3d 508, 522-524 (6th Cir. 2008). In a situation like Jones, the duty to act is obviously fair, but it's not so obvious why it matters. After all, if the victim drowns, the prosecution can
argue simply that the defendant's initial criminal act is what caused the death — for example, the act of pushing the victim into the water. Why would it make any difference whether the defendant had an obligation to rescue?

The answer becomes clear when we recall the concurrence requirement discussed in the Note at p. 258 supra: An offense requires the presence of three elements — the actus reus (a voluntary act or culpable omission), the defendant's
state of mind (mens rea) at the time of that actus reus, and the result (if any is required) caused by that actus reus. The possible existence of a duty to act can make a substantial difference when we take this requirement into account by comparing
the defendant's state of mind — and the resulting degree of blame — that attach to the initial act and to the omission. Suppose that Avery, in a boisterous mood after drinking four beers, runs along a crowded fishing pier, fails to pay attention, and
collides with Jordan, who is knocked into the water. Jordan yells “I can’t swim” and implores Avery to throw the nearby life preserver. But Avery simply watches as Jordan struggles and starts to go under. Avery's affirmative act, running heedlessly
along the pier, presumably amounts to criminal negligence sufficient to support a conviction for involuntary manslaughter or negligent homicide. But is Avery guilty

por
p.278

of murder? That offense, as we shall see,22 could be established by proof that Avery knew that death was almost certain to result. It would be difficult to prove that Avery had that knowledge before colliding with Jordan. But it would be easy
to prove that Avery had that knowledge later, while watching Jordan struggle and doing nothing to help. Imposing a duty to rescue (as the law does in this instance) will bring into the picture the more culpable state of mind that Avery had when
choosing not to assist and therefore will markedly increase the degree of Avery's liability in the event that Jordan drowns.

5. Problem. Should the duty to rescue based on “creating another person's peril” be triggered when the acts that create danger are not culpable at all? Suppose that Hayden, while walking slowly down the pier, accidentally and
without fault bumps into a child, knocking the child into the water. Hayden and another bystander, Casey, then watch the child drown. Hayden's affirmative acts (walking down the pier) and state of mind at that time do not establish any criminal of-
fense. Should the innocent act of imperiling the child give rise to a duty to rescue? Consider J.C. Smith, Liability for Omissions in Criminal Law, 14 Legal Stud. 88, 94 (1984):

Suppose that, on leaving my office on Friday evening, | lock the storeroom door, reasonably believing the room to be empty. | then hear movement inside and realize that | have locked in a colleague and that he will be

imprisoned there for the weekend unless | unlock the door and let him out. Surely my omission to do so would render me liable for false imprisonment (in criminal as well as civil law); and it should be no answer that locking

the door was an entirely lawful and reasonable act. . .

I venture, therefore, to suggest a general principle: ... Whenever the defendant's act, though without his knowledge, imperils the person, liberty or property of another, or any other interest protected by the crim-

inal law, and the defendant becomes aware of the events creating the peril, he has a duty to take reasonable steps to prevent the peril from resulting in the harm in question.

American tort law is in accord.22 And since a criminal law duty to act can arise from obligations under tort and contract law, many American courts impose criminal liability as well. In Commonwealth v. Levesque, 766 N.E.2d 50 (Mass.
2002), the defendants accidentally started a fire and then, despite their awareness of the danger, failed to report it. The blaze got out of control, and six firefighters died attempting to put it out. The court upheld the defendants’ conviction of invol-
untary manslaughter.

QUESTIONS: (a) Under the approach of cases like Levesque, supra, a duty to act would be imposed on Hayden (who accidentally knocked the child into the water) but not on the bystander Casey. Does this make sense? If the law is sound in
allowing

p.27e

p.279
Casey to ignore the child's plight, why should Hayden's wholly faultless act produce a different result? And how should we analyze the liability of a third person (Logan) standing on the pier, if Hayden accidentally knocks Logan into the child, who
falls into the water as a result? As an involuntary agent, Logan — or Logan's body — caused the peril to the child. Is Logan, who committed no act, in the same moral (and legal) position as Casey, who also committed no act, or should Logan be
treated like Hayden, who committed a voluntary but innocent act? Recall that the law imposes no general duty to rescue. The problem, then, is to determine when the reasons for that rule (which presumably apply in the case of Casey) are no
longer applicable. For a careful discussion of the issues, see Larry Alexander, Criminal Liability for Omissions, in Criminal Law Theory 121 (Stephen Shute & A.P. Simester eds., 2002).

(b) Are the duties to rescue that arise under tort law sufficiently well defined to afford adequate notice to affected citizens, thus meeting the criminal law “legality” principle? Or do penal prohibitions triggered by evolving tort precedent
violate the constitutional void-for-vagueness doctrine? We examined the legality and vagueness doctrines in depth at pp. 190-233 supra. In terms of these doctrines — or merely in terms of simple fairness — does evolving tort law provide an ac-
ceptable foundation for criminal liability? In cases like Levesque and Evans, supra, courts have not considered criminal liability unfair. Compare State v. Lisa, 945 A.2d 690, 691 (N.J. 2008). Early one evening, the defendant illegally sold a methadone
tablet to his girlfriend, A.R. She then proceeded to attend several parties, where she drank alcohol and smoked marijuana. Around 3:00 a.m., she went to the defendant's home, drank more beer, had sex with him, and then passed out in his bed-
room. When the defendant attempted to awaken her, she was unresponsive. Several friends, including one who was a nurse, urged him to call 911, but he refused, hoping she would “sleep it off.” When emergency aid was finally summoned the
following afternoon, A.R. was unconscious and had suffered major brain damage; she died ten days later without regaining consciousness. The defendant was charged with reckless manslaughter for failing to summon aid at a time when he knew
that A.R. was in grave danger. The trial court dismissed the indictment on the ground that he owed no duty to A.R. Affirming the dismissal, the New Jersey Supreme Court said (id. at 691):

[T]he Restatement of Torts [does] not provide sufficient notice of a duty to which a theory of criminal omission liability may attach. [S]ufficient notice . .. cannot be found in emanations from a scholarly treatise that has never

made its way into New Jersey substantive criminal law, and perhaps not into our civil law either. We fail to see how these civil common law principles [based on amorphous concepts of the Restatement, as reflected in some

civil cases] could provide adequate notice to justify a criminal charge.

Do you agree? Or did the defendant have sufficient notice?
NOTE ON POSSESSION

Is possession an omission or an act? Ifit is an omission, when is there a duty to act — by terminating the possession? These questions assume great importance as a result of the proliferation of drug-possession and firearms-posses-
sion offenses and the high priority that federal and state prosecutors continue to give to the “war on drugs.”

p.279
p.260

In the simplest cases, a person buys an illegal item — a gun, for example — and puts it into a coat pocket. Here we would say that the buyer takes possession, clearly an affirmative act. But suppose that Smuggler places heroin into the
baggage of Respectable Traveler, hoping that Traveler will not be searched and that Smuggler can later steal Traveler's bag to retrieve the drugs. If Traveler is searched and the drugs are found, is Traveler guilty of illegal possession? Most courts
would not uphold that result; they interpret possession offenses to require that the accused be aware of having the thing illegally possessed, even when the statute is silent on the subject. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Adkins, 331 S.W.2d 260 (Ky.
2011). The Model Penal Code likewise provides that possession can satisfy the actus reus requirement of §2.01(1) only when the accused “was aware of his control [of the thing possessed] for a sufficient period to have been able to terminate his
possession.” Model Penal Code §2.01(4).

Not all courts agree. State v. Bradshaw, 98 P.3d 1190 (Wash. 2004), involved a commercial truck driver who crossed the Canadian border into the state of Washington driving a large semitrailer on which someone had hidden 77 pounds
of marijuana in a space between pallets of cargo. There was no evidence the driver was aware that drugs were on the truck. Nonetheless, the Washington Supreme Court upheld a conviction for possession of illegal drugs, rejecting the argument
that awareness of the presence of an item is inherent in the concept of possessing it.

QUESTIONS: (1) In what sense did the truck driver commit any relevant “act”? Driving the truck, of course, is an act, but the Washington Supreme Court did not attempt to defend liability on that basis. Its approach would support conviction even
if the driver simply sat passively in the truck while (a) a smuggler hid drugs on it and then (b) a police officer, acting on a reliable informants tip, searched and found the drugs. In what sense would the driver have committed any relevant “act” in
such a case?

(2) If liability is based not on an “act” but simply on the driver's omission (the failure to get rid of the drugs), what is the justification for imposing that duty to act? In cases like Pope and other failure-to-rescue situations, the bystander,
though well aware of a peril, is permitted to ignore it. Why should a duty be imposed when the accused had no reason to think there was any need to act?

(3) Suppose the truck driver, though still unaware of the presence of drugs, should have suspected that something was amiss? (Suppose, for example, that the driver noticed a suspicious person loitering near the truck and saw that a
flap covering the cargo was loose.) If drugs are subsequently discovered, would Model Penal Code §2.01 permit a conviction for drug possession? Should the driver be guilty of a drug-possession offense under these circumstances?

¢. Distinguishing Omissions from Acts
Barber v. Superior Court

California District Court of Appeal
195 Cal. Rptr. 484 (Dist. Ct. App. 1983)
[After a preliminary hearing, the magistrate dismissed murder and conspiracy charges against two physicians. The superior court set aside the magistrate’s
p.260
p.261
order and reinstated the charges. The physicians petitioned the court of appeal for review of that decision.]
ComPTON, A... . Deceased Clarence Herbert underwent surgery. [Whhile in the recovery room, Mr. Herbert suffered a cardio-respiratory arrest. He was revived by a team of physicians and nurses and immediately placed on life support equip-
ment.

Within the following three days, it was determined that Mr. Herbert was in a deeply comatose state. [Tests] indicated that Mr. Herbert had suffered severe brain damage, leaving him in a vegetative state, which was likely to be perma-
nent. At that time petitioners [his physicians] informed Mr. Herbert's family of their opinion as to his condition and chances for recovery. While there is some dispute as to the precise terminology used by the doctors, it is clear that they commu-
nicated to the family that the prognosis for recovery was extremely poor. At that point, the family convened and drafted a written request to the hospital personnel stating that they wanted “all machines taken off that are sustaining life” (sic). As a
result, petitioners, either directly or as a result of orders given by them, caused the respirator and other life-sustaining equipment to be removed. Mr. Herbert continued to breathe without the equipment but showed no signs of improvement. . .
After two more days had elapsed, petitioners, after consulting with the family, ordered removal of the intravenous tubes which provided hydration and nourishment. From that point until his death, Mr. Herbert received nursing care which preserved
his dignity and provided a clean and hygienic environment.

The precise issue for determination by this court is whether the evidence presented before the magistrate was sufficient to support his determination that petitioners should not be held to answer to the charges of murder, and conspir-
acy to commit murder. . . . “Murder is the unlawful killing of a human being, . . . with malice aforethought.” Malice [is present] when there is an intent unlawfully to take any life. [Ijf petitioners unlawfully and intentionally killed Mr. Herbert, [malice
is established] regardless of their motive.

The use of the term “unlawful” in defining a criminal homicide is generally to distinguish a criminal homicide from those homicides which society has determined to be “justifiable” or “excusable.” Euthanasia, of course, is neither justifi-
able nor excusable in California. ..

As a predicate to our analysis of whether the petitioners’ conduct amounted to an “unlawful killing,” we conclude that the cessation of “heroic” life support measures is not an affirmative act but rather a withdrawal or omission of further
treatment. Even though these life support devices are, to a degree, “self-propelled,” each pulsation of the respirator or each drop of fluid introduced into the patient's body by intravenous feeding devices is comparable to a manually administered
injection or item of medication. Hence “disconnecting” of the mechanical devices is comparable to withholding the manually administered injection or medication. Further we view the use of an intravenous administration of nourishment and fluid,
under the circumstances, as being the same as the use of the respirator or other form of life support equipment. .. .

There is no criminal liability for failure to act unless there is a legal duty to act. Thus the critical issue becomes one of determining the duties owed by a physician

p.261
p. 262
to a patient who has been reliably diagnosed as in a comatose state from which any meaningful recovery of cognitive brain function is exceedingly unlikely. . . .

A physician has no duty to continue treatment, once it has proved to be ineffective. Although there may be a duty to provide life-sustaining machinery in the immediate aftermath of a cardio-respiratory arrest, there is no duty to continue

its use once it has become futile in the opinion of qualified medical personnel. . . .

Of course, the difficult determinations that must be made under these principles [are] the point at which further treatment will be of no reasonable benefit to the patient, who should have the power to make that decision and who should
have the authority to direct termination of treatment. No precise guidelines as to when and how these decisions should be made can be provided by this court since this determination is essentially a medical one to be made at a time and on the
basis of facts which will be unique to each case... .

[The patient's interests and desires are the key ingredients of the decision making process. . . . When the patient, however, is incapable of deciding for himself, because of his medical condition or for other reasons, there is no clear
authority on the issue of who and under what procedure is to make the final decision. .. .

Under the circumstances of this case, the wife was the proper person to act as a surrogate for the patient with the authority to decide issues regarding further treatment, and would have so qualified had judicial approval been sought.
There is no evidence that there was any disagreement among the wife and children. Nor was there any evidence that they were motivated in their decision by anything other than love and concern for the dignity of their husband and father. . . .

In summary we conclude that the petitioners’ omission to continue treatment under the circumstances, though intentional and with knowledge that the patient would die, was not an unlawful failure to perform a legal duty... . The supe-
rior court erred in determining that as a matter of law the evidence required the magistrate to hold petitioners to answer.

AIREDALE NHS TRUST v. BLAND, [1993] ALL E.R. 821(H.L.): [The House of Lords held that artificial feeding and antibiotic drugs may lawfully be withheld from an insensate patient with no hope of recovery, when it is known that without the
treatment the patient will shortly die. Lord Goff explained] [Djiscontinuation of life support is, for present purposes, no different from not initiating life support in the first place. [AJn omission such as this will not be unlawful unless it constitutes a
breach of duty to the patient. [But] the doctor's conduct is to be differentiated from that of, for example, an interloper who maliciously switches off a life support machine because, although the interloper may perform exactly the same act as the
doctor who discontinues life support, his doing so constitutes interference with the life-prolonging treatment then being administered by the doctor. Accordingly, whereas the doctor, in discontinuing life support, is simply allowing his patient to die
of his pre-existing condition, the interloper is actively intervening to stop the doctor from prolonging the patient's life, and such conduct cannot possibly be categorized as an omission. [W]hereas the law considers that discontinuance of life sup-
port may be consistent with the doctor's duty to care for his patient, it does not, for reasons of policy, consider that it forms any part of his duty to give his patient a lethal injection to put him out of his agony.

p.262

p. 268
NOTE

In alater chapter, we will examine the arguments in favor of allowing active euthanasia at a patient's request. See pp. 896-904 infra. As we will see, only five American jurisdictions currently come close to recognizing such a defense. Yet
“letting the patient die” with her consent is permissible in every American jurisdiction. Indeed, in Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Dept. of Public Health, 497 U.S. 261 (1989), the Supreme Court held that individuals have a constitutional right to refuse
unwanted medical treatment. And the Court held this right available even to a person in a permanent vegetative state, provided there is clear and convincing evidence of the patient's wishes in this regard. Thus, the distinction between killing and
letting die has enormous legal significance — the former is almost invariably illegal, while the latter is permissible and even constitutionally protected. But is there really a distinction, in the medical context, between an act of killing and an omission
of letting die? And even if there is some distinction, does it justify the radically different legal treatment of the two? Consider this comment:

JOHN ROBERTSON, RESPECT FOR LIFE IN BIOETHICAL DILEMMAS — THE CASE OF PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE, 45 CLEV. ST. L. REV. 329, 333-335 (1997): [T]he central issue that remains is whether . . . the moral or social threat to respect for
human life is greater from physician-assisted suicide than it is from our widely accepted current practices of nontreatment? This question is key because most opponents of physician-assisted suicide accept the patient's right to refuse life-saving
medical treatment. They . . . emphasize that overriding the patient's choice to refuse treatment requires a direct imposition or intrusion on the patient, while assisted suicide and active euthanasia entails a person having something done to them.
Proponents of a right to physician-assisted suicide, on the other hand, claim there is no significant moral difference between the two. . ..

The moral distinction between killing and letting die — between actively and passively causing death — has been examined by many bioethicists, philosophers, and lawyers. Most have concluded that the distinction between active
and passive, on which opponents [of physician-assisted suicide] so heavily rest, is a distinction without a significant enough moral difference to support the great weight that opponents of physician-assisted suicide have placed on it. From the
perspective of the affected individual, the sought for end — the relief of suffering and demise — is the same regardless of whether the immediate cause of death is described as active or passive. . . . The line drawn by opponents of assisted suicide

between active and passive is also vulnerable to a charge of inconsistency or arbitrariness. . . . Withdrawing treatment is said to be passive, yet many acts of withdrawal are quite active, for example, “pulling the plug” is literally an act. One cannot
easily distinguish in all significant respects removing ventilators or feeding tubes from the act of writing a prescription for a drug, which the patient will later take on her own. Finally, because the interest in conserving resources exists in both cases,
threats to the poor and elderly to end their life prematurely may be as great with decisions to withhold treatment as they are with asking physicians to write prescriptions for drugs that patients later use to commit suicide.
p. 283
p. 284
QUESTIONS: If active and passive euthanasia should be treated in the same way, should both be permissible? Or should both be prohibited? For further exploration of these issues, see the materials on euthanasia as an affirmative justification,
pp. 896-904 infra.
2. Mens Rea — Culpable Mental States
a. Basic Conceptions
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The criminal law does more than simply identify the harms that society seeks to prohibit by threat of punishment; it also includes an elaborate body of qualifications to these threats of punishment, based on the absence of fault. A
common usage is to consider all of these qualifications and exceptions to liability as examples of the requirement of “mens rea” — a requirement often identified with the classic maxim, actus non facit reum, nisi mens sit rea. Or, in Blackstone’s
translation, “an unwarrantable act without a vicious will is no crime at all.” The vicious will was the mens rea; essentially it refers to the blameworthiness entailed in choosing to commit a criminal wrong. The requirement of mens rea reflects the
‘common-sense view that blame and punishment are inappropriate in the absence of choice.°° From this perspective, a great variety of defenses to criminal liability — involuntary act, duress, legal insanity, accident, and mistake, for example — can
be considered “mens rea” defenses, that is, defenses that aim to establish the absence of moral blameworthiness.

This all-encompassing usage, which treats the term “mens rea” as synonymous with moral fault, can be referred to as mens rea in its broad sense. But courts and commentators often use the term “mens rea” in a narrower sense. Mens
rea in its narrow sense is a more formal and technical requirement; it refers to the kind of mental awareness or intention that must accompany the prohibited act, under the terms of the statute defining the offense.

Relatively few of the mental attitudes we notice in daily life are used in defining mens rea in this narrow sense. Whether the defendant acted regretfully, arrogantly, eagerly, hopefully, and so forth may be relevant for a judge considering
the sentence to be imposed, but attitudes like these seldom factor into the statutory definition of a crime. Instead, almost invariably, the concern of the criminal law is limited to determining whether a defendant intended, expected, or should have
‘expected that his actions would produce particular consequences.

Consider some examples: An attempt to commit a crime consists of an act that comes close to its commission when that act is done with the purpose that the crime be committed. Unlawful assembly is the act of joining with a group in
a public place with intent to commit unlawful acts. Receiving stolen goods is a crime when one receives stolen goods knowing they are stolen. Manslaughter is often defined as the killing of another by an act done with the awareness of a substan-
tial and unjustifiable risk of doing so.

p. 284
p. 285

The fact that criminal liability in these instances requires mens rea in this narrow sense is obvious. That is the way these crimes are defined. But it is important to see that they are so defined because the mens rea element is crucial to

the description of the conduct we want to make criminal. To retum to the examples just given, it would not make sense to punish someone for receiving stolen goods when he had no reason to know they were stolen. We would see nothing criminal

in joining a group in a public place, unless there was an intent to commit unlawful acts. Finally, many acts accidentally result in death. The key to whether an accident should be punished as a criminal act depends on whether the defendant was
aware of the risk or at least should have been aware of the risk.

The mental element required by the definition of any crime, therefore, is of central concern. This subsection on basic concepts and terminology is designed to help identify and distinguish the various kinds of mental states that may be
used in the definition of crimes. Legislatures have often left the mental element undefined or have treated it ambiguously, leaving it to the courts to figure out what the proper mental state should be for that offense. Unfortunately, the courts often
fail to analyze these issues clearly or consistently. This subsection on terminology provides a vocabulary and an analytic framework for understanding and assessing what Justice Robert H. Jackson called “the variety, disparity and confusion of
[the courts’] definitions of the requisite but elusive mental element.” Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246, 252 (1952).

Regina v. Cunningham
© Courtof Criminal App
[1957] 2 0.B. 396

Byrne, J. The appellant was convicted at Leeds Assizes upon an indictment framed under section 23 of the Offences against the Person Act, 1861, which charged that he unlawfully and maliciously caused to be taken by Sarah Wade a
certain noxious thing, namely, coal gas, so as thereby to endanger the life of the said Sarah Wade.

The facts were that the appellant was engaged to be married and his prospective mother-in-law was the tenant of a house, No. 7A, Bakes Street, Bradford, which was unoccupied, but which was to be occupied by the appellant after his
marriage. Mrs. Wade and her husband, an elderly couple, lived in the house next door. At one time the two houses had been one, but when the building was converted into two houses a wall had been erected to divide the cellars of the two houses,
and that wall was composed of rubble loosely cemented.

On the evening of January 17, 1957, the appellant went to the cellar of No. 7A, Bakes Street, wrenched the gas meter from the gas pipes and stole it, together with its contents. [At the time, occupants had to insert coins into the meter in
order to continue receiving heat] [lIn a second indictment he was charged with the larceny of the gas meter and its contents. To that indictment he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment. In respect of that matter he does
not appeal.

The facts were not really in dispute, and in a statement to a police officer the appellant said: “All right, | will tell you. I was short of money. I had been off work for three days, I got eight shillings from the gas meter. | tore it off the wall

p. 265

p. 266
and threw it away.” Although there was a stop tap within two feet of the meter the appellant did not turn off the gas, with the result that a very considerable volume of gas escaped, some of which seeped through the wall of the cellar and partially
asphyxiated Mrs. Wade, who was asleep in her bedroom next door, with the result that her life was endangered. . .

The act of the appellant was clearly unlawful and therefore the real question for the jury was whether it was also malicious within the meaning of section 23 of the Offences against the Person Act, 1861... . Section 23 provides:

Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously administer to or cause to be administered to or taken by any other person any poison or other destructive or noxious thing, so as thereby to endanger the life of such person, or so

as thereby to inflict upon such person any grievous bodily harm, shall be guilty of felony. . ..

[Defense counsel] argued, first, that mens rea of some kind is necessary. Secondly, that the nature of the mens rea required is that the appellant must intend to do the particular kind of harm that was done, or, alternatively, that he must
foresee that that harm may occur yet nevertheless continue recklessly to do the act. Thirdly, that the judge misdirected the jury as to the meaning of the word “maliciously.” . ..

[)he following principle was propounded by the late Professor C.S. Kenny in the first edition of his Outlines of Criminal Law published in 1902; . . .

In any statutory definition of a crime, malice must be taken not in the old vague sense of wickedness in general but as requiring either (1) An actual intention to do the particular kind of harm that in fact was done; or (2)

recklessness as to whether such harm should occur or not (.e., the accused has foreseen that the particular kind of harm might be done and yet has gone on to take the risk of it). It is neither limited to nor does it indeed re-

quire any ill will towards the person injured. . .

We think that this is an accurate statement of the law. . . . In our opinion the word “maliciously” in a statutory crime postulates foresight of consequence.

In his summing-up Oliver, J., directed the jury as follows:

You will observe that there is nothing there about “with intention that that person should take it.” He has not got to intend that it should be taken; it is sufficient that by his unlawful and malicious act he causes it to be taken.

What you have to decide here, then, is whether, when he loosed that frightful cloud of coal gas into the house which he shared with this old lady, he caused her to take it by his unlawful and malicious action. “Unlawful” does

not need any definition. It is something forbidden by law. What about “malicious”? “Malicious” for this purpose means wicked — something which he has no business to do and perfectly well knows it. “Wicked” is as good a

definition as any other which you would get.

The facts ... are these. . . . [The prisoner quite deliberately intended to steal the money that was in the meter . . . broke the gas meter away from the supply pipes and thus released the main supply of gas at large into that

house. When he did that he knew that this old lady and her husband were living next door to him. The gas meter was in a cellar. The wall which

p. 266
p.267

divided his cellar from the cellar next door was a kind of honeycomb wall through which gas could very well go, so that when he loosed that cloud of gas into that place he must have known perfectly well that gas would

percolate all over the house. If it were part of this offense — which it is not — that he intended to poison the old lady, | should have left it to you to decide, and | should have told you that there was evidence on which you

could find that he intended that, since he did an action which he must have known would result in that. As I have already told you, it is not necessary to prove that he intended to do it; it is quite enough that what he did was

done unlawfully and maliciously.

With the utmost respect to the judge, we think it is incorrect to say that the word “malicious” in a statutory offence merely means wicked. We think the judge was, in effect, telling the jury that if they were satisfied that the appellant acted
wickedly — and he had clearly acted wickedly in stealing the gas meter and its contents — they ought to find that he had acted maliciously in causing the gas to be taken by Mrs. Wade so as thereby to endanger her life.

In our view, it should have been left to the jury to decide whether, even if the appellant did not intend the injury to Mrs. Wade, he foresaw that the removal of the gas meter might cause injury to someone but nevertheless removed it. We
are unable to say that a reasonable jury, properly directed as to the meaning of the word “maliciously” in the context of section 23, would without doubt have convicted.

In these circumstances this court has no alternative but to allow the appeal and quash the conviction.
REGINA v. FAULKNER, 13 COX CRIM. CAS. 550, 555, 557 (1877): [Defendant, a sailor, went to the hold of his ship to steal some rum and lit a match in order to see better in the dark. Some of the rum caught fire and the fire spread, completely
destroying the ship. He was charged with violating the Malicious Damage Act by “maliciously” setting fire to the ship. The judge instructed the jury that “although the prisoner had no actual intention of burning the vessel, still, if they found he was
engaged in stealing the rum, and that the fire took place [as alleged], they ought to find him guilty.” The defendant was convicted, but on appeal, the conviction was quashed. Judge Barry, in the principal opinion, explained:] A broad proposition
has been contended for by the Crown, namely, that if, while a person is engaged in committing a felony, . . . he accidentally does some collateral act, which if done wilfully would be another felony either at common law or by statute, he is guilty
of the latter felony. | am by no means anxious to throw any doubt upon, of limit in any way, the legal responsibility of those who engage in the commission of felony, or acts mala in se; but | am not prepared without more consideration to give my
assent to so wide a proposition. [T]o constitute an offence under the Malicious Injuries to Property Act, . . . the act done must be in fact intentional and wilful, although the intention and will may (perhaps) be held to exist in, or be proved by, the fact
that the accused knew that the injury would be the probable result of his unlawful act, and yet did the act reckless of such consequences. . . . The jury were, in fact, directed to give a verdict of guilty upon the simple ground that the firing of the ship,

though accidental, was caused by an act done in the course of, or immediately consequent upon, a felonious operation, and no question of the prisoner's malice, constructive or otherwise, was left to the jury. . .. That direction was erroneous, [and]
the conviction should be quashed.

p.267
Tenn 288
Fitz@eRALD, J. | concur. . . . Counsel for the prosecution in effect insisted that the defendant, being engaged in the commission of, or in an attempt to commit a felony, was criminally responsible for every result that was occasioned thereby, even
though it was not a probable consequence of his act or such as he could have reasonably foreseen or intended. No authority has been cited for a proposition so extensive, and | am of opinion that it is not warranted by law.

NOTES ON COMMON-LAW TERMINOLOGY

1. Introduction. Traditional common-law offenses often require proof that the defendant acted either “willfully,” “intentionally,” “maliciously,” “corruptly,” “wantonly,” “recklessly,” “negligently,” or with “scienter [roughly, knowledge].”
In addition, when “intent” is at issue, courts often distinguish between “general intent” and “specific intent.” And these are just the most common of the mens rea terms encountered in statutes and judicial decisions.

Even with so many mens rea terms potentially in play, criminal law analysis could be manageable if each of these terms had a single, generally accepted meaning. Unfortunately, this has never been the case. Each of these terms has
been given different meanings in different contexts, and some have been given different meanings by different courts, even in identical contexts. In Voisine v. United States, 136 S. Ct. 2272, 2281-2282 (2016), the Supreme Court noted the “in-
determinacy” of this mens rea terminology, because the common law used “overlapping and, frankly, confusing phrases to describe culpable mental states.” To muddy the waters even further, some of the often-repeated definitions are merely
collections of words that convey more atmosphere or emotion than concrete meaning. Having “malice,” for example, is often defined as having an “abandoned and malignant heart.”2! Professor Ken Simons concludes that the common-law cate-
gories were (and still are, in states where they remain in use) “infinitely manipulable.”22

Under these circumstances, legal analysis in the common-law mens rea framework is inevitably somewhat unpredictable; there can seldom be an authoritatively “correct” answer. In considering cases like Cunningham, Faulkner, and
those that follow, the reader can escape this tangle only by focusing on concrete, practical questions: What facts, precisely, was the jury required to find in order to convict? What facts should be required in order to support a just conviction?

2. Malice. In Cunningham, the trial judge defined “malicious” as “wicked.” The Court of Criminal Appeal relied on a textbook writer (Professor Kenny) for the proposition that malice refers not to wickedness but instead to “foresight
of consequences.” The same debate continues in contemporary cases. United States v. Gray, 780 F.3d 458 (1st Cir. 2015), involved a charge under 49 U.S.C. §46507(1), which makes it a crime to “maliciously” give false information about a bomb
threat on an airplane. The government argued that “where a statute does not define a common-law term like malice, courts presume that Congress adopted the common-law

p.268

p. 269
definition,” which the government, like the court in Cunningham, equated with “disregard of the likelihood that damage or injury would result.” The defendant, like the trial judge in Cunningham, argued that malice means “to do something with an
evil purpose or motive.” Id. at 463-464. The First Circuit accepted the defendant's approach for purposes of this particular statute, but only because the statute's structure and legislative history supported that interpretation and was sufficient to
override the presumption to use the common-law definition.

What should “malice” presumptively mean in a criminal statute? We can approach that question from several different perspectives. Consider first the ordinary meaning of language. Which definition is closer to the meaning of “malice”
in everyday speech? Many would think that, from this perspective, the trial judge's definition was clearly the better one. If so, what considerations might explain the prevailing rule, reflected in both Cunningham and Faulkner, that gives malice a
narrower, more technical meaning? Notice, for example, that under the everyday definition (“malicious means wicked”), the sailor in Faulkner would be regarded as committing the same crime as a sailor who deliberately set fire to the ship. Would
that approach make sense? What happens to the boundaries between offenses in a complex criminal code if its mens rea requirements are not linked specifically to the kind of harm each offense is designed to prohibit?

The approach taken in Cunningham (malice means foresight of the prohibited consequence) reflects the prevailing approach at common law. Generally (though not invariably) common-law courts adopt this approach as their “default”
rule — that is, the presumptively applicable standard. Absent clear indications to the contrary, courts will interpret “malice” (and other vague or ambiguous mens rea language) to require that defendants were aware their actions posed a substan-
tial risk of causing the prohibited harm.

We can easily imagine approaches that are either stricter or more lenient. Why not assume that “malice” requires an actual desire to cause the prohibited harm, not merely awareness that it might occur? Conversely, why not assume
that “malice” requires only carelessness (a failure to realize that harm might occur) rather than actual awareness of the risk?

3. Specific intent and general intent. Two terms often used to describe mens rea are the concepts of “specific intent” and “general intent.” Unfortunately, these terms have caused endless confusion in the courts because they are
often used inconsistently or in misleading ways. This Note explains how the terms have been used and provides examples, but confusion will inevitably remain because there are no uniform or prevailing definitions.

(@) The most common usage of “specific intent” is to identify actions that must be done with some specified further purpose in mind. For example, burglary requires (roughly) that a person break and enter a structure with the additional
objective of committing a felony inside. It is not enough for the person to purposefully do the act itself — the breaking and entering. A conviction for burglary requires the prosecution to prove that additional objective. It is therefore common to de-
scribe burglary as a “specific intent crime”; the description is accurate in the sense that conviction for burglary requires proof of that additional (“specific”) purpose to commit a felony inside the building. Similarly, assault with intent to kill requires
(roughly) that a person commit a battery upon another with the specific

p.260
. 290
purpose of killing that person. Without proof of that further purpose, a case of assault with intent to kill must fail. Accordingly, it is likewise common to describe assault with intent to kill as a “specific intent crime.”

Even without proof of the specified additional intention, the person in the above examples usually can be convicted of some other crime — a crime that requires only a “general intent.” In this context, that usually means that conviction
requires only what in ordinary speech we would call a voluntary act. In the first example, actors who broke into a building would be guilty of trespass, a general intent crime; so long as they acted intentionally, in the sense that they knew the nature
of the acts performed, they would be guilty, without proof that they desired any further consequence. Similarly, in the second example, actors would be guilty of simple battery, a general intent crime, regardless of whether they desired any other
consequence to follow.

(b) Things get more complicated because there is another usage of specific intent, namely to identify a crime that requires defendants to have actual knowledge (that is, subjective awareness) of some particular fact in addition to
knowledge of their conduct. Take the crime of bigamy, which prohibits married persons from marrying someone else while still legally married to their current spouse. One element of the offense relates to conduct (the act of marrying) and another
relates to what is often known as an attendant circumstance — that is, a background fact (being married to another person) that is crucial for determining whether that conduct is harmful. In order to convict a defendant for bigamy, the conduct
undoubtedly must be intentional; the person must intend to be participating in a genuine marriage ceremony. An actor who said, “I do,” thinking that this was part of the script in a play about a wedding, would not intend the required conduct; even
if already married to another person, the actor obviously would not be guilty of bigamy.

When a person does intend the conduct (the act of marrying), must it also be shown that the actor knew of the required attendant circumstance (the fact of still being married to someone else)? Suppose the first spouse has been absent
for several years and is assumed (incorrectly) to be dead. Or suppose that the defendant has obtained a divorce decree and assumes (incorrectly) that the decree is legally effective. Should the offense of bigamy require proof that the defendant
knew that the first marriage was still legally in effect? It’s clear that the conduct element of bigamy must be committed intentionally; no one would suggest otherwise. But for the attendant circumstance element, different answers are possible. If
a state does not require proof that the defendant knew the first marriage was still in effect, common-law courts would say that bigamy is a general intent crime. In this context, in other words, a “general intent” crime is one for which awareness of
the attendant circumstance need not be proved; some lesser mental state — perhaps recklessness or negligence — will suffice. In contrast, if a state requires proof that the defendant knew the first marriage was still in effect, common-law courts
would say that bigamy is a “specific intent” crime; in that state, bigamy would not only require an intent to engage in the wedding ceremony, but would also require actual awareness of the specified attendant circumstance — that the actor was still
married to someone else.

In the discussion so far, we have focused on an offense — bigamy — that has only one conduct element and one attendant circumstance element. But most offenses require proof of many elements. Burglary, for example, is often

p.290

p.291
defined as the (1) breaking and entering (2) of a dwelling place (8) of another person (4) in the nighttime (5) with intent to commit a felony inside. Burglary is customarily labeled a specific intent crime, because it requires proof of conduct committed
with some further intent. But in this case there are three attendant-circumstance elements, and defendants might not be aware of any or all of them. They might think they were entering a building not used as a dwelling, that the building was their
‘own home, or that it was still daytime. A jurisdiction might permit conviction without proof that the defendant was aware of any or all of these facts. Courts and legislatures need to consider whether they should permit conviction without proof that
the defendant was aware of particular attendant circumstances, and we will examine that question, in different contexts, throughout this chapter. But whatever the best answer to that question for various elements of various crimes, it is clearly a
question of statutory interpretation and policy that turns on the particulars of specific offenses. Courts could not wisely answer it — and virtually none do — by simply invoking the observation that “burglary is a specific intent crime.”

4, Proving awareness and intent, and the use of presumptions. Most forms of mens rea involve a defendant's internal thoughts and perceptions. Prosecutors can prove a defendant's acts in a straightforward way (through eye-
witnesses, for example). But how can they prove what was in the defendant's mind at that moment? Unless the defendant admits the crucial mental facts, the prosecutor must prove mens rea indirectly, through so-called circumstantial evidence
and the inferences one can draw from it. For example, a larceny charge requires the prosecution to prove that the defendant took the personal property of another and did so with the intent to permanently deprive the other person of that property.
Ifa defendant takes the victim's jewelry and sells it, the prosecutor can argue persuasively that the defendant intended to deprive the victim of the jewelry permanently, because these facts make it highly unlikely that there was a plan to give it
back. But if the defendant took the victim's jewelry and still had it when caught, the defendant might say the only intent was to borrow the jewelry and later return it. In that case, the jury will have to decide whether the government proved beyond
areasonable doubt the intent to permanently deprive. The difficulty of proving what was in the defendant's mind, and proving it beyond a reasonable doubt, is one reason why prosecutors often argue that statutes and judicial decisions should not
require that certain mental facts have to be proved — that those facts should not be part of the defined elements of the offense.

When an offense does include awareness or intent as one of its elements, the process of proving it is often facilitated by presumptions. For example, lawyers often say that people presumably intend the natural and probable conse-
quences of their acts; if Corey aims a pistol at Tyler's head and fires six times, it is reasonable to assume that Corey intended to kill Tyler. But a presumption of this sort becomes troublesome if, for example, Corey fired only once, without making
obvious efforts to aim. To assume that Corey must have intended to kill would dilute the requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt and shift to the defense the burden of explaining Corey's actions. For that reason, the Supreme Court has
imposed strict limits on the use of mandatory presumptions — those the jury is required to draw in the absence of contrary evidence.

p.291

p.292

We explored at pp. 159-160 supra the standard for determining when a mandatory presumption is constitutionally permissible. In a nutshell, presumptions are constitutional only when we can have confidence that over all criminal
cases in general, the presumed fact will always be present when the fact used to trigger that presumption is present. In Francis v. Franklin, 471 U.S. 307, 312 (1985), the Supreme Court applied this test to the old and then-widely-used presumption
that “[a] person of sound mind and discretion is presumed to intend the natural and probable consequences of his acts.” Because this presumption does not hold true in all cases, the Court held it unconstitutional for courts to use this traditional
mandatory presumption.

In contrast, the Constitution allows more flexibility in the use of permissive inferences, in which the judge informs the jury about a factual conclusion that it is permitted but not required to draw. Permissive inferences are allowed
whenever the conclusion is “more likely than not” to be true under the circumstances of the particular case. Thus, in Barnes v. United States, 412 U.S. 837 (1973), the Supreme Court upheld the use of an inference commonly used to help establish
knowledge — the inference that “[pJossession of recently stolen property, if not satisfactorily explained, is ordinarily a circumstance from which [the jury may infer] that the person in possession knew that the property had been stolen.”

5. Negligence. Another response to the difficulty of establishing internal thoughts and perceptions is to eliminate any requirement of proving that sort of subjective mens rea and instead only to require proof that the defendant was
negligent, an objective concept that replaces the need to prove what the particular defendant realized with a need to prove only what a reasonable person would realize. That form of culpability is particularly important in homicide cases, where
cases attempting to define “negligence” have developed a distinctive body of doctrine, which we examine at pp. 506-524 infra. But “negligence” is also the required form of mens rea for some crimes outside the homicide context. Like other tra-
ditional common-law terms, it lacks precision, and courts governed by common-law precedent often disagree about what it means. Some interpret it to require nothing more than ordinary carelessness. E.g., United States v. Ortiz, 427 F.3d 1278
(10th Cir. 2005). Others hold that negligence requires a “gross” departure from normal standards of care. E.g., State v. Chavez, 211 P.3d 891 (N.M. 2009). Consider the following cases.

STATE v. HAZELWOOD, 946 P.2d 875 (ALASKA 1997): [Defendant, the captain of the oil tanker Exxon Valdez, ran his ship aground on a reef, with the result that 11 million gallons of oil spilled into the ecologically sensitive waters of Prince William
Sound. He was prosecuted under an Alaska statute that made it an offense for any person to “permit the discharge of petroleum . . . upon the waters or land of the state except . . . as the department may by regulation permit.” When committed
“negligently,” the offense was designated a misdemeanor, punishable by up to 90 days’ imprisonment.

[At trial, Hazelwood argued that the statute should be interpreted to require proof of “criminal negligence,” that is, “something more than the slight degree of negligence necessary to support a civil action for damagesf] negligence of a
degree so gross as to be deserving of punishment.” The trial judge rejected that

p.292

p. 289
view and instructed the jury that “[a] person acts ‘negligently’ . .. when the person fails to perceive an unjustifiable risk that the result will occur; the risk must be of such a nature and degree that the failure to perceive it constitutes a deviation from
the standard of care that a reasonable person would observe in the situation.” The jury convicted, and the defendant was sentenced to 90 days in jail and a $1,000 fine, both suspended on condition that Hazelwood complete one year of probation,
perform 1,000 hours of community work, and pay $50,000 in restitution.

[The intermediate appellate court, noting that “we are faced with interpreting the penalty statute's ambiguous and undefined use of the term ‘negligently,’ ” upheld the defendant's position and ruled that the trial judge's definition of
negligence was erroneous. The Alaska Supreme Court reversed and reinstated the conviction’]

RasiNowitz, J. ... The difference between criminal and civil negligence although not major is distinct. Under both standards, a person acts “negligently” when he fails to perceive a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a particular result
will occur. [But criminal negligence requires a greater risk. This standard is met only when the risk is “of such a nature and degree that the failure to perceive it constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would
observe in the situation.” In essence, then, the criminal negligence standard requires the jury to find negligence so gross as to merit not just damages but also punishment. It does not spill over into recklessness; there is still no requirement that the
defendant actually be aware of the risk of harm. However, criminal negligence does require a more culpable mental state than simple, ordinary negligence. . . .

An appropriate place to begin an explanation for objective fault crimes is with the objections of those who would abolish them altogether. In Jerome Hall, Negligent Behavior Should Be Excluded from Penal Liability, 63 Colo. L. Rev. 632
(1963), Professor Hall . . . contends crimes that are not based on subjective awareness of wrongdoing [cannot deter because they are addressed to those who] “have not in the least thought of their duty, their dangerous behavior, or any sanction.”
The difficulty with this thesis is that it assumes legal regulations can operate only through the offender's conscious reason. . . . Even when an offender does not of his own accord realize that his conduct is wrongful, he can in many cases be made
to take care. Coercion that causes the offender to pay attention can serve important social aims. . ..

The fulcrum for deciding what level of intent is the absolute minimum for a particular offense is a question of when an expectation of individual conformity is reasonable. . . . Negligence, rather than gross negligence, [is sufficient to
provide] assurance that criminal penalties will be imposed only when the conduct at issue is something society can reasonably expect to deter. Partisans of the criminal negligence approach have expressed the concern that an ordinary negli-
gence standard gives the criminal proceeding an unseemly resemblance to tort law. . . . This fear of tort standards is unfounded. . . . We are not persuaded that the simple or ordinary civil negligence standard is inadequate to protect Hazelwood’s
interests. ...

The [trial court's] adoption of an ordinary negligence standard was not erroneous.

p. 289

p. 208
ComPron, C.J., dissenting. . . . In my view, notions of fundamental faimess . . . require a showing of something more than “failure to act reasonably” before a defendant may be subjected to imprisonment. . . . Civil negligence provides an acceptable
standard of fault for allocating any burden which neglectful conduct creates. [But] a punishment of imprisonment is sufficiently severe that it should not [ordinarily] be imposed . . . for conduct which involves only civil negligence [or] for any devia-
tion whatsoever from “reasonableness.” . . .

It is well established that “mere negligence is insufficient to justify an award of punitive damages.” It is difficult to accept the proposition that an action which cannot form the basis for a punitive civil award fairly can be sanctioned with
imprisonment. . . .| would affirm the decision of the court of appeals.

SANTILLANES v. STATE, 849 P.2d 358 (N.M. 1993): [Defendant cut his seven-year-old nephew's neck with a knife during an altercation and was convicted of child abuse under a statute defining that offense as including “negligently . .. causing . ..
achild to be . . . placed in a situation that may endanger the child's life or health. . ..” The trial court gave the jury a standard definition of negligence sufficient to support civil liability: “An act, to be ‘negligence,’ must be one which a reasonably
prudent person would foresee as involving an unreasonable risk of injury to himself or to another and which such a person, in the exercise of ordinary care, would not do.” The state supreme court found this instruction erroneous:] [W]hen moral
condemnation and social opprobrium attach to the conviction of a crime, the crime should typically reflect a mental state warranting such contempt. . . . We construe the intended scope of the statute as aiming to punish conduct that is morally cul-
pable. . . . We interpret the mens rea element of negligence in the child abuse statute, therefore, to require a showing of criminal negligence instead of ordinary civil negligence.

6. When the statute is silent. In cases like Cunningham and Hazelwood, the relevant statutes gave the courts a starting place because they included some mens rea language. But what if the statute contains no mens rea language
at all? The next case considers that issue.

Elonis v. United States
Supreme Court of the United States
575 U.S. 723 (2015)

Cher Justice RogeRrts delivered the opinion of the Court. Federal law makes it a crime [punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment] to transmit in interstate commerce “any communication containing any threat . .. to injure the person
of another.” 18 U.S.C. §875(c). Petitioner was convicted of violating this provision under instructions that required the jury to find that he communicated what a reasonable person would regard as a threat. The question is whether the statute also
requires that the defendant be aware of the threatening nature of the communication. . .

[After his wife left him, Elonis started posting on Facebook rap songs and other material containing graphically violent language and imagery. Although Elonis often included disclaimers that his posts were “fictitious” and “therapeutic”
for him, the targets of his posts saw them differently. For example, Elonis posted a script in which he wrote]

p.208
p. 295

[Whhat’s interesting is that it’s very illegal to say | really, really think someone out there should kill my wife. . . .l also found that it's incredibly illegal to go on Facebook and say something like the best place to fire a mortar

launcher at her house would be from the cornfield behind it because of easy access to a getaway road and you'd have a clear line of sight through the sun room... .

[After viewing the posts, Elonis’s wife requested and received a state-court order of protection. Elonis responded by posting again]

Fold up your [protection-from-abuse] order and put it in your pocket] Is it thick enough to stop a bullet?” . . . And if worse comes to worse] I've got enough explosives to take care of the State Police and the Sheriff's

Department.

[Elonis posted additional violent language directed against fellow employees, FBI agents, and children in local schools. He was charged with violating 18 U.S.C. § 875(c). At trial] Elonis requested a jury instruction that “the government must prove
that he intended to communicate a true threat.” The District Court denied that request [and] instead informed the jury that

Astatementis a true threat when a defendant intentionally makes a statement in a context or under such circumstances wherein a reasonable person would foresee that the statement would be interpreted by those to whom

the maker communicates the statement as a serious expression of an intention to inflict bodily injury or take the life of an individual.
The Government's closing argument emphasized that it was irrelevant whether Elonis intended the postings to be threats — “it doesn’t matter what he thinks.” A jury convicted [and] Elonis was sentenced to three years, eight months’ imprison-
ment. ...

[On appeal, the Court of Appeals held that Section 875(c) required only an intent to communicate words that a reasonable person would view as a threat. The Supreme Court reversed. After noting that the statute was silent on the
question of mens rea, the Court, observed]

The fact that the statute does not specify any required mental state, however, does not mean that none exists. We have repeatedly held that “mere omission from a criminal enactment of any mention of criminal intent” should not be
read “as dispensing with it.” This rule of construction reflects the basic principle that “wrongdoing must be conscious to be criminal.” . .. The “central thought” is that a defendant must be “blameworthy in mind” before he can be found guilty, a
concept courts have expressed over time through various terms such as mens rea, scienter, malice aforethought, guilty knowledge, and the like. Although there are exceptions, the “general rule” is that a guilty mind is “a necessary element in the
indictment and proof of every crime.” We therefore generally “interpret[ ] criminal statutes to include broadly applicable scienter requirements, even where the statute by its terms does not contain them.” . ..

Elonis’s conviction, however, was premised solely on how his posts would be understood by a reasonable person. Such a “reasonable person” standard is a familiar feature of civil liability in tort law, but is inconsistent with “the conven-
tional requirement for criminal conduct — awareness of some wrongdoing.” Having

p. 295
p. 296

liability turn on whether a “reasonable person” regards the communication as a threat — regardless of what the defendant thinks — “reduces culpability on the all-important element of the crime to negligence,” and we “have long been reluctant to
infer that a negligence standard was intended in criminal statutes.” Under these principles, “what [Elonis] thinks” does matter.

. . In light of the foregoing, Elonis’s conviction cannot stand. . . . Given our disposition, it is not necessary to consider any First Amendment issues.

[The Court did not decide whether the statute required knowledge or recklessness with respect to the threat, leaving that question for another day.]
Justice ALITo, concurring in part and dissenting in part. [W]hen Congress does not specify a mens rea in a criminal statute, we have no justification for inferring anything more than recklessness is needed. . . .
QUESTIONS ON ELONIS

The Court made clear that a negligence standard is disfavored in criminal law but did not decide whether recklessness or knowledge was the right mens rea to read into the statute. What factors should guide that decision? Justice
Alito suggests that the default should be recklessness when a statute is silent. Does that one-size-fits-all default rule represent the best guide to statutory interpretation? Should the severity of the authorized punishment (in this case, five years’
imprisonment) matter? What about the typical mens rea for analogous crimes? Recall that in Cunningham, p. 285 supra, the court held that a statutory requirement of “malice” could be satisfied by recklessness. If a statute requiring “malice” can
be met by recklessness, why should a court require more in a statute that does not expressly require any mens rea at all? Compare the lack of certainty in how to approach these issues in the common-law framework with the Model Penal Code
approach discussed below.
NOTE ON THE MODEL PENAL CODE REFORMS

Responding to the problems posed by common-law mens rea terminology, the MPC proposed a fresh approach that has been extremely influential. The Code’s mens rea framework has been adopted explicitly in more than half of
American jurisdictions, and it often influences judicial interpretation in many of the remaining jurisdictions as well. The older framework for mens rea analysis remains dominant, however, in a minority of the states, and in the increasingly significant
field of federal criminal law. The requirement of a “willful” mens rea, for example, persists in many important federal crimes. One study finds that “courts, legislatures, and scholars [continue to use] meaningless mens rea terms such as ‘willful’; to
employ the simplistic but ineffective distinction between specific- and general-intent crimes; [and] to fail to see that mens rea questions are element-specific.” Michael L. Seigel, Bringing Coherence to Mens Rea Analysis for Secutities-Related Of-
fenses, 2006 Wis. L. Rev. 1563, 1564. This older approach therefore remains very much in play and must be learned as well, despite the success of the more modern MPC framework, which we now examine.

The MPC attempts to mitigate the difficulties of mens rea analysis through three distinct tools — manageable categories, precise definitions, and convenient

p.296

p.297
default rules. First, the Code eliminates the use of general intent, specific intent, and other ambiguous common-law terms, replacing the ten-plus varieties of common-law mens rea with just four mental states — purpose, knowledge, recklessness,
and negligence. Second, the Code provides a relatively clear, rigorous definition for each of its four mens rea terms. Third, the Code provides rules of interpretation (default rules) to enable courts to determine the required mental state sensibly and
predictably when the statutory language concerning mens rea is silent, ambiguous, or contradictory.

Because they are technical and rigorously precise, the MPC provisions are not an easy read, but mastering them is an essential prerequisite for the successful study and practice of contemporary criminal law in any American jurisdic-
tion. As the first step in the process of acquiring that mastery, the student should at this point turn to the Appendix of this book and read with great care the MPC provisions that embody its three mens rea reforms, specifically:

* §2.02(1), which reduces the many common-law mens rea terms to four manageable categories;
* §§2.02(2)(a)-(d), which provide precise definitions for each of the four mental states used in the MPC framework; and
* §§2.02(3)-(4), which provide specific default rules to govern statutory interpretation.

The significance of these provisions and their underlying rationale is explained in the following excerpt, which likewise should be examined with care.

Model Penal Code and Commentaries
Comment to §2.02, at 229-241 (1985)

1. Objective. This section expresses the Code's basic requirement that unless some element of mental culpability is proved with respect to each material element of the offense, no valid criminal conviction may be obtained. . . .

The section further attempts the extremely difficult task of articulating the kinds of culpability that may be required for the establishment of liability. It delineates four levels of culpability: purpose, knowledge, recklessness and negli-
gence. It requires that one of these levels of culpability must be proved with respect to each “material element” of the offense, which may involve (1) the nature of the forbidden conduct, (2) the attendant circumstances, or (3) the result of conduct.
The question

p.297
p. 298
of which level of culpability suffices to establish liability must be addressed separately with respect to each material element, and will be resolved either by the particular definition of the offense or the general provision of this section.

The Model Code’s approach is based upon the view that clear analysis requires that the question of the kind of culpability required to establish the commission of the offense be faced separately with respect to each material element of
the crime. The Code provision on rape will afford an illustration. Under Section 213.1(1) [of the 1962 Code], a purpose to effect the sexual relation is clearly required. But other circumstances are also made relevant by the definition of the offense.

The victim['s] consent to sexual relations would, of course, preclude the crime. Must the defendant's purpose have encompassed the [fact that the victim] opposed his will? [This is an] entirely different [question]. Recklessness may be sufficient for
[this circumstance] of the offense, although purpose is required with respect to the sexual result that is an element of the offense. . . . Failure to face the question of culpability separately with respect to each of these ingredients of the offense re-
sults in obvious confusion. . .

2. Purpose and Knowledge. [T]he Code draws a narrow distinction between acting purposely and knowingly, one of the elements of ambiguity in legal usage of the term “intent.” Knowledge that the requisite external circumstances exist
is a common element in both conceptions.” But action is not purposive with respect to the nature or result of the actor’s conduct unless it was his conscious object to perform an action of that nature or to cause such a result. It is meaningful to
think of the actor's attitude as different if he is simply aware that his conduct is of the required nature or that the prohibited result is practically certain to follow from his conduct.

Itis true, of course, that this distinction is inconsequential for most purposes of liability: acting knowingly is ordinarily sufficient. But there are areas where the discrimination is required and is made under traditional law, which uses the
awkward concept of “specific intent.” [l]n attempts, complicity and conspiracy, [for example] a true purpose to effect the criminal result is requisite for liability. ..

p.298
p.299

8. Recklessness. An important discrimination is drawn between acting either purposely or knowingly and acting recklessly. As the Code uses the term, recklessness involves conscious risk creation. It resembles acting knowingly in that
a state of awareness is involved, but the awareness is of risk, that is of a probability less than substantial certainty; the matter is contingent from the actor's point of view. Whether the risk relates to the nature of the actor’s conduct, or to the exis-
tence of the requisite attendant circumstances, or to the result that may ensue, is immaterial; the concept is the same, and is thus defined to apply to any material element.

The risk of which the actor is aware must of course be substantial in order for the recklessness judgment to be made. The risk must also be unjustifiable. Even substantial risks, it is clear, may be created without recklessness when the
actor is seeking to serve a proper purpose, as when a surgeon performs an operation that he knows is very likely to be fatal but reasonably thinks to be necessary because the patient has no other, safer chance. Some principle must, therefore, be
articulated to indicate the nature of the final judgment to be made after everything has been weighed. Describing the risk as “substantial” and “unjustifiable” is useful but not sufficient, for these are terms of degree, and the acceptability of a risk in
agiven case depends on a great many variables. Some standard is needed for determining how substantial and how unjustifiable the risk must be in order to warrant a finding of culpability. There is no way to state this value judgment that does not
beg the question in the last analysis; the point is that the jury must evaluate the actor's conduct and determine whether it should be condemned. . . .

4. Negligence. The fourth kind of culpability is negligence. It is distinguished from purposeful, knowing or reckless action in that it does not involve a state of awareness. A person acts negligently under this subsection when he inad-
vertently creates a substantial and unjustifiable risk of which he ought to be aware. He is liable if given the nature and degree of the risk, his failure to perceive it is, considering the nature and purpose of the actor's conduct and the circumstances
known to him, a gross deviation from the care that would be exercised by a reasonable person in his situation. As in the case of recklessness, both the substantiality of the risk and the elements of justification in the situation form the relevant stan-
dards of judgment. And again it is quite impossible to avoid tautological articulation of the final question. . .. The jury must find fault, and must find that it was substantial and unjustified; that is the heart of what can be said in legislative terms. . . .

5. Offense Silent as to Culpability. Subsection (3) provides that unless the kind of culpability sufficient to establish a material element of an offense has been prescribed by law, it is established if a person acted purposely, knowingly or
recklessly with respect thereto. This accepts as the basic norm what usually is regarded as the common law position. More importantly, it represents the most convenient norm for drafting purposes. When purpose or knowledge is required, it is
conventional to be explicit. And since negligence is an exceptional basis of liability, it should be excluded as a basis unless explicitly prescribed. .. .

6. Ambiguous Culpability Requirements. Subsection (4) seeks to assist in the resolution of a common ambiguity in penal legislation, the statement of a particular culpability requirement . . . in such a way that it is unclear whether the
requirement applies to all the elements of the offense or only to the elements that it immediately introduces... .

p.299
.300

The Code proceeds in the view that if a particular kind of culpability has been articulated at all by the legislature as sufficient with respect to any element of the offense, the assumption is that it was meant to apply to all material ele-

ments. Hence this construction is required, unless a “contrary purpose clearly appears.” When a distinction is intended, as it often is, proper drafting ought to make it clear.

[For example, flalse imprisonment is defined by section 212.3 of the Model Code to include one who “knowingly restrains another unlawfully so as to interfere substantially with his liberty.” Plainly, . . . the actor must, in order to be
convicted under this section, know that he is restraining his victim. The question whether “knowingly” also qualifies the unlawful character of the restraint is not clearly answered by the definition of the offense, but is answered in the affirmative by
the subsection under discussion.

NOTES ON APPLYING THE MPC APPROACH

1. The basic framework. In order to determine the mens rea required for conviction in any situation, the MPC analysis involves two steps. First, we must determine the “material elements” of an offense. The criteria for making this
determination are found in MPC §1.13(9), which defines an “element,” and in §1.13(10), which specifies when an element is “material.” Second, we must determine which type of mens rea (purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence) is re-
quired with respect to each material element. This determination is governed in the first instance by the terms of the offense itself, and then, in the event those terms are ambiguous, by the default rules of MPC §2.02(3) and §2.02(4).

2. Exercises. Three illustrative state crimes are set forth below. To become familiar with mens rea analysis, consider how the required mens rea would be identified by a court applying MPC principles. What are the “material elements”
of each offense? Does the statute itself make clear the state of mind specifically required with respect to each material element? If not, what level of mens rea is required by the applicable MPC default rule?

Consider those questions, step by step, with respect to the following statutes.

BURGLARY (NY. PENAL LAW $140.25) (2021): A person is guilty of burglary in the second degree when he knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in a building with intent to commit a crime therein, and when: 1. [omitted]; or 2. The building is a
dwelling.
BURGLARY (CAL. PENAL CODE $$459-460) (2021): Every person who enters any house, room, apartment . . . or other building . . . with intent to commit grand or petit larceny or any felony is guilty of burglary. . . . Every burglary of an inhabited
dwelling house . . ., or the inhabited portion of any other building, is burglary of the first degree. . . . All other kinds of burglary are burglary of the second degree.
DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY (D.C. CODE ANN. §22-303) (2021): Whoever maliciously injures or breaks or destroys, or attempts to injure or break or destroy, by fire or otherwise, any public or private property, whether real or personal, not his or her
‘own, of the value of $1000 or more, shall be fined not more than [$25,000] or shall be imprisoned for not more than 10 years, or both... .
p.300
p.301

3. Distinguishing between purpose and motive. An actor's motive differs from the MPC concept of “purpose.” Consider Glanville Williams, The Mental Element in Crime 10, 14 (1965). The author defines purpose (what he calls
intention) in terms of desiring a consequence: “A consequence is intended when it is desired to follow as the result of the actor's conduct.” He then cautions:

[The consequence need not be desired as an end in itself; it may be desired as a means to another end. . . . There may be a series of ends, each a link in a chain of purpose. Every link in the chain, when it happens, is an

intended consequence of the original act. Suppose that a burglar is arrested when breaking into premises. It would obviously be no defence for him to say that his sole intention was to provide a nurse for his sick daughter,

and for that purpose to take money from the premises, but that he had no desire or intention to deprive anyone of anything. Such an argument would be fatuous. He intended (1) to steal money (2) in order to help his daugh-

ter. These are two intentions, and the one does not displace the other. English lawyers call the first an “intent” and the second a “motive”; this is because the first (the intent to steal) enters into the definition of burglary and is

legally relevant, while the second (the motive of helping the daughter) is legally irrelevant, except perhaps in relation to sentence. Although the verbal distinction between “intention” and “motive” is convenient, it must be re-

alized that the remoter intention called motive is still an intention.

If motive is irrelevant to criminal liability, should it be regarded as relevant to sentencing? For a comprehensive analysis, see Elaine M. Chiu, The Challenge of Motive in the Criminal Law, 8 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 653 (2005).

4, Distinguishing between a purpose and a wish. Suppose that an actor gives an airline ticket to a hated relative, hoping that the plane will crash and the relative will die. If the crash occurs, causing the relative's death, has the actor
killed purposely? Would the answer depend on whether:

a. the actor knew that the chances of the plane's crashing were exceedingly remote, but liked to take long shots; or
b. the actor believed the plane would crash because an astrologer predicted it would; or
c. the actor believed it would crash because the actor knew that a group of terrorists had targeted it.

5. The differences between knowledge, recklessness, and negligence. The MPC distinguishes three kinds of actions that are culpable but not purposeful — those that are knowing, those that are reckless and those that are negli-
gent. The Supreme Court has explained the differences as follows (Borden v. United States, 593 U.S. __, 2021 U.S. LEXIS 2990, at "11 (June 10, 2021) (plurality opinion)):

A person who injures another knowingly, even though not affirmatively wanting the result, still makes a deliberate choice with full awareness of consequent harm. Recklessness and negligence are less culpable mental states

because they instead involve insufficient concern with a risk of injury. A person acts recklessly, in the most common formulation, when he

p.301
p.302

“consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk” attached to his conduct, in “gross deviation” from accepted standards. Model Penal Code §2.02(2)(c). That risk need not come anywhere close to a likelihood.

Speeding through a crowded area may count as reckless even though the motorist’s “chances of hitting anyone are far less [than] 50%.” Similarly (though one more step down the mental-state hierarchy), a person acts neg-

ligently if he is not but “should be aware” of such a “substantial and unjustifiable risk,” again in “gross deviation” from the norm. Model Penal Code §2.02(2)(d). There, the fault lies in the person's simple “failure to perceive”

the possible consequence of his behavior.

As this account makes clear, the negligent actor's fault lies in not paying attention when a reasonable person would have done so. Recklessness is more culpable because the actor was aware of the danger but acted anyway. The fault
lies in being aware of what the risk was and choosing to run it. So the crucial factor distinguishing recklessness from negligence is conscious awareness. But conscious awareness of precisely what? For recklessness, the MPC requires conscious
disregard of a “substantial and unjustifiable risk” that some circumstance exists or that some result will follow from the actor's conduct. Does this mean that the actor must be aware (1) that there is a risk, (2) that the risk is substantial, and (8) that
the risk is unjustifiable? Or does it mean only that the actor must be aware that there is some risk, and that the question whether the risk is substantial is a matter for the jury? Or could recklessness mean that the actor must only be aware that the
risk is substantial, and that the question whether it is justifiable is left to the jury?

Grammatically, the MPC appears to require conscious awareness as to all three of the crucial factors. But is this interpretation tenable in practice? Most courts hold that it’s a jury question whether a risk was unjustifiable, because that
sounds like a question of law, and (as we shall see, p. 350 infra) ignorance or mistake about the requirements of penal law is usually no excuse. Accordingly, the defendant's belief on this score is irrelevant. See Kenneth W. Simons, Should the
Model Penal Code’s Mens Rea Provisions Be Amended?, 1 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 179, 194 (2003).

What about the question whether the defendant must be aware that the risk was substantial? Consider State v. Muniz, 2011 WL 96320 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2011). The defendant fired a .22 caliber rifle at a chair in a neighbor's yard where
children were playing. His friends urged him not to shoot because he might miss and hit one of the kids, but Muniz, sure of his marksmanship, fired anyway. He hit one of the children in the head, inflicting severe physical and cognitive injuries. He
was convicted of endangering a minor and aggravated assault, both requiring proof that he had recklessly caused the injuries. Muniz was clearly negligent, but was he reckless? Under the MPC, the jury presumably could not find recklessness if it
concluded that he himself thought there was at most only a slim chance his aim would go wrong. See People v. Strong, 338 N.E.2d 602, 604 (N.Y. 1975). Does this approach properly reflect the need to prove subjective culpability or does it set an
intolerably high barrier to liability? Consider Glanville Williams, The Unresolved Problem of Recklessness, 8 Legal Stud. 74, 77 (1988):

[The subjective] theory [of recklessness] has to deal with the awkward customer who undertook a course of conduct that he knew would involve serious risks if performed by someone not highly skilled, but thought that,

p.302

p. 303

he himself possessed sufficient skill to eliminate danger. [Tlake Shimmen’s case [84 Cr. App. R. 7 (1986)]. The defendant, who held a green belt and yellow belt in the Korean art of self-defence, was demonstrating his skill to.

his friends. To do this, he made as if to strike a plate-glass window with his foot; however, his kick broke the window. A Divisional Court held that he was guilty of criminal damage by recklessness, since he “was aware of the

kind of risk which would attend his act if he did not take adequate precautions,” even though he believed he had taken enough precautions to eliminate or minimise risk. .. .

On subjective principles the court was wrong in saying that a person who believes he has taken enough precautions to eliminate risk is to be held guilty of recklessness merely because he perceived a risk before

taking the precautions. If Shimmen thought he had eliminated risk, he was not subjectively reckless, but the court might have remitted the case to the magistrates with an instruction to decide whether [Shimmen] thought he

had eliminated or merely mitigated the risk. This was a case where the defendant needed to be cross-examined. “Would you have kicked with such force towards your girl friend’s or wife's or your baby's head, relying on

your ability to stop within an inch of it? No? Then you knew that there was some risk of your boot travelling further than you intended.” A person may be convinced of his own skill, and yet know that on rare (perhaps very rare)

occasions it may fail him. In the case at bar, the victim, the owner of the window, did not agree to the demonstration of skill. [T]he actor has no right to impose any foreseen risk on him, beyond those associated with the or-

dinary business of life. He could be given a hot time in the witness-box if he says that in his opinion there was literally no risk.

QUESTION: Would this basis for finding recklessness be possible under the MPC? Under §2.02(2)(c), would it be sufficient for the jury to find that Shimmen knew that “on rare (perhaps very rare) occasions [his skill] may fail him”? For careful
analysis of the alternative ways of interpreting the MPC concept of recklessness, see Simons, supra, at 188-195; David Trieman, Recklessness and the Model Penal Code, 9 Am. J. Crim. L. 283, 361-371 (1981).

Amore common problem is illustrated by the death of Morgan Pena, a two-year-old child killed by a driver who was distracted while using his cell phone. See Kimberly Kessler Ferzan, Opaque Recklessness, 91 J. Crim. L. & Criminology
597, 600 (2001). The driver surely recognized that there was some risk involved in driving while attempting to dial a number on his phone, and he may not have considered himself exceptionally skillful. But the driver nonetheless apparently failed
to appreciate the full extent of the danger his conduct created. He was cited for careless driving and running a stop sign, but he was not charged with a more serious offense because the police determined that he was not reckless. Is the outcome
defensible? Conduct of this sort, which Professor Ferzan labels “opaque recklessness” (awareness of some risk but failure to appreciate how substantial it was), is probably a regular feature of dangerous behavior, and it arguably lies somewhere
between the MPC notions of recklessness and negligence. Professor Ferzan argues (supra, at 627-641) that the culpability of such actors is too serious to escape criminal sanctions. But if the risk that the actor personally appreciates is trivially
small,

p.303

p. 304
how can the actor be charged with subjective culpability rather than mere negligence? For discussion, see Larry Alexander, Insufficient Concern: A Unified Conception of Criminal Culpability, 88 Cal. L. Rev. 931 (2000); Kenneth W. Simons, Rethink-
ing Mental States, 72 B.U. L. Rev. 463 (1992).

6. Do mens rea distinctions matter in practice? The precision of the MPC definitions and the care required to apply them correctly prompt many to wonder whether the legal details really affect actual cases. In other words, when the
facts show that the defendant did not but should have perceived a substantial, unjustifiable risk (i.e., the defendant was negligent but not reckless) will the jury remain equally willing to convict even when instructed that recklessness is required?
When the facts show that the defendant did not know that a legally decisive fact existed but was aware of a substantial, unjustifiable risk that it did (Ie., the defendant acted recklessly but not knowingly) will the jury remain equally willing to convict
even when instructed that knowledge is required? Many skeptics assume that these mens rea refinements have little practical importance, and that in the world outside of classrooms and academic conferences, ordinary jurors will not draw these
distinctions or will simply refuse to be governed by them. Efforts to test this issue empirically suggest, however, that these common assumptions may be exaggerated. In experiments with a representative sample of jury-eligible Americans,°° re-
searchers found that “[w]ith little to no training, [these subjects] appear to grasp the mens rea distinctions drawn by the MPC [and] can apply those distinctions to fact patterns in a manner largely consistent with basic assumptions of the MPC. ...”
See Matthew R. Ginther et al., Decoding Guilty Minds: How Jurors Attribute Knowledge and Guilt, 71 Vand. L. Rev. 241, 276 (2018). The principal qualification was that when a defendant was demonstrably reckless but did not necessarily know
that a crucial circumstance existed, about a third of the subjects were inclined to find guilt even when instructed that actual knowledge was required for conviction. The researchers suspected that these subjects subconsciously inferred knowledge
when the evidence showed that the actor strongly suspected wrongdoing but made a blameworthy decision to proceed anyway. Id. at 273.

In this last situation — a person engages in prohibited conduct, fully aware that a decisive fact probably exists, but claims not to know for sure that it does — the distinction between recklessness and actual knowledge becomes ex-

tremely thin. This is the problem of “willful blindness,” examined in the next section.
b. Willful Blindness
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

While the MPC’s line between reckless conduct and purposeful conduct is bright, its distinction between recklessness and knowledge is murky. Is there a significant difference between being aware of a substantial risk that a circum-

stance exists and knowing that it exists? What if the only reason a defendant doesn’t know the truth is that he chooses to look the other way? Consider the material that follows.
p.304
p. 305
United States v. Jewell
United States Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit
532 F.2d 697 (1976)

Brownie, J. [Alppellant entered the United States driving an automobile in which 110 pounds of marijuana . . . had been concealed in a secret compartment. [He] testified that he did not know the marijuana was present. There was
circumstantial evidence from which the jury could infer that appellant [did know], and that his contrary testimony was false. On the other hand there was evidence from which the jury could conclude that . . . although appellant knew of the presence
of the secret compartment and had knowledge of facts indicating that it contained marijuana, he deliberately avoided positive knowledge of the presence of the contraband to avoid responsibility in the event of discovery. If the jury concluded the
latter was indeed the situation, and if positive knowledge is required to convict, the jury would have no choice consistent with its oath but to find appellant not guilty even though he deliberately contrived his lack of positive knowledge.

[The jury convicted after being instructed that the prosecution could establish knowledge by proving beyond a reasonable doubt that] “if the defendant was not actually aware that there was marijuana in the vehicle . . . his ignorance in
that regard was solely and entirely a result of his having made a conscious purpose to disregard the nature of that which was in the vehicle, with a conscious purpose to avoid learning the truth.”

The legal premise of these instructions is firmly supported by leading commentators here and in England. . . . 7 The substantive justification for the rule is that deliberate ignorance and positive knowledge are equally culpable. The
textual justification is that in common understanding one “knows” facts of which he is less than absolutely certain. To act “knowingly,” therefore, is not necessarily to act only with positive knowledge, but also to act with an awareness of the high
probability of the existence of the fact in question. When such awareness is present, “positive” knowledge is not required.

This is the analysis adopted in the Model Penal Code. Section 2.02(7) states:

When knowledge of the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge is established if a person is aware of a high probability of its existence, unless he actually believes that it does not exist.

p. 305
p. 306

. .. Appellant's narrow interpretation of “knowingly” is inconsistent with the Drug Control Act's general purpose to deal more effectively “with the growing menace of drug abuse in the United States.” Holding that this term introduces a

requirement of positive knowledge would make deliberate ignorance a defense. It cannot be doubted that those who traffic in drugs would make the most of it... .

Itis no answer to say that in such cases the fact finder may infer positive knowledge. It is probable that many who performed the transportation function, essential to the drug traffic, can truthfully testify that they have no positive knowl-
edge of the load they carry. Under appellant's interpretation of the statute, such persons will be convicted only if the fact finder errs in evaluating the credibility of the witness or deliberately disregards the law. . . .

Itis worth emphasizing that the required state of mind differs from positive knowledge only so far as necessary to encompass a calculated effort to avoid the sanctions of the statute while violating its substance. . . . In the language of
the instruction in this case, the government must prove, “beyond a reasonable doubt, that if the defendant was not actually aware . . . his ignorance in that regard was solely and entirely a result of . . .a conscious purpose to avoid learning the
truth.” ...

[Alffirmed.

KeNNeDy, J., dissenting. . . . In light of the Model Penal Code’s definition, the “conscious purpose” jury instruction is defective in three respects. First, it fails to mention the requirement that Jewell have been aware of a high probability that a
controlled substance was in the car. It is not culpable to form “a conscious purpose to avoid learning the truth” unless one is aware of facts indicating a high probability of that truth. To illustrate, a child given a gift-wrapped package by his mother
while on vacation in Mexico may form a conscious purpose to take it home without learning what is inside; yet his state of mind is totally innocent unless he is aware of a high probability that the package contains a controlled substance.

[Second, the instruction] did not alert the jury that Jewell could not be convicted if he “actually believed” there was no controlled substance in the car. The failure to emphasize, as does the Model Penal Code, that subjective belief is
the determinative factor, may allow a jury to convict on an objective theory of knowledge — that a reasonable man should have inspected the car and would have discovered what was hidden inside. . . . Third, the jury instruction clearly states that
Jewell could have been convicted even if. . . “not actually aware” that the car contained a controlled substance. [T]rue ignorance, no matter how unreasonable, cannot provide a basis for criminal liability when the statute requires knowledge. A
proper jury instruction based on the Model Penal Code would be presented as a way of defining knowledge, and not as an alternative to it... .

NOTES
1. Criminal law applications. Knowledge is the mens rea required not only in many drug prosecutions but also in cases involving mail fraud, money laundering, environmental pollution, and a variety of other offenses. Willful blindness
or “ostrich” instructions therefore can be an important means to establish this necessary element. In United States v. Goffer, 721 F.3d 113, 127 (2d Cir. 2013), an
p.306
p.307
insider-trading case, conviction required proof that the defendant knew his information had come from an insider. A person who had inside information gave the defendant some stock tips, saying that the defendant was “better off not knowing
where [his tips] were coming from” because then if the government were to investigate, he could say “I don’t freakin’ know where it came from.” The jury was instructed that it could find the necessary knowledge on a conscious avoidance theory,
and the court upheld the resulting conviction. Some have argued that prosecutors should have made greater use of willful blindness theories against high-level financial executives responsible for the financial crisis of 2008. Jed S. Rakoff, The Fi-
nancial Crisis: Why Have No High-Level Executives Been Prosecuted?, N.Y. Rev. Books, Jan. 9, 2014.

2. Civil litigation. The criminal law concept of willful blindness now plays an important role in a variety of civil proceedings. In Global-Tech Appliances, Inc. v. SEB S.A., 563 U.S. 754, 766 (2011), a civil suit requiring proof of a knowing
patent infringement, the Court held that criminal law precedent should govern the use of the doctrine in civil litigation as well:

Many criminal statutes require proof that a defendant acted knowingly or willfully, and courts applying the doctrine of willful blindness hold that defendants cannot escape the reach of these statutes by deliberately shielding

themselves from clear evidence of critical facts that are strongly suggested by the circumstances. . . .Given the long history of willful blindness [in criminal law], we can see no reason why the doctrine should not apply in civil

lawsuits... .

Plaintiffs have found the criminal law doctrine particularly helpful in civil suits against lawyers, accountants, and investment advisors where “[t]heir education, training, and experience all militate in favor of the jury's finding that the
defendant professionals well understood what was going on.” John P. Freeman & Nathan M. Crystal, Scienter in Professional Liability Cases, 42 S.C. L. Rev. 783, 852-855 (1991). Conversely, defendants can use willful-blindness doctrine to estab-
lish that a plaintiff had “actual knowledge” when that fact would preclude the plaintiff's right to sue. See Intel Corp. Invest. Pol'y Comm. v. Sulyma, 140 S. Ct. 768, 779 (2020).

3. Recklessness plus what? What is the extra element needed to convert mere recklessness into knowledge under a willful-blindness theory? The dissent in Jewell refers to three factors that are arguably relevant: deliberate avoidance,
awareness of a “high probability” that there was marijuana in the car, and a negative factor — not having an actual belief that there wasn't. Which of these factors did Jewell himself meet? Which of them was the jury required to find in order to
convict?

4, Comparing the federal and MPC standards. Which factors should be required to establish “knowledge” on a willful-blindness theory? The federal courts and the MPC give different answers to this question. In Global-Tech, supra,
Justice Alito, writing for eight justices, explained the willful-blindness concept as follows (563 U.S., at 768-769):

While [federal courts] articulate the doctrine . . . in slightly different ways, all appear to agree on two basic requirements: (1) the defendant must subjectively believe that there is a high probability that a fact exists and

p.307
p. 308

(2) the defendant must take deliberate actions to avoid learning of that fact. We think these requirements give willful blindness an appropriately limited scope that surpasses recklessness and negligence. [A] willfully blind

defendant is one who takes deliberate actions to avoid confirming a high probability of wrongdoing. . . . By contrast, a reckless defendant is one who merely knows of a substantial and unjustified risk of such wrongdoing, . . .

and a negligent defendant is one who should have known of a similar risk but, in fact, did not. . ..

The test for willful blindness under MPC §2.02(7) (quoted by the majority in Jewell) is different. Although the MPC and Global Tech both require proof that the defendant was aware of a “high probability” that the required circumstance
existed, MPC §2.02(7) (unlike Global Tech) does not allow a finding of knowledge when a defendant actually believed that the crucial circumstance did not exist. As a result, MPC §2.02(7) aims only to provide a way to infer actual knowledge,
whereas the Global Tech approach allows a different mens rea to substitute for actual knowledge. See Gregory M. Gilchrist, Willful Blindness as Mere Evidence, 54 Loy. L.A. L. Rev. 405 (2021) (arguing that only the former approach is justified).

In Global Tech, Justice Kennedy, dissenting, stressed this point (id. at 772-773), reiterating the concern he had expressed as a court of appeals judge in Jewell:

Willful blindness is not knowledge; and judges should not broaden a legislative proscription by analogy. . . . One can believe that there is a “high probability” that acts might infringe a patent but nonetheless conclude they do

not infringe. The [person] who believes a device is noninfringing cannot be said to know otherwise.

The Court justifies its substitution of willful blindness for the statutory knowledge requirement . . . by citing the “traditional rationale” that willfully blind defendants “are just as culpable as those who have actual

knowledge.” But the moral question is a difficult one. . . . Pethaps the culpability of willful blindness depends on a person's reasons for remaining blind. Or perhaps only the person's justification for his conduct is relevant.

E.g,, [L. Alexander & K. Ferzan, Crime and Culpability: A Theory of Criminal Law (2009)] at 23-68. This is a question of morality and of policy best left to the political branches. . ..

The “equal culpability” thesis advanced by the Jewell and Global Tech majorities is hotly debated. Professor Yaffe argues that in willful blindness situations, “omitting inquiry manifests precisely the same degree of disregard of others’
interests as manifested in knowingly acting criminally.” Gideon Yatfe, The Point of Mens Rea: The Case of Willful Ignorance, 12 Crim. L. & Phil. 19, 19 (2018). For contrasting arguments on the issue of “equal culpability,” in addition to the work of
Professors Alexander and Ferzan cited by Justice Kennedy, see Alexander Sarch, Ignorance Lost: A Reply to Yaffe on the Culpability of Willful Ignorance, 12 Crim. L. & Phil. 107 (2018).

Because, as Justice Kennedy mentions, “{the person] who believes a device is noninfringing cannot be said to know otherwise,” MPC §2.02(7) does not permit a finding of knowledge in that situation, but Global Tech does. In that re-
spect, the

p. 308
p. 309

MPC test theoretically could be more difficult for the prosecution to meet.°4 But how does recklessness under the MPC differ from knowledge-via-willful-blindness under the MPC? What precisely is the difference between awareness of “a sub-
stantial and unjustifiable risk” (I.e., MPC recklessness) and awareness of “a high probability” (I.e., MPC willful blindness)? Under the MPC, is a willfully blind person simply a person who is very reckless?

Willful blindness is more sharply distinguished from recklessness under the Global Tech test. Its second prong (which has no counterpart in the MPC §2.02(7)), requires the prosecution to prove that the defendant took “deliberate
actions to avoid learning of [a crucial] fact.” Suppose that Driver agrees to drive Owner's car from Canada across the border into the United States. Owner then flies back, after giving Driver the car keys and making a plan to meet Driver in Buffalo,
New York. Before starting out, Driver realizes it's highly likely that drugs are concealed somewhere in the cat's body frame. But Driver, who has no practically feasible way to investigate those suspicions, proceeds to drive the car across the border,
where federal agents, acting on a tip, stop the car and find the drugs. Here MPC §2.02(7) permits a finding of knowledge, but Global Tech does not. (Do you see why?) In this situation, the Global Tech test is the more difficult one for the prosecution
to meet. Does Global Tech set a more appropriate standard for establishing willful blindness? Or is it too difficult to meet? Consider these problems in applying its deliberate-avoidance requirement:

(a) Acts versus omissions. Did Jewell “take deliberate actions” to avoid learning the truth? Jewell apparently knew that the car had a secret compartment, but in order to actually “know” what he was transporting, Jewell would need
to dismantle the compartment in which the drugs were hidden. If so, his liability resulted not from “shutting his eyes” but rather from failing to actively investigate. Under the Global-Tech standard, should Jewell’s conviction have been reversed? If
the Supreme Court meant to require affirmative acts to avoid knowledge, is that requirement too stringent? See Alan C. Michaels, Acceptance: The Missing Mental State, 71 S. Cal. L. Rev. 953 (1998); Robin Charlow, Willful Ignorance and Criminal
Culpability, 70 Tex. L. Rev. 1351 (1992). Or should “deliberate actions” include what the Seventh Circuit has described as “cutting off of one’s normal curiosity by an effort of will.”25 When does a failure to investigate become a “cutting off of one’s
normal curiosity"?

In United States v. Fisch, 851 F.3d 402, 411 (6th Cir. 2017), a defense attorney was convicted of obstruction of justice, money laundering, and other crimes, on the basis of willful-blindness instructions justified by his testimony that “I
didn’t ask a lot of questions. . .. Whatever | knew is what he told me.” In United States v. Delgrosso, 852 F.3d 821 (8th Cir. 2017), the defendant was convicted on drug and

p.309
p.310
money-laundering charges, after the jury was given willful-blindness instructions because the defendant admitted that he “could have made further inquiries.” Are these convictions appropriate under the Global Tech test?

Compare United States v. Giovannetti, 919 F.2d 1223 (7th Cir. 1990). Defendant Janis was convicted of aiding and abetting a gambling operation by renting his house to some gamblers, “knowing” that the lessees would use it for
gambling. There was no direct evidence of Janis’s knowledge, but knowing that his lessees were professional gamblers, he made no inquiries about their intended use of the house. The court (per Posner, J.) reversed the conviction, holding that it
was error to give an “ostrich” instruction under these circumstances (id. at 1228-1229):

[Notice] just what it is that real ostriches do (or at least are popularly supposed to do). They do not just fail to follow through on their suspicions of bad things. They are not merely careless birds. They bury their heads in the

sand so that they will not see or hear bad things. They deliberately avoid acquiring unpleasant knowledge. The ostrich instruction is designed for cases in which there is evidence that the defendant, knowing or strongly sus-

pecting that he is involved in shady dealings, takes steps to make sure that he does not acquire full or exact knowledge of the nature and extent of those dealings. . . .

The government points out that the rented house . . . was a short way down a side street from the thoroughfare on which Janis commuted to work daily. It would have been easy for him to drive by the house from

time to time to see what was doing, and if he had done so he might have discovered its use [for gambling]. He did not do so. But this is not the active avoidance with which the ostrich doctrine is concerned. . . . Janis failed

to display curiosity, but he did nothing to prevent the truth from being communicated to him. He did not act to avoid learning the truth.

QUESTIONS: Was the court right to hold that Janis did not have the required mens rea? If so, does that result suggest that defendants like Janis should not be convicted? Or does it suggest that the statutory mens rea requirement should be
relaxed? Why might it be sound to require affirmative efforts to avoid guilty knowledge, rather than imposing criminal liability merely for a reckless failure to investigate? See J.S. Nelson, Disclosure-Driven Crime, 52 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1487 (2019);
Deborah Hellman, Prosecuting Doctors for Trusting Patients, 16 Geo. Mason L. Rev. 3 (2009).

(b) Motive. In United States v. Heredia, 483 F.3d 913 (9th Cir. 2007), the defendant was caught driving her mother from Nogales, Mexico, to Tucson, Arizona, with 349 pounds of marijuana in the trunk of the car, which she had bor-

rowed from an aunt. Charged with knowing possession of a controlled substance, she admitted that she had noticed a “detergent” smell in the car and did not believe her aunt's explanation for it (that “fabric softener” had spilled in the vehicle).

She testified that she suspected there might be drugs in the car, because her mother was visibly nervous during the trip. But she claimed that her suspicions were not aroused until she had passed the last freeway exit before the checkpoint, by
which time it was too dangerous to pull over and investigate. The judge instructed the jury that they could find the defendant guilty if she was aware of a high probability
p.310
pair
that drugs were in the vehicle and “deliberately avoided learning the truth.” The court of appeals upheld the conviction, stating (id. at 918-920):
[Olur cases have not been consistent [on w]hether the jury must be instructed that defendant's motive in deliberately failing to learn the truth [must be] to give himself a defense in case he should be charged with the
crime. . . . Heredia argues that the motive prong is necessary to avoid punishing individuals who fail to investigate because circumstances render it unsafe or impractical to do so. She claims that . . . her suspicions did not
arise until she was driving on an open highway where it would have been too dangerous to pull over. She thus claims that she had a motive other than avoiding criminal culpability. .. .
We believe, however, that the second prong of the instruction, the requirement that defendant have deliberately avoided learning the truth, provides sufficient protections for defendants in these situations... .
A decision influenced by coercion, exigent circumstances or lack of meaningful choice is, perforce, not deliberate. A defendant who fails to investigate for these reasons has not deliberately chosen to avoid learning the truth.
Judge Kleinfeld, concurring on other grounds, objected (id. at 928-929):
The majority converts the statutory element that the possession be “knowing” into something much less — a requirement that the defendant be suspicious and deliberately avoid investigating. The imposition on people
who intend no crime of a duty to investigate has no statutory basis. The majority says that its [approach would] protect defendants who cannot investigate because of “coercion, exigent circumstances or lack of meaningful
choice.” . . . The majority seems to mean that if someone can investigate, they must. A criminal duty to investigate the wrongdoing of others to avoid wrongdoing of one’s own is a novelty in the criminal law.
. .. The government has not conscripted the citizenry as investigators, and the statute does not impose that unpleasant and sometimes risky obligation on people. Shall someone who thinks his mother is carrying
stash of marijuana in her suitcase be obligated, when he helps her with it, to rummage through her things? Should Heredia have carried tools with her, so that (if her story was true) she could open the trunk for which she
had no key? Shall all of us who give a ride to [a] child’s friend search her purse or his backpack? . .
A [willful blindness] instruction ought to require (1) a belief that drugs are present, (2) avoidance of confirmation of the belief, and (3) wilfulness in that avoidance — that is, choosing not to confirm the belief in order
to “be able to deny knowledge if apprehended.”
5. Deliberate avoidance and high probability as distinct issues. Consider this distinction between deliberate avoidance and the probability of a certain fact (David Luban, Contrived Ignorance, 87 Geo. LJ. 957, 962 (1999)):
The focus in a willful ignorance case is on whether the actor deliberately avoided guilty knowledge. The inquiry is about whatever steps the actor took to ward off knowledge prior to the misdeed. The focus in the Model Penal
Code, by contrast, is on how certain the actor is about a fact. The
psi
p32
inquiry is about the actor’s subjective state at the moment of the misdeed. These are completely different issues. An actor can be aware of the high probability of a fact whether or not she took steps to avoid knowing it, and
an actor can screen herself from knowledge of facts regardless of whether their probability is high or low. . . . Douglas Husak and Craig Callender illustrate the latter with a nice pair of examples [Willful Ignorance, Knowledge,
and the “Equal Culpability” Thesis, (1994) Wis. L. Rev. 29, 37-38]. Suppose that a dope distributor tells each of his three couriers never to look in the suitcase he gives to each one, adding that it isn’t necessary for them to
know what the suitcases contain. If the suitcases contain dope, the case is plainly one of willful ignorance. But now suppose that the distributor adds that two of the three suitcases contain nothing but clothing, that he is,

truthful, and that the distributors know he is truthful. If the couriers deliver the suitcases without looking inside and without asking any questions, the case seems indistinguishable from the first case. It is still willful ignorance.
But in the second case, the courier with dope in his suitcase lacks awareness of the high probability that it contains dope. Indeed, he knows that the probability is one-third. He may even believe that his suitcase contains
nothing but clothes. Thus, in the language of the Model Penal Code §2.02(7), he not only lacks awareness of a high probability of the fact’s existence, “he actually believes that it does not exist.”
6. Prevailing law? A review of the recent case law finds that the federal courts are in disarray on virtually all the issues that are central to applying willful-blindness doctrine, including the degree of risk that constitutes a “high probabil-
ity,” whether avoidance requires affirmative acts, and the relevance of the defendant's reason for avoiding knowledge or failing to inquire. See Kenneth W. Simons, The Willful Blindness Doctrine: Justifiable in Principle, Problematic in Practice, 51
Ariz. St. LJ. 505, 521-525 (2021).
c. Mistake of Fact
Regina v. Prince
Court of Crown Cases Reserved
LR. 2 Cr. Cas. Res. 154 (1875)
[Defendant was convicted of taking an unmarried girl under 16 years of age out of the possession and against the will of her father in violation of 24 & 25 Vict, c. 100, §55, providing:
Whosoever shall unlawfully take or cause to be taken any unmarried girl, being under the age of sixteen years, out of the possession and against the will of her father or mother, or of any person having the lawful care or
charge of her, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. . .
[The jury found that the girl, Annie Phillips, was 14 at the time, but that she had told the defendant she was 18, that the defendant honestly believed that statement, and that his belief was reasonable. On appeal, the Court for Crown
Cases Reserved upheld the conviction.]
ps2
p.3t9
BRAMWELL, B. [Finding that to sustain the defendant's position it would be necessary to read into the statute language requiring proof that the accused did not believe the girl he had taken was over the age of 16, the opinion continues:] These
words are not there, and the question is, whether we are bound to construe the statute as though they were, on account of the rule that the mens rea is necessary to make an act a crime. | am of opinion that we are not, . .. and for the following
reasons: The act forbidden is wrong in itself, if without lawful cause; | do not say illegal, but wrong. [W]hat the statute contemplates, and what | say is wrong, is the taking of a female of such tender years that she is properly called a girl, can be
said to be in another's possession, and in that other's care or charge. No argument is necessary to prove this; it is enough to state the case. The legislature has enacted that if anyone does this wrong act, he does it at the risk of her turning out to
be under sixteen. This opinion gives full scope to the doctrine of the mens rea. If the taker believed he had the father’s consent, though wrongly, he would have no mens rea; so if he did not know she was in anyone’s possession, nor in the care
or charge of anyone. In those cases he would not know he was doing the act forbidden by the statute — an act which, if he knew she was in possession and in care or charge of anyone, he would know was a crime or not, according as she was
under sixteen or not. He would not know he was doing an act wrong in itself, whatever was his intention, if done without lawful cause. The same principle applies in other cases. A man was held liable for assaulting a police officer in the execution
of his duty, though he did not know he was a police officer. Why? Because the act was wrong in itself. So, also, in the case of burglary, could a person charged claim an acquittal on the ground that he believed it was past six when he entered, or in
housebreaking, that he did not know the place broken into was a house? It seems to me impossible to say that where a person takes a girl out of her father's possession, not knowing whether she is or is not under sixteen, that he is not guilty; and
equally impossible when he believes, but erroneously, that she is old enough for him to do a wrong act with safety. | think the conviction should be affirmed.

BreTr, J., [dissenting]. [lf the facts had been as the prisoner, according to the findings of the jury, believed them to be, and had reasonable ground for believing them to be, he would have done no act which has ever been a criminal offence in
England; he would have done no act in respect of which any civil action could have ever been maintained against him; he would have done no act for which, if done in the absence of the father, and done with the continuing consent of the girl, the
father could have had any legal remedy. . . . Upon all the cases I think it is proved that there can be no conviction for crime in England in the absence of a criminal mind or mens rea. Then comes the question, what is the true meaning of the phrase.
I do not doubt that it exists where the prisoner knowingly does acts which would constitute a crime if the result were as he anticipated, but in which the result may not improbably end by bringing the offence within a more serious class of crime. As
if a man strikes with a dangerous weapon, with intent to do grievous bodily harm, and kills, the result makes the crime murder. The prisoner has run the risk. So, if a prisoner do the prohibited acts, without caring to consider what the truth is as to
facts — as if a prisoner were to abduct a girl under sixteen without caring to consider whether she was in truth under sixteen — he runs the risk. So if he without abduction defiles a girl who is in fact under ten years old, with a belief

pst

poi
that she is between ten and twelve. If the facts were as he believed he would be committing the lesser crime. Then he runs the risk of his crime resulting in the greater crime. It is clear that ignorance of the law does not excuse. It seems to me to
follow that the maxim as to mens rea applies whenever the facts which are present in the prisoner's mind, and which he has reasonable ground to believe, and does believe to be the facts, would, if true, make his acts no criminal offence at all. |
come to the conclusion that a mistake of facts, on reasonable grounds, to the extent that if the facts were as believed the acts of the prisoner would make him guilty of no criminal offence at all, is an excuse and that such excuse is implied in every
criminal charge and every criminal enactment in England.
NOTES AND QUESTIONS ON MISTAKES OF FACT

1. The rationale of Prince. Prince has long been considered a landmark in common-law mens rea analysis. The statute in Prince, like many criminal statutes that courts must interpret today, contained no mens rea terms, so the court
had to determine what mens rea applied and to which elements of the crime. In the framework that the Prince court adopts, what are the circumstances under which a mistake of fact can or cannot be a defense?

In Prince, the defendant claimed to have made a mistake in an especially sensitive area: The offense implicitly targeted sexual conduct, and the alleged mistake related to Annie Phillips's age. We might therefore think that the result
rests on a narrow ground — that a mistake, even when reasonable, should not be a defense when it relates to the age of a minor in a sexual offense. Is the court's opinion limited in that way, or is its analysis relevant to mistakes of fact more gener-
ally? Notice that near the end of its opinion the court states that “[t]he same principle” that precludes a defense for Prince also applies to mistakes of fact in offenses like burglary and assaulting a police officer. What is that principle?

2. The moral-wrong principle. The court in Prince insists that “[our] opinion gives full scope to the doctrine of mens rea.” But if the defendant made a reasonable mistake, how can it be said that he had any mens rea? Consider Peter
Brett, An Inquiry into Criminal Guilt 149 (1963):

[The opinion] of Bramwell, B. is to my mind clearly in accord with principle. It reflects the view that we learn our duties, not by studying the statute book, but by living in a community. A defense of mistake rests ultimately on

the defendant's being able to say that he has observed the community ethic, and this Prince could not do.

Professor Brett is an exception. Most of the academic commentary has been highly critical of Prince. Consider Graham Hughes's response to Peter Brett in Criminal Responsibility, 16 Stan. L. Rev. 470, 480-481 (1964):

[M)his appears as an appallingly dangerous position which comes close to giving the jury a discretion to create new crimes. In Prince what the accused was doing that he knew to be wrong was presumably to take away a

young girl from the possession of her parents without their consent. Let us vary the position slightly and assume that the charge is one
pai
316

of unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl under sixteen. The accused reasonably believed that the girl was over sixteen. Should he be convicted because he knew that he was fornicating and because fornication is wrong
according to the community ethic? In the first place this assumes that there is a clear community judgment about the wrongfulness of fornication, which is not so. . . . The truth is that there are many community ethics. . . .
Even though ethical attitudes owe much to culture and environment, there is enough room for individual divergence to make Professor Brett’s approach a slippery one.
But the more serious objection is that there seems no reason why the community ethic concerning some conduct, even though clear, should be relevant to a determination of whether other conduct is criminal. .. .
If fornication is not a crime in itself, as it is not in England, why should it become one when the defendant makes a reasonable mistake about the age of his partner?
3. The acoustic separation approach. Professor Meir Dan-Cohen offers a different interpretation of Prince. In Decision Rules and Conduct Rules: On Acoustic Separation in Criminal Law, 97 Harv. L. Rev. 625, 655 (1984), he uses
Prince as an example of how sometimes the same criminal statute may be taken as speaking to two audiences: the general public, to which it directs a conduct rule, and legal officials, to whom it directs a decision rule. The age limitation in Prince,
Professor Dan-Cohen argues, was part of the decision rule addressed to the court, a bright line to limit judicial discretion. The statute's conduct rule was an enactment of the moral norm against taking girls from their parents. It was as though
Parliament had enacted two statutes: One, addressed to the public, said don't take young girls from their parents; the other, addressed to officials, said don't prosecute or convict unless the girl is under 16. Professor Dan-Cohen defends the dis-
tinction between decision rules and conduct rules as follows:
[Cloncerns other than reinforcement of community morality motivate decision rules. Primary among such concerns is the need to shape, control, and constrain the power wielded by decisionmakers. To attain this aim, the
rules governing official decisionmaking must be characterized by a greater degree of precision and determinacy than can normally be expected of the community's moral precepts. Accordingly, whereas a conduct rule may
be fully coextensive with the relevant moral precept, the corresponding decision rule need not be. Instead, the decision rule should define, as clearly and precisely as possible, a range of punishable conduct that is unques-
tionably within the bounds of the community's relevant moral norm.
QUESTIONS: How can we tell whether the statute's age limitation is merely a decision rule, as Professor Dan-Cohen claims? From the distance of more than a century, it is hard to be sure what Parliament and the Prince court were thinking. But
notice the statement of Judge Brett in dissent: “If the facts had been as [Prince] believed them to be, . . . he would have done no act which has ever been a criminal offense in England.” If Parliament had really wanted to make it a crime to take any
young girl away from her parents, why wouldn't it have said so?
p.3ts
p.3t6
Consider the implications of Professor Dan-Cohen's approach for the nulla poena (legality) principle examined in Section B, pp. 190-233 supra. Even if he is correct about what the relevant conduct rule was in this instance, should
courts have the authority to decide which elements of a statutory offense establish only decision rules, not conduct rules, and therefore do not require proof of mens rea?
4, The lesser-crime principle. Judge Brett, while dissenting in Prince, nonetheless had no doubt that when a defendant knowingly commits a crime, “he runs the risk of his crime resulting in the greater crime.” In that situation, Judge
Brett agreed that the defendant cannot raise a mistake of fact as a defense. This “lesser-crime” principle is narrower than the majority's “moral-wrong” approach. But why should a mens rea for one crime justify a conviction for a different, more
serious crime? Recall the Cunningham case, p. 285 supra, where the court held that a defendant who was guilty of stealing a gas meter could not be convicted of the more serious offense of endangering Mrs. Wade, unless it was proved that he
was aware of that danger. Is Judge Brett's approach consistent with Cunningham?
Consider a variation on Prince. Suppose that someone named Thief had no interest in Annie Phillips but only wanted to steal her father’s horse and carriage, and drove it away without realizing that the girl was asleep in the back seat.
Could Thief be convicted of violating the “unmarried girl” statute at issue in Prince? The answer is no: Both Cunningham and Faulkner, p. 287 supra, (the latter decided just two years after Prince) hold that the lesser-crime principle cannot apply
in this situation. Thief's awareness (like Cunningham's and Faulkner's) would make him guilty of a different crime, not merely a lesser one. But if it makes sense to allow the defendant's claim of mistake in cases like Cunningham, Faulkner, and
the situation where Thief steals the horse and carriage, why shouldn't mistake be a defense to a housebreaking charge, when the defendant reasonably believed the building he entered was not being used as a house? Doesn't the lesser-crime
principle violate the bedrock requirement of proportionality, even when the nature of the “lesser crime” is similar to that of the more serious offense? Doesn't the lesser-crime principle give prosecutors too much power to dictate a defendant's sen-
tence because it gives them discretion whether to charge only the lesser offense or the one that carries higher penalties, even when the defendant's underlying fault is exactly the same?

5. The Model Penal Code. As in its approach to mens rea issues generally, the MPC sets aside much of the traditional common-law framework. In its place the Code aims for both analytic clarity and a substantive focus on subjective
culpability. With respect to the first aim, the Code emphasizes that the mens rea elements of an offense and the rules governing mistake cannot be addressed as separate issues. Thus, claims about mistake must be resolved by determining
whether the mistake negates the mens rea required for the crime in question. With respect to the second aim, we have already seen (p. 299 supra) that the Code disfavors criminal liability in the absence of subjective fault (at least recklessness).
The MPC provisions dealing with mistake carry forward this preference for subjective culpability in addressing the degree of punishment. For lesser-crime situations (for example, where a person knowingly breaks into a building but is not aware of
the aggravating fact that the building is a residence), the MPC presumes that, in general, aggravating

p.3t6
p.3i7
circumstances should trigger more severe penalties only when the defendant was subjectively aware of a substantial, unjustifiable risk that the aggravating circumstances existed. The precise statutory formulation of these principles appears in
§§2.02(8), 2.04(1), and 2.04(2), which should be read carefully at this point. The thinking behind these provisions is explained as follows:
Model Penal Code and Commentaries
Comment to §2.04, at 269-274 (1985)

[M)he significance of ignorance . . . of fact... , or a mistake as to such matters, is determined by the mental state required for the commission of the offense involved. Thus ignorance or mistake is a defense when it negates the existence
of a state of mind that is essential to the commission of an offense, or when it establishes a state of mind that constitutes a defense under a rule of law relating to defenses. In other words, ignorance or mistake has only evidential import; it is sig-
nificant whenever it is logically relevant. ..

The critical legislative decisions, therefore, relate to the establishment of the culpability for specific offenses as they are defined in the criminal code. [If] no culpability level is explicitly stated in the definition of the offense, purpose,
knowledge or recklessness is required by Section 2.02(3) as to each material element. . ..

To put the matter as this subsection does is not to say anything that would not otherwise be true, even if no provision on the subject were made. As Glanville Williams has summarized the matter, . . . “It is impossible to assert that a
crime requiring intention or recklessness can be committed although the accused [labored] under a mistake negating the requisite intention or recklessness. Such an assertion carries its own refutation.” This obvious point has, however, sometimes
been overlooked in general formulations purporting to require that mistake be reasonable if it is to exculpate, without regard to the mode of culpability required to commit the crime. . . . There is no justification . . . for requiring that ignorance or mis-
take be reasonable if the crime or the element of the crime involved requires acting purposely or knowingly. . . . Generalizations about mistake of fact . . . or about honest and reasonable mistakes as relevant to general and specific intent crimes,
tend to obscure rather than clarify that simple point. . . .

Subsection (2) is addressed to a limited problem that may produce distortion in the law, namely where the defendant claims mistake but where the criminal offense still would have occurred had the situation been as the defendant
believed it to be. If the defense were denied altogether, an actor culpable in respect to one offense could be convicted of a much more serious offense. On the other hand, the defendant should not go free, for on either view — the facts as they oc-
curred or as the defendant believed them to be — a criminal offense was committed... .

[The solution] embraced in section 2.04(2), is to deny the defense in certain circumstances, but to limit the classification of the offense and the available dispositions of the defendant to those that would have been available upon con-
viction of the lesser offense. . . . The important point . . . is that the effective measure of the defendant's liability should be his culpability, not the actual consequences of his conduct.

p.si7
p38

NOTE ON CURRENT LAW

In many states, the MPC’s mistake proposals have influenced legislative revision or case law. But elsewhere, the contrasting approach to mens rea analysis reflected in the Prince case continues to dominate. The “moral-wrong” and
“lesser-crime” principles remain especially important in offenses involving minors, sexual behavior, and/or drugs, but they are not limited to those contexts.

In State v. Benniefield, 678 N.W.2d 42 (Minn. 2004), the defendant was convicted of possessing drugs within 300 feet of a school. The court held that the prosecution must prove the defendant's knowledge of being in possession of
drugs, but that defendants could be convicted of the more serious school-zone offense without any proof that they knew or should have known they were near a school. This is the most common approach, absent contrary statutory language such
as MPC §2.04(1). In Elonis v. United States, p. 294 supra, the Supreme Court gave this lesser-crime principle qualified endorsement, stating (575 U.S. at 736) that “[w]hen interpreting federal criminal statutes that are silent on the required mental
state, we read into the statute only the mens rea which is necessary to separate wrongful conduct from otherwise innocent conduct.”

Importantly, the Court approved this approach only for “federal criminal statutes that are silent on the required mental state.” A different situation arises when a statute identifies a required mens rea for some of its elements but is silent
on whether mens rea is required for aggravating circumstances. In this situation, the Court has not applied a consistent default rule. In Flores-Figueroa v. United States, 556 U.S. 646 (2009), the defendant was convicted under a statute that im-
poses a mandatory minimum sentence of two years’ imprisonment if a person, when committing certain crimes, “knowingly . . . uses . . . a means of identification of another person.” The defendant used a made-up social security number, unaware
that the invented number actually belonged to another person. Although the lesser-crime principle would make awareness of this fact a matter of strict liability, the Court held that the prosecution must prove that the defendant knew the fake iden-
tification belonged to someone else. But in Dean v. United States, 556 U.S. 558 (2009), decided the same Term as Flores-Figueroa, the Court upheld strict liability with respect to an aggravating fact that triggered a ten-year mandatory minimum
sentence.29

In Dean, unlike Flores-Figueroa, the aggravating circumstance was especially dangerous (discharge of a firearm), arguably supporting strict liability. But the consequences of strict liability were especially harsh (a ten-year mandatory
minimum), arguably supporting the opposite result. The Court has not identified dangerousness or any other distinct fact as the basis for determining when the lesser-crime

p38
p.319
principle will apply. Is strict liability with respect to aggravating circumstances more justifiable in some situations than in others? Or should that approach be followed (or rejected) across the board?

(@) Drug crimes. The lesser-crime issue is especially important in drug trafficking cases. Under federal law, knowing possession of a controlled substance with intent to distribute carries a maximum sentence of 20 years’ imprisonment,
with no mandatory minimum. But if the substance possessed is one of eight drugs deemed especially dangerous (including heroin and cocaine), the maximum sentence can increase to life imprisonment, with a mandatory minimum of five, ten, or
twenty years, depending on which drug was possessed and in what quantity. The question of what mens rea should be required in these circumstances produced a closely divided 6-5 decision in the Ninth Circuit. United States v. Collazzo, 984
F.3d 1308 (9th Cir. 2021) (en banc). The majority held that as long as a defendant knows that the thing possessed is a controlled substance, the maximum sentence and the mandatory minimum are governed by the nature and quantity of the drug
possessed, regardless of whether the defendant knew or even should have known those facts, which can multiply the sentence several times over. This is now the prevailing view in the federal courts. But in Collazzo, five dissenting judges argued
in accord with MPC §2.04 that failing to require proof of mens rea with respect to the seriousness of the offense violates the requirement that punishment be calibrated to the degree of fault, and that “Congress did not intend . . . to impose manda-
tory sentences of five, ten and twenty years, and maximum sentences of life, based on mistakes of fact and unintentional acts.” Id. at 1343 (Fletcher, J., dissenting).

Of course, we might think that dealers will almost always know what drug they are selling, but mere couriers often will not. Doesn't prosecutors’ control over the charges give them too much authority to resolve issues that should be
determined in an adversarial trial? Consider Stephen F. Smith, Proportional Mens Rea, 46 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 127, 128 (2009):

Creating implied mens rea requirements, where necessary to ensure proportional punishment, is not a judicial usurpation of the legislative function. Rather, it is to take seriously the role that courts play, under both constitu-

tional and substantive criminal law, to ensure that punishment “fits” the crime. Moreover, proportional mens rea would represent a needed counterweight to prosecutorial behavior whereas current doctrine does not. [MJens

rea doctrine aimed only at protecting moral blamelessness from punishment will largely be redundant of prosecutorial discretion. Proportionality of punishment, however, is a concern that [many prosecutors] routinely ignore.

Judicial mens rea selection, therefore, has a substantial contribution to make to the achievement of proportionality of punishment.

(b) Sexual abuse of minors. Sexual offenses involving minors raise the lesser-crime and lesser-wrong issues in a context where traditional, pre-Model Penal Code precedent was especially resistant to mistake-of-fact defenses.

Should courts continue to follow the Prince approach in this context today? Consider the material that follows.
p.319
320
People v. Olsen
Supreme Court of California
685 P.2d 52 (Cal. 1984)

Biro, C.J. Is a reasonable mistake as to the victim's age a defense to a charge of lewd or lascivious conduct with a child under the age of 14 years (Pen. Code, §288, subd. (a)")?

In early June 1981, Shawn M. was 13 years and 10 months old. At that time, her parents were entertaining out-of-town guests. Since one of the visitors was using Shawn's bedroom, Shawn suggested that she sleep in her family's
camper trailer which was parked in the driveway in front of the house. Shawn's parents agreed to this arrangement on the condition that she keep the windows shut and door locked... .

At trial, Shawn testified to the following events. On her third night in the trailer, she locked the door as instructed by her parents. She then fell asleep, but was . . . awakened by the sound of barking dogs and by Garcia, who had a knife
by her side and his hand over her mouth.2 Garcia called to appellant to come in, and appellant entered the trailer. Garcia told Shawn to let appellant “make love” to her, or he — Garcia — would stab her... . Appellant proceeded to have sexual in-
tercourse with Shawn. . . . While appellant was still [doing so], her father entered the trailer. Mr. M. grabbed appellant as he was trying to leave, and Garcia stabbed Mr. M. in order to free appellant.

Shawn testified that she knew Garcia “pretty well.” . . . She also testified that she was very good friends “off and on” with appellant and that during one three-month period she spent almost every day at appellant's house. At the time of
the incident, however, Shawn considered Garcia her boyfriend.’ Finally, Shawn admitted that she told both Garcia and appellant that she was over 16 years old. She also conceded that she looked as if she were over 16.

Garcia testified to quite a different set of events... . On. . . the day before the offense Shawn invited him to spend the night in the trailer with her so that they could have sex. He and Shawn engaged in sexual intercourse about four
times that evening. Shawn invited Garcia to come back the following night at midnight.

p.320
p32

The next night, after two unsuccessful attempts to enter the trailer, Garcia and appellant were told by Shawn to return at midnight. . .. Shawn, wearing only a pair of panties, opened the door and invited them in. She told them . . . that
she wanted “to make love” with appellant first. When Mr. M. entered the trailer, appellant was on top of Shawn. Garcia denied threatening Shawn with a knife, . . . breaking into the trailer or forcing her to have sex with them.

At the conclusion of the trial, the court found Garcia and appellant guilty of violating section 288, subdivision (a).Z In reaching its decision, the court rejected defense counsel's argument that a good faith belief as to the age of the victim
was a defense to the section 288 charge. Appellant was sentenced to the lower term of three years in state prison. This appeal followed. . . .

Twenty years ago, this court in People v. Hernandez[, 393 P.2d 673 (1964),] overruled established precedent, and held that an accused's good faith, reasonable belief that a victim was 18 years or more of age was a defense to a charge
of statutory rape. . ..

One Court of Appeal has declined to apply Hernandez in an analogous context. In People v. Lopez (1969) 77 Cal. Rptr. 59, the court refused to recognize a reasonable mistake of age defense to a charge of offering or furnishing mari-
juana to a minor. The court noted that the act of furnishing marijuana is criminal regardless of the age of the recipient and that furnishing marijuana to a minor simply yields a greater punishment than when the substance is furnished to an adult. “[A]
mistake of fact relating only to the gravity of an offense will not shield a deliberate offender from the full consequences of the wrong actually committed.”

. .. There exists a strong public policy to protect children of tender years. [SJection 288 was enacted for that very purpose. Furthermore, even the Hernandez court recognized this important policy when it made clear that it did not
contemplate applying the mistake of age defense in cases where the victim is of “tender years.” . ..

This conclusion is supported by the Legislature's enactment of section 1203.066. Subdivision (a)(3) of that statute renders certain individuals convicted of lewd or lascivious conduct who “honestly and reasonably believed the victim
was 14 years old or older” eligible for probation. The Legislature's enactment of section 1203.066, subdivision (a)(3) . . . strongly indicates that the Legislature did not intend such a defense to a section 288 charge. To recognize such a defense
would render section 1203.066, subdivision (a)(3) a nullity, since the question of probation for individuals who had entertained an honest and reasonable belief in the victim's age would never arise. . . .

ps2
p.922

Itis significant that a violation of section 288 carries a much harsher penalty than does unlawful sexual intercourse (§261.5), the crime involved in Hernandez. Section 261.5 carries a maximum punishment of one year in the county jail or
three years in state prison, while section 288 carries a maximum penalty of eight years in state prison. The different penalties for these two offenses further supports the view that there exists a strong public policy to protect children under 14. . ..
The legislative purpose of section 288 would not be served by recognizing a defense of reasonable mistake of age. . . . Accordingly, the judgment of conviction is affirmed.

GrooIN, J., concurring and dissenting. I agree that the enactment of Penal Code section 1203.066, which renders eligible for probation persons convicted of lewd or lascivious conduct who “honestly and reasonably believed the victim was 14
years old or older,” is persuasive evidence that in the eyes of the Legislature such a belief is not a defense to the crime. What troubles me is the notion that a person who acted with such belief, and is not otherwise shown to be guilty of any crim-
inal conduct,2 may not only be convicted but be sentenced to prison notwithstanding his eligibility for probation when it appears that his belief did not accord with reality. To me, that smacks of cruel or unusual punishment.

. .. [recognize . . . that our legal system includes certain “strict liability” crimes, but generally these are confined to the so-called “regulatory” or “public welfare” offenses. . . . (Morissette v. United States (1952) 342 U.S. 246). Moreover,
with respect to such crimes, . . . “penalties commonly are relatively small, and conviction does no grave damage to an offender's reputation.” (\d., at p. 256, emphasis added.)

Even in the regulatory context, “judicial and academic acceptance of liability without fault has not been enthusiastic.” (Jeffries & Stephen, Defenses, Presumptions, and Burden of Proof in the Criminal Law (1979) 88 Yale LJ. 1325,
1373.) And “with respect to traditional crimes, it is a widely accepted normative principle that conviction should not be had without proof of fault. At least when the offense carries serious sanctions and the stigma of official condemnation, liability
should be reserved for persons whose blameworthiness has been established” (Id., at 1373-1374).

. .. No doubt the standard of what is reasonable must be set relatively high in order to accomplish the legislative objective of protecting persons under 14 years of age. . . . Perhaps it is not enough that a person “looks” to be more than
14; perhaps there is a duty of reasonable inquiry besides. At some point, however, the belief becomes reasonable by any legitimate standard, so that one would say the

p.922
p.928
defendant is acting in a way which is no different from the way our society would expect a reasonable, careful, and law-abiding citizen to act. At that point, it seems to me, the imposition of criminal sanctions, particularly imprisonment, simply
cannot be tolerated in a civilized society. . ..
QUESTIONS ON OLSEN

What “moral wrongs” or “lesser crimes” did Olsen commit? In California, as in many states, the criminality of sexual behavior turns on three factors: the age of the victim, whether force was used, and whether the sexual contact included
intercourse. Under the California Penal Code, forcible nonconsensual sexual contact is always criminal, regardless of the victim's age and the nature of the sexual contact. For consensual behavior, intercourse is criminal whenever the victim is
under 18, but sexual contact short of intercourse is criminal only when the victim is under 14. According to Shawn's version of the events, of course, Olsen's conduct clearly met the requirements for forcible rape. But the trial judge acquitted Olsen
of all the charges involving the alleged use of force. The judge found beyond a reasonable doubt only the facts necessary to convict for consensual misconduct under §288(a). See p. 321 and case footnote 7 supra.

In upholding the conviction on that charge, the California Supreme Court relied on the “lesser-crime” principle, quoting from California cases like People v. Lopez, p. 321 supra. But was that principle really applicable on the facts of
Olsen? According to the trial judge's version of the events, did Olsen’s mistake relate only to the gravity of the offense? What was the lesser crime, if any, that Olsen knew (or should have known) he was committing?

An altemative basis for upholding Olsen's conviction might be the controversial “moral wrong” theory. But again, was that principle applicable on the facts of Olsen? What were the sexual acts Olsen knew (or should have known) he was
committing? In what sense were those acts morally wrong?
B (a Minor) v. Director of Public Prosecutions

House of Lords
[2000] 1 All E.R. 833
[B, a 15-year-old boy, repeatedly asked a 13-year-old girl to perform oral sex. The gil refused, and B was subsequently charged with inciting a child under the age of 14 to commit an act of “gross indecency,” contrary to §1(1) of the
Indecency with Children Act 1960.2 At trial, it was accepted that B had honestly believed that the girl was over 14 years old, but the trial justices ruled that his mistake could
p.928
p.924
not constitute a defense. As a result, B changed his plea from not guilty to guilty, preserving his right to appellate review. On appeal, one of the principal questions before the House of Lords was whether the holding of Regina v. Prince governed in
this case, and if so, whether the English courts should continue to adhere to it.]
Lop NicHoLLs: . . . As habitually happens with statutory offences, . . . Parliament defined the prohibited conduct solely in terms of the proscribed physical acts. Section 1(1) says nothing about the mental element. . . . In these circumstances the
starting point for a court is the established common law presumption that a mental element, traditionally labelled mens rea, is an essential ingredient unless Parliament has indicated a contrary intention either expressly or by necessary implica-
tion...

The existence of the presumption is beyond dispute, but in one respect the traditional formulation of the presumption calls for re-examination. [T]he presumption is expressed traditionally to the effect that an honest mistake by a
defendant does not avail him unless the mistake was made on reasonable grounds. . . . The “reasonable belief” school of thought held unchallenged sway for many years. But over the last quarter of a century there have been several important
cases where . . . the courts have placed new, or renewed, emphasis on the subjective nature of the mental element in criminal offences. The courts have rejected the reasonable belief approach and preferred the honest belief approach. . . . [See]
R. v. Williams, [1987] 3 All ER 411, 415:

The reasonableness or unreasonableness of the defendant's belief is material to the question of whether the belief was held by the defendant at all. If the belief was in fact held, its unreasonableness, so far as guilt or inno-

cence is concerned, is neither here nor there. It is irrelevant.

Considered as a matter of principle, the honest belief approach must be preferable. . . . To the extent that an overriding objective limit (“on reasonable grounds”) is introduced, the subjective element is displaced. . .. When that occurs
the defendant's “fault” lies exclusively in falling short of an objective standard. His crime lies in his negligence. A statute may so provide expressly or by necessary implication. But this can have no place in a common law principle, of general appli-
cation, which is concerned with the need for a mental element as an essential ingredient of a criminal offence.

[Aln age-related ingredient of a statutory offence stands on no different footing from any other ingredient. If a man genuinely believes that the girl with whom he is committing a grossly indecent act is over 14, he is not intending to com-
mit such an act with a girl under 14. Whether such an intention is an essential ingredient of the offence depends upon a proper construction of [the] Act... .

In §1(1) of the 1960 Act Parliament . . . created an entirely new criminal offence, in simple unadorned language. The offence so created is a serious offence. The more serious the offence, the greater is the weight to be attached to the
presumption [requiring proof of mens real, because the more severe is the punishment and the graver the stigma which accompany a conviction. Under §1 conviction originally attracted a punishment of up to two years’ imprisonment. This has

since been increased to a maximum of ten years’ imprisonment. . .. The conduct may be depraved by any acceptable standard, or it may be relatively innocuous behaviour in private between two young people. These factors reinforce, rather than
negative, the application of the presumption in this case... .
p.926
1.926

The purpose of the section is, of course, to protect children. . . . This factor in itself does not assist greatly. . .. There is no general agreement that strict liability is necessary to the enforcement of the law protecting children in sexual
matters. . . . Is there here a compellingly clear implication that Parliament should be taken to have intended that the ordinary common law requirement of a mental element should be excluded in respect of the age ingredient of this new offence? . ..
I cannot find, either in the statutory context or otherwise, any indication of sufficient cogency to displace the application of the common law presumption. In my view the necessary mental element regarding the age ingredient in §1 of the 1960 Act
is the absence of a genuine belief by the accused that the victim was 14 years of age or above. The burden of proof of this rests upon the prosecution in the usual way. If Parliament considers that the position should be otherwise regarding this se-
rious social problem, Parliament must itself confront the difficulties and express its will in clear terms. | would allow this appeal.

| add a final observation. [WJithout expressing a view on the correctness of the actual [decision in R. v. Prince], | must observe that some of the reasoning in R. v. Prince is at variance with the common law presumption regarding mens
rea as discussed above. To that extent, the reasoning must be regarded as unsound. . . . R. v. Prince, and later decisions based on it, must now be read in the light of [the present decision] on the nature and weight of the common law presumption.
Lorp STEYN: [O]ne can be confident that the reasoning of Bramwell, B. [in R. v. Prince], if tested in a modern court, would not be upheld. . . . In any event, | would reject the contention that there is a special rule of construction in respect of age-
based sexual offences. .. . R. v. Prince is out of line with the modern trend in criminal law which is that a defendant should be judged on the facts as he believes them to be. ..

[Appeal allowed.]

GARNETT v. STATE, 632 A.2d 797 (MD. 1993): At the time of the incident in question [Raymond Garnett] was 20 years old. He has an |.Q. of 52. [He] read on the third-grade level, did arithmetic on the 5th-grade level, and interacted with others
socially . . . at the level of someone 11 or 12 years of age.

IA] friend introduced Raymond to Erica Frazier, then aged 13; the two subsequently talked occasionally by telephone. On February 28, 1991, Raymond . . . approached the girl's house at about nine o'clock in the evening. Erica opened
her bedroom window . . . ; he testified that “she just told me to get a ladder and climb up her window.” The two talked, and later engaged in sexual intercourse. Raymond left at about 4:30 a.m. the following morning. On November 19, 1991, Erica
gave birth to a baby, of which Raymond is the biological father.

[Raymond was charged with second-degree rape under Md. Code, art. 27, §463.°] At trial, the defense twice proffered evidence to the effect that Erica herself

926

p.926
and her friends had previously told Raymond that she was 16 years old, and that he had acted with that belief. The trial court excluded such evidence as immaterial, explaining [that] “It is in the Court's opinion a strict liability offense.” The court
found Raymond guilty. It sentenced him to a term of five years in prison, suspended the sentence and imposed five years of probation, and ordered that he pay restitution to Erica and the Frazier family... .

Raymond asserts that the events of this case were inconsistent with the criminal sexual exploitation of a minor by an adult. . . . With an I.Q. of 52, Raymond functioned at approximately the same level as the 13-year-old Erica... . The
precise legal issue here rests on Raymond's unsuccessful efforts to introduce into evidence testimony that Erica and her friends had told him she was 16 years old, the age of consent to sexual relations, and that he believed them. Thus the trial
court did not permit him to raise a defense of reasonable mistake. . .

Statutory rape laws are often justified on the “lesser legal wrong” theory or the “moral wrong” theory; by such reasoning, the defendant acting without mens rea nonetheless deserves punishment for having committed a lesser crime,
fornication, or for having violated moral teachings that prohibit sex outside of marriage. [But] Maryland has no law against fornication. .. . Moreover, the criminalization of an act, performed without a guilty mind, deemed immoral by some members

of the community, rests uneasily on subjective and shifting norms. “[DJetermining precisely what the ‘community ethic’ actually is [is] not an easy task in a heterogeneous society in which our public pronouncements about morality often are not
synonymous with our private conduct.” LaFave & Scott, [Criminal Law (2d ed. 1986)] at 411...

We think it sufficiently clear, however, that Maryland's second degree rape statute . .. makes no allowance for a mistake-of-age defense. The plain language of §463 . . . and the legislative history of its creation lead to this conclu-
sion. . . . This interpretation is consistent with the traditional view of statutory rape as a strict liability crime designed to protect young persons from the dangers of sexual exploitation by adults, loss of chastity, physical injury, and, in the case of
girls, pregnancy. The majority of states retain statutes which impose strict liability for sexual acts with underage complainants. [E]ven among those states providing for a mistake-of-age defense in some instances, the defense often is not available
where the sex partner is 14 years old or less; the complaining witness in the instant case was only 13. . . . Any new provision introducing an element of mens rea . . . should properly result from an act of the Legislature itself, rather than judicial fiat.
Until then, defendants in extraordinary cases, like Raymond, will rely upon the tempering discretion of the trial court at sentencing.

BELL, J., dissenting: . . . To hold, as a matter of law, that section 463(a)(3) does not require the State to prove that a defendant possessed the necessary mental state . . . or that the defendant may not litigate that issue in defense, “offends a
principle of justice so rooted in the traditions of conscience of our people as to be ranked as fundamental.” . . . So interpreted, section 463(a)(3) not only destroys absolutely the concept of fault, but it renders meaningless, in the statutory rape con-
text, the presumption of innocence and the right to due process.
1.926
p.927
NOTE ON STATUTORY RAPE

In statutory rape prosecutions, the traditional insistence on imposing strict liability for mistakes about age has eroded to some extent. Either by statute or judicial decision, roughly a third of the states now permit a defense of mistake at
least under some circumstances — typically when the relevant age of consent is greater than 14 or when the two parties are close in age. But even in those situations, nearly all states that allow the defense do so only when the mistake is reason-
able. And about two-thirds of the states, like Maryland, continue to deny a mistake defense under any circumstances. See Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses, Tentative Draft No., at 403-406 (May 4, 2021); Catherine Carpen-
ter, On Statutory Rape, Strict Liability, and the Public Welfare Offense Model, 53 Am. U. L. Rev. 313, 385-391 (2003). Thus, the Prince case, now repudiated in England, continues to exert a powerful influence on American law.

One American court, in accord with Judge Bell's reasoning in Garnett, supra, has held strict liability in statutory rape to be unconstitutional. See State v. Guest, 583 P.2d 836 (Alaska 1978). But that remains an isolated holding. Virtually
all American courts, even when they express discomfort with strict liability in statutory rape, continue to uphold its constitutionality. See, e.g., State v. Holloway, 916 N.W.2d 338 (Minn. 2018) (upholding statute that does not allow a defense for
reasonable mistake when the defendant is more than ten years older than the victim); State v. Jadowski, 680 N.W.2d 810 (Wis. 2004) (upholding strict liability even when statute does not require an age gap); Owens v. State, 724 A.2d 43 (Md. 1999)
(same). In Owens, the court said (id. at 53, 55) that “[{]he state's overwhelming interest in protecting children from these risks outweighs any interest that the individual may have in engaging in sexual relations with children near the age of consent”
and that “by disallowing a mistake-of-age defense, the state avoids the risk that the inevitably emotional statutory rape trial will focus unjustifiably on the child's appearance and level of maturity.”

This approach predominates even though about a third of the states (16 by one recent count) impose liability even when the defendant is just as young as the victim. See Leslie Y. Garfield Tenzer, #MeToo, Statutory Rape Laws, and
the Persistence of Gender Stereotypes, 2019 Utah L. Rev. 117. Typically, these statutes are worded in gender-neutral terms, but they leave prosecutors free to pick which of the young people to treat as the victim of the other. Predictably, gender
stereotypes prevail, shaping the exercise of prosecutorial charging discretion. Professor Tenzer argues that age-gap requirements are essential to push back against invidious patterns of enforcement and persistent assumptions that women and
girls are “the ‘weaker’ sex.” Id. at 150-151.

Strict liability remains prevalent even though the punishment for statutory rape can be severe and sometimes mandatory, irrespective of the underlying facts. In Maryland, the offense carries a penalty of up to 20 years’ imprisonment.27
In Wisconsin, sexual intercourse or sexual contact with a minor is punishable by up to 40

p.927
p.928

years’ imprisonment if the minor is under 16 and by up to 60 years’ imprisonment if the minor is under 13.22 In Georgia, statutory rape of a minor under 16 carries a maximum sentence of 20 years, with a mandatory minimum of imprisonment of at
least 10 years if the perpetrator is 21 or older.22
The MPC has always rejected this approach, and its recently revised provisions go even further in requiring subjective mens rea. The 1962 Code allowed a defense for mistake as to age when criminality turned on a critical age greater
than ten, but required the defendant to prove that the mistake was reasonable.42 The MPC’s revised Article 213, approved by the American Law Institute in 2021, permits a mistake-of-age defense for sexual offenses on essentially the same basis
as any other mistake of fact: It prohibits acts of sexual penetration with a person younger than 16, but only when the actor is more than five years older and recklessly disregards the risk that the other person is under 16.4.
In many jurisdictions, the ability of sentencing courts to mitigate the harsh impact of a statutory rape conviction, when the defendant is morally innocent, is undercut not only by mandatory minimum penalties, but also by laws requiring
registration and community notification for people convicted of any of a broad list of sexual offenses, usually including statutory rape. As Professor Carpenter notes, supra, at 376:
Whether it carries significant prison time or minimal jail time, conviction of statutory rape in most jurisdictions bears the public equivalent of the “scarlet letter” — the requirement that [those convicted], after serving their
sentences, must register with law enforcement officials. Further, in most states, [statutes] require officials to notify members of the community of the [registrant's location. Whatever the underlying basis for the statutory rape
conviction — intentional exploitation of a young child, or strict liability in the face of a reasonable mistake — all who are convicted in the vast majority of jurisdictions are subject to [these] registration laws. . .
QUESTION: Is it fair — or even rational — to include individuals like Olsen and Garnett on a registry of supposedly dangerous sexual predators? We might think that if statutory rape defendants who lack mens rea can be sentenced to prison, it is
no worse to subject them to mandatory registration and community notification laws. The complication is that after release from prison, the person who was
p.928
p.929
convicted of a sexual offense typically must remain on a registry for several decades, often for life, with potentially devastating impact on the ability to pursue higher education, get a job, or find decent housing. See Model Penal Code: Sexual
Assault and Related Offenses, supra, at 487-488, 533, 577-578, 592-598. For these and other reasons, the American Law Institute, in revising the MPC, disapproved the use of sex-offense registries for age-based sexual offenses like statutory
rape, except in cases involving either incest or a victim younger than 12 and a perpetrator who was at least 21 at the time of the offense. Id. at 541.
d. Strict Liability
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
In treating mistake of fact in the preceding section, we encountered cases of strict liability, that is, cases where liability was imposed without any demonstrated culpability, not even negligence, with respect to at least one of the material
elements of the offense. In all such cases we considered so far, however, courts considered it essential that there was at least some mens rea in a general sense — that is, some legal or moral fault. In this section, we consider a more extreme form
of strict liability, in which the defendant neither knew nor had any reason to know that anything about his behavior was legally or even morally wrong. We will examine the main problems posed by this form of strict liability — how and why it came
to be relied on by legislators as a regulatory device; the role of courts in affecting the extent of strict liability through their authority to interpret statutes; what the virtues and vices of strict liability are; and how far it can be squared with the require-
ments of just punishment.
UNITED STATES v. BALINT, 258 U.S. 250 (1922): [Defendants were indicted for violating the Narcotic Act of 1914 by selling derivatives of opium and coca leaves without the order form required by the Act.2 The crime was punishable by up to five
years in prison. Defendants argued that the indictment was defective for failing to charge that they knew they were selling prohibited drugs. The Supreme Court held that proof of such knowledge was not required by the statute, stating:]
While the general rule at common law was that the scienter was a necessary element in the indictment and proof of every crime, and this was followed in regard to statutory crimes even where the statutory definition did not in terms
include it, there has been a modification of this view in respect to prosecutions under statutes the purpose of which would be obstructed by such a requirement. It is a question of legislative intent. . ..[I]n the prohibition or punishment of particular

acts, the State may in the maintenance of a public policy provide “that he who shall do them shall do them at his peril and will not be heard to plead in defense good faith or ignorance.” Many instances of this are to be found in regulatory measures
in the

p.329

390
exercise of what is called the police power where the emphasis of the statute is evidently upon achievement of some social betterment rather than the punishment of the crimes as in cases of mala in se. . . . [The Act's] manifest purpose is to require
every person dealing in drugs to ascertain at his peril whether that which he sells comes within the inhibition of the statute, and if he sells the inhibited drug in ignorance of its character, to penalize him. Congress weighed the possible injustice of
subjecting an innocent seller to a penalty against the evil of exposing innocent purchasers to danger from the drug, and concluded that the latter was the result preferably to be avoided. Doubtless considerations as to the opportunity of the seller
to find out the fact and the difficulty of proof of knowledge contributed to this conclusion.
UNITED STATES v. DOTTERWEICH, 320 U.S. 277 (1943): [Buffalo Pharmacal Company was a corporation that bought drugs from manufacturers, repackaged them, and shipped them to physicians and others under its own labels, which contained
the manufacturers’ descriptions of the products. On two occasions the manufacturers’ labels, and hence the corporation's labels, were in error, and as a consequence the corporation and Dotterweich, its president and general manager, were
prosecuted for shipping misbranded or adulterated products in interstate commerce in violation of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. The jury acquitted the corporation but convicted Dotterweich, who was sentenced to a fine and proba-
tion for 60 days, although under the statute he could have been sentenced to imprisonment for a year. The Supreme Court affirmed the conviction, holding that the statute required no mens rea at all with respect to whether those charged knew or
should have known the shipment was mislabeled. Justice Felix Frankfurter, writing for the Court, observed:]

The Food and Drugs Act of 1906 was an exertion by Congress of its power to keep impure and adulterated food and drugs out of the channels of commerce. By the Act of 1938, Congress extended the range of its control over illicit
and noxious articles and stiffened the penalties for disobedience. The purposes of this legislation thus touch phases of the lives and health of people which, in the circumstances of modern industrialism, are largely beyond self-protection. Regard
for these purposes should infuse construction of the legislation if it is to be treated as a working instrument of government and not merely as a collection of English words. The prosecution to which Dotterweich was subjected is based on a now
familiar type of legislation whereby penalties serve as effective means of regulation. Such legislation dispenses with the conventional requirement for criminal conduct — awareness of some wrongdoing. In the interest of the larger good it puts the
burden of acting at hazard upon a person otherwise innocent but standing in responsible relation to a public danger. United States v. Balint, 258 U.S. 250... .

Hardship there doubtless may be under a statute which thus penalizes the transaction though consciousness of wrongdoing be totally wanting. Balancing relative hardships, Congress has preferred to place it upon those who have at
least

390
331
the opportunity of informing themselves of the existence of conditions imposed for the protection of consumers before sharing in illicit commerce, rather than to throw the hazard on the innocent public who are wholly helpless.
Morissette v. United States
Supreme Court of the United States
342 U.S. 246 (1952)

Justice JACKSON delivered the opinion of the Court.

[Morissette, a junk dealer, openly entered an Air Force practice bombing range and took spent bomb casings that had been lying about for years exposed to the weather and rusting away. He flattened them out and sold them at a city
junk market at a profit of $84. He was indicted and convicted of violating 18 U.S.C. §641, which made it a crime to “knowingly convert” government property.? The defendant admittedly knew that what he had taken were Air Force bomb casings,

and there was therefore no question that the defendant had “knowingly convert[ed]” to his own use property that previously did not belong to him. His defense was that he honestly believed that the casings had been abandoned by the Air Force
and that he was therefore violating no one’s rights in taking them. The trial judge rejected Morissette's defense and instructed the jury that “[t]he question on intent is whether or not he intended to take the property.” The court of appeals affirmed,
ruling that the statute created several separate offenses, including stealing and knowing conversion. While the crime of stealing traditionally has required an intent to take another's property, in violation of the owner's rights, the court of appeals
held that knowing conversion did not include an element of intent to violate the rights of another, because no such intent was expressly required by the statute. In other words, the court of appeals assumed that Congress meant the term “know-
ingly convert” to carry its conventional tort law meaning — simply an intentional exercise of dominion over property that is not one’s own. The Supreme Court reversed, concluding that the defendant must be proven to have known the facts that
made the conversion wrongful, that is, that the property had not been abandoned by its owner.]

The contention that an injury can amount to a crime only when inflicted by intention is no provincial or transient notion. It is as universal and persistent in mature systems of law as belief in freedom of the human will and a consequent
ability and duty of the normal individual to choose between good and evil. A relation between some mental element and punishment for a harmful act is almost

p.331

p. 392
as instinctive as the child's familiar exculpatory “But | didn’t mean to,” and has afforded the rational basis for a tardy and unfinished substitution of deterrence and reformation in place of retaliation and vengeance as the motivation for public
prosecution. ...

Crime, as a compound concept, generally constituted only from concurrence of an evil-meaning mind with an evil-doing hand, was congenial to an intense individualism and took deep and early root in American soil. As the states
codified the common law of crimes, even if their enactments were silent on the subject, their courts assumed that the omission did not signify disapproval of the principle but merely recognized that intent was so inherent in the idea of the offense
that it required no statutory affirmation. . ..

However, the Balint and Behrman » offenses belong to a category of another character, with very different antecedents and origins. The crimes there involved depend on no mental element but consist only of forbidden acts or omis-
sions. This, while not expressed by the Court, is made clear from examination of a century-old but accelerating tendency, discernible both here and in England, to calll into existence new duties and crimes which disregard any ingredient of intent.
The industrial revolution multiplied the number of workmen exposed to injury from increasingly powerful and complex mechanisms, driven by freshly discovered sources of energy, requiring higher precautions by employers. Traffic of velocities,
volumes and varieties unheard of, came to subject the wayfarer to intolerable casualty risks if owners and drivers were not to observe new cares and uniformities of conduct. Congestion of cities and crowding of quarters called for health and wel-
fare regulations undreamed of in simpler times. Wide distribution of goods became an instrument of wide distribution of harm when those who dispersed food, drink, drugs, and even securities, did not comply with reasonable standards of quality,
integrity, disclosure and care. Such dangers have engendered increasingly numerous and detailed regulations which heighten the duties of those in control of particular industries, trades, properties or activities that affect public health, safety or
welfare.22

While many of these duties are sanctioned by a more strict civil liability, lawmakers, whether wisely or not, have sought to make such regulations more effective by invoking criminal sanctions to be applied by the familiar technique of
criminal prosecutions and convictions. This has confronted the courts with a multitude of prosecutions, based on statutes or administrative regulations, for what have been aptly called “public welfare offenses.” . . . Many of these offenses... are
in the nature of neglect where the law requires care, or inaction where it imposes a duty.

p. 392

p. 339
Many violations of such regulations result in no direct or immediate injury to person or property but merely create the danger or probability of it which the law seeks to minimize. [T]heir occurrence impairs the efficiency of controls deemed essential
to the social order as presently constituted. In this respect, whatever the intent of the violator, the injury is the same, and the consequences are injurious or not according to fortuity. Hence, legislation applicable to such offenses, as a matter of
policy, does not specify intent as a necessary element. The accused, if he does not will the violation, usually is in a position to prevent it with no more care than society might reasonably expect . . . from one who assumed his responsibilities. Also,
penalties commonly are relatively small, and conviction does no grave damage to an offender's reputation. Under such considerations, courts have turned to construing statutes and regulations which make no mention of intent as dispensing with
it and holding that the guilty act alone makes out the crime.° This has not, however, been without expressions of misgiving. . . .

After the turn of the Century . . . New York enacted numerous and novel regulations of tenement houses, sanctioned by money penalties. Landlords contended that a guilty intent was essential to establish a violation. Judge Cardozo
wrote the answer:

The defendant asks us to test the meaning of this statute by standards applicable to statutes that govern infamous crimes. The analogy, however, is deceptive. The element of conscious wrongdoing, the guilty mind accom-

panying the guilty act, is associated with a concept of crimes that are punished as infamous. Even there, it is not an invariable element. But in the prosecution of minor offenses there is a wider range of practice and of power.

Prosecutions for petty penalties have always constituted in our law a class by themselves. That is true, though the prosecution is criminal in form.

Tenement House Dept. v. McDevitt, 109 N.E. 88, 90, (1915)... .

Thus, for diverse but reconcilable reasons, state courts converged on the same result, discontinuing inquiry into intent in a limited class of offenses against such statutory regulations. .. .

339
p. 334

Before long, similar questions growing out of federal legislation reached this Court. Its judgments were in harmony with this consensus of state judicial opinion, the existence of which may have led the Court to overlook the need for full
exposition of their rationale in the context of federal law... .

Neither this Court nor, so far as we are aware, any other has . . . set forth comprehensive criteria for distinguishing between crimes that require a mental element and crimes that do not. We attempt no closed definition, for the law on the
subject is neither settled nor static. The conclusion reached in the Balint and Behrman Cases has our approval . . . for the circumstances to which it was there applied. A quite different question here is whether we will expand the doctrine of crimes
without intent to include those charged here.

Stealing, larceny, and its variants and equivalents, were among the earliest offenses known to the law that existed before legislation; they are invasions of rights of property which stir a sense of insecurity in the whole community and
arouse public demand for retribution, the penalty is high and, when a sufficient amount is involved, the infamy is that of a felony, which, says Maitland, is “. ..as bad a word as you can give to man or thing.” State courts of last resort, on whom fall
the heaviest burden of interpreting criminal law in this country, have consistently retained the requirement of intent in larceny-type offenses. . ..

Congress, therefore, omitted any express prescription of criminal intent from the enactment before us in the light of an unbroken course of judicial decision in all [states] holding intent inherent in this class of offense, even when not
expressed in a statute. Congressional silence as to mental elements in an Act merely adopting into federal statutory law a concept of crime already so well defined in common law and statutory interpretation by the states may warrant quite con-
trary inferences than the same silence in creating an offense new to general law, for whose definition the courts have no guidance except the Act. Because the offenses before this Court in the Balint and Behrman Cases were of this latter class, we
cannot accept them as authority for eliminating intent from offenses incorporated from the common law. . . .

The Government asks us by a feat of construction radically to change the weights and balances in the scales of justice. The purpose and obvious effect of doing away with the requirement of a guilty intent is to ease the prosecution's
path to conviction, to strip the defendant of such benefit as he derived at common law from innocence of evil purpose, and to circumscribe the freedom heretofore allowed juries. Such a manifest impairment of the immunities of the individual
should not be extended to common-law crimes on judicial initiative. ... We hold that the mere omission from §641 of any mention of intent will not be construed as eliminating that element from the crimes denounced. .. .

Of course, the jury, considering Morissette’s awareness that these casings were on government property, his failure to seek any permission for their removal and his self-interest as a witness, might have disbelieved his profession
of innocent intent and concluded that his assertion of a belief that the casings were abandoned was an after-thought. Had the jury convicted on proper instructions it would be the end of the matter. But juries are not bound by what seems in-
escapable logic to judges. They might have concluded that the heaps of spent casings left in the hinterland to rust away presented an appearance of unwanted and abandoned junk,

334
p. 395

and that lack of any conscious deprivation of property or intentional injury was indicated by Morissette’s good character, the openness of the taking, crushing and transporting of the casings, and the candor with which it was all admitted. They
might have refused to brand Morissette as a thief. Had they done so, that too would have been the end of the matter.

Reversed.

Staples v. United States
Supreme Court of the United States
511 U.S. 600 (1994)

Justice THomas delivered the opinion of the Court.

[Defendant was charged with violating the National Firearms Act, which makes possession of an unregistered firearm punishable by up to ten years in prison. The rifle found in his possession met the Act's definition of a firearm — a
weapon capable of automatically firing more than one shot with a single pull of the trigger. The military-style rifle originally had a metal piece that precluded automatic firing, but at some time it had been filed down. Defendant testified that the rifle
never fired automatically in his possession and that he didn’t know it was capable of doing so. He sought an instruction that the government had to prove that he “knew that the gun would fire fully automatically.” This was refused, and the jury con-
victed. On appeal, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed his conviction, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.)

Whether or not §5861(d) requires proof that a defendant knew of the characteristics of his weapon that made it a “firearm” under the Act is a question of statutory construction. . . . Section 5861(d) is silent concerning the mens rea
required for a violation. It states simply that “[ijt shall be unlawful for any person . . . to receive or possess a firearm which is not registered to him in the National Firearms Registration and Transfer Record.” Nevertheless, silence on this point by
itself does not necessarily suggest that Congress intended to dispense with a conventional mens rea element, which would require that the defendant know the facts that make his conduct illegal. .. . On the contrary, we must construe the statute
in light of the background rules of the common law, in which the requirement of some mens rea for a crime is firmly embedded... .

Relying on the strength of the traditional rule, we have stated that offenses that require no mens rea generally are disfavored, and have suggested that some indication of congressional intent, express or implied, is required to dispense
with mens rea as an element of a crime.

...[l]n the Government's view, this case fits in a line of precedent concerning what we have termed “public welfare” or “regulatory” offenses, in which we have understood Congress to impose a form of strict criminal liability through
statutes that do not require the defendant to know the facts that make his conduct illegal. In construing such statutes, we have inferred from silence that Congress did not intend to require proof of mens rea to establish an offense. . . .

Typically, our cases recognizing such offenses involve statutes that regulate potentially harmful or injurious items. . . . In such situations, we have reasoned that

395
396
as long as a defendant knows that he is dealing with a dangerous device of a character that places him “in responsible relation to a public danger,” [United States v.] Dotterweich, [320 U.S. 277] at 281, he should be alerted to the probability of strict
regulation, and we have assumed that in such cases Congress intended to place the burden on the defendant to “ascertain at his peril whether [his conduct] comes within the inhibition of the statute.” [United States v.] Balint, [258 U.S. 250] at 254.

[T]he Government argues that §5861(d) defines precisely the sort of regulatory offense described in Balint. In this view, all guns, whether or not they are statutory “firearms,” are dangerous devices that put gun owners on notice that
they must determine at their hazard whether their weapons come within the scope of the Act.

[T]he Government seeks support for its position from our decision in United States v. Freed, 401 U.S. 601 (1971), which involved a prosecution for possession of unregistered grenades under §5861(d). The defendant knew that the items
in his possession were grenades, and we concluded that §5861(d) did not require the Government to prove the defendant also knew that the grenades were unregistered. [O]ur analysis in Freed likening the Act to the public welfare statute in Balint
rested entirely on the assumption that the defendant knew that he was dealing with hand grenades — .. . a particularly dangerous type of weapon (one within the statutory definition of a “firearm”), possession of which was not entirely “innocent”
in and of itself... .

In glossing over the distinction between grenades and guns, the Government ignores the particular care we have taken to avoid construing a statute to dispense with mens rea where doing so would “criminalize a broad range of appar-
ently innocent conduct.” Liparota [v. United States], 471 U.S. [419] at 426 (1985).

[M)here is a long tradition of widespread lawful gun ownership by private individuals in this country. Such a tradition did not apply to the possession of hand grenades in Freed or to the selling of dangerous drugs that we considered in
Balint. ... Roughly 50 per cent of American homes contain at least one firearm of some sort, and in the vast majority of States, buying a shotgun or rifle is a simple transaction that would not alert a person to regulation any more than would buy-
ing acar....

We concur in the Fifth Circuit's conclusion [in an earlier case] on this point: “It is unthinkable to us that Congress intended to subject such law-abiding, well-intentioned citizens to a possible ten-year term of imprisonment if . .. what
they genuinely and reasonably believed was a conventional semiautomatic [weapon] turns out to have worn down into or been secretly modified to be a fully automatic weapon.” As we noted in Morissette, the “purpose and obvious effect of doing
away with the requirement of a guilty intent is to ease the prosecution's path to conviction.” We are reluctant to impute that purpose to Congress where, as here, it would mean easing the path to convicting persons whose conduct would not even
alert them to the probability of strict regulation in the form of a statute such as §5861(d).

The potentially harsh penalty attached to violation of §5861(d) — up to 10 years’ imprisonment — confirms our reading of the Act. . . . [Punishing a violation as a felony is simply incompatible with the theory of the public welfare offense.
In this view, absent a clear statement from Congress that mens rea is not required, we should not apply the public welfare offense rationale to interpret any statute defining a felony offense as dispensing with mens rea.

[Reversed and remanded.]

1.396
397
PROBLEMS
1. Distributing child pornography. United States v. X-Citement Video, Inc., 51 U.S. 64 (1994), involved a defendant's conviction for violating 18 U.S.C. §2252, which provides:
Any person who...
(1) knowingly transports or ships in interstate or foreign commerce including by computer or mails, . .. any visual depiction, if...
(A) the producing of such visual depiction involves the use of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct; and
(8) such visual depiction is of such conduct; [or]
(2) knowingly receives, or distributes, any visual depiction that . .. has been shipped in interstate or foreign commerce, if. . .
(A) the producing of such visual depiction involves the use of a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct; and
(8) such visual depiction is of such conduct; .. .
shall be punished [by up to ten years’ imprisonment].

Should conviction require proof that the defendant knew that the person shown in the visual depiction was a minor, or only that he knew that the thing he shipped or received was a “visual depiction”? In other words, how far down the
sentence does the word “knowingly” travel? How do prior precedents bear on the analysis of this question?

Notice that, unlike the statutes in Balint and Staples, §2252 is not entirely silent on the question of mens rea: It requires that the acts of shipping or receiving be done knowingly. But it is silent as to the mens rea required for the key
element that determines whether the conduct is criminal — the age of the person depicted. The statute is therefore similar to that in Morissette, where the statute required a knowing conversion but was silent as to the mens rea required with re-

spect to ownership of the property converted. Even with mens rea language in the statute, therefore, precedents on the reach of the “public welfare” concept were applicable in determining whether to construe the statute to require knowledge that
the person depicted was a minor. Is §2252 a “public welfare” offense?

In an opinion by Chief Justice Rehnquist, the Court set aside First Amendment issues and approached the question as one of ordinary mens rea analysis.‘2 The Court acknowledged that under “the most natural grammatical reading, . ..
the term ‘knowingly’ would modify only the surrounding verbs [and] would not modify the elements of the minority of the performers, or the sexually explicit nature

p.397

398
of the material.” But, the Court continued, “we do not think this is the end of the matter, both because of anomalies which result from this construction, and because of the [presumption] that some form of scienter is to be implied in a criminal
statute even if not expressed. . . . Morissette, reinforced by Staples, instructs that the presumption in favor of a scienter requirement should apply to each of the statutory elements that criminalize otherwise innocent conduct.” (id. at 68-69, 72). The
Court therefore construed the statute to require proof, not just that the defendant had shipped or received something he knew to be a visual depiction, but also that he knew that the depiction involved a minor engaged in sexually explicit acts. Jus-
tice Stevens, concurring, wrote (Id. at 79-80) that “to give the statute its most grammatically correct reading . . . would be ridiculous.”

Justice Scalia dissented, and he did not think that the Court's result followed from cases like Morissette and Staples. He asserted that interpreting the statute so that “knowingly” modified only the surrounding verbs was not simply
the “most natural grammatical reading [but] the only grammatical reading,” and he argued that the presumption in favor of a scienter requirement had never been applied “when the plain text of the statute says otherwise” (Id. at 81) (emphasis in
original).

Which approach is more faithful to the principles underlying Morissette and Staples? Which approach better captures the proper role of courts in statutory interpretation? See Eric A. Johnson, Does Criminal Law Matter? Thoughts on
Dean v. United States and Flores-Figueroa v. United States, 8 Ohio St. Lu. 123 (2010).

2. Producing child pornography. The statute involved in X-Citement Video, 18 U.S.C. §2252, focuses on the distribution of child pornography. Congress enacted a separate provision to address the production of this material (18
U.S.C. §2251):

Any person who . .. induces . . . or coerces any minor to engage in . . . any sexually explicit conduct for the purpose of producing any visual depiction of such conduct or for the purpose of transmitting a live visual depiction

of such conduct, shall be . . . imprisoned not less than 15 years nor more than 30 years. . ..

Unlike §2252, this provision contains no mens rea language.“ Should it be construed to require proof that a defendant knew (or recklessly disregarded the risk) that the person depicted was under age? On the one hand, activity of this
kind is (absent coercion) not currently illegal and is to some extent protected by the First Amendment — provided that it involves an adult performer, someone at least 18 years old. So isn’t proof of mens rea essential to separate lawful from illegal
activity that is severely punished? On the other hand, if the person depicted is a minor, the sexual conduct that the defendant induces can verge on, or actually involve, statutory rape. From that perspective, isn’t strict liability appropriate?

398
p. 399

In United States v. Ruggiero, 791 F.3d 1281 (11th Cir. 2015), the court upheld strict liability, stressing that (1) Congress required proof of knowledge in §2252 but omitted that requirement from §2251; (2) the common-law presumption in
favor of mens rea traditionally has not applied to statutory rape; and (3) because producers (unlike distributors prosecuted under §2252) deal with the minor in person, they have a fair opportunity to determine the minor’s age.

The production of child pornography and the grave abuses it entails prompt intense social concern and stringent penalties. Do these considerations support the case for strict liability? Or do they reinforce the need to prove defendants’
awareness of the facts that make their conduct illegal?

State v. Guminga

‘Supreme Court of Minnesota
395 N.W.2d 344 (Minn. 1986)

YerkA, J. [In the course of an undercover operation, two investigators entered Lindee’s Restaurant with a 17-year-old woman. All three ordered alcoholic beverages. The minor had never been in Lindee’s before, and the waitress did
not ask her age or request identification.] When the waitress returned with their orders, the minor paid for all the drinks. After confirming that the drink contained alcohol, the officers arrested the waitress for serving intoxicating liquor to a minor in
violation of Minn. Stat. §340.73 (1984) [a gross misdemeanor]. The owner of Lindee’s, defendant George Joseph Guminga, was subsequently charged with violation of section 340.73 pursuant to Minn. Stat. §340.941 (1984), which imposes vicari-
ous criminal liability on an employer whose employee serves intoxicating liquor to a minor. The state does not contend that Guminga was aware of or ratified the waitress’s actions.

Guminga moved to dismiss the charges on the ground that section 340.941 violates the due process clauses of the federal and state constitutions. [T]he court denied the motion to dismiss. . . . The certified question of law before this
court is as follows:

Whether Minn. Stat. §340.941, on its face, violates the defendant's right to due process of law under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and analogous provisions of the Constitution of the State of

Minnesota.

We find that the statute in question does violate the due process clauses of the Minnesota and the United States Constitutions and thus answer the question in the affirmative. . ..

Under Minn. Stat. §609.03 (1984), a defendant who commits a gross misdemeanor may be sentenced to “imprisonment for not more than one year or to payment of a fine of not more than $3,000 or both.” In addition, a defendant
convicted under section 340.941 may, at the discretion of the licensing authority, have its license suspended, revoked or be unable to obtain a new license. .. . Since this is not an appeal from a conviction, we do not yet know whether, if found
guilty, Guminga would be subjected to imprisonment, a suspended sentence, or a fine.

399
p. 340
Even if there is no prison sentence imposed, under the new sentencing guidelines, a gross misdemeanor conviction will affect his criminal history score were he to be convicted of a felony in the future. . ..

We find that criminal penalties based on vicarious liability under Minn. Stat. §340.941 are a violation of substantive due process and that only civil penalties would be constitutional. A due process analysis of a statute involves a bal-
ancing of the public interest protected against the intrusion on personal liberty while taking into account any alternative means by which to achieve the same end. . . . Section 340.941 serves the public interest by providing additional deterrence to
violation of the liquor laws. The private interests affected, however, include liberty, damage to reputation and other future disabilities arising from criminal prosecution for an act which Guminga did not commit or ratify. Not only could Guminga be
given a prison sentence or a suspended sentence, but, in the more likely event that he receives only a fine, his liberty could be affected by a longer presumptive sentence in a possible future felony conviction. Such an intrusion on personal liberty is
not justified by the public interest protected, especially when there are alternative means by which to achieve the same end, such as civil fines or license suspension, which do not entail the legal and social ramifications of a criminal conviction.2.. .

The dissent argues that vicarious liability is necessary as a deterrent so that an owner will impress upon employees that they should not sell to minors. However, it does not distinguish between an employer who vigorously lectures his
employees and one who does not. According to the dissent, each would be equally guilty. We believe it is a deterrent enough that the employee who sells to the minor can be charged under the statute and that the business is subject to fines or
suspension or revocation of license. . ..

We find that, in Minnesota, no one can be convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment for an act he did not commit, did not have knowledge of, or give expressed or implied consent to the commission thereof. The certified ques-
tion is thus answered in the affirmative. . . .

KeLLey, J. (dissenting): [l]mposition of vicarious liability and the threat of a short jail, not prison, sentence is reasonably related to the legislative purpose: enforcement of laws prohibiting liquor sales to minors. Without the deterrent of possible
p.340

p.3at
personal criminal responsibility and a sentence, the legislature could have rationally concluded that liquor establishment owners will be less likely to impress upon employees the need to require identification of age before serving liquor. Limiting
punishment to a fine allows bar owners to view their liability for violations as nothing more than an expense of doing business. The gravity of the problems associated with minors who consume alcoholic beverages justifies the importance by the
legislature of harsher punishment on those who help contribute to those problems. The state has the right to impose limited criminal vicarious liability on bar proprietors as a reasonable exchange for the state-granted privilege of a liquor license. . ..
NOTES ON VICARIOUS LIABILITY

1. Vicarious liability of employers as individuals. As we shall see in Chapter 7.C infra, corporations and other organizations are routinely held criminally liable for crimes committed by their employees within the scope of their em-
ployment. This type of entity liability, though controversial, is qualitatively different from imposing criminal liability on the employer as an individual. Guminga and the present Note deal only with the latter situation.

When possible sanctions are limited to fines, courts generally uphold convictions of individuals for the illegal conduct of their employees, even without proof of employer fault. See Annot., 89 A.L.R.3d 1256 §§15-18 (2021). But there is
disagreement about statutes that permit a sanction of imprisonment. Guminga holds vicarious liability impermissible under such a statute, even when imprisonment is not actually imposed. Compare State v. Beaudry, 365 N.W.2d 593 (Wis. 1985).
The defendant and her husband were sole shareholders of a corporation with a license to sell alcohol at the Village Green Tavern. The defendant was the designated agent for the corporate licensee. One night the tavern manager violated the terms
of the license by remaining open past closing time, against the instructions of the absent owners, for the sole purpose of entertaining his own friends. Nonetheless, the defendant was convicted on the basis of vicarious liability. The court upheld
the conviction, even though the statute authorized a 90-day jail sentence, on the ground that the penalty imposed was solely a $200 fine.

2. Vicarious liability of parents. A number of jurisdictions seek to hold parents vicariously liable for crimes committed by their minor children. State v. Akers, 400 A.2d 38 (N.H. 1979), involved a statute imposing criminal liability on
parents of minor children who drive off-highway vehicles on public highways. No evidence of parental culpability was required. The court struck down the statute, stating (id. at 40):

Without passing upon the validity of statutes that might seek to impose vicarious criminal liability on the part of an employer for acts of his employees, we have no hesitancy in holding that any attempt to impose such liability

on parents simply because they occupy the status of parents, without more, offends the due process clause of our State constitution.

QUESTIONS: On what principle can the court condemn vicarious criminal liability for parents “without passing upon” vicarious criminal liability for employers? What is the distinction between the two situations? If vicarious criminal liability is
p.3at
p.342
equally problematic for parents and employers, should it be permitted for both situations or for neither?

Many jurisdictions have enacted parental responsibility laws. See Jennifer M. Collins, Ethan J. Lieb & Dan Markel, Punishing Family Status, 88 B.U. L. Rev. 1327, 1338-1343 (2008). One of the broadest, in Oregon, imposes liability on the
parents of any juvenile who violates a curfew law, fails to attend school as required, or commits any crime. Or. Rev. Stat. Ann. §163.577(1), (4) (2020). The statute requires no showing that the parent knew about the violation or contributed to it, but
it affords an affirmative defense if the parent “took reasonable steps to control the conduct of the child. . ..”

Professor Amy Sepinwall points out that when crimes occur, parents, corporate officers, and others who are not at fault in any conventional sense sometimes feel nonetheless that they are “to blame” because of their relationship with
the perpetrator of the offense. Sepinwall, Faultless Guilt: Toward a Relationship-Based Account of Criminal Liability, 54 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 521 (2017). Drawing on these “moral emotional reactions,” id. at 557, Professor Sepinwall builds a contrarian
argument that in some cases these individuals can justifiably be punished on the basis of the “blame” that flows from those relationships, even when it does not amount to personal fault.

The prevailing justification for parental responsibility statutes, however, is not philosophical but pragmatic: controlling juvenile crime by giving parents a strong incentive to exercise oversight. Are there countervailing concerns? One
scholar, after examining police and prosecutorial practices in Oregon, concludes that such laws can lead to overly restrictive parenting and are likely to be “enforced disproportionately against poor, single parents.” Leslie Joan Harris, An Empirical
Study of Parental Responsibility Laws, 2006 Utah L. Rev. 5, 11.

Do such statutes violate basic principles of constitutional law and just punishment? Consider City of Maple Heights v. Ephraim, 898 N.E.2d 974 (Ohio Ct. App. 2008). A juvenile was involved in “fighting” and a variety of offenses resulting
from his flight to evade arrest. His mother was then charged with violating a municipal ordinance that imposes criminal penalties on the parent of any minor who commits any felony or misdemeanor. The appellate court struck down the ordinance,
stating (id. at 981):

Strict liability may . . . be imposed when the harm does not consist of a wrongful act, but of a failure to act at all. .. . In such cases the omission to act constitutes the actus reus. Vicarious liability, however, imputes the acts

of one person to another. [Such liability] “is a substantial departure from the ordinary rule that a principal is not answerable criminally for the acts of his agent without the principal's authorization, consent or knowledge . . .

” [because] guilt must be individual. ..

3. Liability based on personal omissions. Most parental responsibility laws technically avoid the problems of vicarious liability because they punish “contributing to delinquency” or “failure to supervise.” This framework means that
the parent is not convicted for the child's delinquent act as such but rather for the parent's own actus reus — the omission of failing to supervise when there was a duty to do so. Nonetheless, in practice these laws often treat failure to properly su-
pervise as a

p.342
matter that is established automatically by the child’s commission of a delinquent act. Is there a moral or constitutional problem here? See James Herbie Difonzi, Parental Responsibility for Juvenile Crime, 80 Or. L. Rev. 1 (2001).

4, What if the crucial act is personal but involuntary? If vicarious liability offends a basic principle of criminal responsibility, should a similar objection apply when the defendant commits the relevant act personally but not voluntar-
ily? The issue is particularly pertinent in strict liability offenses. Since such offenses do not require proof of mens rea, should they also escape the requirement of a voluntary actus reus? For example, suppose that a child in the passenger seat of a
car unforeseeably grabs the driver's arm, causing the car to swerve into the opposing lane of traffic, in violation of the traffic laws. The driver is not at fault, but since this is a strict liability offense, the absence of mens rea is irrelevant at trial. Is the
absence of a voluntary actus reus also irrelevant? Or are the reasons that arguably justify strict liability with regard to mistakes of fact inapplicable when the defendant has committed no act (as in the case of vicarious liability) or only an involuntary
act? For discussion, see Douglas Husak & Brian P. McLaughlin, Time Frames, Voluntary Acts, and Strict Liability, 12 Law & Phil. 95 (1993); Larry Alexander, Reconsidering the Relationship Among Voluntary Acts, Strict Liability, and Negligence in
Criminal Law, in Ellen Frankel Paul et al. eds., Crime, Culpability, and Remedy 84 (1990).

Regina v. City of Sault Ste. Marie
‘Supreme Court of Canada
85 D.L.R.3d 161 (1978)

Dickson, J. . .. Various arguments are advanced in justification of absolute liability in public welfare offences. Two predominate. Firstly, it is argued that the protection of social interests requires a high standard of care and attention on
the part of those who follow certain pursuits and such persons are more likely to be stimulated to maintain those standards if they know that ignorance or mistake will not excuse them. The removal of any possible loophole acts, it is said, as an
incentive to take precautionary measures beyond what would otherwise be taken. . . . The second main argument is one based on administrative efficiency. Having regard to both the difficulty of proving mental culpability and the number of petty
cases which daily come before the Courts, proof of fault is just too great a burden in time and money to place upon the prosecution. . . . In short, absolute liability, it is contended, is the most efficient and effective way of ensuring compliance with
minor regulatory legislation and the social ends to be achieved are of such importance as to override the unfortunate by-product of punishing those who may be free of moral turpitude. In further justification, it is urged that slight penalties are usu-
ally imposed and that conviction for breach of a public welfare offence does not carry the stigma associated with conviction for a criminal offense.

Arguments of greater force are advanced against absolute liability. The most telling is that it violates fundamental principles of penal liability. It also rests upon assumptions which have not been, and cannot be, empirically established.
There is no evidence that a higher standard of care results from absolute liability. If a person is already taking every reasonable precautionary measure, is

p.349

p.344
he likely to take additional measures, knowing that however much care he takes, it will not serve as a defence in the event of breach? If he has exercised care and skil, will conviction have a deterrent effect upon him or others? Will the injustice
of conviction lead to cynicism and disrespect for the law, on his part and on the part of others? . . . The argument that no stigma attaches does not withstand analysis, for the accused will have suffered loss of time, legal costs, exposure to the
processes of the criminal law at trial and, however one may downplay it, the opprobrium of conviction. It is not sufficient to say that the public interest is engaged. . . . In serious crimes, the public interest is [also] involved and [nevertheless] mens
rea must be proven. ..

The unfortunate tendency in many past cases has been to see the choice as between two stark alternatives: (i) full mens rea; or (ji) absolute liability. . . . There [is], however, . . . a middle position, fulfilling the goals of public welfare
offences while still not punishing the entirely blameless. [This approach] holds that where an offence does not require full mens rea, it is nevertheless a good defence for the defendant to prove that he was not negligent. [That] doctrine proceeds on
the assumption that the defendant could have avoided the prima facie offence through the exercise of reasonable care and he is given the opportunity of establishing, if he can, that he did in fact exercise such care. . . . This burden falls upon the
defendant as he is the only one who will generally have the means of proof. This would not seem unfair as the alternative is absolute liability which denies an accused any defence whatsoever. While the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defendant committed the prohibited act, the defendant must only establish on the balance of probabilities that he has a defence of reasonable care.

I conclude . .. that there are compelling grounds for the recognition of three categories of offences rather than the traditional two:

1. Offences in which mens rea, consisting of some positive state of mind such as intent, knowledge, or recklessness, must be proved by the prosecution. .. .

2. Offences in which there is no necessity for the prosecution to prove the existence of mens rea; the doing of the prohibited act prima facie imports the offence, leaving it open to the accused to avoid liability by proving that he took all reason-
able care. ...

3. Offences of absolute liability where it is not open to the accused to exculpate himself by showing that he was free of fault.

Offences which are criminal in the true sense fall in the first category. Public welfare offences would, prima facie, be in the second category. . . . An offence of this type would fall in the first category only if such words as “wilfully,” “with
intent,” “knowingly,” or “intentionally” are contained in the statutory provision creating the offence. . . . Offences of absolute liability would be those in respect of which the Legislature had made it clear that guilt would follow proof merely of the
proscribed act. The over-all regulatory pattern adopted by the Legislature, the subject-matter of the legislation, the importance of the penalty, and the precision of the language used will be primary considerations in determining whether the of-
fence falls into the third category.

344
p. 346
NOTES

1. Is strict liability unconstitutional? Ina subsequent decision, the Canadian Supreme Court held strict (“absolute”) liability unconstitutional, finding that imprisonment on that basis is not “in accordance with the precepts of funda-
mental justice” guaranteed by Section 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Reference Re Section 94(2) of the Motor Vehicle Act, 23 C.C.C.3d 289 (1985). It ruled that apart from “exceptional conditions, such as natural disasters, the
outbreak of war, epidemics and the like,” offenses involving imprisonment require the prosecution to prove mens rea. Id. at 313. Its reasons were essentially those given in Sault Ste. Marie.

Courts in the United States are largely unwilling to take that step. Balint and Dotterweich, pp. 329-330 supra, hold that strict liability is not per se unconstitutional, and American decisions generally accept its constitutionality, even in
cases that can lead to prison terms, for example in prosecutions for statutory rape, “public welfare” offenses, and a variety of other crimes. E.g., State v. Yishmael, 456 P.3d 1172 (Wash. 2020) (upholding strict liability for unauthorized practice of
law, a misdemeanor). Nonetheless, judicial discomfort with strict liability is evident in decisions that occasionally find strict liability unconstitutional or sustain it only on limited grounds. In State v. Genson, 2020 Kan. App. LEXIS 87, at *29-44 (2020),

the court upheld a strict liability conviction for failing to register under the Kansas Offender Registration Act. The offense was punishable as a felony, but the defendant was sentenced to probation, and the court sustained the conviction only after
balancing a variety of factors, with emphasis on “[whether] the offense carries a slight penalty; [whether] conviction does not lead to substantial stigma; and [whether] the statute regulates inherently dangerous or deleterious conduct.”

In State v. Moser, 884 N.W.2d 890 (Minn. 2017), the defendant was convicted of using the Internet to solicit a minor to engage in sexual activity, an offense punishable by up to three years’ imprisonment. At trial, the minor’s age was
treated as a matter of strict liability. The court held strict liability unconstitutional on these facts because, in contrast to prosecutions for statutory rape, “it is not reasonable to require a defendant in Moser's position, engaging in solicitation solely
over the Internet without any face-to-face contact, to verify the actual age of the person solicited.” Id. at 905.

On essentially the same issue, United States v. Tollefson, 367 F. Supp. 3d 865(E.D. Wis. 2019), reached the opposite result. The defendant was charged with using the Internet to solicit an underage girl to send him pictures of her
performing sex acts, in effect the production of child pornography in violation of 18 U.S.C. §2251, p. 338 supra. Tollefson argued that decisions upholding strict liability under §2251 assume an in-person encounter in which the defendant has an
opportunity to determine the minor's age, and that strict liability becomes unconstitutional as applied to Internet communication and “virtual sex,” where this can be impossible. The court held that “Tollefson's unique circumstance — that he con-
fronted his victim only online — does not set him meaningfully apart from the defendants in those cases, and does not confer upon him a fundamental right to be free from the burden of verifying his victim's age.” Id. at 877.

p.346

p. 346
QUESTIONS: Would prosecution of cases like this be unduly hampered if conviction required proof that the defendant was aware (or should have been aware) of a risk that the victim might be underage? Does the social interest in deterring this
especially harmful conduct justify potential unfairness to defendants? Or do severe sanctions in the absence of any demonstrated fault (recall that §2251 carries a mandatory minimum sentence of 15 years’ imprisonment) violate due process re-
quirements of fundamental fairness and the essential prerequisites of just punishment?

2. Amiddle ground? For a proposal to extend to all strict liability offenses an affirmative defense of the absence of blameworthy conduct, see Laurie L. Levenson, Good Faith Defenses: Reshaping Strict Liability Crimes, 78 Cornell L.
Rev. 401 (1993). In 2002, Florida amended its drug control statutes to provide that “knowledge of the illicit nature of a controlled substance is not an element of any offense under this chapter,” but lack of such knowledge was made an affirmative
defense on which the defendant would bear the burden of proof. Fla. Stat. §893.101 (2002). As a result, people convicted of delivering a package containing cocaine would face a sentence (depending on their criminal history) of either 15 years, 30
years, or life imprisonment, regardless of whether the prosecution could prove they knew or should have known the nature of the contents. After Shelton was convicted under this statute and sentenced to 18 years in prison, a federal court held the
statute unconstitutional. Shelton v. Secretary, Dept. of Corrections, 802 F. Supp. 2d 1289 (M.D. Fla. 2011). The court said (id. at 1300, 1302-1303, 1305):

No strict liability statute carrying penalties of [this] magnitude . . . has ever been upheld under federal law. . . . Where laws proscribe conduct that is neither inherently dangerous nor likely to be regulated, the Supreme Court

has consistently either invalidated them or construed them to require proof of mens rea in order to avoid criminalizing “a broad range of apparently innocent conduct.” . . .

[M)here is a long tradition throughout human existence of lawful delivery and transfer of containers that might contain substances . . . : carrying luggage on and off of public transportation; carrying bags in and out

of stores and buildings; . .. — the list extends ad infinitum. Under Florida's statute, that conduct is rendered immediately criminal if it turns out that the substance is a controlled substance, without regard to the deliverer’s

knowledge or intent.

In response to the argument that the statute's constitutionality was saved by allowing a defendant to raise lack of knowledge as an affirmative defense, the court stated (id. at 1307-1308):

[T]he State . .. cannot shift the burden of proof to a Defendant on an essential element of an offense. [To do so would] dispense with the fundamental precept underlying the American system of justice — the “presumption

of innocence.” . . . Florida's statute is not a “drug dealer beware” statute but a “citizen beware statute.” Consider the student in whose book bag a classmate hastily stashes his drugs to avoid imminent detection. The bag is

then given to another for safekeeping. Caught in the act, the hapless victim is guilty based upon the only two elements of the statute:

p.346
p.347

delivery . . . and the illicit nature of the substance. [At trial] he is presumed guilty because he is in fact guilty of the two elements. He must then prove his innocence. ...
Because [the statute] imposes harsh penalties, gravely besmirches an individual's reputation, and regulates and punishes otherwise innocuous conduct without proof of knowledge or other criminal intent, . . . it

violates the due process clause and . . . is unconstitutional on its face.2
NOTES ON THE ACADEMIC DEBATE

The great majority of academic writing has opposed strict liability,4 but some academics defend it.“ For perspectives on the issues, see A.P. Simester ed., Appraising Strict Liability (2005). Consider the following comments:
ARTHUR GOODHART, POSSESSION OF DRUGS AND ABSOLUTE LIABILITY, 84 L.Q. REV. 382, 385-386 (1968): [T]here are certain offences that have a serious effect on the public interest but which it is difficult to prove under the usual procedure.
[There is a] long-established saying that “it is better that ten guilty men should escape than that one innocent man should be convicted.” . ..On the other hand . . . in certain circumstances . . . the future harm that the ten guilty men who have been
acquitted may do, either by repeating their own offences or by encouraging others by showing how easy it is to avoid conviction, far exceeds any injury that the innocent man can suffer by his conviction. The question then becomes: Is it better that
ten young persons should be tempted to become drug addicts than that one innocent man should be convicted of being in possession of unauthorized drugs?
MARK KELMAN, STRICT LIABILITY: AN UNORTHODOX VIEW, in ENCYCLOPEDIA OF CRIME AND JUSTICE 1512, 1516-1517 (1983) *DH.LA. Hart’s argument that the defendant convicted of a strict-liability offense “could not have helped” commit-
ting the crime depends on the use of a rationally indefensible narrow time frame. [I]t is invariably the case that the actor could have avoided liability by taking earlier steps which were hardly impossible. . .. Its . .. only by constructing the underly-
ing material . . . with a very narrow time frame that the distinction between liability predicated on negligence, and strict liability, maintains its practical import in many critical situations.

p.347
p.348

An example is the familiar problem of “reasonable” (non-negligent) mistakes as to the victim's age in the statutory rape setting. Is one’s view of a “reasonable” belief to be ascertained solely by reference to perceptions available to the
defendant during the purportedly illegal seduction (she “looked” sixteen or “she told me she was sixteen”), or does one require that some checks prior to seduction be taken, such as checking birth certificates or asking parents? Of course, if one is
hostile to statutory rape laws in general, it is perfectly reasonable to negate them by defining negligent perceptions in terms of . .. judgments which can be made at the narrow time-framed moment of the allegedly criminal incident. But it is hardly
conceivable that a defendant ought to attract serious sympathy as someone unable to avoid crime when he has certainly had the opportunity to check on the legal appropriateness of his companion as an object of sexual desire.
QUESTIONS: Does Kelman’s argument show that once we expand the time frame (as a competent prosecutor will always aim to do), there is no practical difference between strict liability and a negligence standard? By using a broad time frame,
Professor Kelman is able to argue, in effect, that the defendant in his example was negligent. But will the defendant have the same opportunity to respond to such an argument if the applicable standard is strict liability rather than negligence? Will
the jury's role be the same?
PHILLIP JOHNSON, STRICT LIABILITY: THE PREVALENT VIEW, in ENCYCLOPEDIA OF CRIME AND JUSTICE 1518, 1520-1521 (1983) °: The objection to strict liability is not that it punishes people who are literally helpless to avoid committing the act,
because it is obvious that they could have avoided any possibility of liability by not going into business in the first place. The point is that selling meat or managing a factory is a productive activity which the law means to encourage, not discour-
age, and we should not punish people who have taken alll reasonable steps to comply with the law. Where strict liability is present in the traditional criminal law, as in the felony-murder doctrine or in the rule that mistake of age is no defense to
statutory rape, the defendant's underlying conduct (robbery or fornication) is deemed wrongful or socially undesirable in itself. Unless we regard business activity as similarly inherently wrongful, holding business managers up to strict liability is un-
justifiable even though they have voluntarily assumed their positions of employment.
STEPHEN J. SCHULHOFER, HARM AND PUNISHMENT: A CRITIQUE OF EMPHASIS ON THE RESULTS OF CONDUCT IN THE CRIMINAL LAW, 122 U. PA. L. REV. 1497, 1586-1587 (1974): [Some argue that strict liability can reduce injuries because those
who fear liability can avoid activities subject to this stringent form of regulation. Although those] who continue to engage in the activity may . . . believe they can be careful, [they] may be just the ones who are most

p.348
p.349
likely to be . . . careless.22° [T]hose who are careful and make provision for risks may be the [ones] most likely to take the sensible precaution of not engaging in this activity at all. [Thus], the dynamic effect [of strict liability] could be to increase the
total harm caused by increasing the proportion of those engaged in the activity who are relatively careless.
DOUGLAS HUSAK, STRICT LIABILITY, JUSTICE, AND PROPORTIONALITY, in A.P. SIMESTER ed., APPRAISING STRICT LIABILITY 81, 100 (2005): [T]he injustice [of strict liability] is a function of the severity of the punishment imposed. . . . Moreover,
the very same objections may apply to statutes that do not impose formal strict liability, so the repeal of [strict liability] offenses provides no assurance that the injustice will be reduced. No one needs to resort to formal strict liability in order to in-
flict draconian punishments that disregard principles of proportionality.
VERA BERGELSON, DOES FAULT MATTER?, 12 CRIM. L. & PHIL. 375 (2018): It [is] a mistake . . . to suggest that some criminal convictions are free from stigma or entail only nominal deprivation. [C]riminal conviction carries a host of collateral
consequences, including an enhanced punishment in the event of a future offense; an impediment to employment; as well as possible loss of voting rights, public benefits, and immigration status. The attempt to downplay punishment for “quasi-
criminal” offenses by analogizing it to torts damages is rather misguided too: torts law does not authorize punitive damages unless the defendant is subjectively at fault. It is quite amazing and anomalous that for the same act committed without
fault the defendant may not be punished civilly but may be punished criminally.
MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT TO §2.05 at 282-283 (1985): This section makes a frontal attack on absolute or strict liability in the penal law, whenever . . . a sentence of probation or imprisonment may be imposed. [W]hen
conviction rests upon [strict liability] the grade of the offense is reduced to a violation, which is not a “crime” and under Sections 1.04(6) and 6.02(4) may result in no sentence other than a fine, or a fine and forfeiture or other authorized civil penalty.
This position is affirmed not only with respect to offenses defined by the penal code; it is superimposed on the entire corpus of the law so far as penal sanctions are involved. Since most strict liability offenses involve special regulatory legislation,
normally found in titles of a code other than the criminal title, this superimposition is essential if the principle of no criminality, probation or imprisonment for strict liability offenses is to be made effective.

[lif practical enforcement precludes litigation of the culpability of alleged deviation from legal requirements, the enforcers cannot rightly demand the use of penal sanctions for the purpose. Crime does and should mean condemnation
and no court should have to pass that judgment unless it can declare that the defendant's act was culpable. This is too fundamental to be compromised. The law goes far enough if it permits the imposition of a monetary penalty in cases where
strict liability has been imposed.

p.349
. 350
e. Mistake of Law
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

One legal doctrine that is especially familiar to non-lawyers is the rule that “ignorance of the law is no excuse.” Yet, as we shall see, this supposedly well-known “rule” turns out to be murky, misleading, and sometimes simply false.
Several distinct problems are presented. First, mistakes of law sometimes arise because a person is aware of a law but misinterprets its meaning; in other instances, the individual does not know that any such law exists at all. Second, misinterpre-
tation or complete ignorance may be relevant because the elements or scope of the criminal law with which the defendant is charged make the awareness or knowledge of some legal standard part of the offense. In this way, a mistake about the
law can arise in the same way as a mistake of fact. Finally, if a mistake of law is of the type that normally does not excuse, can defendants nonetheless claim a defense when their misinterpretation is based on an official document or official ad-
vice that turns out to be incorrect?

The case that follows appears to present a single question, but in fact it involves most of the distinct problems just mentioned. The defendant placed his hopes primarily on the last and most limited type of argument — that his mistake
(though normally irrelevant) should nonetheless excuse because the state penal code recognized a narrow defense for mistakes resulting from reliance on an official source. Before focusing on that issue, however, it will be worth pausing to con-
sider whether the defendant should have a valid excuse even in the absence of this special penal code provision. In light of the principles of culpability considered up to this point, shouldn't the defendant's mistake give him a mens rea defense
even without this particular type of reliance? And if not, then consider whether the special statutory defense should change the result.

People v. Marrero
New York Court of Appeals
507 N.E.2d 1068 (N.Y. 1987)

[Defendant, a corrections officer at a federal prison in Connecticut, was arrested in a Manhattan social club for unlicensed possession of a loaded .38 caliber pistol, in violation of N.Y. Penal Law §265.02.2 When arrested, he protested
that as a federal corrections officer, he was not subject to §265.02. The statutory framework was complex. Section 265.02 made it a crime for any person to possess a loaded firearm, subject to exemptions stated in §265.20. That provision ex-
empted “peace officers as defined in . . . section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law [CPL],” and CPL §1.20, referring in turn to a definition in CPL §2.10, defined “peace officer” to include “correction officers of any state correction facility or of any
penal

350
p.351
correctional institution.” Marrero was nonetheless charged with violating §265.02. His pretrial motion to dismiss the indictment was granted on the ground that he was a peace officer within the meaning of the statutes. The Appellate Division
reinstated the indictment, holding, by a 3-2 vote, that the defendant was not a “peace officer” within the meaning of CPL §§1.20, 2.10. He was then convicted at a trial where the judge refused to instruct the jury to acquit if it found that Marrero rea-
sonably believed he qualified for the statutory exemption. The defendant appealed.]
BELLAcos&, J. . .. The central issue is whether defendant's personal misreading or misunderstanding of a statute may excuse criminal conduct in the circumstances of this case.

The common-law rule on mistake of law was clearly articulated in Gardner v. People, (62 N.Y. 299). In Gardner, the defendants misread a statute and mistakenly believed that their conduct was legal. The court insisted, however, that the
“mistake of law” did not relieve the defendants of criminal liability. .. . This is to be contrasted with People v. Weiss, 276 N.Y. 384, 12 N.E.2d 514 [1938,] where, in a kidnapping case, the trial court precluded testimony that the defendants acted with
the honest belief that seizing and confining the [victim] was done with “authority of law.” We held it was error to exclude such testimony since a good-faith belief in the legality of the conduct would negate an express and necessary element of the
crime of kidnapping, i.e., intent, without authority of law, to confine or imprison another.” [T]he instant case, of course, falls within the Gardner rationale because the weapons possession statute violated by this defendant imposes liability indepen-
dent of one’s intent [to violate the law].

The desirability of the Gardner-type outcome . . . is underscored by Justice Holmes’ statement: “It is no doubt true that there are many cases in which the criminal could not have known that he was breaking the law, but to admit the
excuse at all would be to encourage ignorance where the lawmaker has determined to make men know and obey, and justice to the individual is rightly outweighed by the larger interests on the other side of the scales” (Holmes, The Common Law,
at 48 [1881].

The revisors of New York's Penal Law intended no fundamental departure from this common-law rule in Penal Law §15.20, which provides in pertinent part:

2. A person is not relieved of criminal liability for conduct because he engaged in such conduct under a mistaken belief that it does not, as a matter of law, constitute an offense, unless such mistaken belief is founded upon

an official statement of the law contained in (a) a statute or other enactment... . [or] (d) an interpretation of the statute or law relating

p.351

p.352

to the offense, officially made or issued by a public servant, agency, or body legally charged or empowered with the responsibility or privilege of administering, enforcing or interpreting such statute or law.

The defendant claims as a first prong of his defense that he is entitled to raise the defense of mistake of law under section 15.20(2)(a) because his mistaken belief that his conduct was legal was founded upon an official statement of the
law contained in the statute itself. Defendant argues that his mistaken interpretation of the statute was reasonable in view of the alleged ambiguous wording of the peace officer exemption statute, and that his “reasonable” interpretation of an “of-
ficial statement” is enough to satisfy the requirements of subdivision (2)(a). .. .

The prosecution . . . counters defendant's argument by asserting that one cannot claim the protection of mistake of law under section 15.20(2)(a) simply by misconstruing the meaning of a statute but must instead establish that the
statute relied on actually permitted the conduct in question and was only later found to be erroneous. To buttress that argument, the People analogize New York's official statement defense to the approach taken by the Model Penal Code (MPC).
Section 2.04 of the MPC provides:

(3) A belief that conduct does not legally constitute an offense is a defense to a prosecution for that offense based upon such conduct when . . . (b) he acts in reasonable reliance upon an official statement of the law, after-

ward determined to be invalid or erroneous, contained in (i) a statute or other enactment (emphasis added).°

Although the drafters of the New York statute did not adopt the precise language of the Model Penal Code provision with the emphasized clause, it is evident and has long been believed that the Legislature intended the New York
statute to be similarly construed. . . .

It was early recognized that the “official statement” mistake of law defense was a statutory protection against prosecution based on reliance on a statute that did infact authorize certain conduct. . . . While providing a narrow escape
hatch, the idea was simultaneously to encourage the public to read and rely on official statements of the law, not to have individuals conveniently and personally question the validity and interpretation of the law and act on that basis. If later the
statute was invalidated, one who mistakenly acted in reliance on the authorizing statute would be relieved of criminal liability. That makes sense and is fair. To go further does not make sense and would create a legal chaos. . . . In the case before
us, the underlying statute never in fact authorized the defendant's conduct; the defendant only thought [it did].

p.352
p. 359

[Whhile our construction of Penal Law §15.20 provides for narrow application of the mistake of law defense, it does not, as the dissenters contend, “rule out any defense based on mistake of law.” To the contrary, mistake of law is a
viable exemption in those instances where an individual . . . relies on the validity of [a] law and, later, it is determined that there was a mistake in the law itself. [W]here the government has affirmatively, albeit unintentionally, misled an individual as
to what may or may not be legally permissible conduct, the individual should not be punished as a result. [However,] where, as here, the government is not responsible for the error (for there is none except in the defendant's own mind), mistake of
law should not be available as an excuse. . . . Any broader view fosters lawlessness.

If defendant's argument were accepted, the exception would swallow the rule. Mistakes about the law would be encouraged, rather than respect for and adherence to law. There would be an infinite number of mistake of law de-
fenses which could be devised from a good-faith, perhaps reasonable but mistaken, interpretation of criminal statutes, many of which are concededly complex. Even more troublesome are the opportunities for wrongminded individuals to contrive
in bad faith solely to get an exculpatory notion before the jury. These are . . . the realistic and practical consequences were the dissenters’ views to prevail. Our . . . statutory scheme . . . was not designed to allow false and diversionary strata-
gems. . . . This would not serve the ends of justice but rather would serve game playing and evasion from properly imposed criminal responsibility.

[Alffirmed.

Hancock, J. (dissenting). . .. The basic difference which divides the court may be simply put. Suppose the case of a man who has committed an act which is criminal not because it is inherently wrong or immoral but solely because it violates a
criminal statute. He has committed the act in complete good faith under the mistaken but entirely reasonable assumption that the act does not constitute an offense because it is permitted by the wording of the statute. Does the law require that

this man be punished? The majority says that it does and holds that (1) Penal Law §15.02(2)(a) must be construed so that the man is precluded from offering a defense based on his mistake of law and (2) such construction is compelled by prevail-
ing considerations of public policy and criminal jurisprudence. We take issue with the majority on both propositions.

There can be no question that under the view that the purpose of the criminal justice system is to punish blameworthiness or “choosing freely to do wrong”! our supposed man who has acted innocently and without any intent to do
wrong should not be punished. .. . Since he has not knowingly committed a wrong there can be no reason for society to exact retribution. Because the man is law-abiding and would not have acted but for his mistaken assumption as to the law,
there is no

p. 359
p. 354
need for punishment to deter him from further unlawful conduct. Traditionally, however, under the ancient rule of Anglo-American common law that ignorance or mistake of law is no excuse, our supposed man would be punished.

The maxim “ignorantia legis neminem excusat” finds its roots in Medieval law. . . . Various justifications have been offered for the rule, but all are frankly pragmatic and utilitarian — preferring the interests of society (e.g., in deterring
criminal conduct, fostering orderly judicial administration, and preserving the primacy of the rule of law) to the interest of the individual in being free from punishment except for intentionally engaging in conduct which he knows is criminal.

Today there is widespread criticism of the common-law rule mandating categorical preclusion of the mistake of law defense. The utilitarian arguments for retaining the rule have been drawn into serious question but the fundamental
objection is that it is simply wrong to punish someone who, in good-faith reliance on the wording of a statute, believed that what he was doing was lawful. . . . This basic objection to the maxim “ignorantia legis neminem excusat” may have had
less force in ancient times when most crimes consisted of acts which by their very nature were recognized as evil. In modern times, however, with the profusion of legislation making otherwise lawful conduct criminal (malum prohibitum), the
“common law fiction that every man is presumed to know the law has become indefensible in fact or logic.”

With this background we proceed to a discussion of our disagreement with the majority's construction of Penal Law §15.20(2)(a). ..

It is difficult to imagine a case more squarely within the wording of Penal Law §15.20(2)(a) or one more fitted to what appears clearly to be the intended purpose of the statute than the one before us. .. .

Defendant's mistaken belief that, as a Federal corrections officer, he could legally carry a loaded weapon without a license was based on the express exemption from criminal liability under Penal Law §265.02 accorded ... . to “peace
officers” . . . and on his reading of the statutory definition for “peace officer” . . . as meaning a correction officer “of any penal correctional institution” (emphasis added), including an institution not operated by New York State. Thus, he concluded
erroneously that, as a corrections officer in a Federal prison, he was a “peace officer” and, as such, exempt by the express terms of Penal Law §265.20(a)(1)(a). This mistaken belief, based in good faith on the statute defining “peace officer” is,
defendant contends, the precise sort of “mistaken belief . . . founded upon an official statement of the law contained in . . . a statute or other enactment” which gives rise to a mistake of law defense under Penal Law §15.20(2)(a). He points out, of
course, that when he acted in reliance on his belief he had no way of foreseeing that a court would eventually resolve the question of the statute's meaning against him and rule that his belief had been mistaken, as three of the five-member panel
at the Appellate Division ultimately did in the first appeal.

The majority, however, has accepted the People’s argument that to have a defense under Penal Law §15.20(2)(a) “a defendant must show that the statute permitted his conduct, not merely that he believed it did.” . . .

Nothing in the statutory language suggests the interpretation urged by the People and adopted by the majority. . . . It is self-evident that in enacting Penal Law §15.20(2) as part of the revision and modernization of the Penal Law the
Legislature intended to effect a needed reform by abolishing what had long been considered the unjust archaic common-law rule totally prohibiting mistake of law as a defense. . .

p.354
p. 355

The majority construes the statute, however, so as to rule out any defense based on mistake of law. In so doing, it defeats the only possible purpose for the statute’s enactment and resurrects the very rule which the Legislature rejected

in enacting Penal Law §15.20(2)(a) as part of its modernization and reform of the Penal Law... .

Instead, the majority bases its decision on an analogous provision in the Model Penal Code and concludes that despite its totally different wording and meaning Penal Law §15.20(2)(a) should be read as if it were Model Penal Code
§2.04(3)(b)(). But New York in revising the Penal Law did not adopt the Model Penal Code. As in New Jersey, which generally adopted the Model Penal Code but added one section which is substantially more liberal,!° New York followed parts of
the Model Penal Code provisions and rejected others. .. .

Thus, the precise phrase in the Model Penal Code limiting the defense under section 2.04(3)(b)() to reliance on a statute “afterward determined to be invalid or erroneous” which, if present, would support the majority’s narrow construc-
tion of the New York statute, is omitted from Penal Law §15.20(2)(a). How the Legislature can be assumed to have enacted the very language which it has specifically rejected is not explained. . . .

NOTES ON THE RATIONALE OF IGNORANTIA LEGIS

1. The distinction between mistakes of fact and mistakes of law. What would have been the result in Marrero if the defendant thought his gun was unloaded, not realizing that a fellow-officer had loaded it? The statute applies only
to possession of a loaded firearm, but offenses like the one in Marrero are often strict liability misdemeanors. If so, a mistake about whether the gun was loaded would not afford a defense, even though this error would only involve a mistake of
fact.

So in Marrero, is the key to the result simply that the statute imposed strict liability and required no mens rea at all? That conclusion is hard to reconcile with the court’s references to the “common law rule on mistake of Jaw” (emphasis
added) and its concern that “[if the defendant's argument were accepted, the exception would swallow the rule. Mistakes about the law would be encouraged. . ..” Those passages make clear that Marrero’s claim of mistake about the legal mean-
ing of the term “peace officer” was not allowed as a defense, even though a mistake about the relevant facts would have been allowed. Why should mistakes of law be treated differently from mistakes of fact?

2. Utilitarian reasons against allowing a mistake-of-law defense. The traditional explanation for the rule against allowing mistakes of law to be a defense, even when reasonable, is the one given by Justice Holmes, quoted in
Marrero: “to

p. 355

p. 356
admit the excuse at all would be to encourage ignorance where the lawmaker has determined to make men know and obey.” But if a defense were limited to reasonable mistakes of law, people who failed to exercise due diligence could not count
on a successful mistake-of-law defense and thus would risk criminal liability. Wouldn't that prospect provide a sufficient incentive for people to maximize their understanding of relevant legal rules?

The Supreme Court has accepted precisely this reasoning, but only in a different context — when it faced the question whether a police officer's reasonable mistake of law should excuse an illegal seizure. In Heien v. North Carolina,
574 U.S. 54 (2014), a motorist who had a non-working brake light was stopped by a sheriff's deputy who thought this was a violation of state law; in fact the relevant law required only one working brake light, which the car had. The Supreme Court
nonetheless found no Fourth Amendment violation because it viewed the officer's mistake of law as reasonable. Responding to claims akin to Justice Holmes’s that a defense in these circumstances would discourage officers from learning the law,
the Court responded (id. at 67):

The Fourth Amendment tolerates only . . . mistakes [that are] objectively reasonable. . . . Thus an officer can gain no Fourth Amendment advantage through a sloppy study of the laws he is duty-bound to enforce.

The Court denied that it was “fundamentally unfair to let police officers get away with mistakes of law when the citizenry is accorded no such leeway,” mainly on the ground that the Fourth Amendment prohibits only “unreasonable searches and
seizures.” Id.) But that distinction aside, if a reasonableness requirement gives police officers an adequate incentive to know the law that governs highway stops, why doesn't a reasonableness requirement give civilians an adequate incentive to
know the criminal law generally?

Professor Dan Kahan offers a different explanation for the ignorance-of-law rule: “that individuals are and should be aware of society's morality and that morality furnishes a better guide for action than does law itself. Thus, far from
trying to maximize the incentive that presumptively bad men have to know the law, the doctrine seeks to obscure the law so that citizens are more likely to behave like good ones” — by following the spirit of social expectations rather than looking
to the technical terms of the law in order to find loopholes. Dan M. Kahan, Ignorance of the Law Is an Excuse — But Only for the Virtuous, 96 Mich. L. Rev. 127, 153 (1997).

Professor Kahan argues that the court was right to deny Marrero a mistake-of-law defense, not because of the doctrinal rule against it, but rather because Marrero's “bad character” was signaled by facts not mentioned in the court's

opinion, such as his having “menacingly reached for his weapon when the police approached him in the Manhattan club.” (Id. at 141.)
QUESTIONS: Is it a good idea to modify the mistake-of-law doctrine in this way, so that judges or juries would have the authority to determine whether the defendant in a particular case has observed society's overall moral code and has a good
enough character to deserve a mistake-of-law defense? If so, what evidence should be admissible on the issue? Does this approach to mistakes of law have the same virtues (and vices) as the Prince approach to mistakes of fact, considered at pp.
312-317 supra?
p. 356
p.357
NOTES ON SCOPE OF THE IGNORANTIA LEGIS DOCTRINE

1, Sometimes a mistake of law CAN be a defense. Despite the familiarity of the supposed “rule” that “ignorance of the law is no excuse,” courts consistently allow an ignorance-of-the-law defense in many circumstances. Consider
these cases:

(a) In Regina v. David Smith, [1974] 2 Q.B. 34, the defendant, in preparing to leave his rented apartment, damaged some wall panels and floor boards, in order to retrieve stereo wiring he had installed with the landlord's permission.
Although he himself had bought and installed the wall panels and floor boards, he was charged with violating the Criminal Damage Act, which read: “A person who without lawful excuse destroys or damages any property belonging to another
intending to destroy or damage any such property or being reckless as to whether any such property would be destroyed or damaged, shall be guilty of an offence.” His defense, in his own words, was: “[HJow can | be done in for smashing my own
property. | put the flooring and that in, so if | want to pull it down it's a matter for me.”

Unfortunately for Smith, the wall panels and flooring, once affixed, became the landlord's property as a matter of law. He was therefore convicted under a jury instruction that “belief by the defendant . . . that he had the right to do what
he did is not a lawful excuse within the meaning of the Act . . . because in law he had no right to do what he did.” On appeal, the prosecution argued that “the mental element in the offence relates only to causing damage or to destroying property,
[so] that if ... the property damaged or destroyed is shown to be another's property the offence is committed although the defendant did not intend or foresee damage to another person's property.” The court of appeal reversed, finding the jury
instruction erroneous:

Construing the language of section 1(1) we have no doubt that the actus reus is “destroying or damaging any property belonging to another.” It is not possible to exclude the words “belonging to another” which describes the

“property.” Applying the ordinary principles of mens rea, the intention and recklessness and the absence of lawful excuse required to constitute the offence have reference to property belonging to another. It follows that in

our judgment no offence is committed under this section if a person destroys or causes damage to property belonging to another if he does so in the honest though mistaken belief that the property is his own, and provided

that the belief is honestly held it is irrelevant to consider whether or not it is a justifiable belief.

(b) In State v. Varszegi, 635 A.2d 816 (Conn. App. 1993), the defendant was a landlord whose commercial tenant had missed several payments for a rented office space. Believing that he was acting pursuant to the lease’s default
clause, the landlord came to the office on a weekend, picked the lock, and removed two computers. On the following Monday, the tenant noticed that the equipment was missing and called the police, who warned the landlord that he had no right
to confiscate the property and that he should return it. Nonetheless, he proceeded to sell the equipment. He was convicted of theft, but the appellate court reversed, stating (id. at 818):

p.357
p. 358

A person commits larceny when, with intent to deprive another of property . . ., he wrongfully takes, obtains or withholds such property from an owner. . . . A defendant who acts under the subjective belief that he has a lawful

claim on property lacks the required felonious intent to steal. Such a defendant need not show his mistaken claim of right was reasonable, . . . so long as he can establish his claim was made in good faith.

2. WHEN does the no-excuse rule apply? Compare the Varszegi and David Smith cases to Marrero. In Marrero, a seemingly reasonable mistake of law is not a defense, but the first two cases hold that a mistake of law can be a
defense even if it is unreasonable. What's going on here?

The MPC sets forth a pair of rules that at first blush appear similarly contradictory. Section 2.04(1) provides:

Ignorance or mistake as to a matter of fact or Jaw is a defense if [it] negatives the purpose, belief, recklessness or negligence required to establish a material element of the offense. [Emphasis added.]

Yet §2.02(9) provides:

Neither knowledge nor recklessness or negligence as to whether conduct constitutes an offense or as to the existence, meaning or application of the law determining the elements of an offense is an element of such offense,

unless the definition of the offense or the Code so provides.

Can these two MPC provisions be reconciled? Taken together, do they afford a defense for Marrero, for David Smith, for both, or for neither? Intuition is not a helpful guide here; the MPC must be applied carefully, step by step, to each
of the two cases. The background principle involved, and the separate domains of the two provisions, are explained in Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.02 at 250 (1985):

[he general principle that ignorance or mistake of law is no excuse is greatly overstated; it has no application, for example, when the circumstances made material by the definition of the offense include a legal element.

Thus it is immaterial in theft, when claim of right is adduced in defense, that the claim involves a legal judgment as to the right of property. Claim of right is a defense because the property must belong to someone else for the

theft to occur and the defendant must have culpable awareness of that [legal] fact . . . ; the legal element involved is simply an aspect of the attendant circumstances, with respect to which knowledge, recklessness or negli-

gence, as the case may be, is required for culpability. . . . The law involved is not the law defining the offense; it is some other legal rule that characterizes the attendant circumstances that are material to the offense.

The proper arena for the principle that ignorance or mistake of law does not afford an excuse is thus with respect to the particular law that sets forth the definition of the crime in question. It is knowledge of that law that is

normally not a part of the crime, and it is ignorance or mistake as to that law that is denied defensive significance by this subsection of the Code [§2.02(9)] and by the traditional common law approach to the issue.

p.358
p. 359

The Supreme Court applies the same distinction in federal cases. In Rehaif v. United States, 139 S. Ct. 2191 (2019), the defendant, a foreign citizen, had entered the United States on a student visa. After he received poor grades, the
university dismissed him and told him his “immigration status” would be terminated unless he transferred to a different university or left the country. Without taking either of those steps, Rehaif visited a firing range, where he used two firearms for
target practice. When the government learned this, he was prosecuted under two interrelated statutes: 18 U.S.C. §922(g), which prohibits the possession of firearms by certain persons, including foreign nationals in the United States unlawfully,
and §924(a)(2), which provides that anyone who “knowingly violates” §922(g) can be imprisoned for up to ten years. Rehaif was convicted at a trial where the jury was instructed that the prosecution did not need to prove he knew he was in the
United States unlawfully. If Rehaif thought his presence in the United States was still lawful, was that belief reasonable, given the explicit warning he had received from the university? We might think that, despite the warning, such a belief should
be considered reasonable under all the circumstances. But the Supreme Court held Rehaif's conviction invalid either way, regardless of whether such a belief would be unreasonable, explaining (id. at 2198):

[T]he well-known maxim that “ignorance of the law” (or a “mistake of law”) is no excuse . . . normally applies where a defendant has the requisite mental state in respect to the elements of the crime but claims to be “unaware

of the existence of a statute proscribing his conduct.” In contrast, the maxim does not normally apply where a defendant “has a mistaken impression concerning the legal effect of some collateral matter . . . ,” thereby negat-

ing an element of the offense. Much of the confusion surrounding the ignorance-of-the-law maxim stems from “the failure to distinguish [these] two quite different situations.” . . . The defendant's status as . .. “illegally or

unlawfully in the United States” refers to . . . a “collateral” question of law. A defendant who does not know that he is . .. “illegally or unlawfully in the United States” does not have the guilty state of mind that the statute’s lan-

guage and purposes require.

Under the principle that Rehaif and the MPC illustrate, the results in David Smith and Varszegi are correct. (Do you see why?) What about the result in Marrero? In the language of the MPC Commentaries, did Marrero’s mistake relate
to “the law defining the offense” or to “some other legal rule that characterizes the attendant circumstances”? The Marrero majority clearly assumed the former. The defendant and the dissent apparently accepted this assumption but in effect ar-
gued that a mistake about “the law defining the offense” should be a defense. Was a narrower argument available to Marrero?

3. Problem. The defendant filed a petition seeking to be appointed as guardian for the assets of his 88-year-old mother, who was suffering from severe dementia. The document required the petitioner to list his mother’s “lineal descen-
dants,” but the defendant omitted the names of several of her grandchildren. He was prosecuted for perjury, an offense requiring proof that he had knowingly made a false statement in the petition. The trial court refused to instruct the jury that this
claim of mistake could be a defense, and the appellate court affirmed the conviction, holding that “any mistake about what persons were his mother’s lineal descendants

p.359
360
is a mistake of law, and therefore does not require a charge on mistake of fact.” Law v. State, 824 S.E.2d 778, 786 (Ga. Ct. App. 2019).

How should this case be decided under the MPC: Would the defendant be entitled to a jury instruction that his mistaken belief about who qualified as his mother’s “lineal descendants” was a defense if found to be reasonable? Would
he be entitled to a jury instruction that this mistaken belief was a defense if found to be honest even if unreasonable?
Cheek v. United States

Supreme Court of the United States
498 U.S. 192 (1991)

[Cheek, a pilot for American Airlines, was convicted of willfully failing to file federal income tax returns for a number of years, in violation of 26 U.S.C. §7201, which provides that any person is guilty of a felony “who willfully attempts in
any manner to evade or defeat any tax imposed by this title or the payment thereof.” His defense was that based on information he received from a group opposing the institution of taxation, he sincerely believed that under the tax laws he owed no
taxes, including taxes on his wages, and that if he did, these laws were unconstitutional.

[During its deliberations, the jury sent out a note saying that it could not reach a verdict because “[w]e are divided on the issue as to if Mr. Cheek honestly & reasonably believed that he was not required to pay income tax.” Thereupon
the trial judge further instructed the jury that “[a]n honest but unreasonable belief is not a defense and does not negate willfulness,” and that “[aldvice or research resulting in the conclusion that wages of a privately employed person are not income
or that the tax laws are unconstitutional is not objectively reasonable and cannot serve as the basis for a good faith misunderstanding of the law defense.” The judge also instructed the jury that “[plersistent refusal to acknowledge the law does not
constitute a good faith misunderstanding of the law.”

[Cheek appealed his convictions, charging the trial judge with error in instructing that only an objectively reasonable misunderstanding of the law negates the statutory willfulness requirement. The court of appeals affirmed, and the
Supreme Court granted certiorari.)

Justice WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.

The general rule that ignorance of the law or a mistake of law is no defense to criminal prosecution is deeply rooted in the American legal system. Based on the notion that the law is definite and knowable, the common law presumed

that every person knew the law. .. .

The proliferation of statutes and regulations has sometimes made it difficult for the average citizen to know and comprehend the extent of the duties and obligations imposed by the tax laws. Congress has accordingly softened the
impact of the common-law presumption by making specific intent to violate the law an element of certain federal criminal tax offenses . . . [thus] carving out an exception to the traditional rule. This special treatment of criminal tax offenses is largely
due to the complexity of the tax laws. [T]he standard for the statutory willfulness requirement is the “voluntary, intentional violation of a known legal duty.”

360
p.361

Cheek . . . challenges the ruling that . . . a good-faith belief that one is not violating the law, if it is to negate willfulness, must be objectively reasonable. We agree that the Court of Appeals and the District Court erred in this respect.

. .. We deal first with the case where the issue is whether the defendant knew of the duty purportedly imposed by the provision of the statute or regulation he is accused of violating, a case in which there is no claim that the provision
at issue is invalid. In such a case, if the Government proves actual knowledge of the pertinent legal duty, the prosecution, without more, has satisfied the knowledge component of the willfulness requirement. But carrying this burden requires
negating a defendant's claim of ignorance of the law or a claim that because of a misunderstanding of the law, he had a good-faith belief that he was not violating any of the provisions of the tax laws. . . . In the end, the issue is whether, based on
all the evidence, the Government has proved that the defendant was aware of the duty at issue, which cannot be true if the jury credits a good-faith misunderstanding and belief submission, whether or not the claimed belief or misunderstanding is
objectively reasonable.

In this case, if Cheek asserted that he truly believed that the Internal Revenue Code did not purport to treat wages as income, and the jury believed him, the Government would not have carried its burden to prove willfulness, however
unreasonable a court might deem such a belief. . .. Of course, the more unreasonable the asserted beliefs or misunderstandings are, the more likely the jury will consider them to be nothing more than simple disagreement with known legal du-
ties... and will find that the Government has carried its burden of proving knowledge.

Cheek [also asserted] that he should be acquitted because he believed in good faith that the income tax law is unconstitutional as applied to him and thus could not legally impose any duty upon him of which he should have been
aware. Such a submission is unsound, not because Cheek’s constitutional arguments are . .. frivolous, which they surely are, but because . .. the willfulness requirement in the criminal provisions of the Internal Revenue Code [has been construed]
to require [only] proof of knowledge of the [tax] law. This was because in “our complex tax system, uncertainty often arises even among taxpayers who earnestly wish to follow the law” and “ ‘it is not the purpose of the law to penalize frank differ-
ence of opinion or innocent errors made despite the exercise of reasonable care.’ ” United States v. Bishop, 412 US. 346, 360-361 (1973).

Claims that some of the provisions of the tax code are unconstitutional are submissions of a different order. They do not arise from innocent mistakes caused by the complexity of the Internal Revenue Code. Rather, they reveal full
knowledge of the provisions at issue and a studied conclusion . . . that those provisions are invalid and unenforceable. . . .

We do not believe that Congress contemplated that such a taxpayer . . . could ignore the duties imposed upon him by the Internal Revenue Code and refuse to utilize the mechanisms provided by Congress to present his claims of
invalidity to the courts. . .. [I]n some years, [Cheek did not do so,] and when he did was unwilling to accept the outcome. . . . [Like defendants in criminal cases in other contexts, who “willfully” refuse to comply with the duties placed upon them
by the law, he must take the risk of being wrong.

p.361
p. 962

[It] was therefore not error in this case for the District Judge to instruct the jury not to consider Cheek’s claims that the tax laws were unconstitutional. However, it was error for the court to instruct the jury that petitioner's asserted
beliefs that wages are not income and that he was not a taxpayer within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code should not be considered by the jury in determining whether Cheek had acted willfully.

[On retrial, defendant was convicted on an instruction allowing the jury to consider “whether the defendant's stated belief about the tax statute was reasonable as a factor in deciding whether he held that belief in good faith.” United
States v. Cheek, 3 F.3d 1057 (7th Cir. 1993),]

NOTE ON “WILLFULLY” AND “KNOWINGLY”

The starting place for the analysis in Cheek is a self-evident point — the rule, also stated in Model Penal Code §2.02(9), that a mistake about the existence or meaning of the law defining the offense is a defense if that law says so. But
how does a court decide whether that law allows the defense? The presence of mens rea language like “knowledge” or “willfulness” does not by itself determine the answer: In Cheek, the Court interpreted the word “willfully” to mean the defendant
must be aware of some legal conclusions (that wages are “income”) but not others (that the income tax statute is constitutionally valid). In other cases involving the interpretation of federal statutes, the Court has attributed different implications to
a statutory requirement of “knowledge” or “willfulness,” deciding that these mens rea terms require either (1) awareness of the specific statute at issue, or (2) just a more general awareness that the acts committed are unlawful, or (3) even less —
awareness only of the facts. Professor Sharon L. Davies finds that courts have construed a dozen or more federal criminal laws to require knowledge of illegality, but that in other instances, courts have interpreted “knowledge” or “willfulness” to
require only an awareness of the facts. Davies, The Jurisprudence of Ignorance: An Evolving Theory of Excusable Ignorance, 48 Duke L.J. 341, 344-347 (1998). What circumstances determine whether knowledge of the penal law itself is or should
be required? Consider the following cases:

UNITED STATES v. INTERNATIONAL MINERALS & CHEMICAL CORP,, 402 U.S. 558 (1971): A statute made it a crime for a person to “knowingly violat[e]” a regulation of the Interstate Commerce Commission regarding the transportation of corrosive
liquids. Does that mean the prosecution must prove that defendant knew of the existence and meaning of the applicable regulation, or only that the acts the defendant knowingly committed (shipping a corrosive liquid) violated that regulation? Of
course, a defendant like International Minerals might reasonably be held to a strong duty to know at its peril all the applicable regulations. But those regulations, like the tax code, are complex, and a private individual who mailed a box containing
a household cleaning product could be subject to the regulation too. Nonetheless, the Court held that a criminal conviction requires only knowledge of the facts, not knowledge of what the ICC regulation requires.
LIPAROTA v. UNITED STATES, 471 U.S. 419 (1985): Here the Court reached the opposite conclusion. A statute governing food stamp fraud provided that “whoever knowingly uses, transfers, acquires, alters, or possesses coupons or authorization
p.362
p. 969
cards in any manner not authorized by [the statute] or the regulations [of the Department of Agriculture)” is subject to fine and imprisonment. Does this mean that the prosecution must prove the defendant knew of the existence and meaning of
the relevant regulation, or only that he was aware of doing the acts that violated the regulation? This time the Court held for the former interpretation, influenced by the concern that “to interpret the statute otherwise would be to criminalize a broad
range of apparently innocent conduct.” The Court continued:

§2024(b)(1) declares . . . that “[c]oupons issued to eligible households shall be used by them only to purchase food in retail food stores which have been approved for participation in the food stamp program at prices prevail-

ing in such stores.” (emphasis added). . . . A strict reading of the statute with no knowledge-of- illegality requirement would thus render criminal a food stamp recipient who, for example, used stamps to purchase food from a

store that, unknown to him, charged higher than normal prices to food stamp program participants.

UNITED STATES v. ANSALDI, 372 F.3d 118 (2d Cir. 2004): Ansaldi was charged with selling the chemical compound GBL, which is listed as a controlled substance because when metabolized by the human body, it is converted into GHB, the so-
called date rape drug. Under the statute in question, 21 U.S.C. §841(a), it is unlawful to “knowingly or intentionally . . . distribute . . . a controlled substance.” Ansaldi knew he was distributing GBL but claimed not to know that GBL is a controlled
substance. At trial, that claim was deemed irrelevant. On appeal, the Second Circuit recognized that knowledge of the law is required for conviction of tax evasion but stated, without elaboration, that the drug distribution statute is different:
“Knowledge of, or intent to violate, the law is simply not an element of this offense.” Id. at 128. On this strict liability basis, the court upheld Ansaldi’s conviction and sentence to six years’ imprisonment.

Paul Larkin notes that the presumption that everyone is presumed to know the law developed in a world quite different from twenty-first-century America: “Today, there are thousands of federal and state criminal offenses spread over
the fifty-one titles and 27,000 pages of the U.S. Code and the fifty parallel versions in the states. . .. Congress and the state legislatures . . . use the criminal law to enforce numerous rules made necessary by the transformation of America from [a]
rural, agricultural society. [T]here is too much criminal law for the average person to know its entirety, particularly when you move beyond physically harmful, dangerous, and immoral conduct — conduct that the common law deemed malum in
se or inherently evil — to crimes that exist only because a legislature or regulatory agency decided to invoke the criminal law as an enforcement tool — conduct known as malum prohibitum. . . .” Professor Larkin argues that in today's world, the
presumption that a person knows the applicable criminal law should be rebuttable, “the starting point for an inquiry into what someone knew or could be expected to know.” Larkin, The Folly of Requiring Complete Knowledge of the Criminal Law,
12 Liberty U. L. Rev. 335, 336-337 (2018).

For further analysis of these issues, see Kenneth W. Simons, Ignorance and Mistake of Criminal Law, Noneriminal Law, and Fact, 9 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 487 (2012); John S. Wiley, Not Guilty by Reason of Blameworthiness: Culpability in
Federal Criminal Interpretation, 85 Va. L. Rev. 1021 (1999).

369
p.964
PROBLEM

In United States v. Karani, 984 F.3d 163 (1st Cir. 2021), the defendant had purchased a .45 caliber Glock pistol from a licensed dealer. On the required disclosure form, purchasers must certify that they are “the actual transferee/buy-
er” (:.2., not someone who intends to transfer the weapon to a third party). But the form explains that “[y]ou are also the actual transferee/buyer if you are legitimately purchasing the firearm as a gift for a third party.” Karani affirmed that he was the
actual transferee/buyer even though he planned to (and ultimately did) sell the gun at a discounted price to a friend who could not legally purchase it himself. Karani was prosecuted for “knowingly” making a false statement on the form by asserting
that he was the actual buyer. At trial, he argued that his statement was not knowingly false because he was providing the gun at a discount and believed that the transfer to his friend therefore qualified as a “gift,” a term not defined in any of the
federal statutes, regulations, or forms pertaining to the purchase of firearms. In its instructions, the trial court told the jury that “gift’ means something that is voluntarily transferred to someone without payment,” and that providing a discount did
not make the transfer a gift, even if Karani thought otherwise.

On appeal, Karani argued that “his understanding of the term ‘gift,’ even if it was wrong, was a mistake of law that was critical to the jury's determination of whether he knowingly made a false statement.” Id. at 176. The First Circuit,
rejecting that argument, upheld the conviction. Relying primarily on two sources — Black's Law Dictionary and Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary — it ruled that the trial court’s definition of “gift” was legally correct and that Karani was not
entitled to present a mistake-of-law defense (id. at 177):

[lo prove a knowing violation of the federal firearms laws . . . the government only needed to prove that . .. when Karani signed the relevant documents affirming that he was purchasing the gun either for himself or as a gift

for a third party, he knew the facts contrary to those representations.

Do you agree? Was the court right to hold that Karani could be convicted of knowingly making a false statement, without knowing that his statement was false? The First Circuit deemed Cheek inapplicable because the tax code is far
more complex. But isn’t that the wrong question? Why isn’t the meaning of “gift” like the meaning of the property law concepts at issue in Varszegi and David Smith?

NOTE ON MENS REA REFORM

Abill introduced in 2021 by Senators Mike Lee (R-Utah), Rand Paul (R-Ky.), and Thom Tillis (R-N.C.), the Mens Rea Reform Act of 2021, would make mistake-of-law and mistake-of-fact defenses much more broadly available in federal
cases. It provides that if a federal criminal offense does not specify a required state of mind, the offense “shall be construed to require the Government to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant acted . . . willfully.” Willfully would be
defined (proposed 18 U.S.C. §28(a)(4)) to mean:

(A) that the person acted with knowledge that the person's conduct was unlawful; and
p.964
965
(B) if the element involves the nature, attendant circumstances, object, or result of the conduct of a person, that —

(i) the person had knowledge of the nature, attendant circumstances, object, or result of his or her conduct; and
(ii) it was the conscious object of the person to engage in conduct —
(1 of that nature
(I) with that attendant circumstance;
(IID) with that object; or
(IV) to cause such a result.
Proponents of this provision say its aim is “to reduce overcriminalization, rein in excessive regulation, and curb overzealous prosecutions.”° Opponents object that it will allow corporate executives to violate health, safety, and environ-
mental laws with impunity by “clos[ing] their eyes to what would otherwise be obvious to them.”47
QUESTIONS: Is a provision like this a helpful check on overcriminalization, or would it unduly impede the effective enforcement of health, safety, and environmental regulations? Would a willful-blindness theory prevent executives from using this
provision to avoid responsibility by claiming ignorance of the law? And with respect to mistakes of fact, does the provision go too far in setting a default rule that in effect requires a purpose (“conscious object”) to engage in the prohibited conduct?
For discussion, see Benjamin Levin, Mens Rea Reform and Its Discontents, 109 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 491 (2019); John G. Malcolm, Morally Innocent, Legally Guilty: The Case for Mens Rea Reform, 18 Fed. Soc’y Rev. 40 (2017.22
NOTES ON OFFICIAL RELIANCE
1. The traditional view. Because the reasonableness of a defendant's mistake of penal law ordinarily is irrelevant, courts traditionally refused to consider the defense even when the mistake was based on the assurances of a public
official or a judicial decision. Consider Hopkins v. State, 69 A.2d 456 (Md. 1950). The defendant was convicted of violating a statute making it unlawful to erect or maintain any sign intended to aid in the solicitation or performance of marriages. He
had erected signs that read: “Rev. W.F. Hopkins” and “W.F. Hopkins, Notary Public, Information.” On appeal he argued that the trial judge erred in excluding
966
p. 366
testimony offered to show that the State's Attorney advised him before he erected the signs that they would not violate the law. Maryland's highest court affirmed the conviction, stating:
[Aldvice given by a public official, even a State's Attorney, that a contemplated act is not criminal will not excuse an offender if, as a matter of law, the act performed did amount to a violation. . . . If an accused could be
exempted from punishment for crime by reason of the advice of counsel, such advice would become paramount to the law... .
Defendant was aware of the penal statute. [He] did the thing he intended to do. . .. If the right of a person to erect a sign of a certain type and size depends upon the construction and application of a penal statute,
and the right is somewhat doubtful, he erects the sign at his peril. In other words, a person who commits an act which the law declared to be criminal cannot be excused from punishment upon the theory that he miscon-
strued or misapplied the law.
2. The MPC. Reflecting a widespread view that decisions like Hopkins are unfair, the Code adopts a limited defense for situations in which a defendant reasonably relies on an official interpretation. See §2.04(3), in the Appendix to this
book. The Commentaries explain (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.04 at 274-275 (1985):
All of the categories dealt with in the formulation involve, for the most part, situations where the act charged is consistent with the entire law-abidingness of the actor, where the possibility of collusion is minimal, and where
judicial determination of the reasonableness of the belief in legality should not present substantial difficulty. It is hard, therefore, to see how any purpose can be served by a conviction. It should be added that in the area

of regulatory offenses, where the defense would normally apply, penal sanctions are appropriate in general only for deliberate evasion or defiance. When less than this is involved, lesser sanctions should suffice, for these

typically are situations where a single violation works no major public or private injury; it is persistent violations that must be brought to book. And obviously the defense afforded by this section would normally be available to

defendant only once; after a warning he can hardly have a reasonable basis for belief in the legality of his behavior.

The MPC's official-reliance defense is widely accepted. See, e.g., United States v. Levin, 973 F.2d 463, 468 (6th Cir. 1992); Commonwealth v. Twitchell, 416 Mass. 114, 617 N.E.2d 609 (1993). But it is narrowly framed. The defendant's
expectations must be based on a formal, official statement. So, for example, “desuetude,” a situation involving “a long period of intentional nonenforcement and notorious disregard,” is rarely considered sufficient.*2 For a proposal to allow a nar-
row defense in such situations, see Zachary S. Price, Reliance on Nonenforcement, 58 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 937, 1016 (2017).

p. 366
p.367

3. Due process limits. In a jurisdiction that doesn't accept the MPC official-reliance defense, a defendant may have a constitutional defense. Using the label “entrapment by estoppel,” the Supreme Court has held that a conviction
may violate the Due Process Clause if a government official had told the defendant that the contemplated conduct was lawful. (The catch is that the defendant's reliance must be deemed “reasonable” — see Note 4 infra.)

This due process doctrine was first recognized in Raley v. Ohio, 360 U.S. 423 (1959). Defendants invoked their privilege against self-incrimination before an Ohio government commission after the commission told them they could do
so. This was bad advice, because an Ohio statute automatically protected them from use of their answers in a criminal prosecution; as a result they had no valid privilege to remain silent because their answers could not be used to incriminate
them. They were then convicted of contempt because they had refused to answer the commission's questions. The Supreme Court stated that to affirm the convictions “would be to sanction the most indefensible sort of entrapment by the State
— convicting a citizen for exercising a privilege which the State clearly had told him was available to him” (id. at 438). For discussion of this due process defense, see John T. Parry, Culpability, Mistake, and Official Interpretations of Law, 25 Am. J.
Crim. L. 1 (1997).

4, The reasonableness requirement. Under MPC §2.04(3)(b), the reliance defense is available only for “reasonable reliance upon an official statement of the law, afterward determined to be invalid or erroneous. . . .” The due process
defense has a similar qualification. But why would it ever be unreasonable to rely on an official statement of the law not determined to be erroneous at the time when the defendant acts? Consider these situations.

(a) Federal-state conflict. Federalism, together with newly intense polarization in American politics, generates important clashes over this issue. Many states have legalized the use of marijuana, but it remains a federal crime, severely
punished in some circumstances. Many states and localities have enacted provisions in opposition to federal immigration law. From a different political direction, a number of states have enacted laws purporting to authorize the possession of
firearms in circumstances that federal law prohibits. For discussion of the mistake-of-law implications of these developments, see Mary D. Fan, Legalization Conflicts and Reliance Defenses, 92 Wash. U. L. Rev. 907 (2015).

Of course, lawyers know that the Supremacy Clause makes federal laws controlling when they are within Congress's legislative authority. And lawyers generally have a fairly good understanding of what Congress's legislative authority
is, But many people assume that the law of their state or city is valid, at least until they have reason to think otherwise. Consider United States v. Cox, 906 F.3d 1170 (10th Cir. 2018). Cox owned an Army-surplus store in Kansas, where he sold
homemade silencers that are subject to registration under the National Firearms Act (NFA). Kansas, however, has a statute, the Second Amendment Protection Act (SAPA), that purports to exempt from federal firearms regulations any firearm
(including firearm accessories) manufactured, owned, and “temain{ing] within the borders of Kansas.” The law also makes it a felony for any federal official to enforce federal firearms laws in Kansas with respect to any purely in-state firearm.° Cox,
who did

p.367

p. 368
not register the silencers he made and sold, thought, apparently in good faith, that SAPA allowed him to avoid the “red tape” of federal firearms regulations as long as the silencers never left Kansas. The trial court withheld that defense from the
jury, and he was convicted on eight counts of violating NFA.

Prior to the Cox prosecution, no court had ruled on whether SAPA was void under the Supremacy Clause. Along with Cox himself, the state of Kansas submitted briefs arguing for the validity of SAFA, but Cox’s trial and appellate courts
resolved that issue against them. Cox also argued, however, that he was entitled to rely on the official statement of Kansas law contained in SAPA (which hadn't been held invalid at the time of his conduct), and that he was entitled to present this
reliance defense to the jury.

Notice how Cox’s reliance defense differs from the mistake-of-law defenses raised in previous cases. In Marrero, p. 350 supra, the defendant relied on a New York statute stating that a “peace officer” did not need a firearms permit.
But that statute did not state that a federal correction officer qualified as such; that conclusion was Marrero’s own erroneous interpretation of the law. In Cheek, p. 360 supra, the defendant claimed to think that the applicable income tax statute
was unconstitutional. But no constitutional provision so stated; that conclusion was Cheek’s own erroneous interpretation of the Constitution. In contrast, in Cox, the Kansas statute expressly stated that Kansas residents did not need to register
firearms and firearm accessories that remained entirely in-state. Cox, unlike Marrero and Cheek, did not misinterpret the law on which he sought to rely. The Kansas law meant exactly what Cox thought it meant, but subsequent to his conduct,
courts held that the Kansas law was invalid. In other words, Cox sought to raise exactly the kind of defense contemplated by MPC §2.04(3)(b): reliance on “an official statement of the law, afterward determined to be invalid or erroneous, contained
in () a statute. . . .” And he argued that this reliance met the only other requirement — that it be reasonable.

The Tenth Circuit rejected that argument and affirmed the conviction, holding that Cox's reliance on “the misleading government agent (the Kansas legislature)” was unreasonable, because Congress's power over interstate commerce
unquestionably extends to the in-state activity covered by NFA, and because “Kansas wasn't considering, and didn’t purport to limit, Congress's taxing-clause authority.” Id. at 1191.

Do you agree that there was no jury issue as to whether Cox’s reliance was unreasonable? Does it make sense for reasonableness to be measured from the perspective of a sophisticated constitutional lawyer?

(b) Conflicting decisions within the federal courts. Consider United States v. Albertini, 830 F.2d 985 (9th Cir. 1987). The defendant was convicted of trespass for engaging in a protest demonstration on a naval base. On appeal,
the Ninth Circuit (in Albertini 1) set aside the conviction on the ground that his conduct was protected by the First Amendment. The government then filed a petition for certiorari, seeking review by the Supreme Court. At that point, but before the
Supreme Court decided whether to review the case, Albertini engaged in a second protest demonstration. After that demonstration, the Supreme Court granted review and reversed the Ninth Circuit, holding that the protest was not protected by
the First Amendment. The conviction in Albertini I was therefore reinstated. But the government also prosecuted Albertini for the second demonstration, which had occurred before the Supreme Court's decision to review Albertini I. In Albertini
I,

p. 368

p. 369
he was convicted for the second demonstration and of course no longer had a First Amendment defense. The court of appeals nonetheless reversed the conviction in Albertini II, this time on the ground that he had a due process right to rely on
the previous Ninth Circuit decision ruling that his conduct was lawful:

IA] person who holds the latest controlling court opinion declaring his activities constitutionally protected should be able to depend on that ruling to protect like activities from criminal conviction until that opinion is reversed,

or at least until the Supreme Court has granted certiorari. . .. To hold otherwise would sanction a kind of “entrapment” by the government — convicting Albertini for acts that the government has told him are protected by the

first amendment. . . .

Is this so clear? What if most commentators had criticized the result in Albertini I and predicted that the Supreme Court would reverse it? If there were contrary authority in other circuit courts, would it be unreasonable for people in the
Ninth Circuit to rely on that court's interpretation of the law? Some might argue that people should have the right to rely on the “latest controlling court opinion” in their own jurisdictions. But the Supreme Court rejected that view. In United States
v. Rodgers, 466 U.S. 475, 484 (1984), the Court said that although the existence of a circuit split does not automatically make it unreasonable to rely on in-circuit precedent, in Albertini’s case, “review of that issue by this Court and against the
position of the respondent [was] reasonably foreseeable.”5! Subsequently, the Ninth Circuit overruled Albertini IT and upheld the conviction of someone whose conduct had been lawful at the time under precedent in the Ninth Circuit but not else-
where. United States v. Qualls, 172 F.3d 1136 (9th Cir. 1999). In dissent, Judge Hawkins observed (id. at 1139-1140):

Rodgers has the effect of requiring that a citizen look not to the established law of the circuit in which he resides, but to the law of the circuit taking the most expansive view of conduct prohibited by a statute, [until] the

Supreme Court resolves any . . . disagreement among the circuits. This can have the effect of restraining for years conduct that the Court may ultimately decide was always perfectly legal.

Lawyers can eam sizeable fees for their expertise in predicting changes in the law, but courts sometimes attribute impressive powers of prognostication to people with no legal training. Consider United States v. Muskett, 970 F.3d
1233 (10th Cir. 2020). In 2013, Muskett allegedly brandished a firearm “in furtherance of a crime of violence.” At the time, the controlling Tenth Circuit precedent (United States v. Perez-Vargas 52) held that the alleged conduct (assault with a deadly
weapon) was not a “crime of violence” because it did not inevitably require using physical force directly against another person. Subsequently, the Supreme Court

p.369

p.370
held otherwise, and Muskett was then prosecuted, convicted of the federal “brandishing” offense, and sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment, far more than he would have received in a state prosecution for the assault itself. The Tenth Circuit
upheld Muskett’s conviction and sentence, ruling that his claim of reliance on Perez-Vargas was unreasonable because at the time of his alleged conduct, there was a circuit split on the “crime of violence” issue (a debatable point challenged by the
dissent) and because a Supreme Court opinion “decided nearly three years before [his] conduct . . . provided notice that the logic of Perez-Vargasrested on shaky foundations.” |d. at 1243 (emphasis added). The dissent observed that “Mr. Muskett
would have needed uncanny legal expertise and foresight to anticipate the eventual unravelling of Perez-Vargas based on the Supreme Court's [pre-2013] opinion.” Id. at 1252.

For discussion of these issues, see Trevor W. Morrison, Fair Warning and Retroactive Judicial Expansion of Federal Criminal Statutes, 74 S. Cal. L. Rev. 455 (2001). Note also that due process concems when an arguably unforeseeable
judicial decision extends the reach of the criminal law are analogous to ex post facto concerns when a legislature does so. See p. 312-317 supra.
Lambert v. California

Supreme Court of the United States
355 U.S. 225 (1957)

Justice Doustas delivered the opinion of the Court.

Section 52.38(a) of the Los Angeles Municipal Code defines “convicted person” as follows:

Any person who, subsequent to January 1, 1921, has been or hereafter is convicted of an offense punishable as a felony in the State of California, or who has been or who is hereafter convicted of any offense in any place

other than the State of California, which offense, if committed in the State of California, would have been punishable as a felony.

Section 52.39 provides that it shall be unlawful for “any convicted person” to be or remain in Los Angeles for a period of more than five days without registering; it requires any person having a place of abode outside the city to register if
he comes into the city on five occasions or more during a 30-day period; and it prescribes the information to be furnished the Chief of Police on registering. Section 52.43(b) makes the failure to register a continuing offense, each day's failure con-
stituting a separate offense.

Appellant, arrested on suspicion of another offense, was charged with a violation of this registration law. . .. The case was tried to a jury which found appellant guilty. The court fined her $250 and placed her on probation for three
years. ... No element of willfulness is by terms included in the ordinance nor read into it by the California court as a condition necessary for a conviction.

We must assume that appellant had no actual knowledge of the requirement that she register under this ordinance, as she offered proof of this defense which was refused. The question is whether a registration act of this character
violates Due

p.370
p.a7t
Process where it is applied to a person who has no actual knowledge of his duty to register, and where no showing is made of the probability of such knowledge.

. .. There is wide latitude on the lawmakers to declare an offense and to exclude elements of knowledge and diligence from its definition. . . . But we deal here with conduct that is wholly passive — mere failure to register. It is unlike
the commission of acts, or the failure to act under circumstances that should alert the doer to the consequences of his deed. Cf. . . . United States v. Balint, 258 U.S. 250; United States v. Dotterweich, 320 U.S. 277, 284. The rule that “ignorance
of the law will not excuse” . . . is deep in our law, as is the principle that of all the powers of local government, the police power is “one of the least limitable.” . . . On the other hand, Due Process places some limits on its exercise. Engrained in our
concept of Due Process is the requirement of notice. Notice is sometimes essential so that the citizen has the chance to defend charges. Notice is required before property interests are disturbed, before assessments are made, before penalties
are assessed. Notice is required in a myriad of situations where a penalty or forfeiture might be sutfered for mere failure to act. Recent cases illustrating the point . . . involved only property interests in civil litigation. But the principle is equally ap-
propriate where a person, wholly passive and unaware of any wrongdoing, is brought to the bar of justice for condemnation in a criminal case.

Registration laws are common and their range is wide. .. . Many such laws are akin to licensing statutes in that they pertain to the regulation of business activities. But the present ordinance is entirely different. Violation of its provisions
is unaccompanied by any activity whatever, mere presence in the city being the test. Moreover, circumstances which might move one to inquire as to the necessity of registration are completely lacking. At most the ordinance is but a law enforce-
ment technique designed for the convenience of law enforcement agencies through which a list of the names and addresses of felons then residing in a given community is compiled. The disclosure is merely a compilation of former convictions
already publicly recorded in the jurisdiction where obtained. Nevertheless, this registrant on first becoming aware of her duty to register was given no opportunity to comply with the law and avoid its penalty, even though her default was entirely in-
nocent. She could but suffer the consequences of the ordinance, namely, conviction with the imposition of heavy criminal penalties thereunder. We believe that actual knowledge of the duty to register or proof of the probability of such knowledge
and subsequent failure to comply are necessary before a conviction under the ordinance can stand. . . . Its severity lies in the absence of an opportunity either to avoid the consequences of the law or to defend any prosecution brought under it.
Where a person did not know of the duty to register and where there was no proof of the probability of such knowledge, he may not be convicted consistently with Due Process. Were it otherwise, the evil would be as great as it is when the law is
written in print too fine to read or in a language foreign to the community.

Reversed. . ..

JusTIce FRANKFURTER, Whom JUSTICE HARLAN and JUSTICE WHITTAKER join, dissenting.
The present laws of the United States and of the forty-eight States are thick with provisions that command that some things not be done and others be done,
part
p.972
although persons convicted under such provisions may have had no awareness of what the law required or that what they did was wrongdoing. The body of decisions sustaining such legislation, including innumerable registration laws, is almost
as voluminous as the legislation itself... .

Surely there can hardly be a difference as a matter of faimess, of hardship, or of justice, if one may invoke it, between the case of a person wholly innocent of wrongdoing, in the sense that he was not remotely conscious of violating any
law, who is imprisoned for five years for conduct relating to narcotics [as permitted under Balint, supra p. 329], and the case of another person who is placed on probation for three years on condition that she pay $250, for failure, as a local resi-
dent, convicted under local law of a felony, to register under a law passed as an exercise of the State's “police power.”

[Whhat the Court here does is to draw a constitutional line between a State's requirement of doing and not-doing. What is this but a return to Year Book distinctions between feasance and nonfeasance — a distinction that may have
significance in the evolution of common law notions of liability, but is inadmissible as a line between constitutionality and unconstitutionality. . . .

If the generalization that underlies, and alone can justify, this decision were to be given its relevant scope, a whole volume of the United States Reports would be required to document in detail the legislation in this country that would fall
or be impaired. | abstain from entering upon a consideration of such legislation, and adjudications upon it, because | feel confident that the present decision will turn out to be an isolated deviation from the strong current of precedents — a derelict
on the waters of the law. Accordingly, | content myself with dissenting.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Questions. What precisely, in Justice Frankfurter’s view, is the “generalization that underlies, and alone can justify” the decision in Lambert? Would it invalidate all strict liability legislation, as he seems to imply? Would it invalidate
the traditional rule that even a reasonable mistake of law is not a defense? Could the generalization be confined to cases of omissions? Consider, for example, an ordinance that prohibited “convicted persons” from accepting employment as
babysitters in the city of Los Angeles.

2. Problem. Bryant was convicted of a sex offense in South Carolina. At the time of his conviction, the sentencing judge informed him of South Carolina's law requiring registration by persons convicted of a sexual offense, but the
judge did not comply with a federal requirement that Bryant also be advised of his obligation to register in any other state to which he might move. Later, Bryant moved to North Carolina and was convicted of a crime when authorities discovered
that he had failed to register there. The intermediate appellate court held that under Lambert, Bryant's conviction for failure to register violated due process. The North Carolina Supreme Court reversed. First, that court held, Lambert was distin-
guishable, because the Los Angeles registration statute was a general law enforcement device rather than a public safety measure. Second, the court said, because all states now have some sort of registration regime applicable to persons con-
victed of a sexual offense, the case was “overflowing with circumstances” that should have moved

p.s72
p.378
Bryant to inquire about the need to register. State v. Bryant, 614 S.E.2d 479, 488 (N.C. 2008). Is the result consistent with the reasoning of Lambert? If not, which is the better approach?

3. Entrapment by omission? As we saw above, it is considered a violation of due process to convict a defendant who reasonably relies on an official assurance that his conduct is lawful. See Raley v. Ohio, p. 367 supra. Should a
similar principle afford a defense when a defendant reasonably relies on the failure of a government official to alert him that his conduct will be unlawful?

State v. Leavitt, 27 P.3d 622 (Wash. Ct. App. 2001), involved a man who had been convicted of a misdemeanor domestic violence offense. The sentencing judge failed to comply with a state law requiring that defendants convicted in
such cases be notified that they can no longer possess a firearm. Instead, the judge told Leavitt that he could not possess a firearm during the one-year probation imposed for the misdemeanor. That statement was not false, but it was misleading
because Leavitt was also barred from possessing a firearm after the one-year period. Leavitt took his guns to his brother for safekeeping during the year, but after the expiration of his probation, police found guns in his car, and he was convicted
of unlawful possession. The Washington court noted that knowledge of illegality was not an element of the firearm-possession offense. Nonetheless, the court reversed the conviction because the “combined actions and inactions of the predicate-
sentencing court [in the domestic violence case] misled Leavitt reasonably to understand that his firearm possession restriction was limited to one year. [I]t would be a denial of due process to require Leavitt to speculate about additional firearm-
possession restrictions beyond his one-year probation where the sentencing court did not inform him otherwise.” Id. at 628.

Ina similar case, the Seventh Circuit reached the opposite result. Wilson's wife obtained an order of protection against him. In a hearing that lasted only ten minutes, Wilson and his wife discussed child support and visitation, and the
state judge explained the terms of the order of protection. State law allowed the judge to require Wilson to give up his firearms as part of the order, but the judge did not do so, apparently because Wilson had not used any weapons to threaten
his wife. Nonetheless, a federal statute (not mentioned by the state judge) automatically made firearms possession unlawful under such circumstances. Wilson was convicted of the federal offense and sentenced to 41 months in prison. In United
States v. Wilson, 159 F.3d 280, 289 (7th Cir. 1998), the court of appeals affirmed, stating that “a ‘knowing’ violation of the statute only requires proof of knowledge by the defendant of the facts that constitute the offense.” In dissent, Chief Judge
Richard Posner observed (id. at 293-296):

Congress created, and the Department of Justice sprang, a trap on Carlton Wilson as a result of which he will serve more than three years in federal prison for an act (actually an omission to act) that he could not have

suspected was a crime or even a civil wrong. We can release him from the trap by interpreting the statute under which he was convicted to require the government to prove that the violator knew that he was committing a

crime. This is the standard device by which the courts avoid having to explore the outer boundaries of the constitutional requirement of fair notice of potential criminal liability.

p.379
p.374
[This law] is not the kind of law that a lay person would intuit existed. . . . Yet the Department of Justice took no steps to publicize the existence of the law until long after Wilson violated it... .

The federal criminal code contains thousands of separate prohibitions, many ridiculously obscure, such as the one against using the coat of arms of Switzerland in advertising, or using “Johnny Horizon” as a

trade name without the authorization of the Department of the Interior. The prohibition [at issue here] is one of the most obscure. A person . . . knows or should know that if he is convicted of a felony he will have to get rid of

[his] gun; if he doesn’t know, the judge or the probation service will tell him. But should he be made subject to a restraining order telling him to keep away from his ex-wife, . .. it will not occur to him that he must give up the

gun unless the judge issuing the order tells him. The judge didn’t tell Wilson; so far as appears, the judge was unaware of the law. Wilson's lawyer didn’t tell him either — Wilson didn't have a lawyer. . . . The fact that the re-

straining order contained no reference to guns may have lulled him into thinking that, as long as he complied with the order and stayed away from his wife, he could carry on as before. . .

We want people to familiarize themselves with the laws bearing on their activities. But a reasonable opportunity doesn't mean being able to go to the local law library and read Title 18. . . . If none of the conditions
that make it reasonable to dispense with proof of knowledge of the law is present, then to intone “ignorance of the law is no defense” is to condone a violation of fundamental principles for the sake of a modest economy in
the administration of criminal justice.

Actually a false economy. The purpose of criminal laws is to bring about compliance with desired norms of behavior. . . . This purpose is ill served by keeping the law a secret, which has been the practical upshot
of the Department of Justice's failure . . . either to enforce the law vigorously or to notify the relevant state officials of the law’s existence. . . . The [Supreme] Court voided Lambert's conviction. We should do the same for Wil-
son's conviction.

QUESTION: Would Wilson have a defense under MPC §2.04(3)(a)?
PROBLEM: THE “CULTURAL DEFENSE”

How should the law be applied when people commit acts that are illegal here, but not in the country where they spent most of their life before coming to the United States? A “cultural defense” of this sort is in effect a claim that
ignorance or mistake of penal law should excuse, typically in a context where the law in question is not an obscure regulatory measure but one prohibiting conduct that in the United States is widely considered malum in se — for example, homi-
cide in a situation that does not satisfy American law’s limits on the use of force in self-defense. Courts generally make no exception to the usual mistake-of-law doctrine in such a case. Should they? Is ignorance of the law less culpable in these
circumstances?

Defendants can raise a cultural defense in other ways as well. For example, defendants who have killed their spouse or children after discovering the spouse's

p.374

p.376
infidelity have claimed that such a betrayal, considered intensely shameful and sufficient to provoke a violent response where they were raised, should mitigate the offense to manslaughter, even if it ordinarily would not be sufficient to do so under
American law. See Aahren R. DePalma, | Couldn't Help Myself — My Culture Made Me Do It: The Use of Cultural Evidence in the Heat of Passion Defense, 28 Chicana/o-Latina/o L. Rev. 1, 6-10 (2009).

The argument in favor of allowing these cultural circumstances either as an absolute or mitigating defense is that it “will advance two desirable ends consistent with the broader goals of liberal society and the criminal law: (1) the
achievement of individualized justice for the defendant; and (2) a commitment to cultural pluralism.” James J. Sing, Culture as Sameness: Toward a Synthetic View of Provocation and Culture in the Criminal Law, 108 Yale LJ. 1845, 1847 (1999).
Professor Coleman, however, points to a dilemma (96 Colum. L. Rev. at 1094-1096):

Allowing sensitivity to a defendant's culture to inform the application of laws to that individual [furthers] the idea that the defendant should get as much individualized (subjective) justice as possible. [But what] happens to

the victims — almost always minority women and children — when multiculturalism and individualized justice are advanced by . . . cultural evidence? The answer, both in theory and in practice, is stark: They are denied the

protection of the criminal laws because their assailants generally go free, either immediately or within a relatively brief period of time. [W]hen cultural evidence is permitted to excuse otherwise criminal conduct, the system

effectively is choosing to adopt a different, discriminatory standard of criminality for immigrant defendants, and hence, a different and discriminatory level of protection for victims who are members of the culture in ques-

tion. . .. Thus, the use of cultural defenses is anathema to another fundamental goal of the progressive agenda, namely the expansion of legal protections for some of the least powerful members of American society: women

and children.

There is a lively debate about these issues. Professor Elaine Chiu notes that our penal system already acknowledges the relevance of culture as a mitigating or exonerating factor, but it relies almost exclusively on the discretion of
judges and prosecutors to achieve that goal; she condemns the arbitrariness of that approach and proposes greater reliance on a formal doctrinal defense. See Elaine M. Chiu, Culture as Justification, Not Excuse, 43 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1817 (2006).
For an analysis supporting a defense, together with a comprehensive review of the contexts in which cultural issues arise, see Alison Dundes Renteln, The Cultural Defense (2004). For a contrary view, see Eliot M. Held & Reid Griffith Fontaine, On
the Boundaries of Culture as an Affirmative Defense, 51 Ariz. L. Rev. 237 (2009). The conflict between feminism and multiculturalism in this context is explored in Holly Maguigan, Cultural Evidence and Male Violence: Are Feminist and Multicultural
Reformers on a Collision Course in Criminal Courts?, 70 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 36 (1995).

1, £g, Fla. Stat. Ann, §775.01 (2020) (“The common law of England in relation to crimes, except so far as the same relates to the modes and degrees of punishment, shall be of fll force in this state where there is no existing provision by statute on the subject"); Wash. Rev. Code Ann. §9A.04.060
(2020) (“The provisions of the common law relating to the commission of crime and the punishment thereof, insofar as net inconsistent with the constitution and statutes of this state, shall supplement all penal statutes for this state and all persons offending against the same shall be tried in the courts of this
state having jurisdiction of the offense.”).

5. As part ofits lenity argument, the plurality asserts that Yates did not have “fair warming” that his conduct amounted to a felony. But even under the plurallty's view, the dumping of fish is potentially a federal felony — just under §1812(c)(1), rather than §1519. In any event, the plurality itself ac-
knowledges that the ordinary meaning of §1519 covers Yates’s conduct: [WJhen an ordinary citizen seeks notice of a statute's scope, he is more likely to focus on the plain text than (as the plurality would have it) on the section number, the superfluity principle, and the noscitur and ejusdem canons.

2, See also Maisie A. Wilson, Note, The Law of Lenity: Enacting a Codified Federal Rule of Lenity, 70 Duke L.J. 1663 (2021) (arguing that an even stricter version of the lenty doctrine was arguably implict in the older cases).

‘a, Awnit of prohibition bars further proceedings, on the ground that the alleged conduct, even if proved, would not constitute the offense charged. — EDs.

3, Subsequently, faced with a due process challenge, the government entered into plea negotiations and dismissed the manslaughter indictment. See United States v. Flute, 951 F.3d 908 (8th Cir. 2020).

4, Ex parte Key, 890 So. 2d 1056 (Ala. 2003); State v. Piootte, 661 N.W.2d 381 (Wis. 2008).

2, The ordinance states

(@) Whenever a police officer observes a person whom he reasonably believes to be a criminal street gang member loitering in any public place with one or more other persons, he shall order al such persons to disperse and remove themselves from the area. Any person who
does not promptly obey such an order isin violation of this section.
(0) It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this section that no person who was observed loitering was in fact a member of a criminal street gang,
(©) As used in this section:
(1) “Lotter” means to remain in any one place with no apparent purpose.
(2) “Criminal street gang” means any ongoing organization, association in fact or group of three or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one ofits substantial activities the commission of one or more of the criminal acts enumerated in paragraph (3),
‘and whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattem of criminal gang activity...
(6) "Public place” means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned,
(e) Any person who violates this Section Is subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 for each offense, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both... .

7... The elty believes that the ordinance resulted in a significant decline in gang-related homicides. It notes that in 1996, the last year the ordinance was enforced, the gang-related homicide rate fell by 26%. In 1996, after the ordinance had been held invalid, the gang-related homicide rate rose
1196. However, gang-related homicides fell by 19% in 1997, over a year after the suspension of the ordinance. Given the myriad factors that influence levels of violence, itis difficult to evaluate the probative value of this statistical evidence, or to reach any firm conclusion about the ordinance’s efficacy. Cr.
Harcour, Reflecting on the Subject: A Critique of the Social Influence Conception of Deterrence, the Broken Windows Theory, and Order-Maintenance Policing New York Style, 97 Mich. L. Rev. 291, 296 (1998) (describing the “hotly contested debate raging among . .. experts over the causes of the decline in
crime in New York City and nationally”).

‘a. Vagueness challenges can take two forms: a challenge to a statute on its face and a challenge to the statute as applied. A facial challenge, to be successful, must demonstrate that no matter how harmful a person's conduct may be, one can never tell whether the statute covers the situation or
not. An as-applied challenge, in contrast, only needs to show that the statute does net have a clear meaning in the context ofa particular case. Thus, in State v. Scruggs, 905 A.2d 24 (Conn. 2006), the defendant allegedly caused severe injury to her son's mental health (and ultimately his suicide) by maintain-
ing an extremely cluttered and unsanitary apartment. She was convicted under a statute making it a crime to wilfully place one's child “in such a situation that... the health of such child is likely to be injured.” That statute has a clear meaning in core situations of child abuse, such as a physical assault, and
it therefore is not unconstitutional on its face. But the Connecticut Supreme Court held that it was unconstitutionally vague as applied, because it was not clear whether the statute was intended to cover what Scruggs had done.

{footnote continues on p. 219]

‘A facial challenge is more difficult to win, but when successful, it renders the statute in question entirely invalid and unenforceable. In Morales, the trial courts had dismissed all charges before reaching any consideration of the facts of individual cases. Thus, in order to prevail in the U.S. Supreme
Court, the defendants needed to show that the meaning of the Chicago ordinance could never be clear under any circumstances, and therefore that it was unconstitutional on its face. — EDS.

24, One of the trial courts that invalidated the ordinance gave the following illustration: “suppose a group of gang members were playing basketball in the park, while waiting for a drug delivery. Their apparent purpose is that they are in the park to play ball. The actual purpose is that they are waiting
for drugs. Under this definition of loitering, a group of people innocently sitting in a park discussing their futures would be arrested, while the ‘basketball players’ awaiting a drug delivery would be left alone.”

29. “Literally read . .. this ordinance says that a person may stand on a public sidewalk in Birmingham only at the whim of any police officer of the city. The constitutional vice of so broad a provision needs no demonstration.” 382 U.S. 87 at 90.

9... The logical implication of the plurality’s assertion is that the police can never issue dispersal orders. For example, in the plurality’s view, itis apparently unconstitutional for a police officer to ask a group of gawkers to move along in order to secure a crime scene.

5, See Anthony Braga et al., The Effects of Hot Spots Policing on Crime: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis, 31 Just. Q. 633 (2014).

6. Tetty v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968).

After the election of a new mayor committed to curbing the use of stop-and-frisk, New York City withdrew its appeal.

8. See New York City Police Dept., Stop, Question and Frisk Data, https//www/1nyc.qov/site/nypd/stats/reports-analysis/stopfrisk.page.

9. See New York City Police Dept., Citywide Seven Major Felony Offenses 2000-2020, https://www/1 nyc.gov/site/nypd/stats/crime-statistics/historical pageCitywide Historical Data.

10. John MacDonald, Jeffrey Fagan & Amanda Geller, The Effects of Local Police Surges on Crime and Arrests in New York City, 11 PLoS ONE.e0157223, httosi//jourals.plos.org/plosone/article7id=10.137 1/journal,pone.0157228 (2015); David Weisburd et al., Do Stop, Question, and Frisk Prac-
tices Deter Crime?, 15 Criminology & Pub. Pol'y 31 (2016).

11, See Fatal Force [real-time Washington Post database, https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/investigations/police-shootings-catabase/.

12.1

11S. Lauren Kirchner, Making Police Departments More Diverse Isn’t Enough (Aug. 19, 2014), https://psmag.com/making-police-clepartments-more-diverse-ish-t-enough-19e4a36942064.xsivmstxh; Jeremy Ashkenas & Haeyoun Park, The Race Gap in America’s Police Departments, N.Y. Times,
Apr. 8, 2015.

+14, See Albert W. Alschuler & Stephen J. Schuihofer, Antiquated Procedures or Bedrock Rights? A Response to Professors Meares and Kahan, 1996 U. Chi. Legal. F. 215. See also John Rappaport, Some Doubts About “Democratizing” Criminal Justice, 87 U. Chi. L. Rev. 711 (2020); Stephen J.
‘Schulhofer, Criminal Justice, Local Democracy, and Constitutional Rights, 111 Mich. L. Rev. 1045 (2013).

115. The case came to the Supreme Court on habeas corpus, so the proportionality issue was not presented to the Court directly. Rather, the issue was the technically more limited question whether the state court decision upholding the sentence was “unreasonable,” and the Court held that it was
not.

116. This problem can be reconsidered in connection with the material on omissions and possession-as-an-act, pp. 261-260 infra.

117. Inlater proceedings, the parties settled; the Ninth Circuit then vacated its earlier opinion and dismissed the litigation as moot. Jones v. City of Los Angeles, 505 F.3d 1006 (Sth Cir. 2007). In a subsequent case, the Ninth Circuit, although not bound by the opinion in Jones, nonetheless reaffirmed
its holding. See Martin v. City of Boise, 920 F.3d 584 (8th Cir. 2019).

111. Penal Code section 26 provides in pertinent part that “All persons are capable of committing crimes except those belonging to the following classes: .. . Five — Persons who committed the act charged without being conscious thereof.” (Italics added.)

18. One state rejects this nearty universal rule. See State v. Deer, 287 P.3d 539, 546 (Wash. 2012) (holding that an involuntary act defense (in that case “sexsomnia”) is an affirmative defense that the defense must prove by a preponderance of the evidence.

119. But see Rainey v. Wengler, 2016 WL 225666 (D. Idaho 2016), holding that no “clearly established law” requires making expert testimony available to an indigent defendant who seeks to raise a sleepwalking defense.

20. In 5 Star, one justice, concurring only in the resutt, interpreted the statute to require proof that the defendant intentionally or knowingly killed the wildlife. Accordingly, 5 Star’s voluntary acts of operating the containment ponds were not accompanied at that time by the necessary mens rea.
Three dissenting justices interpreted the statute to impose strict liability. In their view, the required actus reus (voluntary acts of operating the containment ponds) and mens rea (in this case, none) were both met simultaneously at “time one”; the only remaining issue was whether those “time one” acts were
the proximate cause of killing the fish, or whether instead the flood was an “intervening cause.” In later sections of this book, we examine these distinct but inevitably linked issues of mens rea (p. 284 infra) and causation (pp. 567-601 infra).

9.10 ALR. 1137 (1921) (parent to child); Territory v. Manton, 8 Mont. 95, 19 P. 387 (husband to wife); Regina v. Smith, 8 Carr. & P. 153 (Eng. 1837) (master to apprentice); United States v. Knowles, 26 Fed. Cas. 800 (No. 15,540) (ship's master to crew and passengers); cf. State v. Reitze, 86 N.J.L.
407, 92 A. 576 (Innkeeper to inebriated customers).

1. Atticle 27, Section 35A, insofar as it is relevant to this case, reads as follows:

(@) Penalty. Any parent, adoptive parent or other person who has the permanent or temporary care or custody or responsibility for the supervision of a minor child under the age of elghteen years who causes abuse to such minor child shall be guilty of a felony and upon convic-
tion shall be sentenced to not more than fifteen years in the penitentiary.
(0) Definitions. Wherever used in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; ... 7. “Abuse” shall mean any . .. physical injury or injuries sustained by a child as a result of cruel or inhumane treatment or as a result of malicious act or acts by any parent, adoptive
parent or other person who has the permanent or temporary care or custody or responsibility for supervision of a minor child. . .. — EDS.

21, See Richard Philpot et al., Would | Be Helped? Cross-National CCTV Footage Shows That Intervention Is the Norm in Public Conflicts, 75 Am. Psychol. 66 (2020), hitps://dol.org/10.1037/amp0000469.

22, For further discussion, see Michael Meniow & Alexander McCall eds., The Duty to Rescue (1993); Theodore Y. Blumoff, On the Nature of the Action-Omission Network, 24 Ga. St. U. L. Rev. 1003 (2008); Steven J. Heyman, Foundations of the Duty to Rescue, 47 Vand. L. Rev. 673 (1994).

23, See Sharon Yamen, Nanel K. Carr & Aaron Bartholomew, Am | My Brother's Keeper? How Technology Necessitates Reform of the Lack of Duty to Rescue or Duty to Report Laws in the United States, 28 B.U. Pub. Int. LJ. 117 (2019).

24, See Ariel Levy, Trial by Twitter, The New Yorker, Aug. 5, 2013, at 38; Jullet Macur & Nate Schweber, Rape Case Unfolds on Web and Splits City, N.Y. Times, Dec. 17, 2012.

25, See Chapter 7.4, pp. 655-663 intra.

26, See Yamen, et al., supra note 23, at 194-37; Niraj Chokshi, Teenagers Recorded a Drowning Man and Laughed, N.Y. Times, July 21, 2017,

1, The reference is to the failed penal code for Louisiana drafted by Edward Livingston in 1826. See Sanford H. Kadish, Codifiers of the Criminal Law, 78 Colum. L. Rev. 1098 (1978). — Eps.

27. Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013, codified at 20 U.S.C. §1092().

28. Pp. 470-489 infra.

28, See Restatement (Second) of Torts §321, stating that a person who creates a continuing risk of physical harm to another “is under a duty to take reasonable care to prevent the risk from taking effect” and that this rule “applies even though at the time of the act the actor has no reason to believe
that it will nvolve such a risk.” In accord, see also Restatement (Third) of Torts (Draft No. 4) §39,

‘30. This view, of course, is only one way of looking at the problem. H.L.A. Hart has given it its clearest expression. See his Punishment and Responsibility 26 (1968).

31, See p. 464 infra.

82, Kenneth W. Simons, Should the Model Penal Code’s Mens Rea Provisions Be Amended?, 1 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 179, 179 (2003).

41, Section 1.13(@) defines an “element of an offense” to include conduct, attendant circumstances or results that are included in the description of the offense, that negative an excuse or justification for an offense, or that negative a defense under the statute of limitations or establish jurisdiction or
venue. Section 1.19(10) defines the concept of “material element” to include all elements except those that relate exclusively to statutes of limitation, jurisdiction, venue, and the like. The “material elements” of offenses are thus those characteristics (conduct, circumstances, resull) of the actor's behavior that,
when combined with the appropriate level of culpability, will constitute the offense.

‘2, That section of the 1962 Code (now outdated) applied only to a “male who has sexual intercourse with a female not his wife.” The Code Commentary above assumes that this is innerently purposeful conduct. Because modem conceptions of sexual assault (Including the 2021 revision of MPC
Article 213, see §213.0(2)(a) & (0), in the Appendix, infra) extend to any oral-genital contact and to sexual penetration of any person by any person or object, the proscribed conduct is no longer inevitably purposeful. For example, an actor can recklessly, negligently, or even just accidentally cause penetration
by clothing. — Eps.

», This is not a precisely accurate summary of the MPC definitions of “purposely” and “knowingly” in §§2.02(a)& (b). Under those provisions, people can act knowingly only when they are actually aware that particular circumstances exist and that their conduct will cause a required result. §2.02(0)
(9 & (i) But people can act purposely even when they think that required circumstances or results are unlikely, provided that they hope those circumstances exist or that those results will be caused by their conduct. §2.02(a)()& (i). For exploration of this issue, see p. 301, Note 4 infra. — EDs.

‘33, The sample largely mirrored the demographics of the jury-eligible American population, but with modest over-representation of subjects with at least some education beyond high school. See 71 Vand. L. Rev. 241, at 261.

7. [See G. Willams, Criminal Law: The General Part §57 (2d ed, 1961)] at 159:

The rule that witful blindness is equivalent to knowledge is essential, and is found throughout the criminal law. [But] judges are apt to forget its very limited scope. A court can properly find wilful blindness only where it can almost be sald that the defendant actually knew. He suspected

the fact; he realised its probability; but he refrained from obtaining the final confirmation because he wanted in the event to be able to deny knowledge. This, and this alone, is wilful blindness. It requires in effect a finding that the defendant intended to cheat the administration of justice.

‘Any wider definition would make the doctrine of witful blindness indistinguishable from the civil doctrine of negligence in not obtaining knowledge.

‘34, This “negative criterion” probably has little practical significance. Professor Simons asks, “Can a person believe that there is a 70% chance that a fact exists yet at the same time believe that the fact does not exist? This borders on incoherence.” Kenneth W. Simons, The Wilful Blindness
Doctrine: Justifiable in Principle, Problematic in Practice, 51 Ariz. St. LJ. 505, 519 (2021)

35, United States v. Pierotti, 777 F.3d 917, 921 (7th Cir. 2015).

‘36, Dean was convicted of using a gun to commit a robbery, under a statute that imposes a ten-year mandatory minimum sentence if the gun Is discharged. He claimed that the gun discharged accidentally (no one was injured). The Court held that neither knowledge nor intent was required with
respect to the gun's discharge because Dean was “already gulty of unlawful conduct,” and the aggravating element merely enhanced the punishment. Id. at 576.

41, Section 288, subdivision (a) provides in relevant part:

‘Any person who shall wilfully and lewaly commit any lewd or lascivious act ... upon or with the body, or any part or member thereof, ofa child under the age of 14 years, with the intent of arousing, appealing to, or gratifying the lust or passions or sexual desires of such person or of

such child, shall be guilty of a felony and shall be imprisoned in the state prison for a term of three, six, or eight years. ..

2. Although Shawn testified she locked the taller door, she falled to explain how Garcia entered the trailer. A subsequent examination of the traller revealed that there were no signs of a forced entry.

‘3, Shawn admitted that she had engaged in sexual intercourse before the night of June 3d, but denied having any such prior experience with either Garcia or the appellant. However, she did admit having had sexual relations, short of intercourse, with both of them in the past.

5. Appellant's sister corroborated Shawn’s testimony that Shawn made daily visits to the Olsen home during a three-month period. She testified that during these visits Shawn and appellant would go into the latter’s bedroom and close the door. On one occasion appellant's sister saw the two in
bed together. [Four other witnesses described similar episodes involving Shawn and either appellant or other boys.]

7. Garcia was also found guilty of assault with a deadly weapon with infliction of great bodily injury [in the assault on Mr. M.]. Both Garcia and appellant were found not guilty of burglary, forcible rape, and lewd or lascivious acts upon a child under the age of 14 by use of force... .

1.1 do not agree that legislative intent to eliminate good faith mistake of fact as a defense can be inferred from the imposition of relatively higher penalties for that crime. On the contrary, as this court has stated in connection with the crime of bigamy: “The severe penalty imposed . . . and the fact
that it has been regarded . . . as a crime involving moral turpitude, make it extremely unlikely that the Legistature meant to include the morally innocent to make sure the guilty did not escape.”

2. The People suggest that defendant was at least guilty of “sexual intercourse accomplished with a female not the wife of the perpetrator, where the female is under the age of 18 years.” Defendant was neither charged nor convicted of that offense, however, and it is by no means clear from the
record that he had sexual intercourse with the victim.

1. Section 1(1) provides as follows:

Any person who commits an act of gross indecency with or towards a child under the age of fourteen, or who incites a child under that age to such an act with him or another, shall be liable on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years. ... — EDS.

a, “§463 (a)... A person is guilty of rape in the second degree if the person engages in vaginal intercourse with another person... (3) Who is under 14 years of age and the person performing the act is at least four years older than the victim.

“(p) Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section Is guilty of a felony and upon conviction is subject to imprisonment for a period of not more than 20 years.”

‘The current provision, codified at §3-304(c)(1) (2021), Is substantially identical. — Eps.

87. Md. Crim. Code Ann. §3-304(c)(1) (2021).

38, Wis. Stat. §§999.50(3), 948.02(1) & (2) (2021).

39. Ga. Code Ann. §16-6-3(b) (2021). If the victim is at least 14 but less than 16 years old, and the defendant is 16 years old or younger and not more than four years older than the victim, these provisions do not apply, but the defendant is stil guilty of a misdemeanor. Id. §16-6-3(¢).

40, Model Penal Code §213.6(1) (Proposed Official Draft, 1962).

41, See the Appendix to this book, §213.8(1) (2021).The required age gap can be less than five years when the actor is a parent or other close relative of the victim, but here too, liability under the MPC requires proof that the actor recklessly disregarded the risk that the victim was below the spec-
ified age. See id. §213.6(2) (“incestuous Sexual Assault of a Minor’)

a “[It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, exchange, or give away any of the aforesaid drugs except in pursuance of a written order of the person to whom such article is sold, bartered, exchanged, or given, on a form [issued] for that purpose by the Commissioner of Internal Rev-
enue. ..." — EDS.

'b, Section 301 of the Act prohibits the “[[Introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate commerce of any... . drug . .. that is adulterated or misbranded.” — Eos.

a, “Whoever embezzles, steals, purloins, or knowingly converts to his use or the use of another, or without authority, sells, conveys or disposes of any record, voucher, money, or thing of value of the United States ... shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or
both; but if the value of such property does not exceed the sum of $100, he shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one yeat, or both.” — EDS.

.b. United States v. Behrman, 258 U.S. 260 (1922), a companion case to Balint, was another prosecution for a narcotics offense. — EDS.

20. Sayre, Public Welfare Offenses, 33 Col. L. Rev. 55, 73, 84 (1933), cites and classifies a large number of cases and concludes that they fall roughly into subdivisions of (1) illegal sales of intoxicating liquor, (2) sales of impure or adulterated food or drugs, (3) sales of misbranded articles, (4) viola
tions of antinarcotic Acts, (6) criminal nuisances, (6) violations of traffic regulations, (7) violations of motor-vehicle laws, and (6) violations of general police regulations, passed for the safety, health or well-being of the community.

©. But see Henry M. Hart, The Aims of the Criminal Law, 23 Law & Contemp. Probs. 401, 431 n.70 (1958):

In relation to offenses of a traditional type, the Court's opinion seems to be saying, we must be much slower to dispense with a basis for genuine blameworthiness in criminal intent than in relation to modem regulatory offenses. But itis precisely in the area of traditional crimes that the

nature of the act itself commonly gives some warning that there may be a problem about its propriety and so affords, without more, at least some slight basis of condemnation for doing it. Thus, Morissette knew perfectly well that he was taking property which, at least up to the moment

of caption, did not belong to him.

In the area of regulatory crimes, on the other hand, the moral quality of the act is often neutral; and on occasion, the offense may consist not of any act at all, but simply of an intrinsically innocent omission, so that there is no basis for moral condemnation whatever. — EDs.

42. In cases that cannot be viewed as implicating First or Second Amendment rights, lower courts have held that Staples’s mens rea analysis remains controlling. See, e.g., United States v. Bruguler, 735 F.3d 754 (Bth Cir. 2013) (en banc), where the court held that in a prosecution under 18 U.S.C.
{§2242 for “knowingly . ..engag[ing] in a sexual act with another person if that other person is [incapacitated],” conviction requires proof that the defendant knew the victim was incapacitated; the court found (Id. at 758) “no reason to depart from the ordinary approach that the Supreme Court articulated in
Staples.”

43. The jurisdictional clause of §2251 provides, however, that a person who engages in the specified conduct is punishable only “if such person knows or has reason to know that such visual depiction will be transported or transmitted using any means or facility of interstate or foreign commerce
or in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce. . ..”

5. We agree with the reasoning of the Georgia Supreme Court in Davis v. City of Peachtree City, 251 Ga. 219, 304 S.£.2d 701 (1983). Davis involved the criminal conviction of the president of a chain of convenience stores whose employee had sold liquor to a minor. The defendant was prosecuted
Under a city ordinance holding licensees responsible for the acts of their employees and received a $300 fine and a 60-day suspended sentence. The Georgia Supreme Court reversed the conviction: .

Although some commentators and courts have found that vicarious criminal liability does not violate due process in misdemeanor cases which involve as punishment only a slight fine and not imprisonment, we decline to so hold. The damage done to an individual's good name and the

peril imposed on an individual's future are sufficient reasons to shift the balance in favor of the individual. The imposition of such a burden on an employer “cannot rest on so frall a reed as whether his employee will commit a mistake in judgment,” but instead can be justified only by the

appropriate prosecuting officials proving some sort of culpability or knowledge by the employer.

a, Reversed on other grounds, 691 F.3d 1348 (11th Cir. 2012). — Eds.

44, E.g,, Herbert Packer, The Limits of the Criminal Sanction 121-131 (1968); Henry M. Hart, The Aims of the Criminal Law, 23 Law & Contemp. Probs. 401, 422-425 (1958).

45. Eg., James Brady, Strict Liability Offenses: A Justification, 8 Crim. L. Bull. 217 (1972); Steven Nemerson, Criminal Liability Without Fault: A Philosophical Perspective, 75 Colum. L. Rev. 1517 (1975). Cf. Kenneth W. Simons, When Is Strict Criminal Liability Just?, 87 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1075
(1997).

"From J. Dressler ed., Encyclopedia of Crime & Justice, 2E. © 2001 Gale, a part of Cengage Leaming, Inc. Reproduced by permission. www.cengage.com/permissions.

"From J. Dressler ed., Encyclopedia of Crime & Justice, 2E. © 2001 Gale, a part of Cengage Leaming, Inc. Reproduced by permission. www.cengage.com/permissions.

290. This confidence may be one reason why such people are dangerous; if they were concerned about the danger, they would not be inadvertent so often. ...

a. At the time of Marrero’s offense, this provision read as follows: “A person is guilty of criminal possession of a weapon in the third degree [a class D felony] when .... [he possesses any loaded firearm. .. .” N.Y. Penal Law §265.02 (McKinney 1983). — EDs.

.b. In Weiss, the defendants were charged with kidnapping a person suspected of murder. Under the statute, kidnapping was committed when a person “willfully... [s]eizes, confines, inveigles, or kidnaps another, with intent to cause him, without authority of law, to be confined or imprisoned, ...
against his will.” The defendants were precluded from introducing testimony to show their belief that a law enforcement officer had authorized them to seize the murder suspect. The Court of Appeals reversed their conviction, on the ground that such belief would show that defendants lacked the required in-
tent to confine the victim “without authority of law.” — EDs.

c. An example may clarify the kind of situation this provision contemplates. Suppose that a state anti-pollution law exempts nonprofit corporations. Relying on that provision, a nonprofit corporation (NP Inc.) dumps water in a way that would violate the statute were it not for the exemption. In a
prosecution of NP Inc., the trial court finds the exemption invalid because it conflicts with federal legislation. For conduct thereafter, NP Inc. could not invoke the exemption. But under this MPC provision, it would have a defense with respect to previous acts, because the exemption for nonprofits was only
“afterward determined to be invalid.” — EDs.

11. “Historically, our substantive criminal law is based upon a theory of punishing the vicious will. It postulates a free agent confronted with a choice between doing right and doing wrong and choosing freely to do wrong” (Pound, Introduction to Sayre, Cases on Criminal Law [1927], quoted in
Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246, 250, n.4).

110. The New Jersey statute provides that “[a] belief that conduct does not legally constitute an offense is a defense . .. when . . . “(@) The actor otherwise diligently pursues all means available to ascertain the meaning and application of the offense to his conduct and honestly and in good faith
concludes his conduct is not an offense in circumstances in which a law-abiding and prudent person would also so conclude” (N.J. Stat. Ann. §2C:2-4[o][S).

46, See Sens. Lee, Tillis, and Paul Introduce Mens Rea Reform Act, https://www.lee.senate. qov/public/index.cfm/2021/3/sens-lee-tilis-and-paul-introduce-rmens-tea-reform-act.

47. Richard M. Thompson, Il, Congressional Research Service, Mens Rea Reform: A Brief Overview (Apr. 14, 2016), https://www.fas.orq/sap/ors/misc/R44464.pdt.

48. An earlier proposal with similar aims, the Criminal Code Improvement Act of 2015, was more limited. It provided that when a federal criminal offense does not specity a required state of mind, the default mens rea would be knowledge (not purpose) with respect to the material elements of the
offense, and that ignorance or mistake of penal law would be a defense only “if the offense consists of conduct that a reasonable person in the same or similar circumstances would not know, or would not have reason to believe, was unlawful.”

49, See Note, Desuetude, 119 Harv. L. Rev. 2209, 2210 (2006).

‘50. Kan. Stat, Ann. §§50-1204(a), 50-1207.

51. Rodgers was decided three years before Albertini II, but apparently none of the parties in the latter case had called the Ninth Circuit's attention to Rodgers.

‘52, 414 F.3d 1282 (10th Cir. 2005), overruled by United States v. Ontiveros, 875 F.3d 533 (10th Cir. 2017).

p.375
